   
                                                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA   
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
   154 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE 143RD REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2023-24 
(DEMAND NO. 46) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND 
FAMILY WELFARE (MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY 
WELFARE) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8thFebruary, 2024) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA   
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
143RD REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2023-24 (DEMAND 
NO. 46) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY 
WELFARE (MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8thFebruary, 2024) 
) 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. PREFACE (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS (iii) - (iv) 
4. REPORT  
 Chapter–I   Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Ministry 1-24 
 
Chapter–II  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Ministry 
25-42 
 
Chapter–III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
43-47 
 Chapter–IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Ministry have not been received 48-51 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A  GLANCE 52-53 
6. MINUTES* -- 
To be appended at later stage 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2023-24) 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  -  Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel 
6. Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
8. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
9. Dr. Santanu Sen 
10. Shri A. D. Singh 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Shri K. Navas Kani 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Rao Munde 
22. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
27. Dr. Jadon Chandra Sen 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan Director 
3. Dr. Saket Kumar Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Noyaline Vinitha F.C. Joint Director 
5. Shri Roshan Lal Assistant Committee Officer 
  

ii 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and 
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, 
present this 154th Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Governme nt on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 143rd Report on Demands for Grants 2023-24 
(Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare.  
2. The One Hundred Forty-third Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha on 15 th March 2023 and 
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th March 2023. The Action Taken Notes of the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Report were received from the Departments in the Month of 
June, 2023.   
3.  The Committee made a total of 51 recommendations in the 143rd Report, out of which 20 
recommendations have been accepted by the Department and have been cate gorized under 
Chapter- I. There are 21 recommendations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the  Department‟s replies that have been categori zed under Chapter-II. There are 05 
recommendations/ observations, in respect of which replies of the Department, have not been 
accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon and has 
been categorized under Chapter-III while 05 recommendations/ observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Department have not been received, has been categorized under Chapter-IV. 
4. The Committee, in its meeting held on the 5th February 2024 considered the Draft Report 
and adopted the same. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                           BHUBANESWAR KALITA 
5 February, 2024                                                                  CHAIRMAN 
Magha, 1945 (Saka)                   Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
                    Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS  
AE   - Actual Expenditure 
AIIMS    -  All India Institute of Medical Sciences  
ANM   - Auxiliary Nurse and Midwife 
ASHAs   - Accredited Social Health Activists 
AWWs   - Anganwadi Workers 
AYUSH              -          Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy 
BDS   - Bachelor of Dental Surgery 
BE   - Budget Estimate 
CDs   - Communicable Diseases 
CDSCO                   -           Central Drugs Standard Control Organization  
CGHS    - Central Government Health Scheme 
CHCs   - Community Health Centres 
CHS    -  Central Health Services  
CPHC   - Comprehensive Primary Health Care 
CPWD   - Central Public Works Department 
DPRs    -  Detailed Project Reports 
Dr. RML HOSP ITAL   - Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital  
FY   - Financial Year 
GDMOs              -           General Duty Medical Officers 
GDP   - Gross Domestic Product 
GMCs   - Government Medical Colleges 
GoI   - Government of India 
H&WC   - Health and Wellness Centre 
HEFA   - Higher Education Funding Agency 
HMIS   - Health Management Information System 
HSCC   - Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation 
HSCCL   - Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation Limited  
ICMR   - Indian Council of Medical Research 
ICU    - Intensive Care Unit  
IGNOU   - Indira Gandhi National Open University 
IMR   - Infant Mortality Rate 
IPD    -  In Patient Department 
IPV   - Inactivated Polio Vaccine 
IUCD   - Intrauterine Contraceptive Device 
IVF    -  In Vitro Fertilization  
JE   - Japanese Encephalitis 
JSY   - Janani Suraksha Yojana 
MBBS   - Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery 
MCH   - Maternal and Child Health 
MDG   - Millennium Development Goal 
ML    - Microbiological Laboratory 
MMR   - Maternal Mortality Ratio 
MoH&FW  -  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
MRI   - Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
NACO   - National AIDS Control Programme 
NBSUs   - New Born Stabilization Units 
NCDC   - National Centre for Disease Control 
NCDs   - Non-Communicable Diseases 
NCT   - National Capital Territory 
NDMC   - New Delhi Municipal Council 
NE   - North East 
NHM   - National Health Mission 
NHP   - National Health Policy 
NHPS   - National Health Protection Scheme 
NITs    -           National Institutes of Technology 

iv 
 
NPCD                          NPCDCS       -  National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, 
          Cardio-vascular diseases and Stroke 
NPS   -  National Strategic Plan 
NRHM   -  National Rural Health Mission 
NSS                    NSS    -     National Sample Survey 
NUHM   -  National Urban Health Mission 
NUT                   NUT    -  Nephrology Urology and Transplantation 
OBC                   OBC    -  Other Backward Class 
OCP    -  Oral Contraceptive Pill 
OOP    -  Out of Pocket 
OPD                   OPD    -  Out Patient Department 
OT                      OT    -     Operation Theatre 
PAO                   P&AO   -  Pay & Accounts Office 
PCs                    PC   -    Project Consultants 
PFMS    -  Public Financial Management System 
PG    - Post Graduate 
PMSSY   -  Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana 
RCH   -  Reproductive and Child Health 
RE    -  Revised Estimate 
RISE   -  Revitalizing Infrastructure and Systems in Education 
RMNCH+A   - Reproductive Maternal Newborn Child and Adolescent Health 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 143rd Report on Demands for Grants 2023-24 
(Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare.  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which hav e been accepted by the Government: 
1.12, 1.13, 2.7, 2.10, 2.19, 2.22, 2.23, 3.8, 3.32, 3.33, 3.38, 3.39, 3.44, 3.50, 4.10, 
4.11, 4.15, 4.17, 4.27, and 4.32.  
       Total–20 (Chapter-I)  
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's replies: 2.6, 2.16, 2.17, 3.2, 3.6, 3.9, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 3.21, 
3.22, 3.28, 3.36, 3.43, 3.49, 3.52, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.16 and 4.22. 
         Total–21 (Chapter-II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 2.4, 3.16, 3.24, 3.25 and 3.42. 
       Total–5 (Chapter-III)  
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of whic h final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: 2.14, 2.15, 3.3, 3.35 and 3.48. 
          Total-5 (Chapter-IV) 
3.  The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER–I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
1.1 STAFF STRENGTH IN THE DEPARTMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
 
1.1.1 The Committee observes that the vacancy under Group -A, Group-B and Group -C 
categories is 59, 212 , and 183  respectively. The Committee is of the view that inadequate 
strength at many levels must be impeding the functioning of the various Divisions under the 
Department of Health and Family  Welfare. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to take appropriate steps to fill up the vacant positions at various levels and 
implement better work management practices in the Department. The Committee further 
recommends the Ministry to nudge  the Cadre Controlling Authorities and recruiting agencies 
to fill up the vacant posts.  
(Para 1.12 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.1.2 The observations of the committee have been noted for compliance. For the posts 
which are required to be filled up through SSC, the vacancies have been reported. The 
Ministry is vigorously taking up the matter with cadre controlling authorities and recruit ing 
agencies to fill up the posts on a priority basis. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
 
1.1.3 The Committee takes special note of the enhanced use of technology in the health 
sector and believes that modernization of healthcare services is crucial for provi ding 
sustainable and affordable healthcare services. In this background, it is pivotal for the 
workforce supervising the implementation of National health initiatives to become active 
participants in the usage of technology. The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry 
to expand the usage of technology in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and take 
measures to enhance the digital competence of the officials/staff of the Ministry. 
(Para 1.13 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.1.4 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has undertaken a multi-pronged approach 
to roll out the vision of Digital Health in India focusing on restructuring the existing system 
and parallelly enabling the digital health ecosystem in the country in an incl usive way. These 
initiatives include Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM), the e-Sanjeevani telemedicine 
platform, the establishment of Centres of Excellence for Artificial Intelligence (AIIMS Delhi, 
PGIMER Chandigarh, and AIIMS Rishikesh), National Medi cal College Network, Hospital 
Management Information System, e-Office etc. to make the healthcare service sustainable and 
affordable. To enhance the digital competence of the officials/staff to facilitate the effective 
implementation of health IT programmes across country, the Ministry has ensured intensive 
training and hand-holding support, and few of such training are highlighted below: 

2 
 
 For Pan India implementation of e-Sanjeevani platform, more than 2,00,000 doctors and 
paramedics have been trained acros s the country in consultation with CDAC Mohali 
through dedicated master trainers. 
 For ABDM nation-wide roll-out and to integrate all health IT application under ABDM 
ecosystem, hands on training, series of webinars were conducted to officials/health staff 
at National and State level through dedicated trainers. 
 To ensure 100% implementati on of e -Office in ministry, all the officials/ staff were 
oriented through a focused training and a dedicated technical resource was assigned to 
Senior Official and to concerned division for technical support. 
 For AI implementation, es tablished in -house AI -team, who are facilitating training to 
assess the utilization of AI in respective solution of prog ramme division and for 
capacity building along-with providing hands on training for effective use of AI tools. 
 For effective implementati on and promotion of adoption of Electronic Health Records 
standards in Health IT applications across the country, this ministry has set up National 
Resource Centre for EHR at CDAC Pune in 2016 and organized more than 255 training 
and workshop for orientation on effective use of EHR standards. 
 
1.2 BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS VIS-À-VIS ACTUAL EXPENDITURE 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
1.2.1 The Committee further notes that the Department, till 13 th February 2023 had spent 
73.35% of the total allocated budget and 26.65% of the funds remain unspent. The Ministry of 
Finance has time and again come up with guidelines for regulating the expenditure in a 
financial year. The Committee recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to cap 
its expenditure in the last month of the financial year as per the extant guidelines and strictly 
monitor the expenditure of funds in the last quarter of the Financial Year.  
(Para 2.7 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.2.2 In view of the recommendations of the Committee, all Programme Divisions in the 
Ministry have been directed to cap their expenditure in the last month of the financial year. 
However, during the FY 2022 -23, against the approved RE of Rs. 76370.40 crore, 
Rs.73378.54 crore (96.08%) was utilized up to 31.03.2023. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
1.2.3 The Committee notes the submission of the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
and observes that most of the schemes where funds remained underutilized were either due to 
delay/non-availability of encumbrance-free sites or non-receipt of proposals from the States. 
The Committee believes that the Sta tes must also play a proactive role and work in tandem 
with the  Union Government to ensure the robust implementation of the Sc hemes. The 
Committee recommends the Department of Health and Family Welfare to nudge the States 
and hold discussions with the State represen tatives at regular intervals to ensure timely 
disposal of the pending issues. The Department  must make consistent efforts to ensure  
optimum utilisation of the allocated funds. 
(Para 2.10 of the report) 

3 
 
Action Taken 
1.2.4 Although the instructions of the Committee have been taken note of by the Ministry 
and are followed by the Programme Divisions. Vigorously, a few Programme Divisions 
brought difficulties being faced by them, which are depicted as under: - PMSSY-V This 
Ministry has been pursuing the matter of early handing over of the encumbrance free land for 
AIIMS, Darbhanga and AIIMS, Haryana with the respective State Governments. The matter 
of handing over encumbrance-free land for AIIMS, Bihar has been taken up with the  State 
Government persistently. The State Government handed over only 81 acres of land on the 
campus of Darbhanga Medical College and Hospital (DMCH) in September 2022 without 
completing earth-filling work and removing other encumbrances. The State Governm ent then 
conveyed, vide D.O. letter dated 3.4.2023, the decision of the State Cabinet to allot an 
alternate site measuring 151.17 acres of land situated on Ekmi Shobhan Bypass, Anchal -
Bhadurpur, Mouza -Balia, Thana 120/2 for setting up of AIIMS. The centra l team of this 
Ministry visited the alternate site offered by the State Govt. on 27.4.2023 and found this site 
not suitable for setting up of AIIMS. It has been conveyed to the State with reasons for non -
suitability of land vide  letter dated 26 -05-2023 fro m the Secretary (HFW). In respect of 
AIIMS, Haryana, out of the mandated 210 Acre, Govt. of Haryana has executed a Lease Deed 
for 173 Acre of land with this Ministry. The remaining land is yet to be transferred to this 
Ministry by the State  Govt. This Mini stry has been consistently taking up the matter with 
Government of Haryana to expedite the acquisition of the remaining land and its handing over 
to MOHFW. 
 
NACO 
1.2.5 NACO is anchorin g National Aids and STD Control Programme (NACP), a Central 
Sector Scheme, under the aegis of M/o H&FW. Under the scheme, funds are released directly 
to t he State AIDS Control Societies (and not through the  State Governments) for various 
interventions for H IV/AIDS prevention and control, like test and treatment policy, viral load 
monitoring, and decentralized testing and treatment services through community engagement. 
Under the scheme no funds are released for constru cting building structures, etc. and, 
therefore, these observations stressing upon funds remain underutilized due to delay and non-
availability of encumbrance-free sites, which are not related to NACO. 
 
PMJAY 
1.2.6 Under the operation al framework of Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana (AB-PMJAY), the National Health Authority (NHA) releases a Central share of funds 
for the implementation of the scheme to  various State Health Agencies (SHA). SHAs, which  
operate under trust mode , directly reimburse the claims raised by AB -PMJAY em panelled 
hospitals within their respective jurisdictions. In the case of insurance mode,  SHAs pay the 
premium to the insurance company which subsequently reimburses the empanelled hospitals 
against claims raised. 
 
1.2.7 NHA issues guidelines from time to time to SHAs so that the funds released are used 
judiciously. Some of the measures taken in this regard are: 
  Timely collection of utilization certificates 

4 
 
  Checks and balances to ensure compliance on the part of SHAs with regards to refund 
of surplus funds, interest earned etc. 
  Prescribing standard norms with regard to fund utilization under various heads such as 
Grants-in-Aid- Implementation and Granta-in-Aid-Administration. 
 
For the financial year 2022 -23, the funds allocated have been completely utilized other 
than the Northeast component and the budget allocation for the current year (FY 2023 -24) is 
expected to be fully utilized based on the current trend of scheme uptake. 
 
Drug Regulation 
1.2.8 The proposal for fund release from State/UTs has not  been received on expected line.  
Therefore, funds could  not be utilized fully.  The scheme is being continuously monitored 
through organizing video conferencing, writing letters from  various levels and regular 
telephonic conversation with  State Drug Regulators. Besides, state -wise inspection is  being 
conducted at regular intervals to assess the  physical progress of the scheme. In all those 
activities, State Governments are r equested to submit proposal for further release of funds 
along with Utilization Certificate. 
 
Medical Education 
1.2.9 Review meetings at various levels are being convened to review expenditure and 
physical progress of projects at States/UTs to ensure that the matching state share is  released 
in time and 75% of the combined corpus (Central and State share) is utilized so that further 
funds can be sanctioned. Further, visits/inspections by the Officers of this Ministry to 
ascertain the actual progress and problems faced, in any, are also being scheduled from time 
to time. 
 
Tele-Medicine 
1.2.10 With reference to the Scheme T elemedicine, it is informed that, various similar 
proposals received on e - Health were merged and accordingly the funds we re released 
rationally and therefore, some funds were left unspent under the scheme. 
 
1.2.11 NHM-Finance PM -ABHIM is being implemented  as Centrally Sponsored Scheme, 
with few Central Sector Components. The CSS components of the PM Ayushman Bharat 
Health Infrastructure Mission will be implemented by following the existing framework, 
institutions and mechanisms of the National health Mission. Rs. 1228.35 crore was released to 
States/UTs under PM -ABHIM in the FY 2022 -23 Utilization/expenditure under the scheme 
was low in FY 2022 -23 as components under the scheme primarily pertain to infrastructure/ 
capital works which require  long gestation period before grounding due to challenges on 
account of encumbrance free site identification/selection, multi -locational nature of sites/units 
under the scheme, delays in finalization of implementation agency etc. 
 
1.2.12 For the CSS components, the PM Ayu shman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission 
would leverage the existing National Health Mission (NHM) structure available at central and 
state levels for appraisal, approval, and implementation and monitoring. 
 

5 
 
NHM-II 
1.2.13 Presently under NHM, to ensure o ptimal utilization of funds, the following steps have 
been taken by the Ministry: 
i. Performance Audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India, 
ii. Annual Statutory Audits by CAG empanelled major Chartered Accountant  Audit firms, 
iii. Concurrent Audits by Chartered Accountant Audit firms, 
iv. Public Financial Management System (PFMS) in NHM to track flow of funds, 
v. Submission of quarterly Financial Monitoring Reports (FMRs) and Statement of Fund 
Position (SFP) by the States/UTs, 
vi. Review and monitoring of scheme components. 
 
1.2.14 Under NHM, the performance of various health programmes is regularly assessed, 
through National Programme Coordination Committee (NPCC), review meetings, video 
conferences & field visits of senior officials, promoting performance by setting up 
benchmarks for service delivery & rewarding achievements etc. Further, under NHM, 
Common Review Missions (CRM) is conducted annually to assess and monitor the progress 
and implementation status of various schemes. These enable performance  review, input level 
monitoring of programme, corrective actions. 
 
1.2.15 During FY 2022 -23 funds to the tune of Rs. 31,195.81crore have been released to 
States/UTs against the  revised estimates (RE) of Rs. 28,974.29 crore. In FY  2023-24 of Rs. 
29,085.26 crore ha s been allocated (BE)  to NHM. Additional requirements during FY 2023 -
24, if any, will be demanded at RE stage based on the financial progress under the scheme. 
 
Tobacco 
1.2.16 National Tobacco Control Programme is implemented through a three tired structur e 
i.e. (i) National Tobacco Control Cell at Central level/Tobacco Control Division  (ii) State 
Tobacco Control Cell and (iii) District Tobacco Control Cell. The State and District Tobacco 
Control Cells have been subsumed in the flexible for NCDs under Natio nal Health Mission 
(NHM) and budget is allocated through NHM for States and districts through State 
Programme Implementation Plans (PIPs) through NHM and recommendation to the State 
proposals are provided at the central level 
 
1.2.17 Monitoring and evaluation of NTCP activities is undertaken through Online Reporting 
Mechanism and review meetings on periodic basis are organized for effective implementation 
of NTCP activities. 
 
Trauma 
1.2.18 At RE stage 2022 -23, the revenue allocation was Rs.28.55crore and by the end of FY 
2022-23, Rs. 28.084 crore was utilized i.e. 98.35% of allocation. Funds were released towards 
manpower to make Trauma Care Facilities and Burn Units operational and various trainings 
related to Trauma and Burns conducted for Doctors, Nurses and other specialized Staffs. 
 
 
 

6 
 
North East Region 
1.2.19 In the case of RIMS Imph al, the pace of expenditure was low because there was a 
delay in the tender process since the last date of submission of the bid was extended two times 
due to poor response from the prospective bidder. An encumbrance-free site for the project 
was available as t he site is within the campus of the institute and land title belongs to the 
institute. 
 
1.2.20 The work was expected to commence in full swing before the law and order situation 
in the State deteriorated from May 2023 due to which there was no progress in the work. 
Since this is a central sector scheme with direct funding from the Ministry to RIMS Imphal, 
the role of the State Government is minimal. The institute is extending all the possible help to 
the work agency and the contractor in getting permissions and licenses such as Labour 
licenses, Fire NOC, Inner Line permits for labourers etc. from various regulatory authorities. 
Once the situation in th e State becomes normal, RIMS Imphal will coordinate with the work 
agency for the completion of the project within the stipulated timeline i.e. June 2024. 
 
1.2.21 In the case of NEIGRIHMS, the pace of expenditure was low because initially some 
time was taken for finalization of conceptual plans by various departmental end users of the 
hospital and later on finalization of tender documents submitted by M/s HSCC.  The NIT was 
published by M/s HSCC on 29.09.2022 and the initial bid opening was scheduled  on 
21.10.2022. However, there were no bids and the date of submission of Bids was extended to 
09.11.2022. 
 
1.2.22 Two bids were received and 2 months were taken by M/s HSCC for evaluation and 
physical verification of works completed by the lowest bidder-M/s S.P.D. Construction, 
before issuing the offer of award on 17.01.2023 
 
1.2.23 The State Forest Department took time in felling in trees in the CCB areas, due to the 
State Assembly elections in February/March 2023 and could complete only 09.04.202 3. The 
free site was handed over on 11.04.2023, to the contractor. The MUDA permission has been 
obtained for the CCB block and Form -III for migrant labourers have been issued to the 
contractor. The site leveling, layout works , and mobilization of the tools  and plants by the 
bidder are in progress and all efforts will be made for completion of  the work within the 
stipulated time i.e. 10.07.2024. 
 
1.3 GOVERNMENT HEALTH EXPENDITURE IN INDIA 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
1.3.1 The Committee notes that various Government Schemes, over the years have 
expanded the social security ambit and enhanced the list of beneficiaries under various 
Schemes. The consequences of Government intervention is visible in the declining trend of 
Out of Pocket Expenditure (OOPE) which has decreased from 64.2% in the year 2013 -14 to 
48.2% in 2018 -19. However, the Committee notes that a 48.2% of OOPE in health is still a 
major deterrent to quality health care. As per the Global Multidimensional Poverty In dex 
2022 Pre- pandemic data, India is home to approximately 228.9 million poor people, which is 

7 
 
the highest in the world. With such a major chunk of population that remains deprived of 
basic amenities, Government health spending is the only means to gain a ccess to affordable 
healthcare. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Union as well as the State 
Government to make consistent efforts to decrease the OOPE. The Committee recommends  
the Government to follow the examples of High -Income Countries (HIC) where almost 70% 
of the expenditure on Health is borne by the Government. 
(Para 2.19 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.3.2 As per National Health Accounts Estimate 2018 -19, the Out -of-pocket expenditure 
(OOPE) as percentage of Total Health Expenditure (THE) is 48.2%. OOPE on health as 
percentage of THE in the country for the year 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018- 
19 are 62.6%, 60.6%, 58.7%, 48.8% and 48.2% respectively and therefore there is declining 
trend in OOPE as percentage of THE. With a view to reducing the high out of pocket 
expenditure, the Government has undertaken increased investment in the health sector.  The 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is implementing various schemes through States/UTs 
like National Health Mission (NHM), Ayushman Bharat - Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
(AB-PMJAY), Establishment of New Medical Colleges & Increase of Seats in ex isting 
Government Medical Colleges, Pradhan Mantri -Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure 
Mission (PM-ABHIM) etc. and also executing Central Sector Schemes like Pradhan Mantri 
Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) to provide affordable and quality tertiary heal th care 
facilities. So far setting up of 22 new AIIMS and 75 projects of upgradation of Government 
Medical Colleges/ Institutions (GMCIs) have been approved under the PMSSY in various 
phases. The budget allocation for DoHFW has increased by 82% from Rs. 47 ,353 Crores in 
2017-18 (BE) to Rs. 86,175 crores in 2023 -24 (BE). The 15 th Finance Commission has 
provided Rs. 70,051 Crores Grants for health through the Local Governments. The „India 
COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness Package -I‟ ( ECRP-I) of 
Rs.15,000 Crores was approved by the Cabinet on 22nd April 2020 to prevent, detect and 
respond to the threat posed by COVID -19. The Cabinet has also approved, “India Covid -19 
Emergency Response and Health Systems Preparedness Package -II” (ECRP-II) on 08th July 
2021 for an amount of Rs.23,123 Crores. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
1.3.3 The Committee notes that the States have failed to fulfil the National  Health Policy 
target of increasing the Health Sector spending to more  than 8% of their budget by 2020. The 
Committee appreciates that NCT Delhi and Puducherry spend 11.2% and 9.2 % of their total  
State Budget in Health Sector and recommends that other States/UTs  Govt. should follow the 
same. 
(Para 2.22 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.3.4 As per the State Finances - A Study of Budget (RBI) for the year 2022 -23, the State -
wise percentage of Budget expenditure/allocations are given as under at  Annexure- I. Further, 
DoHFW has taken up with States to prioritize allocation to health sector and enhance their 
health budgets at least by 10% every year to reach the goal as envisaged. 

8 
 
1.3.5 The responsibility to strengthen public healthcare facilities and implementation of 
National health Mission lies with the respective State Governments. Under NHM, financial & 
technical support is provided to strengthen the primary healthcare as per State‟s annual action 
plans (PIPs). Further, as of 2020, only Delhi (11.2%) and Puducherry (9.2%)  are spending 
more than 8% of their budget on health. In this regard, Union Government has taken steps to 
increase the health spending by the States such as: 
a)  Policy based intervention through National Health Policy 2017 which recommended 
increasing State health spending to more than 8% of their budget. 
b)  Union Government Policies by supplementing the States through various centrally 
sponsored schemes where the expenditure is shared among the Centre and the State 
Governments. These include schemes like National Health Mission, Ayushman Bharat -
Pradhan Mantri  Jan Arogya Yojana, and Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Health 
Infrastructure Mission. 
c)  Incentivizing states to spend more by the states is the adoption of a conditionality 
framework under the National Health Mission where the States could get more 
budgetary support if they performed well on the agreed indicators of the framework 
follows Result Based Financing (RBF). 
d)  Under 15 th Finance Commission, health grants of Rs. 70,051 crore to local bodies has 
been recommended to strengthen the primary health i nfrastructure in rural and urban 
areas. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
1.3.6 The Committee, in its 134 th Report, had highlighted the existing wide inter -State and 
intra-State disparity in healthcare infrastructure across the country. The Committee observed 
that States with poor financial resources and inefficient fiscal capacity face umpteen 
challenges in es tablishing a robust health infrastructure. The Committee, accordingly, 
reiterates its recommendation that the Union Government must persuade the State 
Governments to achieve the budgetary health expenditure to 8%. 
(Para 2.23 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.3.7 As per National Health Account Estimates, the Capital Health Expenditure has been 
increased from 6.6% 2014 -15 to 9.42% 2018 -19 of Total Health  Expenditure. The  
Government of India provides financial and technical assistance to States/UTs to set up and 
upgrade healthcare services. The main aim of the Government is to facilitate adequate 
infrastructure to have universal access to equitable, affordable , and quality healthcare 
services. 
 
1.3.8 To ameliorate the health infrastructure in the country, the government provides 
additional funds to support to the State Governments for improvement in health infrastructure, 
availability of adequate human resources to man health facilities, improve availabi lity and 
accessibility to quality health care , especially for the underserved and marginalized groups in 
rural areas through Centrally Sponsored Schemes and Central Sector schemes. The major 
programmes under these schemes are: 

9 
 
i)    Pradhan Mantri Ayushman  Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM -
ABHIM) was launched with an outlay of Rs. 64,180 crore as a mission to develop the 
capacities of health care systems (primary, secondary, and tertiary) strengthen existing 
national institutions and create new institutions to cater to detection and cure of new and 
emerging diseases includes support for infrastructure development for Sub -Health 
Centres, Urban Health and Wellness Centres, Block Public Health Units, Integrated 
District A Public Health Laboratories, and Critical Care Hospital Blocks having 
components for implementation of the Atmanirbhar Bharat Package for health sector. 
 
ii)    Under Ayushman Bharat Health & Wellness Centres (HWCs), Comprehensive 
Primary Healthcare by strengthening Sub Health Centres (SH Cs) and Primary Health 
Centres (PHCs) are facilitated. The HWCs are to provide preventive, promotive, 
rehabilitative and curative care for an expanded range of services encompassing 
Reproductive and Child care services, Communicable diseases, Non -communicable 
diseases and all health issues.  
 
iii)   Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) This scheme was launched in 
2022, aiming to develop the backbone required to support the integrated digital health 
infrastructure of the country by bridging the existing gap amongst different stakeholders 
of the healthcare ecosystem through digital highways. By converging with ADBM, the 
government foresees existing healthcare programmes to successfully use the available 
public infrastructure to provide end-to- end services through an IT-based platform. 
 
iv)   Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) scheme was launched to 
correct regional imbalances in the availability of affordable/reliable tertiary healthcare 
services and to augment facilities for quality medical education in the country and 
benefit all citizens of the country to reduce  the out of pocket expenses. Under this 
scheme, 22 new AIIMS will be set up across India and 75 existing State/Central 
Government Medical Colleges/Institutions will be upgraded. 
 
v)    Under 15 th Finance Commission, health grants of Rs. 70,051 crore to local 
bodies have been recommended to strengthen the primary health infrastructure in rural 
and urban areas. These schemes will improve the fiscal capaci ty for developing health 
infrastructure in the country and would help in building robust health infrastructure. 
 
1.4 VACANCY POSITION UNDER CGHS 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
 
1.4.1 The Committee is dismayed to note that Wellness Centres at Vasant Vihar, Alaknanda 
and Rohini Sector -16 have not yet been shifted to CGHS buildings. The Committee in its 
134th Report had observed this delay in handing of the CGHS Wellness Centres at Vasant 
Vihar, Alaknanda and Rohini Sector -16 to CGHS by CPWD. The Committee in its 134 th 
Report had explicitly noted that the CGHS buildings are ready, but the Wellness Centres are 
still running from rented buildings, however, even after one year, the completion certificates 

10 
 
have not been obtained from CPWD. Accordingly, the Committe e reiterates its 
recommendation that the Ministry must obtain the completion certificate from CPWD and 
shift the Wellness Centres to the new buildings at the earliest. The Committee further 
recommends the Ministry to coordinate with the concerned Project agencies and ensure timely 
completion of construction projects in all the CGHS cities. 
(Para 3.8 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.4.2 CGHS has taken over the possession of the buildings at Vasant Vihar, Alaknanda and 
Rohini Sector-16 and the Wellness Centres are functioning from CGHS's own buildings. 
 
1.5 PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHAYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
1.5.1 The Committee observes that 16 new AIIMS have been sanctioned by Cabinet and a 
Project Management Consultant has been appointed in all the new AIIMS except AIIMS 
Darbhanga and Madurai. Out of the 14 AIIMS, the Turnkey tender has been awarded to 13 
AIIMS. The Committee notes that Union Cabinet approved the setting up of new AIIMS at 
Darbhanga on 15.09.2020 and the State Government of Bihar was to provide 150-acre 
encumbrance-free land by Feb 2023. However, the State has handed over land only measuring 
81.09 Acre  for setting up of AIIMS till date. The Committee strongly  recommends the 
Ministry to take up the matter of providing land for  AIIMS Darbhanga with the State 
Government of Bihar.  The Ministry must continue holding review meetings and discussions 
with the State Government and finalize the land for AIIMS Darbhanga. 
(Para 3.32 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.5.2 This Ministry has been pursuing the matter of early handing over of the encumbrance 
free land for AIIMS Darbhanga with the State Govt. Technical Team of this Ministry which 
visited the site of AIIMS Darbhanga  on 23-01-2023 has observed that State Govt. has not yet 
completed the earth filling work and demolition of structures on the 81.09 acre of land which 
has been handed over for AIIMS Darbhanga. Also, State Govt. has not initiated any action on 
transfer of balance 118.93 acre of encumbrance free land for setting up of AIIMS Darbhanga 
to Govt. of India. Meanwhile, vide letter dated 3.4.2023, it has been informed by the State 
Govt. that State Cabinet has taken a decision to provide an alternate site of about 15 1.17 acre 
of land situated on Ekmi Shobhan Bypass, Anchal - Bahadurpur, Mouza -Balia, Thana No. -
120/2 to establish AlIMS, Darbhanga. This  matter of change in location for setting up of 
AIIMS at Darbhanga is under examination in the Ministry. Project Management Consultant 
has been appointed for AIIMS Madurai also. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
1.5.3 The Committee further notes that AIIMS Manethi in Haryana was approved by the 
Union Cabinet on 28.02.2019. However, the lease deed of land between the State Government 
of Haryana and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare could be executed only on 
19.01.2023. The Committee hopes the delay in finalizing the land for AIIMS Manethi does 
not translate to slow pace of work in its construction. 

11 
 
(Para 3.33 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.5.4 The Union Cabinet, in its meeting held on 28th February, 2019, approved the 
establishment of new  All India Institute of Medical  Sciences ( AIIMS) at Manethi , Haryana. 
The project was to be completed within 48 months from the date of approval of Cabinet. 
However, Govt. of Haryana was unable to handover the encumbrance free site approved for 
the establishment of new AIIMS in the State to this Ministry. During the course of time, Govt. 
of Haryana proposed an alternate site, measuring 210 Acre, at Village - Majra Mustil Bhalkhi, 
Tehsil-Manethi, District-Rewari, for the establishment of new AIIMS in the State. A Central 
Team of this Ministry inspected the site and f ound it suitable for establishment of AIIMS in 
the State. Out of the mandated 210 Acre, Govt. of Haryana has executed Lease Deed for 149 
Acre of land. Executing Agency for carrying out the pre-investment work at site has also been 
appointed by this Ministr y. The project will now be completed within 48 months from the 
date of complete handover of land by the State Government. 
 
1.6 FACULTY POSITION IN AIIMS 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
1.6.1 The Committee notes that in AIIMS Patna and Raipur, 143 faculty posts against the 
sanctioned strength of 305 are vacant which implies that approximately 47% of the posts in 
these two Institutes are vacant. In AIIMS Jodhpur, 227 faculty posts are filled whi ch is the 
highest among all new AIIMS. In AIIMS Patna, against the sanctioned strength of 3884 non -
faculty posts, 2202 posts are vacant leading to a vacancy of approximately 57%. AIIMS 
Jodhpur with 1516 vacancies in non-faculty posts fares a little better among the six AIIMS. 
 
1.6.2 The Committee notes with serious concern the shortage of faculty as well as non -
faculty posts in the six AIIMS. The Committee is dismayed at the acute shortage of 
Professors/ Additional Professors/ Associate Professors/ Assistan t Professors in the six 
AIIMS and strongly recommends the Ministry make immediate efforts and ensure better 
management of human resources in the Institutes. The Committee also recommends the 
Ministry, and the Institutes explore giving special packages and offer incentives such as paid 
research collaboration, use of high-end technology, better working hours, etc. to draw 
qualified doctors to these Institutes. 
(Para 3.38, 3.39 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.6.3 To impart the teaching, learning and research activities, adequate faculty and non -
faculty posts have been sanctioned by the Government for all newly created All India 
Institutes of Medical Sciences (AIIMS). The updated position of vacant posts against 
sanctioned strength in the first six AIIMS are as under: 

12 
 
 
 
S.N AIIMS  Faculty Posts Non-Faculty Posts 
Sanctioned Filled Sanctioned Filled 
1. Bhopal  305 196 3884 1797 
2. Bhubaneswar    335* 228 3884 1777 
3. Jodhpur  305 222 3884 2497 
4. Patna  305 205 3884 1907 
5. Raipur  305 189 3884 2251 
6. Rishikesh  305 196 3884 1489 
             *30 Faculty posts have been sanctioned to AIIMS Bhubaneswar on 19.04.2023 
 
1.6.4 The Ministry has facilitated the following provisions for augmenting faculty strength 
in the newly set up AIIMS:  
 
(i) The Standing Selection Committee (SSC) has been constituted in each new 
AIIMS to facilitate expeditious filling up of vacancies. 
(ii)  The upper age limit for direct recruitment against the posts of Professor and 
Additional   Professor has been raised from 50 years to 58 years. 
(iii) Permission has been granted for taking serving faculty from Government 
Medical Colleges/Institutes on a deputation basis. 
(iv) Contractual engagement of retired faculty of Government Medical 
Colleges/Institutes up to 70 years of age has also been allowed.  
(v) Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) cardholders have been allowed to be appointed 
on faculty positions. 
(vi) A visiting  faculty scheme has been formulated to allow national and 
international faculty to work in newly set up AIIMS for teaching and academic 
purposes. 
(vii) Temporary diversion of faculty posts has been allowed on loan basis from one 
Department to another, which can be filled up on a contractual basis. 
(viii) Advertisement for recruitment with one -year validity has been put in place to 
fast track the process of filling up vacancies. 
 
1.6.5 Further, following actions ha ve also been taken by the first Six AIIMS to fill up the  
faculty and non-faculty vacant positions at their respective Institutes: 
 
1.  AIIMS Bhopal: Advertisements have been issued from time to time  to fill t he 
vacant posts in AIIMS Bhopal and the recruitment process expected to be 
completed through the Prescribed Selection Committee as per MoHFW Circular 
dated 01.05.2015. 
 
Currently 915 Group B and C posts have been identified for  recruitment on 
direct recruitment basis. For which proposal has been invited from recruitment 
agencies to conduct the recruitment. 
 
2.  AIIMS Bhubaneswar: With regards to faculty posts, AIIMS Bhubaneswar has 
a sanctioned strength of 305 faculties‟ posts, which include Professor, 
Additional Professor, Associate Professor and Assistant Professor. Presently, 
against the total sanctioned strength, 228 posts have been filled up as on date. 
 

13 
 
Further, the recruitment process for the faculty posts is ongoing against the 
Rolling advertisement published on 28.10.2022 for 67 faculty posts. This final 
result has already been declared in which 25 candidates are found suitable and 
recommended by the Standing Selection Committee. 
 
For Non -faculty posts, the institute has started the pr ocess to advertise all the 
vacant post of Non -faculty (excluding Nursing) & the appointment letters 
expected to be issued by September -2023. 
 
3.  AIIMS Jodhpur: The vacant posts have been advertised and efforts are made to 
fill up the remaining Non-faculty posts at the earliest. 
 
In reference to the paid research collaboration, the Faculty of AIIMS, Jodhpur is 
encouraged to submit research proposals for intramural grant support of Rs. 5 
Lakh each. Further, as required the latest Faculty/ Non-Faculty filled and vacant 
position given in above para 3.37, 80 posts had been advertised in rolling 
advertisement and last dated is 31st May, 2023. Attempts are being made to fill 
the vacant posts. 
 
4.  AIIMS Patna : Out of the total vacant posts of direct recruitment no n-faculty 
posts, 644, posts have been advertised and 200 posts are in the process of 
recruitment through NORCET-2023. 
Nursing Cadre vacancies have already been forwarded to AIIMS New Delhi for 
NORCET -2023 to be conducted in June – 2023. 
 
5.  AIIMS Raipur: Faculty posts: 
 
(i)    Rolling advertisement for recruitment of 116 posts of faculty 
(Professor-29, Additional Professor -29, Associate Professor -38 and Assistant 
Professor-20) in various  departments including Super-specialty departments of 
AIIMS Raipur on Director Recruitment Basis/ Deputation Basis / Contract basis 
/ Retired Faculty on contract basis at AIIMS Raipur is under process. A 
recruitment advertisement for the same will be published shortly.  
 
(ii)   Interview for r ecruitment of 40 posts of Assistant Professor (contract 
basis) in various Specialty and Super Specialty Departments at AIIMS Raipur 
held on 03.05.2023. Result of the same will be published shortly.  
 
Non-faculty posts 
(i)   Recruitment of 150 posts of Nursing Officer (Group -B) on a direct 
recruitment basis is under process. In round 2 of NORCET -2022, document 
verification of 22 candidates is scheduled from 26 th April 2023. Eligible 
candidates will be issued an Order of Appointment after document verification.  
 
(ii)   44 posts of Assistant Nursing Superintendent (Group –A) and 16 posts 
of Deputy Nursing Superintendent (Group -A) have been filled by promotion in 
March 2022. 

14 
 
(iii)   173 posts of Senior Nursing Officer have been filled by promotion of 
Nursing Officer in the month of January, 2022. 
 
(iv)   The Recruitment process of 17 various Group -A and Group-B posts on 
a deputation basis is under process. After the scrutiny of applications claim/ 
objection handling is in progress.  
 
(v)   The Recruitment process for 09 various Group -A and Group -B posts 
comprising Clinical Psychologists, Law Officers, Medical Record Officers, JE 
(AC&R), and Radiotherapy Technician Grade-II on a direct recruitment basis is 
under process. The advertiseme nt for the same was published on 03.06.2022. 
CBT for the same was held on 08.10.2022. The result is withheld due to a Court 
case. 
 
(vi)   Advertisement for recruitment to 55 various Group -B posts on direct 
recruitment is published the last date of receipt of online application is 
20.05.2023. 
 
(vii)   Advertisement for recruitment to 08 various Group -A posts on direct 
recruitment is published last dated of receipt of online application is 28.05.2023. 
 
 (viii)  Recruitment of other non-faculty vacant posts is also being worked out.  
 
6.  AIIMS Rishikesh: Advertisements are issued from time to time to fill the 
vacant posts in AIIMS Rishikesh and 1273 posts of Faculty and Non -faculty are 
to be filled from May to December, 2023.  
 
 
1.7 NATIONAL DIGITAL HEALTH MISSION (NDHM)/ AYUSHMAN BHARAT 
DIGITAL MISSION (ABDM) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
1.7.1 The Committee also notes the apprehensions regarding the possible misuse of data by 
involved private agencies in the absence of robust data protection Laws in the country. The 
Committee accordingly recommends the Department to establish a stringent monitoring 
mechanism for facilitating secure data exchange between the stakeholders and maintain 
confidentiality of the citizens‟ health data. 
(Para 3.44 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.7.2 The Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) aims to make quality healthcare 
affordable and accessible by enabling a national digital health ecosystem that bridges the 
existing gap among different stakeholders. The  infrastructure required for development of 
interoperable digital platform & and certain modules under the National Digital Health 
Mission (now Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission) has broadly been assessed and identified in 
line with the objectives of ABDM. 

15 
 
 
1.7.3 For administrative support and to maintain confidentiality of the citizens' health data, 
various policy frameworks such as Health Data Management Policy, Sandbox Guidelines, 
Health Information Provider Guidelines etc. have  been prepared and issued for smooth 
implementation of ABDM. The Mission will enable access and exchange of health records of 
citizens with their consent. Thus, there is no centralised repository of the data which can be 
exposed to potential risk of data security breach. 
 
1.7.4 Health Data Management Policy (HDM Policy) was released on 14th Dec 2020 by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India. It is a guidance document 
which sets out the minimum standards for privacy and data protection that should be followed 
by all the participants/stakeholders of the Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) 
ecosystem. Health Data Management Policy specifies that no data shall be shared with any 
other entity including insurance and pharmaceutic al companies without consent of the 
individual. 
 
1.7.5 A purpose -based limitation on sharing of data has been imposed on the Health 
Information Users (HIUs). Also, the entity to which data is shared (Health Information User) 
would not further disclose the data without obtaining the consent of the data principal (the 
individual). The data shared would also not be stored beyond the period necessary for the 
purpose specified while obtaining the prior consent of the individual. In addition, principle of 
data minimisation will also have to be adhered to by the entity which has received the shared 
data. 
 
1.8 ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS)-DELHI 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
1.8.1 The Committee notes that approximately 21% faculty positions are lying vacant in 
AIIMS Delhi. 22% and 41% posts are lying vacant under Sr. Resident (Acad.)-Fellowship and 
Sr. Resident (Non -Acad.) respectively. Similarly, Jr. Resident (Acad. & Non -Acad.) as well 
as non -faculty posts are also vacant. The Committee recommends the Institute to make 
constant efforts for recruitment of Assistant Professors and ensure appointment at all posts in 
the Institute. The Institute must also expedite the process of Depart mental promotion for the 
staff, if any, as per rules. 
(Para 3.50 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.8.2 Post of Group “A” (Non-Faculty), “B” & “C” 
 
Group Sanctioned Strength In-position Vacancy 
Group A  
(Non-Faculty) 
729 522 207 
Group B 7984 6885 1099 
Group C 4162 3294 868 
Total 12875 10701 2174 

16 
 
 
The above vacancies are available due to promotion/ 
superannuation/VRS/Resignation/New Creation etc. These vacancies are regularly filled by 
holding interviews/Exam as well as DPC from time to time.  1221 posts under the mode of 
direct recruitment are already advertised and further recruitment process is in progress at 
various levels. The recruitment process for filling up of the remaining posts under mode of 
Direct recruitment is underway. The process of filling up of approximately 900 vacancies by 
holding Departmental Promotion Committee is underway. 
 
 
 
 
Faculty Posts 
 
For promotion of faculty, there is a time bound promotion scheme, based on fixed 
number of years, ACRs, Vigilance/Disciplinary report i.e. Assessment Progression Scheme 
(APS) without linkage to reservation. At  present, around 1832 faculties are going to be  
eligible for promotion under APS w.e.f. 01.07.2023 and process to hold interviews for 
assessing fitness of eligible faculty for the promotions to the next level will be initiated 
shortly. 
 
Senior/Junior Residents 
 
S. No Resident Doctors Sanctioned On Roll Vacant 
1 Junior Resident (Acad) 1213 1002 211* 
Name of Post Number of  
vacant posts 
Status 
Medical 
Superintendent 
(Dr.RPC) 
01 Post advertised in May 2022 on regular basis, but 
none applied. Now, advertised on deputation basis 
and screening of applications is under way. 
Professor 
(Direct) 
107 The matter regarding down grading of post of 
Professor under Direct mode to that of Assistant 
Professor or not is under consideration. Hence 
posts cannot be filled.  
Assistant Professor 215 The process of advertising 202 posts is under 
process.  13 posts were not advertised/ withhold 
due to administrative reasons.  
Associate 
Professor (College 
of Nursing) 
04 03 posts of Associate Professor (College of 
Nursing) were advertised, interviews held but 
recommendations are awaited. 01 posts of 
Associate Professor (College of Nursing) could not 
be advertised due to lien. 
Tutor 01 Going to be advertised. 01 anticipated vacancy also 
to be advertised along with this vacancy. 

17 
 
* Selection process for all seats/posts which will be falling vacant due to completion of tenure 
or resignation etc. during January Session is completed and joining process is in progress. 
Some seats are newly created for MD/MS/MDS/MHA (DM/ M. Ch 6 years courses) courses 
approved by the Academic Committee and Governing Body in 2015 -16 and the same are 
being filled in a phased manner. 
 
S. No Resident Doctors Sanctioned On Roll Vacant 
2 Junior Resident (Non -
Acad) 
219 194 25* 
* Selection process for all seats/posts which will be falling vacant due to completion of tenure 
or resignation etc. during January Session is completed and joining process is in progress. 
 
S. No Resident Doctors Sanctioned On Roll Vacant 
3 Senior Resident (Acad)/ 
Fellowship 
823 613 210* 
* These seats are newly created for DM/M.Ch courses approved by the Academic Committee 
and Governing Body in 2015-16 and the same are being filled in the phased manner.  
 
S. No Resident Doctors Sanctioned On Roll Vacant 
4 Senior Resident (Non -
Acad) 
1136 713 423* 
* Selection process for all seats/posts which will be falling vacant due to completion of tenure 
or resignation etc. during July Session is completed and joining process is in progress. 
 
Reasons for seats falling vacant 
1.8.3 Admissions of Academic Residents (Junior Residents as well as Senior Residents) are 
done every 6 months. After admission process is over in any session (i.e. on 28 th Feb /31 st 
Aug for January & July sessions) any seats which remain vacant or any vacancies which arise 
because of resignation are filled in next session. It implies that vacancies which arise after 28th 
Feb/231st Aug (for January/July session respectively) are filled in next session i.e. within 6 
months. 
 When somebody has joined in a specialty at AIIMS which is snot his/her first choice 
and he or she gets selected at some other place in the subject of his/her choice, then 
these residents resign to join at the new places. Junior Resident (Academic) and Seni or 
Resident (DM/M. Ch) admission in various courses are done twice a year. 
 Some of the residents join residency courses (MD/MS) in some non -clinical branches 
and prepare for PG entrance to secure subject of their choice. Sometimes , even after 
they do not get selected in a subject of their choice even then some resign from MD/MS 
courses in non-clinical branches to sit and prepare for entrance examination. 
 
 Senior Residents (Non -Academic) courses positions are for 3 years duration, and this 
position is joined by doctors after completing MD/MS in the respective specialty. In this 

18 
 
position doctors get teaching and clinical experience before they join as 
specialists/faculty in other/same institutions. While pursuing Senior Residency (Non -
Academic) some of these residents keep on applying for faculty/consultants position 
and leave residency when they get a suitable position. Some Senior Resident (Non -
Academic) leave to start their own practice or go abroad. Recruitment for SR (Non -
Academic) are done every year twice by regular selection and special recruitment 
drives. 
 Junior Resident (Non -Academic) is a tenure post for 6 months. The fresh MBBS are 
eligible for these positions. MBBS doctors join these positions to learn clinical medicine 
in the subject of their choice before they can qualify for the entrance examination and 
join PG courses. Therefore, some of them who happen to get selected in PDG courses 
resign and leave in between. Some of them resign in between to sit at home and prepare 
for the entrance examination.  
 Counseling process for all seats/posts which will be falling vacant due to completion of 
courses/tenure or resignation etc. due in the January session is completed and the 
joining process of the above posts/seats is in progress. 
In order to fill vacancies special recruitment drives and walk -in-interviews are also held as 
and when required from time to time. 
 
1.9 NHM-Universal Health Coverage through Primary Health Care 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
1.9.1 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry in achieving the target of 
operationalization of 1.5 lakh functional AB -HWCs by December 2022. The Committee has 
time and again emphasized the importance of Primary Health care in facilitating an equita ble 
and resilient health system. As per the National Health Account (NHA) estimates for India 
2018-19, the share of Primary Health Care in Current Government Health Expenditure has 
increased from 51.1% in 2013 -14 to 55.2% in 2018 -19. The Committee notes th at according 
priority to the Primary Health care aligns with the policy recommendations of the National 
Health Policy-2017 of assuring free and comprehensive Primary care. However, noting the 
findings of the Rural Health Statistics 2021 -22, the Committee b elieves that the Government 
must bring in more reforms for robust delivery of healthcare services under NHM. 
(Para 4.10 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.9.2 Ayushman Bharat-Health and Wellness Centres is India‟s commitment for achieving 
promotive, preventive,  curative, palliative , and rehabilitative aspects of Universal Health 
Coverage with a goal to provide Comprehensive Primary Health Care as well as free essential 
drugs and diagnostic services through Health and Wellness Centres. 
 
1.9.3 As per RHS 2020-21, the total sub-health centres and primary health centres (Rural & 
Urban) are 1,56,101 and 30,579 respectively, of which 1,59,585 health centres have been 
converted as AB-HWCs as on 30th Mach 2023. The States are in the process of transforming 
the remaining centres; moreover, new centres are also being supported as per population 
norms by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare under NHM. States are supported for 

19 
 
infrastructure, human resources, drug & and diagnostic, Capacity building, IT  services, IEC, 
United funds, etc. at AB-HWCs. 
 
1.9.4 These AB-HWCs have reformed the primary healthcare system in India through the 
provision of expanded packages of healthcare services including screening of non -
communicable diseases, an additional cadre  of Community Health Officers at Sub -health 
centres, availability of drugs & and diagnostics, Teleconsultation services, community 
mobilization and ownership, IT systems for reporting & monitoring as well as quality 
assurances.  
 
1.9.5 Recently, Health Mel as have also been  conducted at AB-HWCs every month to 
improve service utilization and health promotion, Wellness activities like Yoga, Zumba, 
cycling, etc. are also being organized at the AB-HWCs. 
 
1.9.6 As per the National Health Account (NHA) estimates f or India 2019 -20, the share of 
Primary Health Care in Current Government Health Expenditure has increased from 51.1% in 
2013-14 to 55.9% in 2019-20. 
 
1.9.7 The infrastructure gaps have been addressed through the recently launched scheme i.e. 
PM-Ayushman Bh arat Health Infrastructure Mission wherein the infrastructure support for 
17,788 AB-HWCs in rural Areas is provisioned across ten Health Focus States. In addition to 
this, the infrastructural support for 27,581 SHCs and 681 PHCs in rural areas is available  
under 15th Finance Commission Health Grants during the period 2021-22 to 2025-26. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
1.9.8 The Rural Health Statistics 2021 -22 highlights that the health sub-centres, primary 
health centres, and community health centres (CHCs) lack the sanctioned staff and the staff 
strength in many States was even less than the previous year i.e. 2020 -21. The Committee 
notes that a health centre cannot function without an adequate number of doctors, nurses , lab 
technicians, and other healthcare workers such as auxiliary nurse midwives. The Committee 
accordingly recommends the Ministry to ensure that required number of workforce as well as 
infrastructure is made available in the rural areas. The Report also hi ghlighted that the 
population cover for PHCs and CHCs worsened in many States and the number of population 
coverage for the Health Centres is above the Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) norms. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department ensure that such laggard states with 
poor outreach of healthcare are dealt with firmly and special drives are initiated to strengthen 
the State's rural healthcare system. 
(Para 4.11 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.9.9 All the administrative and personnel matters related to health human resource lies with 
the respective States/UT Governments. Under National Health Mission, Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare provides financial and technical support to States/UTs to strengthen their 
healthcare systems based on the r equirements posed by them in their Programme 
Implementation Plans (PIPs) within their overall resource envelope. 

20 
 
 
1.9.10 Under NHM, the following types of incentives and honorariums are provided to 
encourage specialist doctors to practice in rural and remote areas of the country: 
 
(i) Hard area allowance to specialist doctors for serving in rural and remote areas 
and for their residential quarters so that they find it attractive to serve in public 
health facilities in such areas. 
(ii) Honorarium to Gynecologists/Emergency Obstetric Care (EmoC) trained, 
Pediatricians & Anesthetist/Life Saving Anesthesia Skills (LSAS) trained 
doctors are also provided to increase the availability of specialists for conducting 
Caesarean Sections in rural & and remote areas. 
(iii) Incentives l ike special incentives for doctors, the incentive for ANM for 
ensuring timely ANC check-ups and recordings, and incentives for conducting 
Adolescent Reproductive and Sexual Health activities. 
(iv) States are also allowed to offer negotiable salaries to attract specialists including 
flexibility in strategies such as “You Quote We Pay”. 
(v) Non-monetary incentives such as preferential admission in postgraduate courses 
for staff serving in difficult areas and improving accommodation arrangements 
in rural areas have also been introduced under NHM. 
 
1.9.11 Multi-skilling of doctors is supported under NHM to overcome the shortage of 
specialists. Skill up -gradation of existing HR is another major strategy under NRHM for 
achieving improvement in healt h outcomes.  The Public Health Management Cadre is 
envisaged to meet the shortage of human resources and to incentivize the resources available. 
It will provide adequate opportunity to the health workforce to excel and have ideal career 
trajectories that wi ll bring stability and retention in the system. The guidelines for setting up 
Public Health Management Cadre have been shared with all States and they are being 
provided guidance and technical support for implementation of the same. 
 
1.9.12 The infrastructure gaps have been addressed through the recently launched scheme i.e. 
PM-Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission wherein the infrastructure support for 
17,788 AB-HWCs in rural areas is provisioned across ten High Focus States. In addition to 
this, t he infrastructural support for 27,581 SHCs and 681 PHCs in rural areas is available 
under 15th Finance Commission Health Grants during the period of 2021 -22 to 2025-26. The 
implementation and progress of the National Health Mission (NHM) continued to be 
reviewed at the national level through Annual Common Review Missions (CRM) which 
comprise of government officials from Different Ministries and NITI Aayog, public health 
experts and representatives of development partners and civil society. Common Review 
Mission (CRM) correlates the performance and duly tracks the expenditure under flexi pools. 
 
1.9.13 The framework of conditionalities has been developed keeping in mind the priorities 
in the health sector in India which the States/UTs must strive to achieve. This sent a clear 
message to all the States/UTs that good performance would be monitored, acknowledged , and 
rewarded. The Conditionality Framework 2022-24 sets out 15 indicators and the criteria for 

21 
 
receiving a penalty or incentive under each indicator inc luding indicators for HR availability 
and Infrastructure Strengthening/Branding. 
 
1.10 AYUSHMAN BHARAT -PRADHAN MANTRI JAN AROGYA YOJANA 
(PMJAY) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
1.10.1 The Committee notes that the utilization trend under the Scheme has picked up; 
however, there is still scope for improving the absorption capacity under the Scheme. The 
Committee notes that in FY 2022-23, funds to the tune of Rs. 4580.1 crore have been released 
to the States/UTs which is the hig hest since the inception of the Scheme. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the Ministry to continue its measures to maximize the utilization 
under the Scheme and periodically track the progress of the Scheme. The Committee notes 
that the budget allocation in FY 2023 -24 is Rs. 7200 crore and hopes the funds are optimally 
used for expanding the beneficiary base under the Scheme. The Ministry must conduct a 
special drive to generate awareness regarding the Scheme, especially in rural and tribal areas 
with poor outreach. 
(Para 4.32 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.10.2 For the financial year 2022 -23, Rs. 6412 crore were allocated out of which Rs. 6048 
crore have been released to States / UTs implementing AB -PMJAY as part of the Central 
share of funds. Further, the budget allocated for the financial year 2023 -24 is Rs. 7200 crore.  
AB-PMJAY has been implemented since September 2018. Over the last 4 years of scheme 
implementation, 33 States/UTs have joined the scheme. Initially, the scheme uptake was low 
in comparison to what was anticipated. However, it has gradually increased over the years. 
Further, the uptake of the scheme was affected during COVID. However, now the scheme 
utilization has picked up. For the financial year 2022 -23, the funds allocated have been 
completely utilized other than the North -East component , and the budget allocation for the 
current year (FY 2023 -24) is expected to be fully utilized based on the current trend of 
scheme uptake. 
 
1.10.3 NHA is working on reaching out to eligible beneficiaries through a massive IEC 
campaign and Ayushman Card creation drive. In this direction, the following key initiatives 
have been taken by NHA: 
 
1. Aapke Dwar Ayushman : Ensuring delivery of Ayushman Card to a ll eligible 
beneficiaries is fundamental to the scheme's development. Accordingly, NHA launched 
Aapke Dwar Ayushman Campaign. ADA campaign implemented by NHA in January 
2021 enlisted the services of grassroots functionaries such as frontline healthcare 
workers, Panchayati Raj personnel, and village-level agents from service providers from 
CSC and UTIITSL for beneficiary mobilization and card creation. This has resulted in 
the verification of over 14.7 crore beneficiaries of which, over 10 crore Ayushman 
Cards have been created since April 2022. The States have been directed to tag the non -
SECC beneficiaries and saturate for card creation. Further, ADA is being launched in 

22 
 
the focus States of Assam, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil 
Nadu & and Karnataka. With the increase in the number of Ayushman Cards issued, the 
uptake under the scheme will get a further push. 
 
2. PM-JAY Mobile Application :  Beneficiary verification and card creation have been 
enabled on the PM-JAY mobile application. This mobile application is equipped with 
face-authentication technology that eliminates the dependency on any external 
authentication device. Mobile applications are being used for door-to-door campaigns. 
 
3. Database enrichment  – NHA has coordinated with various Central Government 
ministries implementing welfare schemes such as Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana to 
enrich the SECC beneficiary database. Further, NHA is integrating the verified 
beneficiary family database under PMJAY with the National Food Security Act 
database for better targeting of individual family members. 
 
4. Technology upgradation  – NHA has made improvements to the Beneficiary 
Identification System (BIS) platform. The newly launched BIS 2.0 platform makes it 
convenient for the scheme‟s beneficiaries to generate Ayushman cards. Under BIS 2.0, 
village-wise access to the beneficiary database has been enabled for better mobilization 
of the scheme‟s beneficiaries. BIS 2.0 has been deployed in 14 States / UTs. 
 
1.11 TERTIARY CARE PROGRAMS  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
1.11.1 The Committee notes that in BE 2022 -23, funds to the tune of Rs. 500.50 crore were 
allocated to the Tertiary Care Program which was slashed to Rs. 327.45 at RE stage. 
However, the actual expenditure till 14.02.2023 has been reported to be only Rs. 246.29 crore 
leading to an unspent balance of Rs. 81.16 crore. 
(Para 4.15 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.11.2 Under the National Programme for Control of Blindness & Visual Impairment 
(NPCB&VI), Rs. 8.00 crore was allotted as BE against which Rs. 3.90 crore was approved as 
RE. Out of this, Rs. 3.19 crore is the actual expenditure as of 31.03.2023. Under the National 
Programme for Healthcare of the Elderly (NPHCE), Rs. 98.79 crore  was allotted  as BE 
against which Rs. 17.15 crore was approved as RE. Out of this, Rs. 4.864 crore is the actual 
expenditure as on 31.03. 2023. The expenditure under the programme is low as MoU has not 
been received from the PGIMER, Chandigarh for setting up of Geriatr ic Care and 
Rehabilitation Centre at PGIMER, Chandigarh on a total project cost of Rs. 1.50 crore. 
Further, the GIA has been released from the Budget on the basis of the request received from 
the implementing agencies approved under the Programme.  
 
1.11.3 The Central Government implements the Strengthening of Tertiary  Cancer Care 
Centre Facilities Scheme (under the Tertiary component of the National Programme for 

23 
 
Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke) in order to 
enhance the facilities for tertiary care of cancer. 19 State Cancer Institutes (SCIs) and 27 
Tertiary Care Cancer Centres (TCCCs) have been approved under the said scheme. States are 
given financial assistance in the ratio of 60:40 (90:10 in the case of NE and hilly States). The 
budget allocation under this component in BE 2022 -23 was Rs. 175 crore which was revised 
to Rs. 120 crores at the RE stage. As of 31st March 2023, Rs. 119.99 crore was utilized 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
1.11.4 Considering the prevalence of non -communicable diseases, the Committee feels that 
more concerted efforts must be done to tackle lifestyle diseases. The budgetary allocation 
under NPCDCS must be increased considerably; however, the Department must improve the 
absorption capacity under the Scheme. The Committee in its 139 th Report assessed the status 
of NPCDCS Scheme and noted that the screening of common Cancer under NPCDCS 
program is mostly opportunistic. The Committee had recommended that cancer must be dealt 
with separately and must not be grouped under other lifestyle diseases. The Committee 
reiterates its recommendation that the Department must devise a targeted plan for cancer 
control. 
(Para 4.17 of the report) 
Action Taken 
1.11.5 The Non -Communicable Diseases (NCDs) a ccount for 63% of mortality in India. 
Considering the burden, the budgetary allocation has been increased for NCDs under National 
Programme for Prevention and Control of Non -Communicable Diseases (NP NCD) in 7 th 
Mission Steering Group. The Department of Health & Family Welfare provides technical and 
financial support to the States/UTs under the National Programme for Prevention and Control 
of Non -Communicable Diseases (NP NCD) erstwhile NPCDCS, as part of the National 
Health Mission (NHM), based on the proposals received from the States/UTs and subject to 
the resource envelope . The programme focuses on strengthening infrastructure, human 
resource development, health promotion , and awareness generation, screening, early 
diagnosis, management, and referral to an appropriate level of the healthcare facility for 
treatment of the Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs). 
 
1.11.6 Most of the NC Ds including Cancer are lifestyle diseases. The risk factors are 
common for Non -Communicable Diseases (NCDs) including Cancers. Accordingly with the 
vision that “all Indians enjoy the highest attainable status of health, well -being, and quality of 
life at all ages, free of preventable NCDs including Cancer”, it is essential that dedicated 
NCD-related services under the National NC D Programme should be provided across  all 
levels from National to peripheral in an integrated manner. 
 
1.11.7 The government is aligned to the SDG -3.4 goal of reducing premature mortality by 
one-third due to four main NCDs including cancer through prevention and treatment by 2030. 
 
 
 

24 
 
1.12 PRADHAN MANTRI AYUSHMAN BHARAT HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE 
MISSION (PM-ABHIM) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
1.12.1 The Committee notes that the Scheme has an outlay of Rs. 64,180 crores over 6 years 
and aims at developing capacities of health systems and institutions across levels. The 
ambitious goals must reflect in the budgetary allocation for the Scheme so that the major 
interventions envisaged under the Scheme can be achieved. The Committee notes that the 
Scheme has been allocated Rs. 4200 crore in BE 2023 -24 which is a 123% increase in 
budgetary allocation vis -a-vis RE 2022 -23. The Scheme was allotted a budget of R s. 4177 
crore in BE 2022 -23 and Rs. 1885.45 in RE 2022 -23, however, only Rs. 749.75 crore have 
been utilized under the Scheme.  The Committee understands that the PM -ABHIM is one of 
the biggest pan -India Schemes, however, such a dismal trend of utilization would pose a 
roadblock in accomplishing its vision of providing comprehensive healthcare across the 
country. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to make a roadmap for 
judicious utilisation of the funds under PM-ABHIM so that the targets are achieved within the 
set 6 year time frame. The Ministry must conduct a realistic assessment of budgetary funds 
required under the Scheme and adhere to the strict timeline for the achievement of physical 
targets. 
(Para 4.27 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.12.2 PM-ABHIM is being implemented as Centrally Sponsored Scheme, with few Central 
Sector Components. The CSS components of the PM Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure 
Mission will be implemented by following the existing framework, institutions , and 
mechanisms of the National Health Mission. Rs. 1228.35 crore was released to States/UTs 
under PM-ABHIM in the FY 2022 -23. Utilization/expenditure under the scheme was low in 
FY 2022 -23 as components under the scheme primarily pertain to infrastructure/ capit al 
works which require a long gestation period before grounding due to challenges on account of 
encumbrance-free site identification/selection, multi -locational nature of sites/units under the 
scheme, delays in finalization of implementation agency etc.  For the CSS components, the 
PM Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission would leverage the existing National 
Health Mission (NHM) structure available at central and state levels for appraisal, approval, 
and implementation, and monitoring. 
 
1.12.3 Presently under NHM, to ensure optimal utilization of funds the following steps have 
been taken by the Ministry: 
i) Performance Audit by the Comptroller & Auditor General (CAG) of India. 
ii) Annual Statutory Audits by CAG-empaneled major Chartered Accountant Audit Firms. 
iii) Concurrent Audits by Chartered Accountant Audit Firms. 
iv) Public Financial Management System (PFMS) in NHM to track the flow of funds. 
v) Submission of quarterly Financial Monitoring Reports (FMRs) and Statement of Fund 
Position (SFP) by the States/UTs. 
vi) Review and monitoring of scheme components 

25 
 
CHAPTER–II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
 
2.1 BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS VIS-À-VIS ACTUAL EXPENDITURE 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.1.1 The Committee notes that the Department of Health and Family Welfare has been 
allotted a total budget of Rs. 86,175 crore against the total proposed estimates of Rs. 
89,532.05 crore, thus leaving a shortfall of Rs. 3357.05 crore. The Committee further 
observes that the utilization trend in the past five years of the Department of Health & Family 
Welfare has been satisfactory. However, the Committee notes that in 2022 -23, for the first 
time in five years , the Revised Estimates are lower than the Budgeted Est imates of the 
Department.   
(Para 2.6 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.1.2 In BE 2 -23-24, the projected demand for the Ministry was ₹92612.05 crore which is 
higher by 7.44% than BE 2022 -23. However, against this demand, only 89155.00 crore is 
allocated by th e Ministry of Finance. The additional demand of the Budget, if required, will 
be projected through supplementary Demands for Grants 2023-24.  
 
2.2 GOVERNMENT HEALTH EXPENDITURE IN INDIA 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.2.1 The Committee is of the view that  innovation in health is crucial for establishing an 
affordable and accessible healthcare delivery system, especially for a developing economy 
like India. The need of the hour is to recognize health as a key sector for economic as well as 
social developmen t. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Government to 
make health a priority and increase its investment in the health sector. 
(Para 2.16 of the report) 
Action Taken 
2.2.2 As per the National Health Accounts Estimates report, GHE as a share of  General 
Government Expenditure (GGE) has increased from 3.8% in 2023 -24 to 4.81% in 2018 -19. 
This increase indicates over time priority given to the health sector by the government has 
improved 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.2.3 The Committee further notes that as per the Economic Survey 2022 -23, the total 
health expenditure as a percentage of GDP was 2.1 %, however, the expenditure on „Health‟ 
includes expenditure on „Medical and Public Health‟, „Family Welfare‟, and „Water Suppl y 
and Sanitation. The Committee recommends that only the Budget of the Union Ministry of 

26 
 
Health and Family Welfare and States Health Budget should be exclusively considered under 
Total Health Expenditure. 
(Para 2.17 of the report) 
Action Taken 
2.2.4 As per  National Health Account (NHA) Estimates, the Total Health Expenditure 
(THE) consists of expenditures incurred by Government, Household and Private Entity. As 
per the NHA Estimates for the year 2018 -19, the Total Health Expenditure for India is 
estimated Rs. 5,96,440 Crore, which is 3.16% of GDP. 
 
2.3 CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME: 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.3.1 The Committee notes that in Financial Year 2022 -23, under the revenue head 
approximately 73% of the funds have been utilised vis -a-vis RE 2022-23. However, under the 
capital head, the actual expenditure is just 11% of the Revised Estimates 2022 -23. Pending 
payments under the revenue head have been cited as the reason for underutilization of funds 
and expenses to the tune of Rs. 24 crore is yet to be accounted under the capital head. 
(Para 3.2 of the report) 
Action Taken 
2.3.2 Under the head of account Major Works, Rs. 5.12 crore remained un -allocated due to 
less receipt of a smaller number of proposals than expected from CGHS. Further, Rs. 15.61 
crore was surrendered by CPWD -Bhopal, CPWD -Chennai, and CPWD -Delhi due to slow 
pace of work. Under the head of account , Machinery & Equipment‟ –file pertaining to the X-
ray Unit for Parliament House Annexe (PHA), and three Physiotherapy Units for the Supreme 
Court and PHA is under process and not likely to get completed by the end of the FY 2022 -
23. One ENT Workstation for the Supreme Court is under process for which bids have failed 
twice and is under process for the third time. 
 
2.4 VACANCY POSITION UNDER CGHS 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.4.1 The Committee notes that approximately 22% posts in Allopathic Medical Offices and 
39% posts in Non-Gazetted staff are vacant. The Committee feels that the shortage of doctors 
is a major problem that pervades the Indian healthcare system. Under CGHS, the Government 
has also been employing retired doctors for filling the vacancies in CGHS dispensary. 
However, the Committee observes that the doctor to population ratio still remains skewed in 
many cities that are covered under CGHS. The Committee accordingly recommends the 
Ministry to assess the requirement of doctors in CGHS dispensaries across the country and 
ensure that adequate doctor to population r atio is maintained in all the CGHS cities. The 
Committee further recommends the Ministry to expedite the recruitment of 340 candidates 
selected through Combined Medical Examination for filling up vacancies including the 
vacancies under CGHS. 
(Para 3.6 of the report) 
 

27 
 
Action Taken 
2.4.2 With respect to status of recruitment of 340 candidates selected through CMS 
Examination, the requisite information is given as under:- 
a.  Total candidates recommended by UPSC: 340 No 
b.  Offer issued till date i.e. 02.05.2023- 265 No. 
c.  Candidates joined till date- 35 No. 
d.  Candidates pending for offer (due to provisional medical)-75 No. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.4.3 The Committee further notes that certain other issues such as non - availability of 
medicines in CGHS dispensaries, delay in clearance of the dues owed to the private hospitals, 
viability of the CGHS rates, poor experience of the beneficiaries etc persist i n the CGHS 
ecosystem. Issues of basic medicines been indented in some CGHS dispensaries have also 
been noted. The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure consistent supply of 
medicines under CGHS through Schemes like the Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaush adhi 
Pariyojana (PMBJP). The Committee further observes that empanelling top private hospitals 
for providing comprehensive tertiary care is challenging under the present CGHS rates. The 
Committee accordingly recommends that a grading system for hospitals m ay be devised 
where CGHS rates are standardised for each category of hospitals. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to make an assessment on the budget required for expanding the 
pool of empanelled hospitals under the Scheme. The Committee has obser ved that CGHS 
rates for treatment and diagnosis have not been revised for many years and therefore, 
recommends that it may be revised keeping in view the present  market rates. 
(Para 3.9 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.4.4 Procurement of medicines through Jan Aushadhi Pariyojana  (JAP). Computerization 
enabled the authorities to identify the medicines which are not supplied by the Medical Stores  
organization and indented frequently. The government has taken a decision to proc ure such 
medicines through JAP and it has been implemented in all CGHS Cities since last  quarter of 
2022-23. Under this initiative, demand for non-available medicines based on data compiled 
by Chief Medical Officers in charge of Wellness Centres is placed to identified distributors of 
JAP by an Additional Director, CGHS of concerned City/Zone so that medicines required for 
two months consumption is available at Wellness Centres. Once the system of procurement of 
medicines through JAP is  stabilized, the depe ndency on Authorized Local Chemists  would 
come down drastically. 
 
2.5 SAFDURJUNG HOSPITAL (SJH) & VARDHMAN MAHAVIR MEDICAL 
COLLEGE (VMMC): 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.5.1 The Committee notes that against the projected demand of Rs. 2124.90 crore, funds to 
the tune of Rs. 1853.34 crore have been allotted to SJH & VMMC, leading to a shortfall of 
Rs. 271.56 crore. However, a close scrutiny of the budget estimates for 2022-23 (Annexure 

28 
 
A) reveals that under sub head 4210 Mach & Equip, against the allocated funds of Rs. 95 
crore, only Rs. 13.17 crore have been spent till 10.02.23. The Committee is surprised to note 
that the Institute procured machineries only worth Rs. 13.86 cror e and against the total 
allocated funds of Rs. 128.27 crore under the Capital head, only 20.32% of funds have been 
utilised. 
(Para 3.12 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.5.2 The Projected Demand for FY 2023 -24 was Rs. 2124.90 crore [Revenue -SJH-Rs. 
1815.80 crore, VMMC- Rs. 27.50 crore and Capital- SJH-Rs. 281.60 crore] against the above 
Rs. 1853.34 crore has been allotted for FY 2023 -24 [Revenue - SJH-Rs. 1671.94 crore & 
VMMC-Rs. 26.40 crore and Capital - SJH Rs. 155.00 crore].  The projected demand under 
Capital – SJH was Rs. 125 crores for the construction of the Lecture Theatre and boys‟ hostel 
at VMMC and Rs. 26.81 crore for other original major works. The allotted budget for major 
works is Rs. 80 crore.  Against the demand of Rs. 40 crores for the Dwarka housing project 
and Rs. 21 crores for housing up-gradation work under Capital Housing – SJH, only Rs. 25.25 
crore was allotted.Rs. 60 crore was the projected demand for procurement of M&E and the 
allotted budget is Rs. 43 crore.However, in Capital Head, R s. 10 crore has been sanctioned to 
Dwarka Project on 12.05.2023 only. 
 
2.5.3 In respect of procurement of medical equipment, the Special Secretary (H)  directed 
HSCC and HILL to complete all tender formalities by the end of June 2023. One proposal for 
45 it ems (Rs. 22 crore) and one proposal for Super Speciality Block (SSB) and New 
Emergency Block (NEB) for 5 items (Rs. 12.61 crore) have been received from HSCC and 
will be placed before Internal Purchase Committee (IPC). 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.5.4 The Committee further notes that under revenue head, 85.41% of funds have been 
utilised leading to a balance budget of Rs. 231.56 crore. Against the backdrop of Institute 
failing to ensure maximum utilisation of the allocated budget in 2022 -23, the demand for 
more funds seems unjustified. However, the Committee acknowledges that the funds have 
been slashed for VMMC and Dwarka Project. The Committee hopes that the Institute takes 
proactive actions to ensure that these projects do not suffer because of any shortage of funds. 
(Para 3.13 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.5.5 The fund allotted under the Capital head for FY 2022 -23 was not fully utilized as 
A&A and E&A were not received from the Ministry for the Dwarka Housing project. Hence 
only 5.00 crore was utilized. Also, Rs. 5.00 crore was placed at CPWD for the project of the 
Lecture Theatre and Boy‟s Hostel. However, Rs. 4.52 crore has been returned by the CPWD 
at the end of March as they have not utilized the same. Hence , the savings. The LHMC & 
Associated Hospital has taken proactive measures to ensure that the projects do not cutter. 
There has not been any shortage of funds. Maximum possible funds have been utilized for the 
execution of projects and procurements of medical equipment to improve infrastru cture at 

29 
 
patient care services. Approximately 90% of the allocated budget has been utilized for FY 
2022-23. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.5.6 The Committee in its 134 th Report had flagged the slow pace of construction activities 
such as redevelopment of staff colony and hostel facilities, stack parking around newer blocks 
and other projects in the Safdurjung Hospital and Vardhman Mahavir Medical College. The 
Committee als o notes that Rs. 232.84 crore has been allocated for construction of Lecture 
theatre and Auditorium in VMMC at SJH and the Boys Hostel Building. The Committee 
strongly recommends the Institute to ensure that all the construction projects are completed 
within the stipulated timeframe and unnecessary  delays are avoided. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry  to adhere to the timeline of 27 months for completion of the 
Dwarka Project. 
(Para 3.14 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.5.7 Construction of Safdarjung Hospital Staff Colony at Dwarka project started late. At 
present construction work has been started and will be completed by 30.06.2026. Due to the 
delay in local bodies‟ approval, construction work of the Lecture Theatre, Audito rium and 
Boys‟ Hostel at VMMC & SJH has not started yet. However, the Boys ‟ Hostel, Auditorium 
and Lecture Theatre will be completed by October 2024. 
 
2.6 RAMMANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL (RML), NEW DELHI AND PGIMER, 
DR. RML HOSPITAL 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.6.1 The Committee notes that in Dr. RML Hospital, under Revenue head, against an 
allocation of Rs. 702.31 crore in RE 2022 -23, funds to the tune of Rs. 555.69 crore have been 
utilised till 11.02.2023 leading to an unspent balance of Rs. 146.62 crore. Similarly, under 
capital head, the actual expenditure is Rs. 117.29 crore against an allocation of Rs. 140 crore 
in RE 2022 -23. The utilisation trend in 2021 -22 also reflects that Dr. RML Hospital, under 
Capital Head could spent only Rs. 49.07 crore against Rs. 100 crore allotted in BE 2021-22. 
(Para 3.21 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.6.2 Under Revenue Head, against an allocation of Rs. 702.31 crore in RE 2022 -23, after 
surrender RE -2022-23 funds were Rs. 687.31 crore. Rs. 624.56 crore has been utilized ti ll 
31.03.2023 leaving an unspent balance of Rs. 62.73 crore. Under Capital Head, the actual 
expenditure is Rs. 117.29 crore against an allocation of Rs. 140 crore in RE 2022 -23. As per 
direction in the Senior Officers‟ Meeting, Dr. RML Hospital has been directed to plan for full 
utilization of funds during the FY 2023-24. 
 
 
 

30 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.6.3 The Committee further notes that in BE 2023 -24, the combined budget of Dr. RML 
Hospital and ABVIMS has been enhanced to Rs. 901.43 crore under the Revenue head and to 
Rs. 370.75 crore under the Capital head leading to a total of Rs. 1272.18 crore. Examinin g the 
data furnished by the Department, it is observed that funds under capital as well as revenue 
head in 2021 -22 and 2022 -23 remained unutilised. The Committee notes that patients from 
Delhi and outside Delhi visit Dr. RML Hospital on a daily basis which necessitates creation of 
additional infrastructure for the Institute. The Committee notes that budgetary funds have 
been sought for construction of Super Specialty Block to house the existing Super Specialties 
as well as opening of new Super Specialties l ike Medical and Surgical Oncology, Nuclear 
Medicine, Radio Therapy, Organ Transplant Medicine (Renal, Live, Cardiac) & Pediatric 
Cardiology. In this backdrop, it is crucial that the allotted budgetary funds are put to good use. 
Accordingly, the Committee, recommends the Department to ensure maximum utilisation of 
the budget for the creation of targeted capital assets. 
(Para 3.22 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.6.4 The targeted capital assets at VMMC are the construction of the Lecture Theatre and 
boys‟ hostel at VMMC and the approximate cost for the same is Rs. 232.84 crore. The 
projected demand for the SY 2023 -24 under Capital -SSH for the same was Rs. 125 crore. 
However, Rs. 80 crore was allotted for the project and various major works by the Ministry 
Rs. 0.48 crore has been placed to CPWD for the project in the financial year.  Monthly 
meetings under the Chairmanship of Director & MS to ensure  maximum utilization of the 
budget allocated to ABVIMS. 
 
2.7 PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHAYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.7.1 The Committee notes that against the revised estimates of Rs. 8269.56 crore in 2022 -
23, Rs. 6771.83 crore have been utilised till 30.01.2023. The Committee hopes that the 
Ministry is able to judiciously utilise the remaining funds under PMSSY Scheme in the last 
quarter of the Financial Year. 
(Para 3.28 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.7.2 For the FY 2022-23, Rs. 7744.92 crore has been utilized against the RE of Rs. 8269.56 
crore under PMMSY scheme which is 93.66%. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.7.3 The Committee is aware that any delay in construction work results in cost escalation 
from the original estimates. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to 
put in place a stringent monitoring mechanism to ensure timely completion of al l AIIMS 
projects to avoid time and cost overruns. The Committee also recommends the Department to 
rationalize the procedure for procurement of medical equipment and ensure that the 

31 
 
installation of equipment is synchronized with the progress of construction  packages. The 
Department must also ensure that technical manpower for operation of the medical equipment 
in available in the Institutes. 
(Para 3.36 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.7.4 In order to avoid any delay in the construction work of the project and to ensure timely 
installation and commissioning of medical equipment in synchronization with the 
construction work, regular review meetings at various levels are being held in the Ministry 
with the Executing Agencies of  the projects and all other stakeholders. Site visits of officials 
are also conducted to oversee the progress of civil works and to facilitate coordination 
amongst different stakeholders for the timely completion of works. 
 
2.8 NATIONAL DIGITAL HEALTH MISSION (NDHM)/ AYUSHMAN BHARAT 
DIGITAL MISSION (ABDM) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.8.1 The Committee sees huge potential in the Scheme in improving  accessibility to wider 
range of digital health services and integration  of the digital health ecosystem. However, 
standardisation of NDHM architecture across the country and co-operation of States is crucial 
for successful implementation of the Scheme. The Committee,  therefore, recommends the 
Department to bring all the States in one platform and n udge the States for creation of the 
administrative machinery for the Mission. 
(Para 3.43 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.8.2 The role of the States/UTs has been critical since the inception of ABDM, and this 
was recognized early on. As a result, States/UTs were advised to adopt a similar governance 
structure for implementing this mission, which was communicated in May 2021. The 
States/UTs were advised to establish a state office for ABDM and set up administrative 
machinery. ABDM is a central sector scheme that provides dedicated funding for five years 
starting from the year 2021 till 2026 to finance the States/UTs with Human Reso urces for the 
State office with vertical heads and a Project Management Unit (PMU). NHA has issued 
detailed guidelines on 08 March 2022 regarding this matter.  In addition, the States/UTs are 
provided funds for Capacity Building , and Information Education a nd Communication 
activities. Rs. 500 Cr has been allocated for Human resources support, and Rs. 140 Cr has 
been earmarked for CB/IEC activities for the period of five years till 2026. 
 
2.9 ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS) NEW DELHI 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.9.1 The Committee recalls that the approval of the construction of 3519 Dwelling Units 
dates back to 2016, accordingly, the Committee recommends the Institute to start the projects 
in Ayurvigyan Nagar and West Ansari Nagar o nce the final approvals are received. The  

32 
 
Committee further recommends the Ministry to monitor the  progress and ensure that the 
projects are completed within 60  months. The Ministry must also ensure judicious allocation 
for both  the Projects. The Committee  notes that Master Plan for AIIMS Delhi  is a very 
ambitious project to transform AIIMS New Delhi into a  world class Medical University. The 
Committee recommends the  Department to approve budgetary allocation for the Project so 
that AIIMS Delhi Infrastructure can further be enhanced and modernized. 
(Para 3.49 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.9.2 Since approval for monetization at West Ansari Nagar was not permitted by the 
statutory authority and for A.V. Nagar best possible options to monetize commercial space 
could not be firmed up and since project financing has reduced considerably, the 4 th 
Empowered Committee in its meeting held on 16.03.2023 has taken the following decisions:- 
 
i) The Empowered Committee (EC) agreed to an e-auction for these sales of the Local 
Shopping Complex at Ayur Vigyan Nagar which is nearing completion. 
ii)  The Empowered Committee also noted that the FAR at West Ansari Nagar is not 
permitted to be monetized by DDA. 
iii)  The proposal of NBCC for the construction and sale of Service/. Apartments at Ayur 
Vigyan Nagar were not agreed to by the Empowered Committee as it was not in 
consonance with the Cabinet Decision on the subject. 
iv) The Empowered Committee directed NBCC to evaluate the project cost at present rates, 
potential revenue flow with the reduced area available for commercialization, financial 
feasibility implementation plan, etc., and examine whether the proposal needs approval 
of the Cabinet due to change in basic premises on which the project was approved.  
v) The Empowered Committee also advised NBCC to also draw on the 
experience/learning from other projects taken up on the same mode which were under 
implementation or have been implemented. 
vi) The Empowered Committee also directed NBCC to explore various options by 
analyzing the market trends and proposing the best option for monetization of the 
saleable area available for the project.  
 
2.9.3 Action as above has been initiated by M/s NBCC . As regards the Master Plan for 
AIIMS, New Delhi, the Master Plan has been prepared after putting intensive consultative 
exercises and prolonged meetings. This Master Plan has all statutory approvals. AIIMS has 
submitted the EFC Memorandum for the Implementation of Master Plan to MoHFW on 23 rd 
March 2022. The response to comments  received from apprising Ministry/Niti Aayog in the 
EFC Memo has already been received. The said EFC Memo is currently under examination 
by the Department of Expenditure. The total cost of the project is approximately Rs. 1500 
crore spread over a period of  7-8 years in 2 phases. The annual budgetary expenditure is 
expected to be around  Rs. 2000 crores and will result in the transformation of AIIMS New 
Delhi into a world -class medical university with the creation of over additional 3000 pa tient 
care beds inc luding 300 emergency beds. 100m new operation theatres, state -of-the art 
research labs, animal facilities, clinical trial facilities, AYUSH & integrated care facility, 

33 
 
modern academic spaces, 4000 hostel units, 14000 parking spaces , etc. The set timelines for 
the project as per the EFC proposal are: 
 
Phase-I 55 months from the date of final budgetary approval. 
Phase-II 78 months from the date of final budgetary approval. 
 
2.10 FAMILY WELFARE SCHEME 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.10.1 The Committee recommends the Department to track the progress of all the health 
Programs running under the Family Welfare Scheme and make concerted efforts for the 
achievement of better maternal and child health outcomes. The Committee also recommends 
the Department to assess the findings of the latest National Family and Health Survey (NFHS) 
and accordingly take necessary steps to improve health indicators. 
(Para 3.52 of the report) 
Action Taken 
2.10.2 The National Family Health Survey (NFHS) is a large -scale, multi -round survey 
conducted in a representative sample of households throughout India. Five rounds of the 
survey have been successfully conducted since the first survey in 1992 -93 and the fifth in 
2019-21. The survey provides district, state , and nat ional information for India on fertility, 
infant and child mortality, the practice of family planning, maternal and child health, 
reproductive health, nutrition, anaemia, utilization , and quality of health and family planning 
services. 
 
2.10.3 The NFHS (National Family Health Survey) has been developed in accordance with 
the global Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) standard. The sampling techniques, 
questionnaire, and methodology used in NFHS are finalized after in -depth deliberations in the 
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC), wherein all stakeholders‟ i.e representatives from all 
program divisions of MoHFW, concerned central ministries and other development partners 
are members. The sixth round of NFHS has already been approved for 2023 -24 and  is 
currently in its initial phase.  
 
Progress of Key Maternal and Child Health Indicators in NFHS 
S. N Key Maternal and Child Health Indicators NFHS-5 
(2019-21) 
NFHS-4 
(2015-16) 
1 Percentage of mothers who had at least 4 antenatal 
care visits  
58.5 51.2 
2 Percentage of mothers who consumed iron folic acid 
for 180 days or more when they were pregnant 
26.0 14.4 
3 Percentage of mothers who received postnatal care 
from a doctor/nurse/LHV/ANM/midwife/other 
health personnel within 2 days of delivery * 
 
78.0 62.4 

34 
 
4 Average out-of-pocket expenditure per delivery in a 
public health facility (Rs.) 
3245 
  
3197 
5 Percentage of children who received postnatal care 
from a doctor/nurse/LHV/ANM/midwife/other 
health personnel within 2 days of delivery 
11.5 NA 
6 Percentage of institutional births 88.6 78.9 
7 Percentage of births attended by skilled health 
personnel[1] 
89.4 81.4 
8 Percentage of births delivered by caesarean section  21.5 17.2 
9 Percentage of children age 12 -23 months fully 
vaccinated based on information from either 
vaccination card or mother's recall[2] 
76.4 62.0 
10 Prevalence of symptoms of acute respiratory 
infection (ARI) in the 2 weeks preceding the survey  
2.8 2.7 
11 Percentage of children under age 6 months 
exclusively breastfed[3] 
63.7 55.0 
12 Percentage of children under 5 years who are 
stunted (height-for-age)[4] 
35.5 38.4 
13 Percentage of children under 5 years who are wasted 
(weight-for-height)4 
19.3 21.0 
14 Percentage of children under 5 years who are 
underweight (weight-for-age)4 
32.1 35.8 
15 Percentage of children under 5 years who are 
overweight (weight-for-height)[5] 
3.4 2.1 
* Figures are taken from the NFHS-5 factsheet. 
[1] Doctor/nurse/LHV/ANM/midwife/other health personnel. 
[2] Vaccinated with BCG, measles-containing vaccine (MCV)/MR/MMR/Measles, and 3 
doses each of polio (excluding polio vaccine given at birth) and DPT or Penta vaccine 
[3] Based on the youngest child living with the mother. 
[4] Below -2 standard deviations, based on the WHO standard. 
[5] Above +2 standard deviations, based on the WHO standard 
[6] Haemoglobin in grams per decilitre (g/dl). Among children, prevalence is adjusted for 
altitude. Among adults, prevalence is adjusted for altitude and for smoking status, if known. 
As NFHS uses capillary blood for the estimation of anaemia, the results of NFHS-5 need not 
be compared with other surveys using venous blood. 
 
2.11 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.11.1 An examination of the budgetary trend of NHM, which is Government's flagship 
health systems reform programme, reveals that the Scheme has exhibited exceptional 
utilisation of budgetary funds over the past few years. The Committee notes that in BE 2022 -
23, funds to the tune of Rs. 28,287 crore have been spent against the revised estimates of Rs. 
28,974 crore, however, in BE 2023 -24, funds to the tune of Rs. 29,085 crore has been 
allocated to NHM which is meager 0.4% increase vis-a-vis RE 2022-23. 
(Para 4.5 of the report) 

35 
 
Action Taken 
2.11.2 During FY 2022 -23 funds to the tune of Rs. 31,195.81 crore have been released to 
States/UTs against the revised estimates (RE) of Rs. 28,974.29 crore. In FY 2023 -24, Rs. 
29,085.26 crore has been allocated (BE) to NHM. Additional requirements during FY 2023  
24, if any, will be demanded at RE stage based on the financial progress under the scheme. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.11.3 National Health Mission aims at strengthening health system in the States and 
additional funds are transferred to the States for improving several key indicators of 
Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and communicable diseases. 
However, the Committee notes that India still lags behind in many indi cators and the SDG 
targets for many health indicators are yet to be achieved. The Maternal Mortality Ratio SDG 
target of 70 by 2030 is yet to be achieved by all the States. Similarly, India's Under 5 
Mortality Rate (U5MR) is 32/1000 live births whereas the SDG target is 25 by 2030. 
(Para 4.6 of the report) 
Action Taken 
2.11.4 The Sustainable Development Goal (SDGs) was adopted by India in September 2015 
and SDGs came into effect by January 1, 2016. NITI Aayog was entrusted with the task of 
coordinating the SDGs, mapping schemes related to the SDGs and their targets and 
identifying lead and supporting ministries for each target.  The MoHFW is the Nodal Ministry 
for SDGs Goal -3 ``Health for al ‟‟. Since the SDGs have come into effect, there has been 
steady progress in the achievement of SDGs. As per the NITI Aayog‟s SDG Index, there has 
been a steady growth in India‟s progress towards achieving SDGs -3. From the year 2018 till 
2022, there has been an average of around 10% year-on-year improvement in India‟s 
achievement of Goal 3. India‟s performance for achievement of SDG -3 as measured by NITI 
Aayog‟s SDG Index in 2018 was 52, and for the year 2022, the score is 74. Stat-wise progress 
for achievement of SDG-3 has also been consistently increasing. 
 
2.11.5 In recent years, India has witnessed a significant decline in  the Maternal Mortality 
Ratio from 130 in 2014 -16 to 97 per  lakh live births in 2018 -20. As per the latest “Special 
Bulletin on MMR 2018 -20” released  by O/o Registrar General of India, the Maternal  
Mortality Ratio (MMR) of India has declined to 97 /lakh live births.  Upon achieving this, 
India has accomplished the National  Health Policy (NHP) target for MMR of less than 100/ 
lakh live births and is on the right track to achieve the SDG  target of MMR of less than 
70/lakh live births by 2030. 
 
2.11.6 Eight Indian States have shown outstanding progress and have achieved both NHP and 
SDG targets for MMR viz. Kerala (19), Maharashtra (33), Telangana (43),  Andhra Pradesh 
(45), Tamil Nadu (54), Jharkhand (56 ), Gujarat (57) and Karnataka (69).  Seven States have 
shown the highest decline in MMR i.e.  Rajasthan (28 points), Chhattisgarh (23 points), 
Odisha (17 points), Karnataka (14 points), Telangana and Andhra  Pradesh and Gujarat (13 
points each). 
 

36 
 
2.11.7 Besides MMR, there has been a significant improvement in  key MH Indicators as per 
NFHS-5 data: 
1. Antenatal check -ups in the first trimester increased from 58.6% (NFHS-4) to 70% 
(NFHS-5). 
2. Institutional deliveries increased from 78.9% (NFHS-4) to 88.6% (NFHS-5). 
3. Institutional delivery in Public Health Facilities increased from 52.1% (NFHS-4) to 
61.9% (NFHS-5). 
4. Births assisted by SBA increased from 81.4% (NFHS-4) to 89.4% (NFHS-5). 
5. Postnatal care from a doctor/nurse/LHV/ANM/midwife/other health personnel 
within 2 days of delivery increased from 62.4% (NFHS-4) to 78% (NFHS-5). 
6. Average out-of-pocket expenditure per delivery in a public health facility decreased 
from Rs. 3,197 (NFHS-4) to Rs. 2,916 in (NFHS-5) 
 
Key strategies for accelerating the pace of decline of MMR 
2.11.8 Maternal Health programs are synchronous with their vision to avert preventable death 
during the antepartum, intrapartum , and immediate postpartum period.  Under the National 
Health Mission (NHM), India has made concerted efforts to provide accessible, quality 
maternal health services and minimize preventable maternal deaths. 
 
2.11.9 Public health is a state subject, and the  primary responsibility of strengthening the 
public healthcare system, including the provision of quality healthcare lies with the respective 
State Governments.   However, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare through NHM, 
provides significant technical  and financial support to all States/UTs by approving the State 
specific proposals received through Programme Implementation Plans (PIPs).  The 
Government of India has initiated the following key strategies to reduce maternal deaths: 
 
 Janani Suraksha Yojana  (JSY), a demand promotion and conditional cash transfer 
scheme with the objective of reducing Maternal and Infant Mortality by promoting 
institutional delivery among pregnant women. 
 Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK)  aims to eliminate out -of-pocket 
expenses for pregnant women and sick infants by entitling them to free delivery, 
including caesarean section, free transport, diagnostics, medicines, other consumables, 
diet and blood in public health institutions.  
 Surakshit Matratva Ashwasan (SUMAN)  aims to provide assured, dignified, 
respectful and quality healthcare at no cost and zero tolerance for denial of services for 
every woman and newborn visiting the public health facility to end all preventable 
maternal and newborn deaths. 
 Pradhan Mantri Suraksh it Matritva Abhiyan (PMSMA ) provides pregnant women 
a fixed day, free of cost , and quality Antenatal Care on the 9 th day of every month. 
Further, an Extended PMSMA (e -PMSMA) strategy is being implemented to ensure 
quality ANC to pregnant women, especially to high-risk pregnancy (HRP) women , and 
individual HRP tracking till a safe delivery is achieved. 
 LaQshya aims to improve the quality of care in the labour room and maternity 
operation theatres to ensure that pregnant women receive respectful and quality c are 
during delivery and immediate post-partum.  

37 
 
 Comprehensive Abortion Care services are being strengthened through training of 
health care providers, supply of drugs, equipment, Information Education and 
Communication (IEC), etc. 
 Monthly Village Health and Nutrition Days (VHND ) as an outreach activity at 
Anganwadi centres for the provision of maternal and childcare including nutrition in 
convergence with the ICDS. 
 Delivery Points - „Delivery Points‟ have been strengthened in terms of infrastructure, 
equipment, and trained manpower for the provision of comprehensive RMNCAH+N 
services. 
 Functionalization of First Referral Units (FRUs)  by ensuring manpower, blood 
storage units, referral linkages, etc. 
 Setting up of Maternal and Child Health (MCH) Wings  at high caseload facilities to 
improve the quality of care provided to mothers and children. 
 Operationalization of Obstetric ICU/HDU  at high case load tertiary care facilities 
across the country to handle complicated pregnancies. 
 Capacity building is undertaken for all cadres of healthcare workers. 
 Maternal Death Surveillance Review (MDSR)  is being implemented both at facilities 
and at the community level. The purpose is to take corrective action in case of maternal 
death at appropriate levels and improve the quality of obstetric care. 
 Regular IEC/BCC  is conducted for early registration of ANC, regular ANC, 
institutional delivery, nutrition, and care during pregnancy etc. 
 MCP Card and Safe Motherhood Booklet  are distributed to pregnant women to 
educate them on diet, rest, danger signs of pregnancy, benefit schemes , and institutional 
deliveries. 
 Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) portal is a name-based web-enabled tracking 
of pregnant women and newborns to ensure the provision of regular and complete 
services to them including antenatal care, institutional delivery, and post-natal care. 
 Birth Waiting Homes (BWH) are established  in remote and tribal areas to promote 
institutional delivery and improve access to healthcare facilities. 
 Outreach camps  are provisioned to improve  the reach of health care services, 
especially in tribal and hard-to-reach areas. This platform is used to increase awareness 
for Maternal and child health services, and community mobilization as well as to track 
high-risk pregnancies. 
 Performance based incentives to ANMs (SBAs):  ANMs trained in SBA are 
incentivized to attend home deliveries in pre -identified and notified villages in remote 
and inaccessible areas where it is difficult to bring a woman to the institution for 
delivery on account of geographical/climatic exigencies. 
 
2.11.10 Inputs of CH Division, MoHFW  on Para 4 .6 of 143rd Reports of DRPSC on 
Health & Family Welfare on the Demands for Grants (2023 -24). As per the latest Sample 
Registration System Report of the Registrar General of India, the Under 5 Mortality Rate is 
32 per 1000 Live births in 2020 at the National Level. Under National Health Policy 2017, an 
ambitious target of Under 5 Mortality i.e. 23 per 1000 live births by 2025 has been set up. 
Considering the annual decline rate of 5.93% from 2010 (59 per 1000 live births) – 2020 (32 
per 1000 live births), th e country would achieve the SDG Target of Under 5 Mortality Rate 

38 
 
(25 per 1000 live births by 2030) before 2030. In order to further bring down Under 5 
mortality all across the country, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) 
supports all States/U Ts in the implementation of Reproductive, Maternal, New -born, Child, 
Adolescent Health and Nutrition (RMNCAH+N) strategy under National Health Mission 
(NHM) based on the Annual Program Implementation Plan (APIP) submitted by States/ UTs.  
 
2.11.11 The interventions for improving child survival and reduction of child mortality 
are placed below: 
 
 Facility Based New-born Care: Sick New-born Care Units (SNCUs) are established at 
District Hospital and Medical College level, and New-born Stabilization Units (NBSUs) 
are established at First Referral Units (FRUs)/ Community Health Centres (CHCs) for 
care of sick and small babies.  
 Community-based care of New -born and Young Children:  Under Home Based 
New-born Care (HBNC) and Home -Based Care of Young Children (HBYC) program, 
home visits are performed by ASHAs to improve child-rearing practices and to identify 
sick new-born and young children in the community.  
 Mothers’ Absolute Affection (MAA): Early initiation and exclusive breastfeeding for 
the first six months and appropriate Infant and Young Child Feeding (IYCF) practices 
are promoted under Mothers‟ Absolute Affection (MAA).  
 Social Awareness and Actions to Neutralize Pneumonia Successfully (SAANS)  
initiative implemented in 2019 for the reduction of Childhood morbidity and mortality 
due to Pneumonia.  
 Universal Immunization Programme (UIP)  is implemented to provide vaccination to 
children against life-threatening diseases such as  Tuberculosis, Diphtheria, Pertussis, 
Polio, Tetanus, Hepatitis B, Measles, Rubella, Pneumonia and Meningitis caused by 
Haemophilus Influenzae B. The Rotavirus vaccination has also been rolled out in the 
country for prevention of Rota -viral diarrhoea. Pneu mococcal Conjugate Vaccine 
(PCV) has been introduced in all the States and UTs. 
 Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakaram (RBSK):  Children from 0 to 18 years of age 
are screened for 32 health conditions (i.e.  Diseases, Deficiencies, Defects , and 
Developmental delay) under Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakaram (RBSK) to improve 
child survival. District Early Intervention Centres (DEICs) at the district health facility 
level are established for the confirmation and management of children screened under 
RBSK. 
 Nutrition Rehabilitation Centres (NRCs)  are set up at public health facilities to treat 
and manage the children with Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) admitted with medical 
complications. 
 Intensified Diarrhoea Control Fortnight / Defeat Diarrhoea (D2)  initiative 
implemented for promoting ORS and Zinc use and for reducing diarrhoeal deaths. 
 Anaemia Mukt Bharat (AMB) strategy  as a part of POSHAN Abhiyan aims to 
strengthen the existing mechanisms and foster newer strategies to tackle anaemia which 
include testing & and treatment of anaemia in school going adolescents & and pregnant 

39 
 
women, addressing non -nutritional causes of anaemia and a comprehensive 
communication strategy.  
 Capacity Building:  Several capacity-building programs of health care providers are 
undertaken to improve maternal and child survival and health outcomes. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.11.12 The Committee notes that NHM aims at bridging the gap especially in rural 
healthcare services which needs a comprehensive decentralized approach. However, the  
stagnant allocation to the Scheme does not fare well with the objectives of the Scheme to 
develop a resilient health system across the States. Over the years, despite the maximum 
utilisation, the budgetary allocation to the Scheme has not increased. Consi dering the 
important role played by the Scheme in the provisioning of accessible,  affordable, 
accountable, and effective healthcare in the States, the Committee strongly recommends the 
Department increase the total allocation of the Scheme. 
(Para 4.7 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
2.11.13 Fund allocation for FY 2023 -24 under NHM has increased to Rs. 29,085.26 
crore against BE 2022-23 of Rs. 28,859.73 crore/RE (2022-23) of Rs. 28,974.29 crore. 
 
2.12 TERTIARY CARE PROGRAMS 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
 2.12.1 The Committee further notes that in 2022, a National Tele Mental Health programme 
was launched to improve access to quality mental health counselling & and care services and 
the Programme has been allocated a budget of Rs. 133.73 crore in BE 2023 -24. The 
Committee believes that the time is right to bring mental health to centre stage and expand the 
scope of the National Mental Health Programme. The Department may explore the creation of 
one inclusive nationwide scheme for mental health that encompass es all the facets of mental 
health. The Committee accordingly recommends the Department to upgrade NMHP as an 
umbrella Scheme for Mental Health that covers all the aspects of mental health care service 
and delivery. The Committee also notes that there was a considerable rise in mental health 
issues during the pandemic. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to 
take effective measures to increase the outreach of mental healthcare services and integrate 
psychological support services into primary healthcare. 
(Para 4.16 of the report) 
Action Taken 
2.12.2 The Government of India has launched the National Tele Mental Health Programme 
(Tele MANAS) - a toll -free mental health helpline that provides support and assistance to 
those struggling with mental health issues. Access to trained and accredited counsellors is 
available across the country in multiple languages on the numbers 14416 and 1800-891-4416. 
 
2.12.3 Tele MANAS is a revolutionary digital mental health service connecting distressed 
individuals with mental health professionals on a 24x7 basis. Individuals suffering from any 

40 
 
kind of mental distress can reach out to these services and seek help from professionals in this 
tier-based system. Tele MANAS is an excellent resource that can provide them with the help 
they need and has received more than 100,000 calls since its launch on 10th October 2022. 
Realizing the impact that COVID -19 may have on the mental health of the people, including 
children, the Government has set up a 24/7 helpline to provide psychosocial support, by 
mental health professionals, to the entire affected population, divided in to different target 
groups viz children, students, adult, elderly, women and healthcare workers. In addition, 
guidelines/ advisories on the management of mental health issues, catering to different 
segments of society have also been issued by the Government. 
 
2.12.4 Further, the Government of India implements the National Mental Health Programme 
(NMHP) as well as the District Mental Health Programme (DMHP) under NMHP in 716 
districts of the country. Under DMHP, sufficient funds are provided to each district  supported 
under the Programme for targeted interventions with the following objectives: 
 
i. To provide facilitative skills to class teachers to promote life skills among their 
students. 
ii. To provide the knowledge and skills to class teachers to identify emotional conduct, 
scholastic, and substance use problems in their students. 
iii. To provide a system of referral for students with psychological problems in schools 
to the District Mental Health Team for input and treatment. 
iv. To involve other stakeholders like parents, and community leaders to enhance the 
development of adolescents etc. 
 
2.12.5 In addition to the above, the Government is also taking steps to strengthen mental 
healthcare services at the primary healthcare level. Mental health services have been a dded to 
the package of services under Comprehensive Primary Health Care under Ayushman Bharat – 
HWC Scheme. Operational guidelines on Mental, Neurological, and Substance Use Disorders 
(MNS) at Health and Wellness Centres (HWC) have been released under the ambit of 
Ayushman Bharat. 
 
2.16 HUMAN RESOURCE FOR HEALTH AND MEDICAL EDUCATION 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
2.16.1 The Committee notes that under Phase III establishment of new medical colleges 
attached with district/referral hospitals , 75 colleges have been approved, however, only 29 
colleges are functional. Under the Scheme, Rs. 20,590.21 crore have been released, however, 
Rs. 6125.64 crore is yet to be released. Under Up-gradation of State Govt. Medical colleges 
for increasing MBBS ( UG) seats , Rs. 887.49 crore is yet to be released by the Central 
Government whereas under Up-gradation of State Govt. Medical Colleges for increasing PG 
seats, Rs. 2119.60 crore is the due balance central share. The Committee notes that the 
Umbrella Scheme, Human Resource for Health & Medical Education  aims at upgrading the 
medical education infrastructure in the States which will greatly address the shortage of 
doctors in the country. However, non-release of earmarked funds to the States may impact the 
performance of the Scheme. The Committee also notes the submission of the Ministry that the 

41 
 
release of central share depends on the receipt of Detailed Project Report from the State 
Governments. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to take up the  matter of 
DPRs with the States and review the utilisation and physical progress of the Scheme in the 
States. The Ministry must urge the States to submit the utilisation certificates for the released 
funds so that the timely transfer of remaining funds can be facilitated. 
(Para 4.22 of the report) 
Action Taken 
a. Establishment of new medical colleges attached with district/referral hospitals 
 
2.16.2 This Ministry administers a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for “Establishment of 
new medical colleges attached  with existing district/referral hospitals”  with preference to 
underserved areas and aspirational districts, where there is no existing Government or private 
medical college. Under the Scheme, a total of 157 medical colleges have been sanctioned in 
three p hases with fund sharing between the Centre and State Governments in the ratio of 
90:10 for Northeastern and Special Category States and 60:40 for others. Out of the 157 
approved colleges, 94 are functional. 
(Rs in crore) 
Phase No. of 
colleges 
approved 
No. of 
colleges 
functional 
Total 
approved 
cost 
Central 
share 
Funds 
released 
Centre 
share due 
I 58 52 10962 7541.10 7541.10 0 
II 24 15 6000 3675.00 3675.00 0 
III 75 32 24370.41 15499.74 10606.35 4893.39 
Total 157 99 41332.41 26715.84 21822.45 4893.39 
 
The provision of sufficient funds was ensured in the last financial year as well as has 
been made available in the BE for the current year for the purpose. 
 
b.  Upgradation of State Govt Medical colleges for increasing MBBS seats. 
 
2.16.3 The main objective of this scheme is to create 10000 MBBS seats and bridge the gap 
in the number of seats available in the government and private sector, mitigate the shortage of 
Doctors by increasing the number of undergraduates, and utilize the existing infrastructure for 
increasing additional undergraduate seats in a cost-effective manner. As of now, a total of 
4677 MBBS se ats have been approved under this scheme  with an approved cost of Rs. 
561.25 crore. The central share amounts to Rs. 3468.13 crore, out of which Rs. 2740.74 crore 
has been released till date. Under the scheme , funds are provided for civil works, equipment 
and furniture.  It is a key investment that contributes towards the future of strengthening 
Human resources in the healthcare system. The provision of sufficient funds was ensured in 
the last financial year as well as has been made available in the BE for the current year for the 
purpose. 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
c. Scheme for up-gradation of State Govt Medical Colleges for increasing PG seats- 
 
2.16.4 This scheme aims at creating 8058 new PG seats in two phases, which would mitigate 
the shortage of specialist doctors. A total of 7916 PG seats have already been approved under 
the scheme till date.  Out of these, 1986 PG seats have been approved in FY 2022 -23. 
Therefore, at present, only 142 PG seats are remaining to be approved under the Scheme, the 
proposals for which are currently under consideration in the Ministry. Under the two phases 
of this sc heme, the total approved cost as of now is Rs. 5842.09 crore. The Central share of 
this amounts to Rs. 3686.65 crore, out of which an amount of Rs. 2193.27 crore has been 
released so far. The provision of sufficient funds was ensured in the last financial year as well 
as has been made available in the BE for the current year for the purpose. 
 
2.16.5 Reasons for low expenditure and steps taken: 
 Sanction of funds is conditional to the release of corresponding state share, actual 
utilization of 75% of central and state share funds by the States and submission of 
utilization certificates by the State Governments. The request for the release of funds  
from the States has been low due to the non -fulfillment of these essential 
conditionalities for further release of funds. Despite the availability of sufficient funds 
with this ministry, due to low expenditure by states/UTs , further release of funds could  
not be made to them resulting in low expenditure on the part of the Central 
Government. 
 
2.16.6 The Ministry has reviewed the expenditure and physical progress of projects on 
various occasions from time to time, where the States have been requested to ens ure that the 
matching State share is released in time and 75% of the combined corpus (Central and state 
share) is utilized so that further funds can be sanctioned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
CHAPTER–III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
3.1 BUDGETARY PROJECTION VIS-A-VIS ALLOCATION 
 
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
3.1.1 It is observed for the last 5 years, the budgetary allocations have always been less than 
the projected Demands for Grants for the Department of Health & Family Welfare. For the 
projected additional demands for funds at RE stage, then again a reduced budget was 
approved. As regard the projections made for the budgetary allocations, there is decline in the 
projected demands since 2021 -22. For the year 2023 -24, the projected BE was Rs. 89532.00 
Cr and the approved BE is Rs. 86175.00 Cr. Adjusting with the inflation rate of 5.5 % for the 
month of December 2022, the expected BE 2023 -24 should have been Rs. 87150.00 Cr over 
BE 2022-2023. Public health plays an important role in facilitating economic development of 
the country, therefore, in view of inadequate and overstretched public heath infrastructure; the 
investments in health sector should increase. Given that inflation r ate is expected to be on 
higher side in near term, the government should consider demanding for higher budgetary 
allocations for health sector at RE stage. 
(Para 2.4 of the report) 
 
3.1.2 The Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been allocated Rs 89,155crores 
in Union Budget 2023 -24, this includes ₹86175.00 crore for the Department of  Health & 
Family Welfare and ₹2980.00crore for the Department of Health Research. In 2023 -24, there 
is a 12.84 % / 7.38% increase in allocation as compared to RE 2022 -23 and a 3.83% /6.89% 
increase/decrease in allocation as compared to BE 2022 -23 in respect of the Department of 
Health & Family Welfare as given in the following table.  
 
Year BE 
 2022-23 
RE  
2022-23 
BE  
2023-24 
(Projecte
d) 
BE  
2023-24 
 
Addl. 
(BE 
23-24) 
% 
over 
BE 
2022-
23 
Addl. 
(BE 
23-24) 
% 
over 
RE 
2022-
23 
Expected 
Budget  
for 2023-
24 after 
adjusting 
5.5% 
inflation 
rate 
(over BE 
2022-23) 
Department 
of Health & 
Family 
Welfare 
83000.0
0 
76370.4
0 
89532.05 86175.00 3.83 12.84 87150.00 
 
 
 

44 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.1.3 The National Health Policy 2017 aims to raise the Government's health 
expenditure to 2.5% of GDP by 2025 and reduce the proportion of households 
experiencing catastrophic health expenditure by 25% from the level of 2017, by 2025. In 
view of the above targets and to enhance the preparedness for future pandemics like 
Covid-19, the Committee feels that the increase in allocation as informed by the 
Ministry is insufficient and recommends increasing in budget allocated to the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare departments, with establishing a mechanism ensuring the 
optimal utilisation of funds. 
 
3.2 VACANCIES IN  SAFDURJUNG HOSPITAL (SJH) & VARDHMAN 
MAHAVIR MEDICAL COLLEGE (VMMC): 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
3.2.1 The Committee notes that almost 24% of posts in Group A Medical, 44% in Group A 
Non-Medical, 39% in Group B Gazetted, 12% in Group B Non -Gazetted are lying vacant. 
Large vacancies in workforce will have an impact on the smooth functioning of the Institute.  
The Committee is of the opinion that the administrative manpower must be commensurate 
with UG, PG seats & teaching faculty. Vacancies even in non -faculty staff are not acceptable 
and the Institute must ensure that manpower in the Academic Section and VMMC  
Administration is increased proportionately. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the 
Ministry to expedite the recruitment at various Posts in the Institute. Besides it is also 
recommended that promotional guidelines in general and for Persons with Benc hmark 
Disabilities (PwBDs) across various categories of employees are followed to retain best 
talent. 
(Para 3.16 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
3.2.2 Sanctioned vis-à-vis position strength as on 01.03.2023 is given as under:- 
 
Group Sanctioned In Position Vacancies 
Group-A Medical 589 443 146 
Group-A Non- 
Medical 
204 130 68 
Group-B Gazetted 50 22 28 
Group-B Non- 
Gazetted 
2807 2457 343 
Group-C 796 596 186 
Group-C(erstwhile 
Group (D) 
957 704 253 
Tenure 1412 1160 252 
Total 6815 5512 1276 
 
 

45 
 
Note- 
(i)  The Hospital is making continuous efforts to fill up the posts for which recruitment 
rules are notified. 
(ii) Safdarjung Hospital also follows the guidelines issued by DoPT  for reservation of 
persons with benchmark Disabilities (PwBDs). 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.2.3 The Committee has observed that 1276 positions (nearly 19% of sanctioned 
posts) in medical and non -medical departments remain unfilled. These vacancies may 
disrupt the smooth functioning of Institute's operations  and result in poor patient 
outcome. The Committee believes that administrative staffing should match the number 
of undergraduate and postgraduate seats as well as teaching faculty. Vacancies in non -
faculty roles are also unacceptable, and the Institute should increase staff in the 
Academic Section and VMMC Administration accordingly. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry regularly monitor and expedite the recruitment process 
for various vacant positions in the Institute. 
 
3.3 INCOMPLET PROJECT WORKS IN RAMMANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL 
(RML), NEW DELHI AND PGIMER, DR. RML HOSPITAL 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
3.3.1 While examining the Demands for Grants 2022 -23, the Committee had noted that the 
expected date of completion for construction of Hostel Block at Dr. RML Hospital and 
ABVIMS was 05.12.2022; however, now the date of completion has been extended to July, 
2023. Similarly, the Stipulated Date of Completion for Super Speciality Block was  
10.03.2022 which was extended to 28.11.2023. However, the project has been delayed and 
the new target date for completion of the Project is 27.04.2024. 
 
3.3.2 The Committee is dismayed at the repeated extension of timeline for the completion of 
both the P rojects. The Committee is of the view that delay due to the lockdown imposed 
during COVID-19 pandemic can no more be cited as an excuse for extending the timeframe 
of the Projects. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Institute to adopt better projec t 
management tool/strategy for robust monitoring of both the Projects and strictly adhere to the 
new timeline. 
(Para 3.24, 3.25 of the report) 
Action Taken 
3.3.3 The Project Monitoring Meetings of local bodies are being held regularly for 
monitoring the projects. Due to VIP areas and shortage of space, the extension of time was 
given to Dr. RMLH with strict directions to get completed Hostel Block by 31.07.2023 and  
Super Speciality Block by 27.04.2024.The physical progress till date of Super Speciality 
Block, RML is approximately 25%. HSCC stated that the project was delayed due to various 
reasons:- 

46 
 
a. Hindrance due to a ban on construction activities because of severe air quality by 
GNCT of Delhi order dated 13.11.2021. 
b. Hindrance on construction activities due to night curfew due to 3rd wave of COVID -19 
pandemic order dated 27.12.2021. 
c. Weekend curfew because of 3rd wave of Covid -19 pandemic order dated 04.01.2022 
and full curfew w.e.f. from 11.01.2022 to 23.01.2022. 
d. Hindrance due to change in Architecture plan at Ground Floor due to requirement raised 
by RML. 
e. Delay in Mural approval. 
f. During MCD Election 04.12.2022 site was closed. 
g. Delay in installation of lifts and procurement of water and fire pumps by M/s NCC. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3.4 The Ministry has not informed about the status of progress in completion of 
construction work of Hostel Block. The physical progress till date of Super Speciality 
Block, RML is appr oximate 25%. However, the projects are already delayed and it 
seems that the Super Speciality Block may miss the new target date of 27.04.2024. The 
Committee is dismayed at the repeated extension of the timeline for the completion of 
both the Projects. The  Committee recommends the Institute to adopt better project 
management tool/strategy for robust monitoring of both the Projects and strictly adhere 
to the new timeline. 
 
3.4 NATIONAL DIGITAL HEALTH MISSION (NDHM)/ AYUSHMAN BHARAT 
DIGITAL MISSION (ABDM) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
3.4.1 The Committee notes that Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission which was launched in 
2021 is aimed at creating an integrated digital health infrastructure of the country. However, 
the utilisation of funds under this flagship scheme of the Government has not been 
satisfactory at all. The Committee notes that the actual expenditure in 2021 -22 was just Rs. 
27.81 crore whereas in 2022 -23, the actual expenditure has been Rs. 41.03 crore against the 
revised estimates of Rs. 140 crore in 2022-23. 
(Para 3.42 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
3.4.2 Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (earlier known as NDHM) was launched 
nationwide aiming to develop the backbone necessary to support the integrated digital health 
infrastructure of the country.  The utilization of funds during FY 2021 -22 and FY 2022 -23 
under ABDM is less than projected, are primarily due to the fact that major part of the funds 
to be release to States for ABDM implementation.  The first step of appointment of State 
Mission Directors ( SMDs) in the States for ABDM and other relevant officials. As every 
State has different process of administrative approval and hiring,  which led to delay the 
proposals from State and resulted in reduced expenditure. Furthermore, proposals from 

47 
 
certain states have not been received yet. The culmination of the aforementioned factors 
therefore created obstacles for optimal utilization of funds. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.4.3 The Ministry has informed that the utilization of funds in ABDM was lower than 
projected due to the scheme's implementation being carried out through the states. Each 
state has its own administrative approval and hiring processes, leading to delays in 
proposals and reduced expenditure. Additionally, proposals from certain states are sti ll 
pending. To address this issue, it is recommended that the Ministry engage with the 
states through meetings and sensitization workshops to streamline the administrative 
processes and expedite the implementation of the scheme. This approach will help in 
enhancing coordination and expediting the utilization of funds for ABDM across all 
states. 
 
  

48 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
4.1 GOVERNMENT HEALTH EXPENDITURE IN INDIA 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
4.1.1 The Committee notes that the Government Health Expenditure as a percentage of 
GDP is 1.28% for 2018 -19 which lags behind the National Health Policy target of increasing 
Government Health Expenditure to 2.5% of GDP by 202 5. A close scrutiny of the Health 
Budget reflects the lack of priority assigned to health. The Committee observes that the health 
budget allocation trends over the years do not align with the ambitious target set in National 
Health Policy. The Committee is of the opinion that adequate health financing forms the pillar 
of a well -functioning health system which is crucial for the reduction of Out -of-Pocket 
Expenditure (OOPE) in health. The pandemic further reaffirmed the need of a sustainable 
health financing ecosystem especially in tackling a sudden public health crisis. 
(Para 2.14 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
4.1.2 As per National Health Account Estimates, the Government Health Expenditure 
(GHE) has been increased from 1.15% in 2014-15 to 1.28% in 2018-19 as percentage of GDP 
and it is expected to increase further by 2025. Department of Health and Family Welfare 
(DoHFW) has taken up with States to prioritize allocation to health sector and enhance their 
health budgets at least by 10% every year to reach the g oal as envisaged. The budget 
allocation for DoHFW has increased by 82% from Rs. 47,353 Crores in 2017 -18 (BE) to Rs. 
86,175 crores in 2023 -24 (BE). DoHFW is making efforts to increase allocation in health 
budget. The 15 th Finance Commission has provided Rs . 70,051 Crores Grants for health 
through the Local Government. Under the „India COVID -19 Emergency Response and 
Health System Preparedness Package‟ (ECRP) of Rs.15,000 crores in phase -I and Rs. 23,123 
Crores in phase –II was provided with an objective to prevent, detect and respond to the threat 
posed by COVID-19. Further, as per the Economic Survey 2022-23, the expenditure on health 
reached 2.1% of GDP for F.Y. 2022-23(BE). 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
 4.1.3 The Committee in its 126th Report on DFG (2022 -23) had also recommended the 
Government for increasing its health expenditure to 2.5 % of GDP in  the next two years and 
to 5% by 2025. However, with such stagnant allocation to health and the slow pace of 
increase in allocation, the goal of achieving the NHP target of health expenditure to 2.5% 
seems a distant dream. 
(Para 2.15 of the report) 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
Action Taken 
4.1.4 The budget allocation for Department of Health and Family Welfare (DoHFW) has 
increased by 82% from Rs. 47,353 Crores in 2017 -18 (BE) to Rs. 86,175 crores in 2023 -24 
(BE). The Departmen t is making efforts to increa se allocation in health budget. The 
Department has taken up with States to p rioritize allocation to health sector and enhance their 
health budgets at least by 10% every year to reach the goal as envisaged 
 
4.1.5 The 15th Finance Commission has also provided Rs.70,051 Crores Grants for health 
through the Local Government.  Further, Under the „India COVID -19 Emergency Response 
and Health Syste m Preparedness Package‟ (ECRP) of Rs.15,000 crores in phase -I and Rs. 
23,123Crores in phase –II was provided with an objective to prevent, detect and respond to 
the threat posed by COVID-19.  
 
4.1.6 Corresponding to the increase in GHE, there has been a de cline in the share of Out-of-
Pocket Expenditure (OOPE)from 64.2% to 48.2% during the same period. The increasing 
GHE and decreasing OOPE will increase access to health facilities and would help bring 
down the proportion of the population suffering from Cat astrophic Health Expenditure, as 
envisaged in the NHP. 
 
4.2 CENTRTAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME 
 
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
4.2.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to ensure smooth and timely 
flow of funds and settle the pending bills at the earliest. However, under the Scheme, even 
after considering all the cited expenses under the revenue and capital head, funds still remain 
unutilised. The Committee believes that such an important employee‟s welfare scheme that is 
tasked with providing health care services must exhibit maximum utilisation of funds. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to continue making efforts for maximum 
utilisation of the allotted funds under the Scheme. 
(Para 3.3 of the report) 
Action Taken 
4.2.2 All A dditional Directors of CGHS participating Units have been appr ised that 
Expenditures have to be monitored under OE (Capital and Revenue) and PoRB on a monthly 
basis and directed to consume the entire quota of grants allocated against a monthly 
expenditure plan (MEP) and thereafter , a quarterly expenditure plan (QEP). They have been 
requested to prepare a roadmap of MEP and QEP for the FY 2023-24. 
 
4.3     OPD and IPD services  in AIIMS 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
4.3.1 The Committee further observes that MBBS classes have started in AIIMS Guwahati, 
Samba (Jammu) and Madurai, however OPD and IPD services are  yet to commence at these 
campuses. The Committee fails to understand that in the absence of OPD services, how the 
Institute aims to impart clinical experience to the MBBS students. The Committee 

50 
 
accordingly recommends the Ministry to ensure that the absen ce of adequate infrastructure 
and facilities do not impact the education of next generation of Doctors. The Ministry must 
take stock of the progress in the new AIIMS so that adequate infrastructure is available for 
conducting theory and practical classes i n the Institutes. The Ministry must expedite the 
commencement of OPD and IPD services in all the new AIIMS. 
(Para 3.35 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
4.3.2 IPD and OPD Services for AIIMS Guwahati have started w.e.f 14.04.2023. Ministry is 
making all efforts to start  the IPD & OPD Services in AIIMS Jammu w.e.f current  financial 
year. For providing clinical exposure to students of AIIMS  Madurai, the Institute has made 
arrangements with District Hospital, Ramanathapuram and Tamil Nadu. Similarly, for AIIMS 
Jammu, arrangements has been made by the Institute with Govt. Medical College Jammu and 
Govt. Hospital, Gandhinagar (Jammu). 
 
4.4 ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS):   Utilisation of 
budgetary Allocation 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
4.4.1 The Committee notes that against the Revised Estimates of Rs. 4400.24 crore in BE 
2022-23, the expenditure up to January 2023 has been Rs. 3422.46 crore leading to an unspent 
balance of Rs. 977.78 crore. The Committee hopes that the Institute is able to optimally utilise 
the remaining funds in the last quarter. The Committee expects the Institute to complete the 
Project for Expansion of Centre for Dental Education and Research (CDER) by May, 2023 
without any further delays. 
(Para 3.48 of the report) 
Action Taken 
4.4.2 The Committee notes that against the RE of Rs. 4400.24 crore in RE 2022 -23, the 
expenditure upto January, 2023 has been Rs. 3422.46 crore leading to an unspent balance of 
Rs. 977.78 crore. The Committee hopes  that the Institute is able to optimally utilize the 
remaining fund in the last quarter. The Committee expects the Institute to complete the 
project for expansion of Centre for Dental Education and Research (CDER) by May 2023 
without any further delays. 
                                                                (Rs in Crore) 
Head RE 2022-23 Grant Released Provisional 
Expenditure 
GIA Salary 2300.00 2300.00 2243.00* 
GIA General 1338.50 1300.00 13220.00 
HEFA Principal repayment 269.79 269.79 269.54** 
Interest repayment 34.95 24.00 24.75** 
SAP 7.00 7.00 8.13*** 
Creation of Capital Assets 450.00 450.00-125.00 
(surrender) 
325.00**** 
Total 4400.24 4225.79 4192.42 

51 
 
*  As per RE 2300.00 crore was received in GIA Salaries against which unspent balance i.e. 
Rs. 57 crore was transferred to Scheduled Commercial bank account for making payment of 
salary for the month of March 2023 to be paid in April 2023. 
**  Excess amount of interest amounting to Rs. 0.75 crore was met out from previous ye ar 
balances available of HEFA Interest and Rs. 0.25 crore against repayment of Principal 
amount of HEFA lapsed under TSA. 
*** Excess expenditure under GIA General and SAP was met out from Reserve & Surplus 
available and previous year balance available respectively. 
**** As per RE 4500.00 crore was received in Creation of Capital Assets against which Rs. 
125.00 crore was surrendered by the Institute. 
 
4.4.3 The grant allocated to the Institute for the above financial year was almost utilized by 
the Institute .The project for the expansion of Centre for Dental Education and Research 
(CDER) is being executed by M/s HSCC (A Central PSU under the Ministry of Housing & 
Urban Affairs (MoUHA)). The progress of the work is periodically reviewed by the 
“Committee for National Referral and Research Institute for Higher Dental Studies 
(NaRRIDS) Expansion Project”. In the last review meeting which was held on 19.05.2023, it 
has been confirmed by M/s HSCC that all the infrastructure works under this project will be 
completed by end June 2023. 
 
A pie-chart depicting the status of action taken by the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare on the 143rd Report has been given hereunder: 
 
 
 
 
******* 
 
39%
41%
10%
10%
Status of action taken by the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare in respect of 
143rd   Report of the Committee
Recommendations/ Observations 
accepted by the Government
Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of Ministry's replies
Committee has made further 
recommendations
Final replies of the Ministry have 
not been received

52 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  - AT   A  GLANCE 
 
BUDGETARY PROJECTION VIS-A-VIS ALLOCATION 
 
 The National Health Policy 2017 aims to raise the Government's health 
expenditure to 2.5% of GDP by 2025 and reduce the proportion of households 
experiencing catastrophic health expenditure by 25% from the level of 2017, by 2025. In 
view of the above targets and to enhance the preparedness for future pandemics like 
Covid-19, the Committee feels that the increase in allocation as informed by the 
Ministry is insufficient and recommends increasing in budget allocated to the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare departments, with establishing a mechanism ensuring the 
optimal utilisation of funds. 
(Para 3.1.3) 
 
VACANCIES IN  SAFDURJUNG HOSPITAL (SJH) & VARDHMAN MAHAVIR 
MEDICAL COLLEGE (VMMC): 
 
 The Committee has observed that 1276 positions (nearly 19% of sanctioned 
posts) in medical and non -medical departments remain unfilled. These vacancies may 
disrupt the smooth functioning of Institute's operations and result in poor patient 
outcome. The Committee believes that administrative s taffing should match the number 
of undergraduate and postgraduate seats as well as teaching faculty. Vacancies in non -
faculty roles are also unacceptable, and the Institute should increase staff in the 
Academic Section and VMMC Administration accordingly. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry regularly monitor and expedite the recruitment process 
for various vacant positions in the Institute. 
(Para 3.2.3) 
 
INCOMPLET PROJECT WORKS IN RAMMANOHAR  LOHIA HOSPITAL (RML), 
NEW DELHI AND PGIMER, DR. RML HOSPITAL 
 
 The Ministry has not informed about the status of progress in completion of 
construction work of Hostel Block. The physical progress till date of Super Speciality 
Block, RML is approximate 25%. However, the projects are already delayed and it 
seems that the Super Speciality Block may miss the new target date of 27.04.2024. The 
Committee is dismayed at the repeated extension of the timeline for the completion of 
both the Projects. The Committee recommends the Institute to adopt better project  
management tool/strategy for robust monitoring of both the Projects and strictly adhere 
to the new timeline. 
(Para 3.3.4) 
 
 
 

53 
 
NATIONAL DIGITAL HEALTH MISSION (NDHM)/ AYUSHMAN BHARAT 
DIGITAL MISSION (ABDM) 
 
 The Ministry has informed that the utilization of  funds in ABDM was lower than 
projected due to the scheme's implementation being carried out through the states. Each 
state has its own administrative approval and hiring processes, leading to delays in 
proposals and reduced expenditure. Additionally, prop osals from certain states are still 
pending. To address this issue, it is recommended that the Ministry engage with the 
states through meetings and sensitization workshops to streamline the administrative 
processes and expedite the implementation of the sc heme. This approach will help in 
enhancing coordination and expediting the utilization of funds for ABDM across all 
states. 
(Para 3.4.3) 