 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENTOFINDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-FIRST REPORT 
ON 
IMPLEMENTATION OF AYUSHMAN BHARAT 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2023)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
REPORT NO.  
151 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs   
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
  
 
PARLIAMENTOFINDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-FIRST REPORT 
ON 
IMPLEMENTATION OF AYUSHMAN BHARAT 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


 
CONTENTS 
 
 
1. Composition of the Committee (i) 
2. Preface (ii) 
3. Acronyms (iii) 
  
Chapter-I 
Introduction:  Overview of Health Care 
Policies in India 
 
 
1-9 
 
 
10-24 
 
 
 
25-36 
Chapter-II 
Ayushman Bharat Scheme 
Chapter-III 
Way Forward 
 
 
 
4. Recommendations/Observations —At a Glance 37-48 
5. Minutes 49-56 
6. Annexure, Tables and List of Sources 57-60 

i  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24) 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel 
6. Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
8. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
9. Dr. Santanu Sen 
10. Shri A. D. Singh 
LOKSABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Shri K. Navas Kani 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Rao Munde 
22. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
27. Dr. Jadon Chandra Sen 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3.      Dr. Saket Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Noyaline Vinitha F.C.  Joint Director 
5.   Shri Roshan Lal   Assistant Committee Officer 
 

ii  
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report  on its 
behalf, present this One Hundred Fifty-first Report on the subject “Implementation of Ayushman 
Bharat” which was adopted by the Committee in its meeting held on the 11th December, 2023. 
2. Even after the economic gains made in recent years, public health spending has not kept 
pace resulting in many people being left behind. India's health sector is characterised by a low 
rate of public investment and an overburdened public healthcare system. While progress has been 
made, significant disparities in healthcare access and outcomes still exist.  Furthermore, the 
COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the need for a stronger and more resilient healthcare system. 
The government continues to work on expanding and improv ing healthcare services for all 
citizens. In this direction, Ayushman Bharat is a health scheme of the Government of India 
launched on the 23 rd September 2018 to achieve Universal Health Coverage ( UHC) as 
recommended in the National Health Policy 2017 and the S ustainable Development Goals 
(SDG).The primary objective behind identifying the subject, “Implementation of Ayushman 
Bharat" by the Committee was, therefore, to examine the  healthcare access and a ffordability in 
India, the progress made in achieving the UHC, challenges being faced  and potential areas of 
improvement in the implementation of Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana to achieve the SDG 
goals by 2030. 
3. The Committee held deliberations with the r epresentatives of the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare and the National Health Authority during its meeting held on the 13th June 2023 
for holistic examination of the subject . Besides, t he Committee had undertaken study visits to 
Chennai, Thiruvananthapuram and Bengaluru from the 23 rd May to 26 th May 2023, and to 
Mumbai and Goa from the 10 th July to 11th July 2023 to assess the ground realities related to the 
scheme in the country and implementation problems thereof. During the study visits , the 
Committee also interacted with the insurance companies and the PSUs to examine the aspects 
related to the role of insurance companies in the implementation of the scheme and the utilization 
of the Corporate Social Responsibility funds respectively. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report and reproduced at the end 
of the Report at ‘Observations/Recommendations-at a Glance’. 
5. On behalf of the Committee, I extend special thanks to the Secretary of the Department 
of Health and Family Welfare, and the CEO of  the National Health Authority . I also 
acknowledge the contribution of the stakeholders for their deep insight and valuable suggestions 
during interactions. I further extend special appreciation of the officers of the Committee 
Section for their valuable efforts in assimilating all relevant information and enabling the 
Committee to produce this quality Report. 
 
 
New Delhi   BHUBANESWAR KALITA 
December, 2023 Chairman, 
Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)       Department-related Parliamentary Standing     
      Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 

iii  
ACRONYMS 
 
ABDM   Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission 
ABHIM   Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission 
ACA   Affordable Health Care Act  
APL   Above Poverty Line 
BIS   Beneficiary Identification System 
BMS   Beneficiary Management System 
CAG   Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CFAR   Centre for Advance Research 
CGHS   Central Government Health Scheme  
CGRMS   Central Grievance Redressal Management System 
CSMBS    Civil Servant Medical Benefit Scheme 
CSR   Corporate Social Responsibility 
DEC   District Empanelment Committee 
DGNO   District Grievance Nodal Officer 
DIU   District Implementation Unit 
DPCs    District Project Coordinators 
DQAS    Daily Quick Audit System 
EHCPs   Empanelled Health Care Providers 
ESIS   Employees' State Insurance Scheme  
HBP   Health Benefit Packages 
HEM   Hospital Empanelment Management 
HWCs   Health and Wellness Centres (Ayushman Arogya Mandirs) 
ISA   Implementation Support Agencies 
LMIC   Lower and Middle-Income Countries 
NAFU   National Anti-Fraud Unit 
NFSA   National Food Security Act   
NGNO   National Grievance Nodal Officer 
NHA   National Health Authority 
NHM    National Health Mission  
NLEM    National List of Essential Medicines  
NRCMS   New Rural Cooperative Medical Scheme  
NUHM   National Urban Health Mission  
OOPE    Out-of-Pocket Expenditure  
PHC    Primary Health Care  
PHI   Primary Health Institutes 
PMJAY   Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
PMS   Provider Management System 
PPP   Public-Private Partnership 
RMNCH+A   Reproductive-Maternal- Neonatal-Child and Adolescent Health  
RSBY   Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
SAFUs   State Anti-Fraud Units 
SDGs   Sustainable Development Goals 
SEC   State Empanelment Committees 
SECC2011  Socio-Economic Caste Census, 2011  
SFM   Support Function Management.  
SGNO   State Grievance Nodal Officer 
SHA   State Health Agencies 
SSS    Social Security Scheme  
TMS    Transaction Management System  
UCS    Universal Coverage Scheme 
UEMBI   Urban Employment-Based Medical Insurance  
UHC   Universal Health Coverage  
UNO   United Nations Organisation  
URBMI    Urban Resident Basic Medical Insurance  
UTs   Union Territories   
VLEs   Village Level Entrepreneurs  
 
 

1 
 
Chapter- I 
Introduction 
 
1.1 Overview of Healthcare Policies in India 
1.1.1 Healthcare policies in India have evolved over the years to address the country's 
healthcare challenges and provide access to affordable and quality healthcare services for its 
vast and diverse population. T he National Health Policy (1983) aimed to provide "health for 
all" by the year 2000. The 1980s marked a shift towards a more comprehensive and integrated 
healthcare approach. It emphasised the development of primary healthcare services, the 
provision of essen tial drugs, and the integration of traditional medicine into the healthcare 
system. 
1.1.2 Post economic liberalisation in 1990s, private healthcare providers expanded rapidly, 
leading to concerns about equity and quality. The government introduced health i nsurance 
schemes like the Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) and Employees' State 
Insurance Scheme (ESIS) to provide coverage to specific groups. In 1996, the Rashtriya  
Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) was launched to provide health insurance coverage to b elow-
poverty-line families. National Health Policy (2002) recognised the importance of the private 
sector in healthcare and sought to encourage public -private partnerships. It also aimed to 
increase public spending on healthcare. 
1.1.3 The National Rural Health Mission  (NRHM), launched in 2005 aimed to improve 
healthcare delivery in rural areas by strengthening primary healthcare infrastructure, training 
healthcare workers, and providing free essential drugs. The National Urban Health Mission 
(NUHM), launched in 2013 envisages meeting the healthcare needs of the urban population 
with a focus on the urban poor, by making available to them essential primary healthcare 
services and reducing their out-of-pocket expenses for treatment. The two Missions were later 
subsumed under National Health Mission (NHM). The salient components of NHM includes 
Health System Strengthening, Reproductive-Maternal- Neonatal-Child and Adolescent Health 
(RMNCH+A), and Communicabl e and Non-Communicable Diseases.  The NHM envisages 
the achievement of universal access to equitable, affordable & quality healthcare services that 
are accountable which is the broad objective of Universal Health Coverage (UHC) under 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) of United Nations Organisation (UNO). 
1.1.4 The new National Health Policy was unveiled in 2017 with a focus on increasing 
government spending on healthcare, strengthening primary healthcare, reducing out -of-pocket 
healthcare expenditures, improving access to quality healthcare services, and achieving 
universal health coverage (UHC), with a focus on poor and vulnerable populations. 
1.1.5 UHC in India is a significant policy goal, and to achieve this goal, the Government has 
embarked on a series of initiatives, the cornerstone of which is Ayushman Bha rat launched in 
2018.  Ayushman Bharat - Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY) , one of the 
components of the Scheme, is aimed at achieving UHC in India by providing health insurance 

2 
 
coverage to eligible families for secondary and tertiary medical treatm ent in empanelled 
private and public hospitals. With Ayushman Bharat- Health and Wellness Cent res: HWCs 
(since ren amed as Ayushman Arogya Mandirs ), another component of the Scheme, the 
government aims to strengthen healthcare infrastructure across the country, with a focus on 
setting up more HWCs  (Ayushman Arogya Mandirs) and upgrading existing facilities. These 
efforts were intended to enhance the a vailability of primary healthcare services. The present 
study of the Committee  is to evaluate the following which may play a crucial role in 
achieving the scheme's overarching goal of providing accessible and affordable healthcare to 
all citizens of India: 
 Accountability among government agencies and healthcare providers responsible for 
delivering services under PMJAY;  
 Health insurance component of the scheme; and 
 Evolve new approaches to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the scheme. 
1.2 Healthcare Access and Affordability in India 
1.2.1 There exists a positive correlation between economic growth and improved health 
indicators. Significant disparities in terms of access and affordability to healthcare exist 
across the country.  The quality of public  healthcare facilities, including Primary H ealth 
Centres, Community H ealth Centres, district hospita ls, and tertiary care hospitals, varies 
widely. Rural areas face  significant challenges in terms of shortages of healthcare providers, 
infrastructure, and medical supplies. Urban areas have relatively better infrastructure and 
services compared to rural areas, but they are often concentrated in metropolitan cities, 
leading to overcrowding and long waiting times. The private healthcare sector in India offers 
a wide range of services, from primary healthcare to high -end specialised treatments, but it 
can be very expensive and inaccessible to a large portion of the population. 
1.2.2 A significant proportion of the Indian  population faces challenges in accessing 
affordable healthcare, leading to financial strain and even catastrophic out -of-pocket 
expenses. Lack of health insurance coverage is a significant factor contributing to 
affordability issues. While government -sponsored insurance schemes exist, coverage is often 
limited, and many people remain uninsured. There is a need for more healthcare 
infrastructure, an increase in the healthcare workforce, and reforms to reduce out -of-pocket 
expenses. India's healthcare access  and affordability landscape is complex and marked by 
disparities. While the country has made progress in recent years with government initiatives, 
significant challenges remain in ensuring that quality healthcare is accessible and affordable 
to all its citizens, particularly those in underserved rural areas. 
1.2.3 Health makes a vital  contribution to economic progress , given that healthier 
populations live longer, are more productive, and have higher savings rates. For capital to be 
translated into positive healthcare outcomes, healthcare should be given priority in the budget. 
The Committee noted that in keeping with the objective of the National Health Policy 2017, 
Central and State Governments’ budgeted expenditure on the health sector reached 2.1 per 
cent of GDP in FY 2022-23 (BE) and 2.2 per cent in FY 2021-22 (RE), against 1.6 per cent in 
FY 2020-21. The Economic Survey 2022 -23 highlighted that the share of government health 

3 
 
expenditure in total health expenditure has increased from 28.6 per cent in FY 2013 -14 to 
40.6 per cent in FY 2018 -19. The Survey also shows the hike in  the share of spending on 
health in the total expenditure on social services, which has increased from 21 per cent in FY 
2018-19 to 26 per cent in FY 2022-23 (BE).  
1.2.4 NITI Aayog , in its 2021 report on “Health Insurance for India’s Missing Middle ”, 
mentioned that India’s health sector is characterised by low Government expenditure on 
health, high out -of-pocket expenditure (OOPE), and low financial protection for adverse 
health events. Persistently low Government spending on health has constrained the cap acity 
and quality of healthcare services offered in the public system. Overburdened public hospitals 
often divert individuals to seek treatment in the costlier private sector. Almost 60% of all 
hospitalisations and 70% of out -patient services are delivered  by the private sector (NSSO’s 
75th Round Survey on Social Consumption of Health, 2017-18). 
1.2.5 The private sector is characterised by high OOPE, leading to low financial protection. 
Relatively low health insurance coverage and costlier provision of heal th services in the 
private sector drive India’s high out-of-pocket expenditure (OOPE). Despite the decline in the 
past few years, India’s OOPE as a per cent of current health spending is 63%, significantly 
above the average for lower -middle income countrie s and amongst the highest in the world. 
High OOPE poses a financial risk to individuals. They are vulnerable to impoverishment from 
expensive trips to the hospital and other health facilities. The impoverishing impact of health 
expenditure is similar in bo th rural and urban areas. Further, the incidence of catastrophic 
health spending – health expenditure exceeding a particular threshold share of consumption 
expenditure – has increased. 
OOPE as a percentage of current health expenditure, India, and select country 
aggregates, 2000-2018: 
  
Source: World Bank Open Data 


4 
 
1.2.6 The Committee believes that the Government's health expenditure needs to be 
increased reasonably from the present 2. 1 percent of GDP  on the lines of the objectives 
of the National Health Policy 2017. Apart from increased public health expenditure, the 
efficient utilisation of available funds should also be emphasised to improve the quality 
and access of healthcare infrastructure. The active collaboration with private 
stakeholders may also help in strengthening the infrastructure significantly.  
1.2.7 The Committee is of the view that h ealth insurance is a mechanism of pooling the 
high level of OOPE in India to provide greater financial protection against health shocks 
and improve efficiency in the organisation and delivery of healthcare for better health 
outcomes. Increased health insurance coverage will reduce catastrophic and 
impoverishing health expenditures by imposing a ceiling on the maximum health 
expenditure incurred by an individual  or household.  The publicly funded health 
insurance schemes are envisaged as keystone to advance Universal Health Coverage.  
 
1.3 Universal Health Coverage  
1.3.1 Universal Health Coverage (UHC) means that all people have access to the full range 
of quality health services they need, when and where they need them, without financial 
hardship. It covers the full continuum of essential health services, from health promotion to 
prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, and palliative care across the life cou rse. UHC is firmly 
based on the WHO Constitution 1948, which declares health a fundamental human right and 
commits to ensuring the highest attainable level of health for all. 
1.3.2 Achieving UHC is one of the targets adopted by Sustainable Development Goal s 
(SDGs) in 2015. The SDG target 3.8 specifically aims to achieve UHC, including financial 
risk protection, access to quality essential healthcare services and access to safe, effective, 
quality, and affordable essential medicines and vaccines for all  by 2030. Advances towards 
this target are tracked through indicators on the coverage of essential health services (SDG 
3.8.1) and catastrophic health spending (SDG 3.8.2), which is defined as the proportion of a 
country’s population with large household expend itures on health relative to their total 
household expenditure.  
1.3.3 At the United Nations General Assembly High-Level Meeting on UHC in 2019, 
countries reaffirmed that health is a precondition for and an outcome and indicator of the 
social, economic, and environmental dimensions of sustainable development. WHO’s 
Thirteenth General Programme of Work aims to have 1 billion more people benefit from 
UHC by 2025 while also contributing to the targets of 1 billion more people better protected 
from health emergencies and 1 billion more people enjoying better health and well-being.  
1.3.4 As a foundation for UHC, WHO recommends reorienting health systems towards 
Primary Health C are (PHC). In countries with fragile health systems, WHO focuses on 
technical assistance to build national institutions and service delivery to fill critical gaps in 
emergencies. In more robust health system settings, WHO drives public health impact 
towards health coverage for all through policy dialogue for the systems of the future and 

5 
 
strategic support to improve performance. The WHO India Country Cooperation Strategy 
2019–2023 highlighted t he four strategic prioritie s for cooperation with India, and to 
accelerate progress on UHC is the priority: 
 
1.4 Healthcare and Health Insurance Schemes in Other Countries 
1.4.1 Healthcare and health insurance schemes vary widely from country to country. The 
design and effectiveness of these systems can vary widely based on each country's economic, 
political, and cultural factors. Each country/region has adopted a different model to increase 
health insurance coverage. Some have increased insurance coverage  through the expansion of 
government-subsidised schemes, while others have focused on developing robust voluntary 
coverage programs. NITI Aayog's 'Health Insurance for India's Missing Middle' report 2021 
reviews the experience of three developing countries /regions - Thailand, China, and Latin 
America, to develop a deeper understanding of what has worked internationally.  
 


6 
 
Thailand  
1.4.2 Thailand has three major health insurance schemes – government subsidised and 
compulsory contributory – which cumulatively cover its large population. The Civil Servant 
Medical Benefit Scheme (CSMBS) covers civil servants (all public sector employees), their 
spouses, and immediate relatives. The Social Security Scheme (SSS) covers formal sector 
employees in the private sector. The largest of the three schemes is the Universal Coverage 
Scheme (UCS); it covers those excluded by CSMBS or SSS. The UCS covers almost 48 
million people, or approximately 75% of Thailand’s population. Most of the rural population 
and the urban informal sector fall under this scheme. The screening of eligible candidates for 
UCS is done using a national electronic database with a citizen’s ID base. 
1.4.3 The scheme offers a comprehensive set of services , including inpatient and outpatient 
care and medicines in the National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM). It also lays emphasis 
on health promotion and disease prevention. However, the scheme relies on annual 
government budget allocation and runs the risk of lower budgets during “lean years” of 
economic downturn with fiscal constraints. 
China  
1.4.4 There are three main health insurance schemes in China , namely Urban Employment-
Based Medical Insurance (UEMBI), Urban Resident Basic Medical Insurance (URBMI), and 
the New Rural Cooperative Medical Scheme (NRCMS). They cumulatively cover nearly the 
entire population of the country. In addition to these, there are private medical insurance 
schemes that act as top-ups for those wanting additional benefits beyond those offered by the 
above schemes.  
1.4.5 The UEMBI is a compulsory contributory scheme for the urban formally employed 
population and their families. It covers nearly 20% of China’s population. The URBMI is a 
government-run voluntary scheme for urban residents who are not formally employed. It 
covers around 23% of China’s population, including the unemployed, students, elderly people 
without previous employment, etc. URBMI covers inpatient and outpatient services along 
with critical illnesses. The scheme is financed by individual contributions and go vernment 
subsidies shared between the central and lower-level governments. The NRCMS is a 
voluntary, partially subsidised scheme, like the URBMI, for rural areas. It provides health 
insurance coverage to rural households. In 2016, URBMI and NRCMS were merged into the 
Urban and Rural Resident Basic Medical Insurance (URRBMI) since they were broadly 
similar.  
1.4.6 The need to increase the scale of financing available for URRBMI and to establish a 
sustainable financing mechanism has been felt to address the rapidly rising demands for 
healthcare.  
Latin America  
1.4.7 Several Latin American countries have expanded health insurance coverage to those 
outside the organised sector to move towards UHC. Bolivia, Colombia, Costa Rica, 

7 
 
Dominican Republic, Mexico, Peru, and Uruguay have introduced health insurance schemes 
covering additional groups beyond the poor. They have done this through partially subsidised, 
contributory health insurance schemes for the non -poor, predominantly engaged in the 
informal sector. Additionally, there are also schemes to cover vulnerable groups, including 
the disabled, pregnant women, the elderly and indigenous people. Aside  from Bolivia and 
Uruguay, other above-mentioned Latin American countries classify their population b ased on 
income to determine eligibility. The households are targeted either through direct targeting, 
involving the use of surveys to determine eligibility, or through indirect targeting, which 
identifies and includes beneficiaries of other social assistance programs.  
1.4.8 However, there are several challenges in the Latin American  models. For example, 
there is adverse selection in Chile. Younger, healthier, and high -income people opt out of the 
public health insurance scheme , reducing cross -subsidisation. Peru and the Dominican 
Republic suffer from high exclusion errors in their targeting and unequal coverage. Since they 
do not have an integrated risk pool  enabling cross -subsidisation, the fully subsidised have 
access to smaller benefit packages rela tive to contributory members. Further, there are high 
exclusion errors , i.e., eligible people are excluded from the scheme due to targeting and 
identification problems. Other Latin American countries, with multiple health insurance 
schemes for different so cio-economic groups, also suffer from high premiums and inequality 
in access to healthcare due to fragmented risk pools. 
United States 
1.4.9    United States has about 17 percent of GDP investment in healthcare, which is the 
largest in the world. Affordable Health Care Act (ACA), popularly known as ‘Obamacare’, 
was implemented in 2014. Through a host of comprehensive healthcare reforms, the 
Obamacare covered about fifty percent uncovered population by 2016. The Employer 
mandate in Obamacare requires large e mployers to provide  health insurance to employees or 
face penalties. This provision was, however, eliminated in 2019. Preventive Services such as 
vaccinations and screening are covered without cost sharing which promote early detection 
and disease control. The law also focuses on improving healthcare cost through organizations 
like Accountable Care organi sation and provides for bundled payments for certain healthcare 
packages. Obamacare emphasi ses health information technology  to enhance coordination 
among health care providers and improve patients’ outcomes. The implementation of 
Obamacare has led to significant reduction in the uninsured and improved access to essential 
healthcare services for millions of Americans. It aims for widespread coverage, affordability, 
and quality care.  Specific health schemes like Medicare, Medicaid have been subsumed in 
Obamacare. As of 2021, 91.7 percent population is covered through public and private health 
insurance. 
1.4.10 The Committee notes that t he experience s of Thailand, China, and Latin 
American countries demonstrate the difficulty of increasing health coverage in the 
informal/unorganised sector. Thailand made good progress in UHC by fully subsidising 
the informal sector , while China has partially subsidis ed that segment. However, 
China’s experience also indicates the possibility of sustained coverage through a 

8 
 
contributory and voluntary scheme. Further, the examples from Latin America 
highlight that adverse selection and inadequate risk -pooling is a pressi ng challenge for 
voluntary contributory schemes targeted towards the informal sector.  The adverse 
selection due to opting out of high -income people reduces cross-subsidisation, leading to 
high premiums and inequality in access to healthcare.  
1.4.11 The Co mmittee is of the view that the Government may consider some of the 
provisions of the Affordable Care Act of United States for inclusion in Ayushman 
Bharat. By including  some sections of the persons falling in APL category , the 
provisions for 'employer mandate' to provide health  insurance to the employee and his  
family, subsuming of specific schemes for children and senior citizens, tax incentives and 
disincentives to corporate regarding healthcare are some of the measure s worth 
including in the Ayushman Bharat Scheme and PMJAY. 
1.5 Purpose of Report on Implementation of the Ayushman Bharat Scheme 
1.5.1 Ayushman Bharat is a health scheme of the Government of India launched on the 23 rd 
September 2018 to achieve UHC as recommended in the National Health Policy 2017 and the 
SDGs. The scheme has been rolled out in rural and urban areas, based on the deprivation and 
occupational criteria of the Socio -Economic Caste Census , 2011 (SECC 2011) respectively, 
for over 10.74 crore families, with further expansion o f beneficiary base to 12 crore families 
based on National  Food Security Act (NFSA) data. The aim of the scheme is to reduce the 
out-of-pocket expenditure of poor and vulnerable populations and expand the coverage of 
essential health services by implementing its two interrelated components, PMJAY and 
HWCs (Ayushman Arogya Mandir).  
1.5.2 Despite the gains made in recent years, public health spending has kept pace neither 
with the country's economic gro wth nor with that of most other countries in the WHO South -
East Asia Region, resulting in many people being left behind. India's health sector is 
characterised by a low rate of public investment and an overburdened public healthcare 
system. This results in  diverting individuals to seek treatment in the private sector, with 
varying quality of healthcare and rising rates of out -of-pocket health expenditures. While 
progress has been made, significant disparities in healthcare access and outcomes still exist, 
and the government continues to work on expanding and improving healthcare services for all 
citizens. Furthermore, the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the need for a stronger and more 
resilient healthcare system. The pandemic has disrupted essential health se rvices around the 
world and threatened already-achieved health outcomes. The Committee feels that i f UHC is 
to become a reality by 2030, growth in the provision and coverage of essential health services 
must greatly accelerate.  
1.5.3 The increasing cost o f quality healthcare combined with greater need and demand for 
health with increasing incomes, higher life expectancy, and epidemiological transition 
towards non -communicable diseases have made health coverage imperative. Expansion of 
health insurance cove rage is a vital mechanism to safeguard individuals against catastrophic 
and unpredictable health expenditures and to achieve UHC. Health insurance can also 
improve the efficiency and quality of healthcare provision. Insurers with pooled funds have 

9 
 
more bar gaining power and information against providers as compared to individual 
customers. 
1.5.4 Apropos of the above, s tudying the implementation of the Ayushman Bharat Scheme 
is important for a nalysing and assessing the effectiveness of the program in achieving its 
goals of improving access to  healthcare, reducing financial burden, and addressing health 
disparities. It is necessary to identify areas where the quality of healt hcare services can be 
improved, which migh t involve assessing the infrastructure of healthcare facilities, the 
training of healthcare professionals, or the availability of essential  medicines and  medical 
equipment. It may help in understanding  the financial implications of the program and the 
ways to make it more sustainable. 
 
1.6 The Process Followed 
1.6.1 The Committee held deliberations with the representatives of the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare and the National Health Authority on the 13 th June 2023 for holistic 
examination of the subject "Implementation of Ayushman Bharat". The Committee had also 
undertaken study visits to Chennai, Thiruvananthapuram and Bengaluru from the 23 rd May to 
26th May 2023, and to Mumbai and Goa from the 10 th July to 11 th July 2023 to assess the 
ground realities related to the scheme in the country and implementation problems thereof. 
During the study visits, the Committee as well interacted with the insurance companies and 
the PSUs to examine the aspects related to the role of insurance companies in the 
implementation of the scheme and the utilisation of the Corporate Social Responsibility funds 
respectively.  
1.6.2. The Committee also examined the study notes and the replies to its questions obtained 
from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, and other stakeholders.  The Committee , 
besides consulting reputed journals like the Lancet, also perused the following documents and 
information to acquaint itself with in-depth knowledge on the subject: - 
i. National Health Policy 2017 
ii. The contents on the website of the WHO regarding Universal Health Coverage and 
the Sustainable Development Goals 
iii. The WHO India Country Cooperation Strategy 2019-2023 
iv. Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Performance Audit of 
Ayushman Bharat- Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
v. Report of the NITI Aayog on the Health Insurance for India's Missing Middle  
vi. Annual Report 2021 -2022 of the National Health Authority and the information 
available on their website 
vii. Economic Survey-2022 
viii. Union Budget 2023-24 
1.6.3 The draft copy of this Report was considered by the Committee at its meeting held on 
the 11 th December, 2023. The suggestions and amendments were included, and the Report 
was finalized. 

10 
 
Chapter- 2 
Ayushman Bharat Scheme 
2.1 Rationale and Components for Ayushman Bharat 
2.1.1 The National Health Policy 2017 envisages the goal of attaining the highest possible 
level of health and well -being through a preventive and promotive healthcare orientation and 
universal access to good quality healthcare services without anyone having to face financial 
hardships. Consequently, Ayushman Bharat Scheme was launched in 2018 with the objective 
to provide promotive, preventive, curative, palliative and rehabilitative aspects of Universal 
Health Coverage through two inter -related components viz.(i) Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana (PMJAY) for providing financial protection for accessing hospitalisation care at th e 
secondary and tertiary levels,   and (ii) Health & Wellness Centers ( Ayushman Arogya 
Mandir) with an  aim to transform the existing primary health infrastructures into Heal th & 
Wellness Centers to deliver comprehens ive primary healthcare services.   Ayushman Bharat 
has been designed to meet Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and its underlining 
commitment, which is to "leave no one behind."   It is an attempt to move from a sectoral and 
segmented approach to health service delivery to a comprehensive  equity and  need-based 
health care service. 
2.1.2 In the year 2021, two more components , Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) 
and Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission ( ABHIM), were added und er the ambit 
of Ayushman Bharat. ABDM (erstwhile National Digital Health Mission) was launched to  
realise the vision of the National Health Policy 2017 to provide quality healthcare by 
leveraging technology. ABDM intends to develop th e backbone necessary to support the 
integrated digital health infrastructure of the country. ABHIM was launched to fill critical 
gaps in health infrastructure, surveillance, and health research with an aim to strengthen the 
public health infrastructure. 
 
2.1.3 The three dimensions of Universal Health Coverage represented through the Universal 
Health Care Cube are – population coverage, package of services provided (disease coverage) 
 


11 
 
and level of financial protection. The aim of the Committee in this study is to see whether  the 
efforts undertaken by the Government to move on all these three dimensions incrementally  
through Ayushman Bharat are in right direction to achieve Universal Health Coverage  in the 
country. 
 
2.2 Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY) 
2.2.1 As stated earlier, the focus of the Committee in this report is to scrutinise and evaluate 
the Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY) within the broader framework of Ayushman 
Bharat. It will delve into a range of features and issues pertaining to PMJAY.   PMJAY was 
launched on the 23rdSeptember, 2018, in Ranchi, Jharkhand.  It is the largest publicly funded 
health assurance scheme in the world, which aims to provide a health cover of Rs. 5 lakhs per 
family per year for secondary and tertiary care hospitalisation across public and private 
empanelled healthcare providers. The salient features of PMJAY are as follows: 
i) 33 States/UTs are currently implementing PMJAY barring Delhi, Odisha, and West 
Bengal. 
ii) PMJAY provides cashless access to health care services for the beneficiary at  the 
point of service, that is, the hospital. 
iii) PMJAY envisions to help mitigate catastrophic expenditure on medical  treatment, 
which pushes nearly six crore Indians into poverty each year. 
iv) It covers up to 3 days of pre -hospitalisation and 15 days of post-hospitalisation 
expenses, including diagnostics, medicines, and follow-up consultation. 
v) There is no restriction on the family size, age, or gender. The RSBY had a family 
cap of five members. However, PMJAY has been designed in such a way that there 
is no cap on family size or age of members. 
vi) All pre–existing conditions are covered from day one. This means that any eligible 
person suffering from any medical condi tion before being covered by PM JAY will 
now be able to get treatment for all those medical conditions as  well under this 
scheme right from the day they are enrolled. 
vii) Benefits of the scheme are portable across the country wide.A beneficiary can  visit 
any empanelled public or private hospital in India to avail cashless treatment. 
viii) Health Benefits Package 2022 includes 1121 packages and 1949 procedures across 
27 specialties.  
ix) Many of the States and UTs have further expanded the beneficiary base to 
approximately 15.5 crore families at their own cost.  
x) The health cover of Rs. 5 lakhs is on a family floater basis, which means that it can 
be used by one or all members of the family.  

12 
 
Institutional Mechanism  
2.2.2 The implementation of PMJAY is being administered through a three -tier mechanism 
at the National, State and District levels. The National Health Authority (NHA) has been 
constituted as the apex body tasked with the implementation of PMJAY.  NHA is governed  
by a Governing Board, which is chaired by the Hon’ble Union Minister of Health and Family 
Welfare. A full -time CEO in the rank of Secretary, appointed by the Government of India, 
oversees the NHA under the guidance of the Governing Board.  
2.2.3 For effective implementation of PMJAY, State Governments have set up State Health 
Agencies (SHA) or designated the function to an existing agency, trust, or any other society. 
The SHA is the nodal agency responsible for the implementation of PMJAY in the State , 
headed by a Chief Executive Officer. The SHA can onboard additional staff or 
Implementation Support Agencies (ISA) to aid  in the implementation of the scheme. The 
CEO of SHA is appointed by the State Government and is ex -officio member-secretary of the 
Governing Council of the SHA.  
2.2.4 In addition to the State -level entity, a District Implementation Unit (DIU) has also 
been established to support the implementation in every district included under the scheme. 
This team will be in addition to the team deploy ed by the insurance company/ISA. The DIU 
will coordinate with the implementing agency (ISA/insurer) and the empanelled hospitals to 
ensure effective implementation and send review reports periodically. The DIU must work 
closely and coordinate with the District Chief Medical Officer and his/her team. 
 
2.3 Coverage of beneficiaries under PMJAY 
2.3.1 The Scheme has been rolled out in rural and urban areas, based on the deprivation and 
occupational criteria of the Socio-Economic Caste Census , 2011 (SECC-2011), respectively, 
for over 10.74 crore poor and vulnerable families. PM JAY subsumed the then-existing 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) , which had been launched in 2008. The families 
that were covered in the RSBY but were not present in the SECC -2011 database are also 
covered under the scheme. The SECC database involves ranking the households based on 
their socio-economic status. It uses exclusion and inclusion criteria and accordingly decides 
on the automatically included and automatically exclud ed households. Rural households that 
are included (not excluded) are then ranked based on their status of seven deprivation criteria. 
Urban households are categorised based on occupation categories. In line with the approach 
of the Government to use the SE CC database  for social welfare schemes, PM JAY also 
identifies targeted beneficiary families through this data. 
2.3.2 Out of the total seven deprivati on criteria for rural areas, PM JAY covers all such 
families who fall into at least one of the six deprivation criteria (D1 to D5 and D7 ) 
(Annexure-I) and automatic inclusion  of D6 (Destitute/ living on alms, manual scavenger 
households, primitive tribal group, legally released bonded labour) deprivation criteria. For 
urban areas, the re are various  occupational categories  (Annexure-I) of workers  including 
Rag-picker, Beggar, Domestic Worker, and Street Vendor who are eligible for the scheme. 

13 
 
2.3.3 The Committee was informed that there were some limitations with the SECC  
database, like non-traceability (only five crore individuals of 1.8 crore families were verified), 
inappropriate inclusion & exclusion of people and difficulty in identifying beneficiaries on the 
ground with certainty .  Further, many States were already implementing their own health 
insurance schemes with a set of beneficiaries already identified. There were large variations 
across States in terms of eligibility criteria and databases. To solve all these problems , the 
Union Cabinet provided flexibility to States/UTs to use existing non -SECC digitised 
databases against unidentified SECC beneficiary families to ensure that all families eligible as 
per the SECC data are covered and not denied benefits.  In January 2022, due to the decennial 
population increase, the beneficiary base to be covered under the scheme has been increased 
to 12 crore families.   
 
2.3.4 The Committee noted that in its Report No. 11 of 2023 on the Performance Audit of 
PMJAY, the Comptroller and Auditor Genera l of India (CAG) stated that the SECC database 
of 2011 used as eligibility criteria for the scheme was more than seven years old at the time of 
inception of the scheme. Because of economic development and employment opportunities, 
many households may have become ineligible for inclusion , while others may have become 
eligible for the SECC under the existing criteria. Analysis of Beneficiary Identification 
System (BIS) data revealed several inconsistencies in the SECC database , like different 
names and dates of birth of benefici aries in two different columns, invalid or blank entries in 
the fields for name, year of birth and gender of beneficiary. In its report , the CAG also 
highlighted several errors , like unrealistic size of family  against unique ID  and delay in 
rejection of cases in the BIS database. (Table 1 and 2 of the said Report) 
2.3.5 The report of CAG highlights the possibility of the presence of ineligible beneficiaries 
in the BIS database. It also indicates a lack of validation controls in the beneficiary 
registration process , resulting in the presence of duplicate beneficiaries in the system. 
Moreover, delayed action in the finalisation of approval of eligible beneficiaries and weeding 
out of the ineligible beneficiaries resulted in delayed/denied benefits to potential beneficiaries 
and ineligible persons availing benefits of the scheme and excess payment of premiums to the 
insurance companies. Further, it also delays re -application by a potential beneficiary in case 
rejection was due to lack of documents.  
2.3.6   The Committee, in the above context, was apprised that several beneficiaries were 
facing problems in addition  and inclusion  of family members  above or less than the 
prescribed 6 family members. T he ministry stated that the  criteria of 6 family members 
is with reference to one mobile number only  and there was no cap on family size in 
PMJAY. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the difficulties being faced by the 
beneficiaries having family size less than  or more than 6 members  may be addressed 
promptly by updating the application software. 
2.3.7 The Committee observes that the accurate identification and registration of the 
eligible beneficiaries under PMJAY is a major challenge. It is difficult to reach the 
poorest and the most vulnerable population of the country due to low literacy and 
awareness. This is true for most Lower and Middle -Income Countries (LMIC) , and 

14 
 
India is not an exception. It  is essential to ensure that the benefits reach the target 
section of population. 
2.3.8 The Committee believes that the Ministry and NHA , along with implementing 
States/UTs, need to undertake a country-wide drive to scrutinise and validate the BIS 
database. Validation checks should be in place to increase the accuracy and reliability of 
the data. The inconsistencies in the database may be removed at the earliest . The 
appropriate mechanism may be devised to ensure weeding out of ineligible beneficiaries 
and identification of eligible beneficiaries  in a planned, coordinated and time -bound 
manner. States/UTs need to be impressed upon  to map their own database with the 
SECC database to avoid duplication. The process for approval or rejection of ineligible 
beneficiaries and registration of eligible beneficiaries needs to be made simple and less 
time-consuming to avoid delay beyond the prescribed time. 
2.3.9 The Committee recommends that the NHA needs to develop an IT-based solution 
to educate and create awareness that a family is eligible for the scheme, and ways to 
rapidly identify the family if any member c omes to a n empanelled hospital for 
treatment. 
2.3.10 The Committee believes that t he Information, Education and Communication 
(IEC) programs are significant to understanding the various target audiences for 
PMJAY, like their attitudes and perceptions towards the scheme, and to educate the 
target audience about the scheme driving  changes in their attitudes and behaviour. The 
programs are necessary to maximise the reach, impact, and awareness  of the scheme  
amongst targeted beneficiaries. NHA needs to set up designated IEC cells, make special 
efforts in a planned manner and sensitise the entitled beneficiaries to generate 
awareness about the scheme. NHA should coordinate with SHAs and NGOs to design a 
comprehensive IEC plan and undertake IEC campaigns in a planned manner. Such IEC 
efforts should be recorded, reviewed, and monitored regularly.  
2.3.11 The Committee notes that  the flexibility has been given to the States/UTs to 
choose the remaining beneficiaries from any digital database that the State/UT has if the 
broad nature of these new people matches with the beneficiary nature of PMJAY. The 
Committee is of the view that under that dispensation, States/UTs may be asked to 
include senior citizens, particularly those r esiding in old age homes or any other place  
by revising the Deprivation Criteria, as beneficiaries of the scheme. Many senior citizens 
residing in places like shelter homes and old age homes do not fall under the Below 
Poverty Line and face financial problems while availing treatments. Their inclusion in 
the scheme would help them access affordable and quality treatment.  
 
2.4 Implementation Process- PMJAY 
2.4.1 Various States are using different models for implementing their own health 
insurance/assurance schemes. Since States are at different levels of preparedness and have 

15 
 
varying capacities to manage such schemes, PMJAY provides the States with the flexibility to 
choose their implementation model. They can implement PMJAY through three modes - trust, 
insurance, or mixed/hybrid. 
A. Trust Mode 
 Under this model  of implementation , the scheme is directly implemented by 
the State Health Agency ( SHA) without the intermediation of the insurance company. 
The payment to the healthcare providers  is made directly by the SHA . The SHA 
engages the services of an Implementation Support Agency (ISA) for claim 
management and related activities. As there is no in surance company in the picture, 
apart from day -to-day management and administration of the scheme, the SHA also 
carries out specialised tasks such as hospital empanelment, beneficiary identification, 
claims management and audits and other related tasks . 23  States/UTs have adopted 
this model of implementation.  
B. Insurance Mode 
 In the insurance model  of implementation, the SHA competitively selects an 
insurance company through a  tendering process to manage the scheme  in the 
State/UT. Based on market-determined premiums , SHA pays a premium to the 
insurance company per eligible family for the policy period , and the insurance 
company, in turn, does the claims settlement and payments to the service provider. 
The financial risk for implementing the scheme is als o borne by the insurance 
company in this model.  However, to ensure that the insurance company does not 
make an unreasonable profit, the scheme provides for a mechanism where insurance 
companies can only get a limited percentage of the premium for their profit and 
administrative costs.  After adjusting a  defined percentage for expenses of 
management (including all costs , excluding only service tax and any cess, if 
applicable) and after settling all claims, if there is a surplus, then 100 per cent of 
leftover surplus should be refunded by the insurer to th e SHA within 30 days.  7 
States/UTs have adopted this model of implementation.  
C. Mixed/Hybrid Mode 
Under this  model of implementation , the SHA engages both the trust and 
insurance models in various capacities with the aim of being more economically 
efficient, providing flexibility and allowing convergence with the State scheme. Initial 
cover of a certain amount is provided by the insurance company, and the rest of the 
cover, up to Rs. 5 lakh is provided under trust mode. 3 States/UTs have adopted this 
model of implementation.  
2.4.2 The Committee has been informed that i nitially, the States/UTs preferred the 
insurance mode of scheme implementation as these States had limited or no experience in 
health financing schemes.  However, over the years of scheme implementation, the number of 
States/UTs implementing the scheme under trust mode has risen from 17 to 23 States , 

16 
 
whereas the number of States who have adopted insurance mode has fallen from 11 to 7 
States/UTs. This trend hints at the wider adoption of the trust mode over other modes of 
scheme implementation.  
2.4.3 With respect to the implementation challenges in the trust, insurance and mixed/hybrid 
model, the Committee has been informed that:  
i)  In trust mode, the fina ncial outgo is not one -time, while in Insurance mode, the 
premium amount is paid to the Insurance companies in one go.  Hence, the 
financial management is easier in the trust mode.  
ii)  In trust mode, revision of packages or any policy decision/amendment can be made 
during the policy period. However, in Insurance mode, implementation of such 
decisions can only be done after completion of the policy period. 
iii)  In Insurance mode, at the start of the policy year, claims are settled in a time-bound 
manner. However, to cap the loss ratio, the Insurance companies tend to raise 
unnecessary queries or reject claims towards the end of the policy period. 
iv) For States/UTs with limited funds, claim settlement can be ensured timely in 
Insurance mode. 
2.4.4 The Committee observes tha t there is a trend amongst the States to prefer the 
trust model and is of the view that the States opt for this model owing to their experience 
of working with the insurance companies.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Government to explore provisions to modify and improve the modalities related to the 
insurance mode to make it simpler, transparent, and attractive to the States. This will 
provide more options for the States to implement the scheme according to their regional 
demography and needs. The  outgo of funds is immediate in  insurance mode . The 
Committee suggests that t he Government should push for  payment of premium  of 
insurance in instalments, preferably monthly/quarterly instalments.  
2.4.5 The Committee further believes that the Government should evaluate the 
performance of insurance companies. The Government should explore a robust 
monitoring mechanism to keep a check on any unjustified profit -making and any 
unethical link age between the insurance compan ies and hospitals . Necessary 
mechanisms should be in place to ensure that the insurance companies are working as 
per the objectives and norms of the scheme.   
 
Financing Mechanism 
2.4.6 PMJAY is a centrally sponsored scheme, and the costs are shared between the Central 
and State Governments. The Government of India decides a national ceiling amount per 
family that is used to determine the maximum limit of the central share of the contribution. 
The actual premium discovered through the open tendering process, or the maximum ceiling 

17 
 
of the estimated premium decided by the Government of Ind ia for the implementation of 
PMJAY, whichever is less, would be shared between the Central Government and States/UTs 
in the ratio as per the extant directives issued by Ministry of Finance. In addition, 
administrative cost for implementing the scheme at the State level is also provided under the 
scheme and shared between the Centre and State in the same sharing pattern. 
2.4.7 The existing sharing pattern is in the ratio of 60:40 for all States and Union Territories 
with legislature, except the North-Eastern States , two  Himalayan States (Himachal Pradesh 
and Uttarakhand) and one Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, where the sharing ratio is 
90:10. For Union Territories without legislature, the  Central Government may contribute up 
to 100% on a case-to-case basis. The Central and State Governments/UT must open a separate 
designated escrow account through which the payment of premium , i.e., States/UTs and 
Central Government’s share of the premium, is released. The estimation, allocation, and 
utilisation of Grant-in-aid under PMJAY are given as below: 
 
 
Source: Annual Report 2022-23 of NHA (Fund Utilisation for 2023-24 is till 31.08.23) 
 
2.4.8 The Committee notes that the fund released by the Central Government during 
the last five years, from 2018 -19 to 2022 -23, towards PMJAY is around Rs. 17,000 
crores, of which Rs. 6,180 crores were released in the last financial year. Also, except for 
the last financial year, the fu nd utilisation was much less as compared to the budget 
estimation. The Government should take steps to ensure higher and more efficient 
utilisation of funds allocated in the budget. The Committee would further like to state 
2400 
6400 
6400 
6400 
6412 
7200 
2001.17 
3200 
3100 
3199 
6462 
7125.90 
1965.25 
3129.33 
2636.64 
3066.58 
6180.69 
2834.03 
0 
1000 
2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
6000 
7000 
8000 
2018 - 19  2019 - 20  2020 - 21  2021 - 22  2022 - 23  2023 - 24  
Rs. In Crore 
Estimation, Allocation and Utilisation of  Grants -in -aid  
Budget Estimate 
Revised Estimate 
Fund Utilised 

18 
 
that the budget of Rs. 6,000 -7,000 crores allocated as the share of the Central 
Government is much less for 33 States/UTs. The Committee suggests that the budget 
allocation for the scheme should be increased as the PMJAY is the keystone scheme of 
the Government in achieving the UHC. For this purpose, other old/peripheral schemes 
of the Government in the healthcare sector may be subsumed or integrated with 
PMJAY so that the unutilised funds, resources, and manpower involved in those 
schemes may be utilised for the efficient implementation of PMJAY.    
 
2.5 Empanelment of Hospitals and Management 
2.5.1 Preventive and quality health care are the core components of achieving  Universal 
health coverage. PMJAY covers medical and hospitalisation expenses for secon dary and 
tertiary care procedures with an aim to bring low -cost quality treatment as well as to provide 
essential drugs and diagnostic services at affordable prices  to the beneficiaries . State Health 
Authorities, through State Empanelment Committees (SEC) , are empowered to empanel 
private and public health service providers in their respective State/UTs. The States are free to 
decide the mode of verification of empanelment applications, conducting the physical 
verification either through the District Empanelment Committee (DEC) or using the selected 
insurance company (Insurance Mode) under the broad guidelines for hospital empanelment. 
2.5.2 All public facilities with the capability of providing inpatient services (Community 
Health Centre level and above) are deemed empanelled under PMJAY. Private Hospitals may 
apply online through the Hospital Empanelment Management (HEM) portal for empanelment. 
The process of empanelment of Private Hospitals is defined in the Flow Chart below: 
 
 


19 
 
2.5.3 According to Hospital Empanelment and Management (HEM) guidelines, the criteria 
for empanelment have been divided into two broad categories viz. General and Specialty. The 
Empanelled Health Care Providers (EHCPs) empanelled under PMJAY for providing general 
care should meet the minimum requirements of General Criteria. Under the Specialty Criteria, 
Hospitals would be empanelled separately for certain tertiary care packages authorised for one 
or more specialities (viz. Cardiology, Oncology , Neurosurgery, etc.) and the Hospitals are 
required to meet the advanced criteria to provide those facilities as speciality packages, over 
and above the general criteria.  
2.5.4 The network of empanelled hosp itals across the States/UTs under PMJAY has 
expanded from 7,387 (3413 private and 3974 public) in 2018 to 28,432 (12,859 private and 
15,573 public) as on the 12th June 2023. 
 
2.5.5 The Committee note s that there are deficiencies like medical equipment being out of 
order and lack of basic infrastructure such as IPD beds, Operation Theatres, ICU care with 
ventilator support systems, blood banks, pharmacy, round-the-clock ambulance services, etc. 
Some EHCPs d o not confo rm to the prescribed safety measures like fire, bio -waste 
management, etc. In Manipur, Tripura, and Uttarakhand, it has been reported1 that 163 
EHCPs were empanelled without conduct of physical verification. This risks the empanelment 
of EHCPs, which do not fulfil the minimum criteria of empanelment.  
2.5.6 As of November 2022, the availability o f EHCPs per one lakh beneficiaries  ranged 
from 1.8 EHCPs in Bihar to 26.6 EHCPs in Goa. The availability ratio was  highest in the 
Union Territory of Lakshadweep, i.e., 90.8 EHCPs per lakh beneficiaries.   The availability of 
EHCPs is very low in the States/UTs of Assam (3.4), Dadra Nagar Haveli -Daman Diu (3.6), 
Maharashtra (3), Rajasthan (3.8) and Uttar Pradesh (5).  The CAG report also stated that some 
of the EHCPs  had not applied for empanelment of some of the specialities available to them 
and denied such services to PMJAY beneficiaries. Further, healthcare facilities in some 
districts of States lack speciality services, forcing PMJAY beneficiaries to travel to an other 
district/State to avail of the treatment1.  
                                                           
1Report of CAG on Performance Audit of Ayushman Bharat-PMJAY; No 11 of 2023 
3974 
9992 12141 13274 14252 15573 
3413 
6572 
8208 10055 11768 12859 
Year 2018 Year 2019 Year 2020 Year 2021 Year 2022 Year 2023 
Expanding Network of Hospitals 
Public Private 

20 
 
2.5.7 The Committee recommends that NHA and SHAs should ensure that the EHCPs 
follow all  the norms and safety measures. The physical verification process should be 
followed earnestly to ensure that only those hospitals are empanelled that fulfil the 
requisite criteria. The Ministry should ensure that the periodic social audits of EHCPs , 
involving beneficiaries, are carried out effectively in coordination with NHA and SHAs 
so that malpractices may get detected and action may be initiated against the errant 
EHCPs. Consequently, this will also ensure  that benchmarks  for discharging social 
responsibilities are adhered to by EHCPs. There is also a strong need to invest in public 
hospitals to improve and upgrade the quality of the existing health facilities. The 
Committee believes that these steps would help in building an effective and accountable 
network of health service providers as per quality standards. 
2.5.8 The Committee also noticed that the availability of EHCPs is not uniform across 
the country, and it is very low in some of the States. The Ministry, in coordination with 
State authorities, should make concerted efforts to encourage more private hospitals to 
get empanelled under the scheme in all the districts, particularly in regions with low 
density of EHCPs, and  to eradicate disparities in the availability of EHCPs per lakh  
beneficiaries across various regions of the country. The IEC activities may be utilised 
robustly in efforts to empanel more hospitals. This would make affordable and quality 
treatment accessible to poor and vulnerable populations uniformly across the coun try, 
particularly in rural and remote areas, removing any regional disparity.  
2.5.9 The Committee observes that failure to provide all available specialities by 
EHCPs reduces the availability of such services to beneficiaries. The Ministry , in 
coordination wi th NHA and SHAs , should ensure that all the specialities available in 
EHCPs are empanelled under PMJAY. Missing specialities should be empanelled in a 
time-bound manner. There is also a strong need to upgrade the speciality services 
available in EHCPs in all districts across the country as the lack of speciality services 
compels the beneficiaries to move off places , which causes hardship and a great amount 
of inconvenience, besides adding to the OOPE. 
2.5.10 The Committee has been informed that the average available bed size is roughly 
48 beds per EHCP. This indicates that most of  the hospitals/institutions empanelled 
under PMJAY are of small scale , and many of the bigger hospitals/institutions are not 
empanelled under the scheme.  The Ministry informed that most of these hospitals are in 
Tier-2 and Tier -3 towns and fewer in Tier -1 or metropolitan cities , and they are in a 
constant process of engagement with all bigger hospital chains to persuade them to  join 
PMJAY. The Government should examine why larger hospitals are not joining the 
scheme and make efforts to empanel them. The Committee also recommends that the 
health facilities falling under the following categories be mandatorily empanelled:  
i. health facilities availing tax benefits;  
ii. those receiving land grants/ concessions from the Centre/ State Gove rnments for 
their establishment;  

21 
 
iii. facilities affiliated with medical colleges; and  
iv. any other category deemed fit by the Government. 
2.5.11 The Committee came to know of t he instances of delay in approval of 
empanelment of hospitals. In some cases , the delays beyond the stipulated period of 30 
days ranged from 1 day to 44 months. The Committee is of the view that t he 
Government should review t he procedures in this regard  and take necessary steps to 
reduce the pendency in such approvals after carrying out all effective checks.  
 
2.6 Convergence of PMJAY with Schemes of States 
2.6.1 At the time of implementation of PMJAY, it was observed that many States/UTs were 
simultaneously implementing their own health insurance/assurance schemes for various target 
populations. The benefit cover of these schemes is mostly available within the State 
boundaries except for some smaller States that have empanelled a few hospitals outside the 
State boundaries. Very few States had converged their schemes with the erstwhile RSBY 
scheme due to the lack of flexib ility in the design of the RSBY. Even though these schemes 
were targeting the poor and vulnerable, there were large variations across States in terms of 
eligibility criteria and databases. Few States were using the food subsidy d atabase, while 
some others had created a separate database for their welfare schemes. 
2.6.2 The primary objectives for launching PMJAY were to ensure comprehensive coverage 
for catastrophic illnesses, reduce catastrophic out -of-pocket expenditure, improve access to 
hospitalisation care, and reduce unmet needs in secondary and tertiary  healthcare. PMJAY is 
providing national portability of healthcare and has also established national standards for a 
health assurance system.  It intends to converge various health insur ance schemes across the 
States to check duplicity and ensure that eligible beneficiaries get covered. The Committee 
has been informed that , as a result, 24 States have converged their health assurance schemes 
with PMJAY , and efforts ar e being made to converge leftover State schemes. The 
convergence of the State specific schemes has helped bring uniformity in ensuring common 
cover amount, pan-India healthcare provider network ensuring healthcare services to eligible 
beneficiaries across the country, common Health Benefit Packages (HBP) with standardised 
rates across the country, common implementation structure for SHA and DIU across the 
country, centralised database at IT platform of NHA ensuring seamless exchange of 
information, and de-duplicated beneficiary database. 
2.6.3 In the spirit of cooperative federalism and keeping in mind variations across the 
States, a lot of flexibility has been built in the PMJAY design. Therefore, PMJAY provides a 
lot of flexibility to States in terms of the following parameters: 
i) Mode of implementation – States can choose the implementation model and can 
implement the scheme through Trust, Insurance or Mixed model. 
ii) Usage of beneficiary data – PMJAY uses SECC data for targeting the beneficiaries ; 
however, States have been provided flexibility to decide on the dataset for this 

22 
 
purpose if they are covering more beneficiaries than SECC-defined numbers. 
However, the State will need to ensure that all beneficiaries eligible as per SECC 
data are also covered. 
iii) Co-branding – States can co-brand their existing health insurance/assurance schemes 
with PMJAY as per the co-branding guidelines of the scheme. 
iv) Expansion of cover to more people – States can cover a greater number of families 
than those defined as per SECC data. For these additional families, the full cost will 
need to be borne by the States. 
v) Increasing benefit cover to higher value – If the State want, they can even expand the 
benefit cover beyond Rs. 5 lakhs per family per year. However, in this case, the cost 
of additional cover will need to be completely borne by the State. 
vi) Revision in package numbers and pricing – Keeping in view the different disease 
profiles and cost of service variations across the States, flexibility has been provided 
to the States to expand the number of packages , and within a limit, the State can also 
revise the package prices. 
vii) Reservation of packages for public hospitals – To ensure that such services that can 
be provided well by Government health facilities are not misused by private 
providers, NHA has defined a set of conditions that are reserved for only public 
health care facilities. States can revise the list of such conditions that are reserved for 
public hospitals. 
viii) IT Systems – Before the launch of PMJAY , some of the States were implementing 
their own health insurance schemes and were  using their own IT systems. PM JAY 
provides flexibility so that States can continue using their own IT system and share 
data with NHA on a real-time basis in the specified format. 
2.6.4 The Committee observes that the PMJAY scheme is running either after merging 
or in parallel with the State Government schemes. There are concerns that at the time of 
implementation, PMJAY, which is the major funding agency, may get the back seat in 
comparison to State schemes. The Government is taking steps like co -branding of 
Ayushman Bharat cards, kiosks, etc. The Committee believes that the  Central 
Government should make efforts  in right earnest  for the convergence of State schemes 
with Ayushman Bharat and to give prominence to PMJAY.  
 
2.7 Monitoring, Fraud Control and Grievance Redressal 
2.7.1. NHA is monitoring PMJAY through the functiona l domains , namely, Beneficiary 
Management System (BMS), Transaction Management System (TMS), Provider Management 
System (PMS) and Support Function Management. This system aims to provide access to 
real-time information regarding various aspects of the scheme and helps foster a culture of 
data-based decision -making. NHA has  also developed Grievance Redressal Guidelines and 
has established a Central Grievance Redr essal Management System (CGRMS) to ensure that 

23 
 
disputes and grievances of PMJAY beneficiaries and other stakeholders are resolved in a 
transparent and time-bound manner. 
2.7.2 Grievance Redressal under PMJAY has a three -tier system at the District, State a nd 
National levels. At each level, there is a dedicated nodal officer, viz. District Grievance Nodal 
Officer (DGNO), State Grievance Nodal Officer (SGNO) and National Grievance Nodal 
Officer (NGNO). One can lodge a grievance on the portal https://cgrms.pmjay.gov.in/ or 
through the national call centre 14555 or throu gh mail, letter, fax , etc. The nodal officers are 
responsible for resolving grievances as per the defined turn -around time. Complainants can 
track the status of their grievance using the Unique Grievance Number, which is generated at 
the time of registration. The Committee has been informed that as of 28thAugust 2023, 98% of 
the total registered grievances have been resolved.  
2.7.3 For a programme of the complexity and magnitude of PMJAY, it is essential to put in 
place a s trong anti-fraud mechanism to maintain financial integrity as well as safeguard the 
health and well-being of the scheme's beneficiaries. Accordingly, NHA has set up a National 
Anti-Fraud Unit (NAFU) , which works in close coordination with State Anti -Fraud Units 
(SAFUs) to instrumentalise anti -fraud and abuse control activities at the ground level. The 
Committee has been informed that NHA is also using artificial intelligence and machine 
learning technologies to detect suspicious transactions and potential frauds in PMJAY. 
NAFU, along with SAFU, also conducts surprise joint medical audits . As of 5th August 2023, 
the SHAs have taken appropriate actions against a total of 1.6 lakh claims as p er guidelines of 
NHA. Further, 210 hospitals have been de -empanelled, and 188 hospitals have been 
suspended due to their involvement in malpractices.  
2.7.4  The Committee appreciates the fact that during the study of this subject, about 
98 percent of the total grievances registered were resolved  and the implementation of 
PMJAY is being continuously monitored and evaluated at NHA . The Commit tee 
endorses the need for a robust data collection and analysis system  for a mega scheme. 
Further, fraudulent practice s, such as overbilling and unnecessary procedures, can 
strain the program's finances and undermine its goals. Preventing and detecting fraud is 
a significant concern. In view of these facts, the Committee is of the opinion that 
technology is crucial for monitoring and fraud prevention , as all the processes and data 
are in electronic form. To enhance the evaluation and analysis of available data in 
PMJAY, the Committee recommends establishing a dedicated  and skilled  IT research 
team, to develop and monitor the  technical aspects of  IT applications for effective 
dissemination of information and data analysis .  Additionally, regular upgrades and 
improvements to PMJAY portals and modules are essential. Capacity-building 
programs in IT and data processing should be organised for officials and stakeholders, 
including hospital staff, at various levels. 
2.7.5 The Committee believes that the instances of fraud activities should be recorded 
and shared with all SHAs. Artificial  intelligence and machine learning technologies 
should be used intensively in data scrutiny, analysis, and monitoring. Further, instead of 
taking only reactive actions to the malpractices, the Government must set up 

24 
 
mechanisms through scrutiny of electronic data and field inspection to anticipate and 
take proactive actions to prevent fraudulent practices. 
2.7.6 The Committee feels that obtaining feedback, satisfaction level and suggestions 
from the patients/beneficiaries plays an inevitable role and provides important 
indicators to ensure that the EHCPs are providing quality healthcare services. This also 
helps in evaluating and monitoring the performance and role of other 
intermediaries/stakeholders like insurance companies, Implementation Support 
Agencies (ISA), Arogya Mitras, NHA & SHAs officials, etc.  
2.7.7 The Committee has observed that some of the EHCPs , after performing 
treatment/surgery, say that they are empanelled, but the surgery performed is not 
covered under the PMJAY. The Committee believes that to prevent such instances, the 
Government must publish a list of empanelled healthcare providers with the procedures 
for which they are empanelled. Such a list must be made accessible t o the illiterate 
people, tribal population and people living in remote areas through Arogya Mitras, 
ASHA workers, Community Service Centres, etc. Further, the Government must ensure 
that all hospitals place a board with a list of all empanelled procedures available in that 
hospital at the reception area and the kiosks installed there.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
Chapter- 3 
Way Forward 
 
3.1 Best Practices in Providing UHC 
3.1.1 There are instances of best practices across the country , as reported by the NHA on its 
website. Such practices inspire the states to learn from the current best practices being 
showcased as well as be motivated to adopt and try new systems and practices to improve 
scheme efficiency and effectiveness. Some of the best practices that should be implemented 
across the country are delineated below: 
Sikkim- BIS camp at the level of Gram Panchayat Unit 
State Health Agency, Sikkim , had organised a BIS camp at Mangshilla Gram 
Panchayat Unit. The  Zilla Panchayat  provided logistical arrangements for the 
campsite, and the ward panchayats checked the list of eligible beneficiary families in 
that area from the SECC database that was shared. The Mangshila  Nari Samaj, the 
active Civil Body Society in the area, conducte d IEC activities along with the ASHA 
workers. The Common Services Cent res and Village Level Entrep reneurs (VLEs) 
were approached for the camp. Nearly 90% of the beneficiaries of Mangshila  Tibuk 
GPU were covered. It is now being replicated across all districts of the state to saturate 
beneficiary coverage. 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu - Expanding PMJAY to non-SECC 
families to achieve UHC. 
The Administration added two more categories in PMJAY under the head of non -
SECC families to provide UHC to the residents of the UT of DNH &  DD, and they 
have achieved 100% coverage. These additional categories are resident families whose 
annual income is below Rs. 1.5 lakh ( premium paid by UT Administration), a ll 
resident families whose annual income is abo ve Rs. 1.5 lakh (p remium paid by the 
individual) and Building and Other Construction Worker s ( premium paid by labour 
welfare board).  
Chandigarh- BIS Camps and door-to-door verification of beneficiaries  
Chandigarh, being an urban city with a high migratory population, it had become 
difficult to verify the beneficiaries of the scheme. Out of 71,278 target families, only 
23,687 could be traced, and thus , verification of genuine beneficiaries  was necessary. 
To ensure t his, all PMJAY cards registered in a month were scrutinised by cross -
checking documents, telephonic verification, and verification from hospital records, if 
needed. A special  focus was on non -KYC patients/cards , and door-to-door field 
verification of some sectors was also performed. This ensured that 99% of the cards 
were genuine, as verification was done afresh. 

26 
 
Uttar Pradesh-Usage of Community Radio services  
To increase awareness of the scheme at the grassroots level, an Integrated 
Communication strategy  with the community radio was developed. The Centre for 
Advance Research (CFAR) was roped in to organise a community radio media 
workshop for this purpose. CFAR , through its media coverage , captures beneficiary 
success stories and publishes positive news updates related to PMJAY in UP. 
Community radio has played a vital role in mobilising beneficiaries to enrolment 
stations.  
Kerala- Installation of Kiosks as  a one -stop solution for all PMJAY-related 
information and issues  
The State IEC team has conceptualised and installed kiosks at Empanel led Health 
Care Providers (EHCPs) as the one -step solution that serves as a knowledge point for 
the scheme. Monitoring and evaluation are carried out wit h the support of the District 
Implementation Unit (DIU) to perceive the impact generated through this innovation.  
It was found that the kiosk has significantly impacted the branding of the PMJAY 
scheme, easy identification of beneficiaries and easy process flows of admissions in 
installed healthcare institutions. It has also increased patient flow to the healthcare 
institutions. Besides, District EHCP Connect is an initiative of SHA Kerala to connect 
with EHCPs through District Project Coordinators (DPCs) for information sharing, 
mutual bonding, doubt clearance, and advanced training. These initiatives have helped 
in reducing claim rejections due to failure in adher ence to scheme guidelines. This has 
led to an overall improvement in scheme utilisation by the EHCPs. 
Jammu & Kashmir- Publication of success stories through wall calendars  
Word of mouth plays an essential role in successful behaviour change. For this 
purpose, SHA J&K printed the  success stories and testimonials of PM JAY 
beneficiaries on yearly calendars and distributed them to beneficiaries to encourage 
others to avail of benefits under the PM JAY scheme. The success stories and 
testimonials are captured by visiting beneficiaries who have taken treatment under the 
scheme and getting their consent to publish their story. These calendars were 
distributed among masses through Public and Private Empanelled hospitals during the 
current year. 
Karnataka- Online referral system for beneficiaries from Primary Health 
Institutions to Empanelled Hospitals to ensure a continuum of care. 
Beneficiaries usually visit Primary Health Institutes (PHI) as their first level of 
treatment. In case the beneficiary n eeds to take fu rther treatment that may not be 
available at the PHI level, a referral is provided for taking treatments under any of the 
other empanelled hospitals. SHA Karnataka has migrated  this manual referral system 
into an online referral system. Through this, every PHI’s and empanelled hospital's 
capabilities and specialities are mapped to the online referral system. The system 

27 
 
searches for the availability of specialities in the PHIs of  the respective district. If 
there is no availability, the system provides a list of hospitals in ascending order of 
proximity for beneficiaries. This strong referral system has ensured that patients utilise 
the government hospital facilities , thereby aidi ng in the capacity and capability 
building of the government PHIs. 
Maharashtra- Clinical protocols developed to prevent misuse of packages and 
procedures under the scheme. 
SHA Maharashtra has developed clinical protocols by using principles of evidence -
based medicine to help treating specialists arrive at appropriate treatment decisions 
that prevent misuse of procedures and packages under the PMJAY scheme. The 
clinical protocols include a simple set of questions developed by the experts of 
specialities from the Private and Public sectors to be answered by treating physicians 
while raising pre-authorizations. This practice prevented the misuse of packages while 
raising pre-authorisations. 
Uttarakhand- Daily Quick Audit System (DQAS) to improve efficiency and reduce 
fraud of claims. 
The SHA introduced the Daily Quick Audit System (DQAS) in September 2019 to 
check irregularities in claims approved for payment by the Implementation Support 
Agency (ISA). A Universal Committee was constituted to conduct a Daily Quick 
Audit of all approved  claims. The committee is chaired by the Chairman SHA, with 
Directors of all divisions and the State coordinator of ISA as members. Capacity 
building of all committee members and daily audits improved the quality and time of 
claim processing, resulting in faster claims to the hospitals. Further, this practice aided 
in detecting frauds by virtue of which 13 hospitals have been de-empanelled, and there 
has been recovery and savings of more than Rs.1 crore. 
Nagaland- Daily audit of Ayushman Cards at the time of pre-authorisation  
In Nagaland, to solve the problem of utilisation of the scheme by ineligible 
beneficiaries, the SHA decided to conduct a daily audit of Ayushman cards against 
which pre -authorisation has been registered. Daily record-keeping and monthly 
reporting are being done to ensure e ffective implementation. This exercise identified 
10 Beneficiary Identification System (BIS) operators who were involved in issuing 
fraudulent Ayushman cards to ineligible beneficiaries. From September 2020 to 
January 2022, SHA has audited more than 7,429 pre -authorisation cases, of which 99 
pre-authorisation cases have been cance lled due to ineligible cards amounting to over 
Rs. 12 lakhs. 
3.1.2 The Ministry , in coordination with NHA and SHAs , should accelera te and 
intensify the IEC activities. The camps at village and block levels should be organised in 
a planned manner to increase awareness about the scheme and to fast-pace the 
registration of eligible beneficiaries. Civil societies, NGOs and local-level officials need 

28 
 
to be involved in making these camps successful. The ration shops may also be roped in 
to increase awareness among the local masses, which could play a significant role in 
saturating beneficiary coverage across all the districts. Further, the verification of 
genuine beneficiaries is necessary to prevent the leakage of funds. The practice followed 
in Chandigarh should be implemented across the country, particularly in urban areas 
where the proportion of the migratory population is high, to ensure the genuineness of 
beneficiaries. A dedicated cell should be formed in every district for cross -checking of 
documents, telephonic verification, and door-to-door field verifications with a special 
focus on non -KYC beneficiaries. The success stories and testimonials of PMJAY 
beneficiaries should be given wide publicity through Community Radio, wall calendars 
and kiosks installed at EHCPs. Kerala's model of kiosks as a one-step solution should be 
encouraged. 
3.1.3 In order to achieve 100% coverage of targeted beneficiaries under the PMJAY 
scheme, the states with a smaller  number of identified and eligible beneficiaries should 
include additional categories in the scheme. Further, as per the report of  NITI Aayog titled 
"Health Insurance for India's Missing Middle", at least 30% of the population (about 40 crore 
individuals) are devoid of any financial protection for health.  
 
 
 
3.1.4 The PMJAY scheme and State Government extension schemes provide 
comprehensive hospitalisation cover to the bottom 50% of the population , and around 20% of 
the population is covered through social health insurance and private voluntary health 
insurance. The uncovered population spread across all expenditure quintiles in both urban and 
rural areas. This category predominantly constitutes the self -employed (agriculture and non -
agriculture) informal sector in rural areas and a broad array of informal, semi -formal and 
formal occupations in urban areas.  


29 
 
 
 
3.1.5 The report of NITI Aayog highlighted the issue of low financial protection for 
health in the missing middle segment of the population. There are some States where the 
target set to cover the population under the PMJAY scheme has not been met through 
identifying beneficiaries as per the SECC database and other digital databases available 
with the States. The Committee, in view of the findings of the NITI Aayog, is of the view 
that such States should include new cat egories for 100% targeted coverage under the 
scheme. This will also address the issue highlighted by NITI Aayog. Further, the 
expansion of health insurance /assurance coverage is a necessary step to achieve UHC. 
Hence, the outreach and base of beneficiarie s to be covered under the PMJAY scheme 
should be gradually increased till UHC is achieved.   
3.1.6 The Committee appreciates the  fact that Ayushman Bharat scheme , since its 
implementation has covered a large section of population  at a fair speed, about 40 crore 
Ayushman Cards  have been  targeted at the end of current financial year . The 
Committee has however, observed that there is  wide variation in the per capita amount 
spent on health care per annum among the States ranging from Rs. 556/- (Bihar) to Rs. 
9450/- (Arunachal Pradesh) , according to a study 2. To achieve UHC, the Committee  
                                                           
2www.thelancet.com,Vol13, June,2023 


30 
 
recommends the Government to  impress upon the Sta tes/UTs with low investment in 
health care, to enhance it reasonably to achieve the targets of UHC. 
3.1.7 The Committee observes that the initiative of District EHCP Connect in Kerala 
helps in information sharing and capacity building of EHCPs in dealing with the 
treatment of beneficiaries and improves adherence to scheme guidelines. The online 
referral system adopted in Karnataka made the search for available specialist treatment 
in the proximity to the residence easy and aided  in the optimal utilisation of available 
resources. The practice of following clinical protocols developed by using principles of 
evidence-based medicine checks the misuse of packages while raising pre -authorisations. 
The Committee is of the opinion that these good practices should be implemented across 
the country as these initiatives would lead to an overall improvement in scheme 
utilisation. 
3.1.8 The Committee observes that the daily audit system by the dedicated audit team, 
as adopted by the states of Uttarakhand and Nagaland , aided in detecting fraudulent 
practices, improved quality and time of claim processing, and effective impleme ntation 
of the scheme. The Committee also appreciates the IT -enabled beneficiary feedback and 
redressal system developed in Punjab. The sharing of experiences and feedback by 
beneficiaries after obtaining the treatment services helps in monitoring the qual ity of 
services and checks for illegal activities. The Committee is of the opinion  that a robust 
daily audit system and the IT -enabled automated feedback and redressal system should 
be established at the district level in all the States/UTs.  
 
3.2 Challenges and potential areas of improvement under PMJAY 
3.2.1 The Committee, during study, observed inter alia , the following challenges in 
implementation of AB-PMJAY: - 
(i)  Limited Coverage:  PMJAY aims to provide health coverage to economically 
vulnerable sections of society, the scheme's coverage remains limited. Several health 
services, such as outpatient care, preventive healthcare, and non -hospitalisation 
expenses, are not covered under PMJAY. This limitation restricts the comprehensive 
access to healthcare for the beneficiaries. 
(ii)  Disparities in Implementation: Despite efforts to ensure uniform implementation 
across the country, disparities in the execution of PMJAY persist between s tates and 
regions. Some states have faced challenges in the effective deployment of funds and 
resources, leading to uneven access to quality healthcare for beneficiaries. This 
inconsistency in implementation has hindered the scheme's ability to reach its f ull 
potential. 
(iii)  Infrastructure and Resource Constraints: Inadequate healthcare infrastructure and 
human resources in certain regions have posed significant challenges to the successful 
implementation of PMJAY. The lack of well -equipped hospitals, skilled medical 

31 
 
personnel, and essential medical equipment has affected the quality of healthcare 
services provided under the scheme. This issue has resulted in long waiting times and 
substandard treatment for many beneficiaries. 
(iv)  Information Dissemination and Awareness: Despite efforts to create awareness 
about PMJAY, there have been challenges in effecti vely disseminating information 
about the scheme, especially in rural and remote areas. Limited awareness among the 
target population has resulted in a low rate of enrolment and utilisation of the scheme. 
This lack of awareness has hindered the scheme's potential to reach and benefit its 
intended beneficiaries. 
(v)  Fraud and Misuse: PMJAY has encountered instances of fraud and misuse, including 
false claims, identity theft, and improper billing practices by some healthcare 
providers. Such fraudulent acti vities have led to financial losses for the government 
and compromised the quality of healthcare services provided to the beneficiaries. 
Addressing these issues requires a robust monitoring and oversight mechanism to 
ensure transparency and accountability in the implementation of the scheme. 
(vi)  Administrative Challenges: Complex administrative procedures and bureaucratic 
hurdles have posed challenges in the smooth functioning of the Scheme. Delays in the 
approval process, cumbersome documentation require ments, and procedural 
bottlenecks have hindered the timely delivery of healthcare services to the 
beneficiaries. Streamlining administrative processes and reducing red tape could help 
improve the overall efficiency of the scheme. 
(vii)  Quality of Care: While the Scheme aims to provide affordable healthcare, ensuring 
the quality of healthcare services remains a challenge. Inadequate monitoring 
mechanisms and quality control measures have resulted in varying standards of care 
across different healthcare f acilities. Ensuring uniform quality standards and regular 
monitoring of healthcare providers are essential to enhance the overall effectiveness of  
the Scheme. 
3.2.2 The Committee is of the considered view that  to achieve Universal Health 
Coverage, untapped sections of community , regions and sections of the people must be 
covered under the scheme to increase the  covered population axis. Providing preventive 
health and making the health benefit packages attractive  would result in  decrease in 
disease burden axis  thereby reducing the implementation  cost, the third axis of the 
Cube. Addressing these shortcomings requires a comprehensive approach, including 
strengthening healthcare infrastructure, improving administrative efficiency, enhancing 
awareness, and implementing robust monitoring mechanisms to ensure transparency 
and accountability.  
 
 

32 
 
3.2.3 The Committee, in order that the PMJAY becomes more effective to achieve UHC , 
places following observations and recommendations with scope of improvement on record: 
i) Quality of Healthcare Services and health infrastructure: 
a. Maintaining the quality of healthcare services across a vast network of 
public and private providers is challenging. Variability in the quality of care can 
affect patient outcomes.  The Committee has observed that most of the 
Government hospitals are not up to the standard in clean liness, infrastructure, 
and the treatment of the patients. These hospitals are not patient friendly.  The 
Government must take steps to make Government hos pitals patient -friendly, 
ensure quality  cleanliness and upgrade the basic infrastructure. The Ministry, 
through the Health Secretaries across the States, should have a periodic report on 
cleanliness and infrastructure in those hospitals.  Government hospitals may be 
rated like private hospitals under NABH.   
 
b. The Committee has been informed of the complaints regarding delays in 
settling claims and payments. This may be because schemes like PMJAY deal in 
volume. The Government should address the issue by ensuring that the turn -
around time of claim settlement and claim rejection ratio is reduced significantly. 
This may be done by implementing various provisions like the use of IT-based 
modules, regular interaction among SHAs, EHCPs, ISA s, insurance companies 
and other stakeholders, and capacity building of stakeholders involved in claim 
processing. These steps would  increase the proportion of timely payments , which 
is the major concern of most hospitals and would attract major private ho spitals 
for empanelment under PMJAY.  
 
c. The Committee would also like to highlight that there are regional 
disparities in healthcare infrastructure and services between different states and 
regions, which lead to unequal access and outcomes. Moreover, most of the 
healthcare infrastructure is concentrated in cities and urban areas. It is also seen 
that the public healthcare facilities available in rural areas are flawed due to the 
shortage of well -equipped and staffed infrastructure , which limits the 
accessibility to care. The Committee believes that the Government should take 
steps to strengthen the healthcare infrastructure in rural and underserved areas 
to ensure accessibility to quality healthcare services. 
 
d. The Committee would like to place an emphasis in applying behavioural 
science insights to increase the uptake of the PMJAY Scheme. Keeping in view 
some of the recent behavioural studies, the Committee suggests that PMJAY 
messaging to the target ed population can be revised by including the following 
behavioural insights: 
 

33 
 
 Simplification: PMJAY messaging to contain short and simplified text with 
clear behavioural instruction to register with the Scheme.  
 
 Social norms: People simulate behaviour when they see that others are also 
doing it. PMJAY messaging can be designed in such a way that carries a 
strong message that others are doing it. Moreover, behavioural studies 
indicate that people are risk -seeking over losses but risk -averse over gains. 
Gain-framed PMJAY messaging will prove to be effective. 
 
ii) Capacity and Workforce: 
a) Ensuring an adequate and skilled healthcare workforce to meet the 
increased demand for services is a challenge. In view of this fact, the Committee 
is of the opinion that the Government must fill the vacancies at various levels in 
NHA, SHAs, DIUs and other implementing agencies at the earliest. Apart from 
that, the Ministry must also engage with State Governments to ensure that the 
medical professional workforce , including the paramedical staff , is adequate in 
all healthcare institutions. A periodic report may be called from Health 
Secretaries in the States about vacancies at various levels in healthcare 
institutions of the respective State.  
b) The Committee believes that capacity building of people involved in the  
implementation of PMJAY must be upgraded through t raining and mid-career 
programs. The Government should focus on providing training related to 
technical skills, IT systems, accounting, data analysis, optimal use of artificial 
intelligence, etc. This would help in the efficient and intensive usage of the new 
technologies in the implementation and monitoring of the PMJAY scheme. This 
would also play a major role in improving the indicators highlighting the 
achievements, acceptance, coverage, and impact of the scheme.  
iii) Importance to Medical Ethics: 
 The Committee is of the opinion  that maintaining medical ethics and 
avoiding unnecessary procedures, tests, and over -prescription is a concern, as it 
can lead to rising costs and potential harm to patients. The Government should 
give impetus to  value education and ethics in medical curriculu m and training 
workshops to sensitise the staff involved in the implementation of the scheme that 
maintaining small ethical standards would bring significant results.  
iv) Technology and Data Security: 
a) The Committee has been informed that the personal d etails and medical 
history of the beneficiaries under PMJAY are maintained by the NHA through 
various modules of their IT platform. The beneficiaries may visit multiple 
doctors. The digital record would help the doctor to see the medical history of the 
beneficiary with his/her consent. T he NHA has also maintained a standardised 

34 
 
registry containing the list of all the hospitals , which is called the Healthcare 
Facility Registry, a list of all the healthcare professionals, doctors, nurses, a list of 
all lab s, a list of all the drugs, etc. These initiatives are significant to make the 
PMJAY scheme cashless, paperless, portable, transparent, etc. However, t he 
Committee would also like to highlight that s afeguarding patient data and 
ensuring the security of hea lth information systems are vital to prevent data 
breaches and misuse. The Government must ensure robust IT infrastructure with 
quality encryption and safeguards.  
b) The Committee also believes that the Government should give impetus to 
trust-building cam paigns as some of the beneficiaries may hesitate to join the 
scheme of misleading information regarding breaches of their personal and 
medical data security.  The Committee has also been informed that some of the 
healthcare professionals have also raised d ata security concerns and are 
hesitating to register at the NHA registry. The Government must address these 
concerns through continuous interaction and trust-building initiatives.  
v) Indirect Cost and Expenditure Beyond the Cover of Rs. 5 lakhs 
a) The Committee has seen that , while interacting with the beneficiaries of 
Ayushman Bharat, even if the beneficiaries are insured, they must bear the high 
indirect cost that might go beyond their ability to pay.  To address the 
catastrophic financial burden on p oor patients and to achieve the objective of 
PMJAY, the Government needs to cover this indirect financial loss for a poor 
patient for whom this cost is not negligible.  
b) The Committee , while interacting with both private and government 
hospitals, has noted that some of the complex and high -end surgeries or chronic 
treatment cost more than the sum of Rs. 5 lakhs covered under the PMJAY. Also, 
some of the costly procedures and surgeries are not covered under the scheme. To 
address such issues , some of t he hospitals have set an example by successfully 
attracting Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds and private investment to 
create funds to bear the expenditure of beneficiaries for the cost of treatment 
over and above the insured sum of Rs. 5 lakhs.  The Government need to 
implement such practices across the country to make PMJAY more and more 
effective and beneficial for the poor sections of the society.   Further, in many 
cases, the amount of Rs. 5 lakhs may not be utilised by every patient/family. Only 
in cases of serious diseases and other surgeries , this amount is utilised. Apart 
from Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi, t he Government should  consider the creation of 
some special purpose vehicle or arrangement to cater to fill the gap in such 
special cases in a more structured manner.  
c) The Committee would also like to suggest that the Government must 
encourage more Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) and take steps to attract more 
funds through CSR. The NHA management team should assist the Government 
hospitals in attracting more CSR funds from private companies and PSUs. The 

35 
 
Government should also make strategies to bring more funds to less 
industrialised States through CSR and PPP mechanisms. These initiatives would 
also assist in addressing the lack of healt hcare facilities in rural and remote areas 
and filling the gaps due to regional disparities.  
d) The Committee is of the view that the cost of medicines, particularly in 
cases of diseases like cancer where long -term treatment is required, is also a 
matter of concern. The Government should consider providing medicines free of 
cost to all the beneficiaries across the States through the PMJAY scheme.   
vi) Need to expand the treatment procedures covered under PMJAY 
 The Committee has come to know that some costly procedures and serious 
diseases are not included in the PMJAY. Further, the OPD expenses are not 
covered by the scheme and are considered only in the case of inpatients. The 
Committee recommends that the cove rage of procedures and surgeries under 
PMJAY needs to be increased. Further, the Committee suggests that the rates 
under the health benefit packages (HBP) of PMJAY must be revised frequently 
and kept updated vis-à-vis the present market rates.   
vii) Inclusion of Above Poverty Line (APL) middle-class people in the PMJAY 
 The Committee is of the view that there are many lower middle -class 
people who fall in the APL category, and they are just above the BPL and the 
inclusion criteria for the PMJAY. Such people are in dire need of this scheme. 
The report of NITI Aayog titled “Health Insurance for India’s Missing Middle” 
also suggests that even after the implementation of the PMJAY, at least 30% of 
the population (over 40 crore individuals) still lack any f orm of financial 
protection for health. Adverse health events can lead to financial hardship and 
even push them into poverty. They are characterised by informal employment 
with unstable incomes and a lack of social security benefits. The Committee 
believes that the Government should consider expanding the base of beneficiaries 
to be covered under the PMJAY by including more categories in eligibility 
criteria. This is also in line with the eventual objective of the Government to 
attain the SDG goal of the UHC.  
viii) Guidelines and Mechanism to Govern Employment and Conduct of Arogya 
Mitras 
 The Committee has been informed that the Central Government has not 
issued any standard guidelines to employ Arogya Mitras under the PMJAY. 
There are different arrangements to employ them and to pay them any 
honorarium across the States. In some States, they are retired or serving 
employees of the same hospital for which additional payment is made to them for 
their services. They help the patients in their registration and provide guidance 
during the treatment. The Committee recommends that the Central Government 

36 
 
should issue guidelines and minimum qualifications to be complied with by the 
States while employing Arogya Mitras. The Government should devise a 
mechanism to monitor the conduct and ethical behaviour of Arogya Mitras.  
3.2.4 The Committee feels that a ddressing these challenges and concerns is essential to 
ensure the success and sustainability of PMJAY in providing he althcare access to millions of 
vulnerable individuals in the country . Regular assessments and adjustments are needed to 
overcome these issues and make the program more effective.  

37 
 
RECOMMENDATONS/OBSERVATIONS- AT A GLANCE 
Healthcare Access and Affordability in India 
 The Committee believes that the Government's health expenditure needs to be 
increased reasonably from the present 2.1 percent of GDP on the lines of the objectives 
of the National Health Policy 2017. Apart from increased public health expenditur e, the 
efficient utilisation of available funds should also be emphasised to improve the quality 
and access of healthcare infrastructure. The active collaboration with private 
stakeholders may also help in strengthening the infrastructure significantly.  
(Para 1.2.6) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that health insurance is a mechanism of pooling the 
high level of OOPE in India to provide greater financial protection against health shocks 
and improve efficiency in the organisation and delivery of healthcare f or better health 
outcomes. Increased health insurance coverage will reduce catastrophic and 
impoverishing health expenditures by imposing a ceiling on the maximum health 
expenditure incurred by an individual or household. The publicly funded health 
insurance schemes are envisaged as keystone to advance Universal Health Coverage.  
(Para 1.2.7) 
 
Healthcare and Health Insurance Schemes in Other Countries 
 The Committee notes that the experiences of Thailand, China, and Latin 
American countries demonstrate the difficulty of increasing health coverage in the 
informal/unorganised sector. Thailand made good progress in UHC by fully subsidising 
the informal sector, while China has partially subsidized that segment. However, 
China’s experience also indicates the poss ibility of sustained coverage through a 
contributory and voluntary scheme. Further, the examples from Latin America 
highlight that adverse selection and inadequate risk -pooling is a pressing challenge for 
voluntary contributory schemes targeted towards the  informal sector. The adverse 
selection due to opting out of high -income people reduces cross-subsidisation, leading to 
high premiums and inequality in access to healthcare.  
(Para 1.4.10) 
The Committee is of the view that the Government may consider some of the provisions 
of the Affordable Care Act of United States for inclusion in Ayushman Bharat. By 
including some sections of the persons falling in APL category, the provisions for 
'employer mandate' to provide health insurance to the employee and his family, 
subsuming of specific schemes for children and senior citizens, tax incentives and 
disincentives to corporate regarding healthcare are some of the measures worth 
including in the Ayushman Bharat Scheme and PMJAY. 
 (Para 1.4.11) 

38 
 
Ayushman Bharat Scheme 
Coverage of beneficiaries under PMJAY 
The Committee, in the above context, was apprised that several beneficiaries 
were facing problems in addition and inclusion of family members above or less than the 
prescribed 6 family members. The ministry stated that the criteria of  6 family members 
is with reference to one mobile number only and there was no cap on family size in 
PMJAY. The Committee therefore recommends that the difficulties being fa ced by the 
beneficiaries having family size less than or more than 6 members may be addressed 
promptly by updating the application software. 
(Para 2.3.6) 
 
 The Committee observes that the accurate identification and registration of the 
eligible beneficiari es under PMJAY is a major challenge. It is difficult to reach the 
poorest and the most vulnerable population of the country due to low literacy and 
awareness. This is true for most Lower and Middle -Income Countries (LMIC), and 
India is not an exception. It  is essential to ensure that the benefits reach the target 
section of population. 
(Para 2.3.7) 
 
 The Committee believes that the Ministry and NHA, along with implementing 
States/UTs, need to undertake a country -wide drive to scrutinise and validate the BIS  
database. Validation checks should be in place to increase the accuracy and reliability of 
the data. The inconsistencies in the database may be removed at the earliest. The 
appropriate mechanism may be devised to ensure weeding out of ineligible beneficia ries 
and identification of eligible beneficiaries in a planned, coordinated and time -bound 
manner. States/UTs need to be impressed upon to map their own database with the 
SECC database to avoid duplication. The process for approval or rejection of ineligib le 
beneficiaries and registration of eligible beneficiaries needs to be made simple and less 
time-consuming to avoid delay beyond the prescribed time. 
(Para 2.3.8) 
 
 The Committee recommends that the NHA needs to develop an IT -based solution 
to educate and  create awareness that a family is eligible for the scheme, and ways to 
rapidly identify the family if any member comes to an empanelled hospital for 
treatment. 
(Para 2.3.9) 
 

39 
 
 The Committee believes that the Information, Education and Communication 
(IEC) p rograms are significant to understanding the various target audiences for 
PMJAY, like their attitudes and perceptions towards the scheme, and to educate the 
target audience about the scheme driving changes in their attitudes and behaviour. The 
programs are necessa ry to maximise the reach, impact, and awareness of the scheme 
amongst targeted beneficiaries. NHA needs to set up designated IEC cells, make special 
efforts in a planned manner and sensitise the entitled beneficiaries to generate 
awareness about the scheme . NHA should coordinate with SHAs and NGOs to design a 
comprehensive IEC plan and undertake IEC campaigns in a planned manner. Such IEC 
efforts should be recorded, reviewed, and monitored regularly.  
(Para 2.3.10) 
 
 The Committee notes that the flexibility  has been given to the States/UTs to 
choose the remaining beneficiaries from any digital database that the State/UT has if the 
broad nature of these new people matches with the beneficiary nature of PMJAY. The 
Committee is of the view that under that dispe nsation, States/UTs may be asked to 
include senior citizens, particularly those residing in old age homes or any other place 
by revising the Deprivation Criteria, as beneficiaries of the scheme. Many senior citizens 
residing in places like shelter homes an d old age homes do not fall under the Below 
Poverty Line and face financial problems while availing treatments. Their inclusion in 
the scheme would help them access affordable and quality treatment.  
(Para 2.3.11) 
Implementation Process- PMJAY 
 The Committee observes that there is a trend amongst the States to prefer the 
trust model and is of the view that the States opt for this model owing to their experience 
of working with the insurance companies. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Government to explore provisions to modify and improve the modalities related to the 
insurance mode to make it simpler, transparent, and attractive to the States. This will 
provide more options for the States to implement the scheme according to their regional 
demography and needs. The outgo of funds is immediate in insurance mode. The 
Committee suggests that the Government should push for payment of premium of 
insurance in instalments, preferably monthly/quarterly instalments.  
 (Para 2.4.4) 
 The Committee further  believes that the Government should evaluate the 
performance of insurance companies. The Government should explore a robust 
monitoring mechanism to keep a check on any unjustified profit -making and any 
unethical linkage between the insurance companies and  hospitals. Necessary 
mechanisms should be in place to ensure that the insurance companies are working as 
per the objectives and norms of the scheme.   
(Para 2.4.5) 

40 
 
Financing Mechanism 
 The Committee notes that the fund released by the Central Government d uring 
the last five years, from 2018 -19 to 2022 -23, towards PMJAY is around Rs. 17,000 
crores, of which Rs. 6,180 crores were released in the last financial year. Also, except for 
the last financial year, the fund utilization was much less as compared to t he budget 
estimation. The Government should take steps to ensure higher and more efficient 
utilization of funds allocated in the budget. The Committee would further like to state 
that the budget of Rs. 6,000 -7,000 crores allocated as the share of the Centr al 
Government is much less for 33 States/UTs. The Committee suggests that the budget 
allocation for the scheme should be increased as the PMJAY is the keystone scheme of 
the Government in achieving the UHC. For this purpose, other old/peripheral schemes 
of the Government in the healthcare sector may be subsumed or integrated with 
PMJAY so that the unutilized funds, resources, and manpower involved in those 
schemes may be utilized for the efficient implementation of PMJAY.    
(Para 2.4.8) 
 
Empanelment of Hospitals and Management 
 The Committee recommends that NHA and SHAs should ensure that the EHCPs 
follow all the norms and safety measures. The physical verification process should be 
followed earnestly to ensure that only those hospitals are empanelled th at fulfil the 
requisite criteria. The Ministry should ensure that the periodic social audits of EHCPs, 
involving beneficiaries, are carried out effectively in coordination with NHA and SHAs 
so that malpractices may get detected and action may be initiated against the errant 
EHCPs. Consequently, this will also ensure that benchmarks for discharging social 
responsibilities are adhered to by EHCPs. There is also a strong need to invest in public 
hospitals to improve and upgrade the quality of the existing heal th facilities. The 
Committee believes that these steps would help in building an effective and accountable 
network of health service providers as per quality standards. 
(Para 2.5.7) 
 
 The Committee also noticed that the availability of EHCPs is not uniform  across 
the country, and it is very low in some of the States. The Ministry, in coordination with 
State authorities, should make concerted efforts to encourage more private hospitals to 
get empanelled under the scheme in all the districts, particularly in regions with low 
density of EHCPs, and to eradicate disparities in the availability of EHCPs per lakh 
beneficiaries across various regions of the country. The IEC activities may be utilised 
robustly in efforts to empanel more hospitals. This would make aff ordable and quality 
treatment accessible to poor and vulnerable populations uniformly across the country, 
particularly in rural and remote areas, removing any regional disparity.  
(Para 2.5.8) 

41 
 
 The Committee observes that failure to provide all available s pecialities by 
EHCPs reduces the availability of such services to beneficiaries. The Ministry, in 
coordination with NHA and SHAs, should ensure that all the specialities available in 
EHCPs are empanelled under PMJAY. Missing specialities should be empanell ed in a 
time-bound manner. There is also a strong need to upgrade the speciality services 
available in EHCPs in all districts across the country as the lack of speciality services 
compels the beneficiaries to move off places, which causes hardship and a gr eat amount 
of inconvenience, besides adding to the OOPE. 
(Para 2.5.9) 
 
 The Committee has been informed that the average available bed size is roughly 
48 beds per EHCP. This indicates that most of the hospitals/institutions empanelled 
under PMJAY are of sm all scale, and many of the bigger hospitals/institutions are not 
empanelled under the scheme.  The Ministry informed that most of these hospitals are in 
Tier-2 and Tier -3 towns and fewer in Tier -1 or metropolitan cities, and they are in a 
constant process of engagement with all bigger hospital chains t o persuade them to join 
PMJAY. The Government should examine why larger hospitals are not joining the 
scheme and make efforts to empanel them. The Committee also recommends that the 
health facilities falling under the following categories be mandatorily empanelled:  
i. health facilities availing tax benefits;  
ii. those receiving land grants/ concessions from the Centre/ State Gove rnments for 
their establishment;  
iii. facilities affiliated with medical colleges; and  
iv. any other category deemed fit by the Government. 
 (Para 2.5.10) 
 
 The Committee came to know of the instances of delay in approval of 
empanelment of hospitals. In some cases, the delays beyond the stipulated period of 30 
days ranged from 1 day to 44 months. The Committee is of the view that the 
Government should review t he procedures in this regard and take necessary steps to 
reduce the pendency in such approvals after carrying out all effective checks.  
(Para 2.5.11) 
 
Convergence of PMJAY with Schemes of States 
 The Committee observes that the PMJAY scheme is running either after merging 
or in parallel with the State Government schemes. There are concerns that at the time of 
implementation, PMJAY, which is the major funding agency, may get the back seat in 
comparison to State schemes. The Government is taking steps like co -branding of 

42 
 
Ayushman Bharat cards, kiosks, etc. The Committee believes that the Central 
Government should make efforts in right earnest for the convergence of State schemes 
with Ayushman Bharat and to give prominence to PMJAY.  
(Para 2.6.4) 
 
Monitoring, Fraud Control and Grievance Redressal 
  The Committee appreciates the fact that during the study of this subject, about 
98 percent of the total grievances registered were resolved and the implement ation of 
PMJAY is being continuously monitored and evaluated at NHA. The Committee 
endorses the need for a robust data collection and analysis system for a mega scheme. 
Further, fraudulent practices, such as overbilling and unnecessary procedures, can 
strain the program's finances and undermine its goals. Preventing and detecting fraud is 
a significant concern. In view of these facts, the Committee is of the opinion that 
technology is crucial for monitoring and fraud prevention, as all the processes and dat a 
are in electronic form. To enhance the evaluation and analysis of available data in 
PMJAY, the Committee recommends establishing a dedicated and skilled IT research 
team, to develop and monitor the technical aspects of IT applications for effective 
dissemination of information and data analysis.  Additionally, regular upgrades and 
improvements to PMJAY portals and modules are essential. Capacity -building 
programs in IT and data processing should be organised for officials and stakeholders, 
including hospital staff, at various levels. 
(Para 2.7.4) 
 
 The Committee believes that the instances of fraud activities should be recorded 
and shared with all SHAs. Artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies 
should be used intensively in data scrutiny, analysis, and monitoring. Further, instead of 
taking only reactive actions to the malpractices, the Government must set up 
mechanisms through scrutiny of electronic data and field inspection to anticipate and 
take proactive actions to prevent fraudulent practices. 
(Para 2.7.5) 
 
 The Committee feels that obtaining feedback, satisfaction level and suggestions 
from the patients/beneficiaries plays an inevitable role and provides important 
indicators to ensure that the EHCPs are providing quality healthcare serv ices. This also 
helps in evaluating and monitoring the performance and role of other 
intermediaries/stakeholders like insurance companies, Implementation Support 
Agencies (ISA), Arogya Mitras, NHA & SHAs officials, etc.  
(Para 2.7.6) 
 

43 
 
 The Committee has ob served that some of the EHCPs, after performing 
treatment/surgery, say that they are empanelled, but the surgery performed is not 
covered under the PMJAY. The Committee believes that to prevent such instances, the 
Government must publish a list of empanell ed healthcare providers with the procedures 
for which they are empanelled. Such a list must be made accessible to the illiterate 
people, tribal population and people living in remote areas through Arogya Mitras, 
ASHA workers, Community Service Centers, etc. Further, the Government must ensure 
that all hospitals place a board with a list of all empanelled procedures available in that 
hospital at the reception area and the kiosks installed there.    
(Para 2.7.7) 
 
Best Practices in Providing UHC 
 The Ministry,  in coordination with NHA and SHAs, should accelerate and 
intensify the IEC activities. The camps at village and block levels should be organised in 
a planned manner to increase awareness about the scheme and to fast -pace the 
registration of eligible benef iciaries. Civil societies, NGOs and local -level officials need 
to be involved in making these camps successful. The ration shops may also be roped in 
to increase awareness among the local masses, which could play a significant role in 
saturating beneficiar y coverage across all the districts. Further, the verification of 
genuine beneficiaries is necessary to prevent the leakage of funds. The practice followed 
in Chandigarh should be implemented across the country, particularly in urban areas 
where the propor tion of the migratory population is high, to ensure the genuineness of 
beneficiaries. A dedicated cell should be formed in every district for cross -checking of 
documents, telephonic verification, and door -to-door field verifications with a special 
focus on  non-KYC beneficiaries. The success stories and testimonials of PMJAY 
beneficiaries should be given wide publicity through Community Radio, wall calendars 
and kiosks installed at EHCPs. Kerala's model of kiosks as a one -step solution should be 
encouraged. 
(Para 3.1.2) 
 
 The report of NITI Aayog  highlighted the issue of low financial protection for 
health in the missing middle segment of the population. There are some States where the 
target set to cover the population under the PMJAY scheme has not been met through 
identifying beneficiaries as per the SECC database and other digital databases available 
with the States. The Committee, in view of the findings of the NITI Aayog, is of the view 
that such States should include new categories for 100% targeted coverage under the 
scheme. This will also address the issue highlighted by NITI Aayog. Further, the 
expansion of health insurance /assurance coverage is a necessary step to achieve UHC. 
Hence, the outreach and base of beneficiaries to be covered under the PMJAY scheme 
should be gradually increased till UHC is achieved.   
(Para 3.1.5) 

44 
 
 
 The Committee appreciates the fact that Ayushman Bharat scheme, since its 
implementation has covered a large section of population at a fair speed, about 40 crore 
Ayushman Cards have been targeted at the end of curre nt financial year. The 
Committee has however, observed that there is wide variation in the per capita amount 
spent on health care per annum among the States ranging from Rs. 556/ - (Bihar) to Rs. 
9450/- (Arunachal Pradesh), according to a study2. To achieve  UHC, the Committee 
recommends the Government to impress upon the States/UTs with low investment in 
health care, to enhance it reasonably to achieve the targets of UHC. 
(Para 3.1.6) 
 
 The Committee observes that the initiative of District EHCP Connect in K erala 
helps in information sharing and capacity building of EHCPs in dealing with the 
treatment of beneficiaries and improves adherence to scheme guidelines. The online 
referral system adopted in Karnataka made the search for available specialist treatment  
in the proximity to the residence easy and aided in the optimal utilisation of available 
resources. The practice of following clinical protocols developed by using principles of 
evidence-based medicine checks the misuse of packages while raising pre -authorisations. 
The Committee is of the opinion that these good practices should be implemented across 
the country as these initiatives would lead to an overall improvement in scheme 
utilisation. 
(Para 3.1.7) 
 
 The Committee observes that the daily audit system  by the dedicated audit team, 
as adopted by the states of Uttarakhand and Nagaland, aided in detecting fraudulent 
practices, improved quality and time of claim processing, and effective implementation 
of the scheme. The Committee also appreciates the IT -enabled beneficiary feedback and 
redressal system developed in Punjab. The sharing of experiences and feedback by 
beneficiaries after obtaining the treatment services helps in monitoring the quality of 
services and checks for illegal activities. The Committe e is of the opinion that a robust 
daily audit system and the IT -enabled automated feedback and redressal system should 
be established at the district level in all the States/UTs.  
(Para 3.1.8) 
Challenges and potential areas of improvement under PMJAY  
The Committee is of the considered view that to achieve Universal Health Coverage, 
untapped sections of community, regions and sections of the people must be covered 
under the scheme to increase the covered population axis. Providing preventive health 
and making the health benefit packages attractive would result in decrease in disease 
burden axis thereby reducing the implementation cost, the third axis of the Cube. 
Addressing these shortcomings requires a comprehensive approach, including 

45 
 
strengthening healthcare infrastructure, improving administrative efficiency, enhancing 
awareness, and implementing robust monitoring mechanisms to ensure transparency 
and accountability.  
(Para 3.2.2) 
 The Committee, in order that the PMJAY becomes more effective to achie ve UHC, 
places following observations and recommendations with scope of improvement on record: 
i) Quality of Healthcare Services and health infrastructure: 
a) Maintaining the quality of healthcare services across a vast network of 
public and private provid ers is challenging. Variability in the quality of care can 
affect patient outcomes. The Committee has observed that most of the 
Government hospitals are not up to the standard in cleanliness, infrastructure, 
and the treatment of the patients. These hospita ls are not patient friendly.  The 
Government must take steps to make Government hospitals patient -friendly, 
ensure quality cleanliness and upgrade the basic infrastructure. The Ministry,  
through the Health Secretaries across the States, should have a periodic report on 
cleanliness and infrastructure in those hospitals. Government hospitals may be 
rated like private hospitals under NABH.   
b) The Committee has been informed of the complaints regarding delays in 
settling claims and payments. This may be becau se schemes like PMJAY deal in 
volume. The Government should address the issue by ensuring that the turn -
around time of claim settlement and claim rejection ratio is reduced significantly. 
This may be done by implementing various provisions like the use of IT-based 
modules, regular interaction among SHAs, EHCPs, ISAs, insurance companies 
and other stakeholders, and capacity building of stakeholders involved in claim 
processing. These steps would increase the proportion of timely payments, which 
is the major concern of most hospitals and would attract major private hospitals 
for empanelment under PMJAY.  
c) The Committee would also like to highlight that there are regional 
disparities in healthcare infrastructure and services between different states and 
regions, which lead to unequal access and outcomes. Moreover, most of the 
healthcare infrastructure is concentrated in cities and urban areas. It is also seen 
that the public healthcare facilities available in rural areas are flawed due to the 
shortage of well -equipped and staffed infrastructure, which limits the 
accessibility to care. The Committee believes that the Government should take 
steps to strengthen the healthcare infrastructure in rural and underserved areas 
to ensure accessibility to quality healthcare services. 
d)  The Committee would like to place an emphasis in applying behavioural 
science insights to increase the uptake of the PMJAY Scheme. Keeping in view 
some of the recent behavioural studies, the Committee suggests that PMJAY 
messaging to the targeted population can be revised by including the following 
behavioural insights: 

46 
 
 Simplification: PMJAY messaging to contain short and simplified text with 
clear behavioural instruction to register with the Scheme.  
 Social norms: People simulate behaviour when they see that others are also 
doing it. PMJAY messaging can be designed in such a way that carries a 
strong message that others are doing it. Moreover, behavioural studies 
indicate that people are risk -seeking over losses but risk -averse over gains. 
Gain-framed PMJAY messaging will prove to be effective. 
 
ii) Capacity and Workforce: 
a) Ensuring an adequate and skilled healthcare workforce to meet the 
increased demand for services is a challenge. In view of this fact, the Committee 
is of the o pinion that the Government must fill the vacancies at various levels in 
NHA, SHAs, DIUs and other implementing agencies at the earliest. Apart from 
that, the Ministry must also engage with State Governments to ensure that the 
medical professional workforce , including the paramedical staff, is adequate in 
all healthcare institutions. A periodic report may be called from Health 
Secretaries in the States about vacancies at various levels in healthcare 
institutions of the respective State.  
b) The Committee bel ieves that capacity building of people involved in the 
implementation of PMJAY must be upgraded through training and mid -career 
programs. The Government should focus on providing training related to 
technical skills, IT systems, accounting, data analysis, optimal use of artificial 
intelligence, etc. This would help in the efficient and intensive usage of the new 
technologies in the implementation and monitoring of the PMJAY scheme. This 
would also play a major role in improving the indicators highlighting t he 
achievements, acceptance, coverage, and impact of the scheme.  
iii) Importance to Medical Ethics: 
 The Committee is of the opinion that maintaining medical ethics and 
avoiding unnecessary procedures, tests, and over -prescription is a concern, as it 
can lead to rising costs and potential harm to patients. The Government should 
give impetus to value education and ethics in medical curriculum and training 
workshops to sensitise the staff involved in the implementation of the scheme that 
maintaining small ethical standards would bring significant results.  
iv) Technology and Data Security: 
a) The Committee has been informed that the personal details and medical 
history of the beneficiaries under PMJAY are maintained by the NHA through 
various modules of their  IT platform. The beneficiaries may visit multiple 
doctors. The digital record would help the doctor to see the medical history of the 
beneficiary with his/her consent. The NHA has also maintained a standardised 
registry containing the list of all the hosp itals, which is called the Healthcare 
Facility Registry, a list of all the healthcare professionals, doctors, nurses, a list of 
all labs, a list of all the drugs, etc. These initiatives are significant to make the 

47 
 
PMJAY scheme cashless, paperless, portable , transparent, etc. However, the 
Committee would also like to highlight that safeguarding patient data and 
ensuring the security of health information systems are vital to prevent data 
breaches and misuse. The Government must ensure robust IT infrastructure with 
quality encryption and safeguards.  
b) The Committee also believes that the Government should give impetus to 
trust-building campaigns as some of the beneficiaries may hesitate to join the 
scheme of misleading information regarding breaches of their  personal and 
medical data security.  The Committee has also been informed that some of the 
healthcare professionals have also raised data security concerns and are 
hesitating to register at the NHA registry. The Government must address these 
concerns through continuous interaction and trust-building initiatives.  
v) Indirect Cost and Expenditure Beyond the Cover of Rs. 5 lakhs 
a) The Committee has seen that, while interacting with the beneficiaries of 
Ayushman Bharat, even if the beneficiaries are insured,  they must bear the high 
indirect cost that might go beyond their ability to pay.  To address the 
catastrophic financial burden on poor patients and to achieve the objective of 
PMJAY, the Government needs to cover this indirect financial loss for a poor 
patient for whom this cost is not negligible.  
b) The Committee, while interacting with both private and government 
hospitals, has noted that some of the complex and high -end surgeries or chronic 
treatment cost more than the sum of Rs. 5 lakhs covered under the PMJAY. Also, 
some of the costly procedures and surgeries are not covered under the scheme. To 
address such issues, some of the hospitals have set an example by successfully 
attracting Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds and private investment to 
create funds to bear the expenditure of beneficiaries for the cost of treatment 
over and above the insured sum of Rs. 5 lakhs. The Government need to 
implement such practices across the country to make PMJAY more and more 
effective and beneficial for the  poor sections of the society.   Further, in many 
cases, the amount of Rs. 5 lakhs may not be utilised by every patient/family. Only 
in cases of serious diseases and other surgeries, this amount is utilised. Apart 
from Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi, the Governmen t should consider the creation of 
some special purpose vehicle or arrangement to cater to fill the gap in such 
special cases in a more structured manner.  
c) The Committee would also like to suggest that the Government must 
encourage more Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) and take steps to attract more 
funds through CSR. The NHA management team should assist the Government 
hospitals in attracting more CSR funds from private companies and PSUs. The 
Government should also make strategies to bring more funds  to less 
industrialised States through CSR and PPP mechanisms. These initiatives would 
also assist in addressing the lack of healthcare facilities in rural and remote areas 
and filling the gaps due to regional disparities.  

48 
 
d) The Committee is of the view that the cost of medicines, particularly in 
cases of diseases like cancer where long -term treatment is required, is also a 
matter of concern. The Government should consider providing medicines free of 
cost to all the beneficiaries across the States through the PMJAY scheme.   
vi) Need to expand the treatment procedures covered under PMJAY 
 The Committee has come to know that some costly procedures and serious 
diseases are not included in the PMJAY. Further, the OPD expenses are not 
covered by the scheme and  are considered only in the case of inpatients. The 
Committee recommends that the coverage of procedures and surgeries under 
PMJAY needs to be increased. Further, the Committee suggests that the rates 
under the health benefit packages (HBP) of PMJAY must b e revised frequently 
and kept updated vis-à-vis the present market rates.   
vii) Inclusion of Above Poverty Line (APL) middle-class people in the PMJAY 
 The Committee is of the view that there are many lower middle -class 
people who fall in the APL category , and they are just above the BPL and the 
inclusion criteria for the PMJAY. Such people are in dire need of this scheme. 
The report of NITI Aayog titled “Health Insurance for India’s Missing Middle” 
also suggests that even after the implementation of the P MJAY, at least 30% of 
the population (over 40 crore individuals) still lack any form of financial 
protection for health. Adverse health events can lead to financial hardship and 
even push them into poverty. They are characterised by informal employment 
with unstable incomes and a lack of social security benefits. The Committee 
believes that the Government should consider expanding the base of beneficiaries 
to be covered under the PMJAY by including more categories in eligibility 
criteria. This is also in li ne with the eventual objective of the Government to 
attain the SDG goal of the UHC.  
viii) Guidelines and Mechanism to Govern Employment and Conduct of Arogya 
Mitras 
 The Committee has been informed that the Central Government has not 
issued any standard guidelines to employ Arogya Mitras under the PMJAY. 
There are different arrangements to employ them and to pay them any 
honorarium across the States. In some States, th ey are retired or serving 
employees of the same hospital for which additional payment is made to them for 
their services. They help the patients in their registration and provide guidance 
during the treatment. The Committee recommends that the Central Gove rnment 
should issue guidelines and minimum qualifications to be complied with by the 
States while employing Arogya Mitras. The Government should devise a 
mechanism to monitor the conduct and ethical behaviour of Arogya Mitras.  
(Para 3.2.3) 
 

49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING  
 
           The Committee met at 03.00 PM on Tuesday, the 13 th June, 2023 in Committee Room 
'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
CHAIRMAN 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita -     Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Anil Agrawal 
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri K. Navas Kani 
7. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
8. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
9. Dr. Jadon Chandra Sen 
10. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan    Director  
3. Smt. Gunjan Parashar    Deputy Director 
 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, and National Health 
Authority  
1. Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Secretary, MoHFW 
2. Shri S. Gopalakrishnan, Special Secretary, MoHFW & CEO, NHA 
3. Shri Lav Agarwal, Additional Secretary, MoHFW 
4. Shri Vishal Chauhan, Joint Secretary, MoHFW 
5. Dr. Pankaj Arora, Director, NHA 
6. Shri Rohit Deo Jha, Joint Director, NHA 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the  Committee and apprised 
them that for holistic examination of the subject "Implementation of Ayushman Bharat" and in 
view of the importance to know the ground realities related to the subject across the country 
and implementation problems thereof, t he Committee had recently undertaken a study visit to 
Chennai, Thiruvananthapuram and Bengaluru. The study visit was beneficial in examination of 
implementation of the scheme at ground level. He proposed that if Members are agreed to, a 
two days study visit to th e States of Maharashtra and Goa on 10 th and 11th July, 2023 may be 

51 
 
undertaken to hear the views of Shipping Corporation of India and different Port Trusts  for 
their contributions in strengthening Ayushman Bharat through their CSR initiatives. 
 
3. The Chairman informed the Members that the Committee has also taken up another 
subject i.e. “Quality of Medical Education in India” for detailed examination. D uring the 
proposed visit, the Committee would also like to interact with some banks to assess their role in 
facilitating quality medical education in India as a lender for aspiring medical students and 
main-banker for establishment, up -gradation and strengthening of medical institutions. The 
Committee, then authorized the Chairman to finalize the prop osed study visit programme and 
approach the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for seeking necessary approval. Thereafter, t he 
Chairman stated that the Committee would be hearing Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Secretary, 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Shri Gopalakr ishnan, CEO, National Health Authority 
along with other officials of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to acquaint with their views 
on implementation of Ayushman Bharat. 
 
4.  Later, the Chairman welcomed the witnesses and then asked them to apprise the 
Committee of their views on the present status of implementation of Ayushman Bharat Scheme 
and how far the scheme has achieved its objective since inception including its functioning, 
problems identified and corrective measures taken thereon, new initiatives t aken to strengthen 
it, public-private partnerships, public awareness programs, feedback from beneficiaries of the 
scheme and other stakeholders, integration with state -specific insurance schemes, collaboration 
with PSUs for direct contribution in Ayushman Bharat. 
 
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare gave a brief description on the 
subject and then the CEO, National Health Authority made a detailed presentation  on the 
subject, who inter-alia highlighted the following key points:  
(i) Ayushman Bhar at- Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB -PMJAY) launched on 
23rd September, 2018 is the largest publicly funded health assurance scheme in the 
world; 
(ii) 33 States/UTs are currently implementing the scheme barring Delhi, Odisha and 
West Bengal; 
(iii) The scheme prov ides health cover of Rs. 5 Lakh per family per year for secondary 
and tertiary care which has no cap on family size, age and gender; 
(iv) Health benefit package under the scheme includes 1121 packages and 1949 
procedures across 27 specialities in the year 2022; 
(v) Approx. 23.61 crore Ayushman Bharat Cards have been issued;  
(vi) As on 12 th June, 2023, a total of 28,432 hospitals are empanelled under the scheme 
out of which 12,859 hospitals are private; 
(vii) Out of the 5.19 crore hospital admissions, 48% are female patients; 
(viii) The implementation of AB -PMJAY is being administered through a three -tier 
mechanism at National, State and District levels; 
(ix) AB-PMJAY is implemented through three modes- trust, insurance and mixed; 
(x) High end procedures such as bone marrow transplant and coch lear implant surgery 
have been introduced in Health Benefit Package 2022; 

52 
 
(xi) NHA established a Central Grievance Redressal Management System (CGRMS) 
portal and any complaint received are immediately assigned to respective State 
Grievance Nodal Officer designated at each SHA for necessary action;  
(xii) National Anti-Fraud Unit (NAFU) has been created at NHA for overall monitoring 
and implementation of anti-fraud framework supported by State Anti-Fraud Unit; 
(xiii) NHA is using Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning t o detect fraud 
proactively;   
(xiv) Under Anti -fraud initiatives, 5.7 Lakh Ayushman Cards have been disabled, 210 
hospitals have been de-empanelled and 214 hospitals have been suspended;  
(xv) In view of the limitations of SECC database such as non -traceability, inappropriate 
inclusion & exclusion and difficulty to identify beneficiary on ground with certainty, 
the Union Cabinet in Jan 2022 provided flexibility to States/UTs to use existing non -
SECC digitized database against unidentified SECC beneficiary families and  this has 
helped in increasing the beneficiary base to 12 crore families. 
(xvi) Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) was launched in September 2021 with 
aim to build an integrated digital health infrastructure in the country; 
(xvii) More than 40 crore 14 -digit Ayushman Bharat Health Account (ABHA) have been 
created that facilitate sharing of health data with appropriate consent; 
(xviii) More than 1.9 lakh healthcare professionals have been registered on Healthcare 
Professionals Registry (HPR) which is a comprehensive reposito ry of all healthcare 
professionals; and 
(xix) More than 2 lakh health facilities have been registered on Health Facility Registry 
(HFR) which is a comprehensive repository of health facilities of the nation across 
different systems of medicine. 
 
6. After the presentation, the Members of the Committee made some suggestions and 
raised certain queries which are as under:- 
(i) Some states have their health insurance scheme and Ayushman Bharat is 
implemented in integrated mode with those state schemes which leads to le ss 
prominence to Ayushman Bharat. 
(ii) For high end costly surgeries the beneficiaries have to shell out money beyond the 
sum of Rs. 5 lakhs and asked the Ministry to think ways to fill those gaps such as 
through CSR funds from third party, to create funds for the said purpose, etc. 
(iii) The Committee also enquired about any policy of the Ministry to deal with the 
situation where beneficiaries have to bear indirect expenditure like loss of wages, 
transportation, etc. 
(iv) The Committee desired to know the number of beds covered under the scheme. 
(v) The Committee was also keen to know why big hospitals/institutions are not getting 
empanelled under the scheme and also suggested that the government may insist to 
reserve certain percentage of beds in such hospitals for empanelme nt under the 
scheme. 
(vi) The Committee pointed out that as far as trust, hybrid and insurance models are 
concerned the most of states are going with Trust model.  

53 
 
(vii) The Committee suggested that for individual health insurance the Ministry should 
push for monthly  payment of premium which would lessen the burden of one -time 
payment of huge premium. 
(viii) The Committee pointed out that many high end procedures and also OPD expenses 
are not covered under Ayushman Bharat Scheme. 
(ix)  The Committee desired to know whether the in surance companies involved in the 
scheme have been evaluated by the Government for their performance and 
unjustified profit making.  
(x) The Committee suggested that the standard of facilities in Government hospitals 
should be upgraded and also the Government should consider providing free 
medicine to all patients.  
(xi) The Committee desired to know about number of anti -fraud investigations initiated 
in the country and what are the reasons for suspension of hospitals in large numbers 
in Madhya Pradesh recently. 
(xii) The Committee suggested that all procedures of empanelled hospitals covered under 
Ayushman Bharat should be prominently displayed at some suitable place near the 
reception of the hospital, as some hospitals after treatment told beneficiaries that the 
surgery done was not covered under the scheme.  
(xiii) The Committee suggested that the benefits of the scheme should also be extended to 
above poverty line families and specifically senior citizens residing in old age homes. 
(xiv)  The Committee enquired about the recruitment  process of Ayushman Mitras and 
whether their services are monitored and assessed.  
 
7. The Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare along with CEO, National Health 
Authority, then replied to some of the queries of the Committee and inter -alia highlighted the 
following points: - 
(i)  Most states run their own health insurance schemes along with the Ayushman Bharat. 
In order to ensure due prominence to the Ayushman Bharat, the Ministry has given 
directions to issue co -branded cards with photographs of both, Prime Minister and 
Chief Minister affixed on them. Further, Hospitals have been directed to establish a 
co-branded 'May I help you' Kiosk in their reception area.  
(ii) The revision of Package rates of Ayushman Bharat is under review for the 6th time. The 
reason behind certain big hospitals not showing interest in empanelment under 
Ayushman Bharat may be delay in settlement of claims, hence the Ministry is 
focussing on timely payment of the claims and persuading such hospitals to join the 
scheme.  
(iii) Under the scheme more than 13 lakh beds are being offered in various empanelled 
hospitals and health centres.  
(iv) For registration under Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM), some doctors and 
health professionals are showing initial hesitancy that t hey may be monitored by 
external agencies using the data on ABDM. The Ministry is in dialogue with various 
health professional bodies to persuade doctors to get registered with ABDM in large 
numbers.  

54 
 
(v) The Ministry informed that there is complete flexib ility for the states to choose any 
mode i.e. trust, insurance and hybrid. However, regular reviews with the states are 
being done and the states may switch from one mode to another mode.  
(vi)The Ministry acknowledged the suggestion of the Committee regard ing payment of 
premium in instalments and assured to explore it with insurance companies.  
(vii) Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi (RAN) fund has been created under the Ayushman Bharat 
scheme for providing certain financial assistance in case of surgical intervention s 
costing more than Rs. 5 lakhs. Ministry also acknowledged the suggestion of the 
Committee to involve CSR funds directly in Ayushman Bharat to meet the gaps in 
high end surgeries. 
(viii) On the point of covering senior citizens belonging to above poverty line also under 
the scheme, the Ministry apprised the Committee that all the states have been given 
flexibility to fill the shortfall in number of beneficiaries under Ayushman Bharat in 
their states, after considering the SECC data, from any digital databa se of the State as 
long as the broad nature of these new people is similar to the beneficiary nature of AB-
PMJAY and this may also include the senior citizens.  
(ix) With respect to Sickel Cell Anaemia, the Secretary apprised that screening for the 
disease will be done in the whole country and treatment will be provided under 
Ayushman Bharat scheme. The patients will also be provided pre -marriage 
counselling.  
(x) The Ayushman Mitras , in some states, are the retired hospital employees and in some 
states outsourced. However, no regulating guidelines have been issued by the 
government. The point of the Committee is well taken that mechanism will be evolved 
to monitor the conduct of the Ayushman Mitras.  
8. The Chairman then asked the witnesses to submit a written response to the queries 
raised by the Members to the Secretariat within 15 days.   
9. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10. The meeting then adjourned at 4:41 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

55 
 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Monday, the 11 th December, 2023 in Committee 
Room-4, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
6. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
7. Dr. Santanu Sen 
8. Shri A. D. Singh  
LOK SABHA 
9. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
10. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
11. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
12. Shri K. Navas Kani 
13. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
14. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
15. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
16. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
17. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
18. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S.  
19. Shri Anurag Sharma 
20. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
21. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan  - Director  
3. Dr Saket Kumar  -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Noyaline Vinitha F.C.   -          Joint Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and  informed 
them about the agenda for the day, i.e. to consider and adopt ******Draft 151 st Report of the 
Committee on the subject “Implementation of Ayushman Bharat”; *******.  
 
3. The Committee then considered the draft **** 151st ******Reports of the Committee. 
The Committee discussed that Government should consider mandatory empanelment of some 
big hospitals under the Ayushman Bharat Scheme to cater to the critical care needs that are 

56 
 
not available in small hospitals. Thereafter,  it was decied to incorporate in the 151st report of 
the committee that, Hospitals availing tax exemptions, land concessions, and those affiliated 
with medical colleges could be considered for mandatory empanelment  under Ayushman 
Bharat Scheme.  After a b rief discussion, the Committee adopted the ****** 151 st Reports. 
******The Committee also authorised the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual 
errors in the ****** 151st Reports, if necessary. 
 
4. The Committee decided that the ***** 151 st Reports may be presented to the Rajya 
Sabha and simultaneously laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha in the ensuing Session.  
 
5.      ****** 
6. *******  
7. The meeting adjourned at 4:30 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*pertains to other matter 
 

57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE, TABLES  
and  
LIST OF SOURCES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

58 
 
Annexure I 
DEPRIVATION CRITERIA FOR RURAL AND URBAN AREAS 
 
As per Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC) database, the deprivation criteria D1 to D5 
and D7 for rural areas are: 
 
 D1- Only one room with kucha walls and kucha roof 
 D2- No adult member between ages 16 to 59 
 D3- Households with no adult male member between ages 16 to 59 
 D4- Disabled member and no able-bodied adult member 
 D5- SC/ST households 
 D7- Landless households deriving a major part of their income from manual casual 
labour. 
 
For urban areas, the following 11 occupational categories of workers are eligible for the 
scheme: 
 Ragpicker 
 Beggar 
 Domestic worker 
 Street vendor/ Cobbler/hawker / other service provider working on streets. 
 Construction worker/ Plumber/ Mason/ Labo ur/ Painter/ Welder/ Security guard/ 
Coolie and other head-load worker 
 Sweeper/ Sanitation worker/ Mali 
 Home-based worker/ Artisan/ Handicrafts worker/ Tailor 
 Transport worker/ Driver/ Conductor/ Helper to drivers and conductors/ Cart puller/ 
Rickshaw puller 
 Shop worker/ Assistant/ Peon in small establishment/ Helper/Delivery Assistant / 
Attendant/ Waiter 
 Electrician/ Mechanic/ Assembler/ Repair worker 
 Washerman/ Chowkidar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
Tables 1 and 2 
 
Report (No. 11 of 2023) of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on 
Performance Audit of Ayushman Bharat- Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
 
Cases of Family Size against one PMJAY ID 
 
Table 1 
Range of members 
in a household 
11 to 50 50 to 100 100 to 200 200 to 201 
Actual number of 
cases 
43180 12 04 01 
 
 
Cases of Delay in Processing of Rejection of Cases 
 
Table 2 
State/UT Rejected cases Maximum delay (in 
days) 
Assam 1640 32 
Chandigarh 632 70 
Himachal Pradesh  5287 199 
Jammu & Kashmir 497358 404 
Kerala 1149 223 
Madhya Pradesh 198555 NA 
Manipur 90 18 
Punjab 254 32 
Uttar Pradesh 34066 334 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60 
 
Sources:  
 
1.  National Health Policy, 2017; Government of India.  
2.  Background material of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  
3.  Union Budget (2023-2024), Ministry of Finance.  
4.  Economic Survey, 2022, Ministry of Finance.  
5.  Annual Report 2021-2022, National Health Authority.  
6.  Universal Health coverage (UHC) and Sustainable Development Goals, World 
 Health Organisation.  
7.  Health Insurance for India’s Missing Middle , Kumar Anurag and Sarwal 
 Rakesh, Niti Aayog, October 2021.  
8.  Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Performance Audit 
 of Ayushman Bharat- Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana, Union Government 
 (Civil), National Health Authority, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
 Report No. 11 of 2023 (Performance Audit).  
9.  Shrink the universal health coverage cube , Masamine Jimba and Maya Sophia 
 Fujimura, The Lancet, Volume 392, Issue 10164, P2551, December 15, 2018.  
10.  Estimating funds required for UHC within Indian States , Nachiket Mor and 
 Sudheer Kumar Shukla, The Lancet Regional Health – Southeast Asia 
 2023;13: 100165, Volume 13, 100165, June 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 