PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
ONE HUNDRED THIRD REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Ninety-Ninth Report on Demands for Grants
2017-18 (Demand No. 42) of the Department of
Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  20th December, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  20 th December , 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2017/Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)
103
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
ONE HUNDRED THIRD REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Ninety-Ninth Report on Demands for Grants
2017-18 (Demand No. 42) of the Department of
Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  20th December , 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  20 th December , 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2017/Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS  (NHM S ECTOR A ND H EALTH S ECTOR)......................................................... (iv)-(xi)
4. R EPORT  P ART–A (NHM)........................................................................................... 1-32
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee............................... 2-5
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government's replies.......................................... 6-18
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee........................ 19-31
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited............................................................... 32
REPORT - P ART B (H EALTH S ECTOR )....................................................................... 33-76
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee............................... 34-41
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government's replies.......................................... 42-55
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee......................... 56-75
Chapter-IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited................................................................ 76
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE....................................................... 77-86
Part A – NHM........................................................................................................ 77-80
Part B – Health Sector ............................................................................................ 81-86
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................. 87-90
7. A NNEXURES .............................................................................................................. 91-118

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia
3. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
4. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
6. Shri Ashok Siddharth
7. Shri K. Somaprasad
8. Dr. C. P . Thakur
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Thangso Baite
12. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chouhan (Nandu Bhaiya)
13. Dr. (Ms.) Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
14. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
15. Dr. K. Kamaraj
16. Shri Arjun Lal Meena
17. Shri Anoop Mishra
18. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
19. Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey
20. Shri Chirag Paswan
21. Shri C. R. Patil
22. Shri M.K. Raghavan
23. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
24. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde

(ii)
25. Shri Gyan Singh
26. Shri Bharat Singh
27. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
28. Shrimati Rita Tarai
29. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
30. Shri Manohar Utawal
31. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family
Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, hereby present
this One Hundred Third Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Committee's Ninety-ninth Report on Demands for Grants 2017-18 (Demand
No. 42) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the
year 2017-18.
2. The Ninety-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health
and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th March,
2017. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the
Department of Health and Family Welfare were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the
12th December, 2017.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on the 12th
December, 2017.
N
EW D ELHI; PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV
12th December, 2017 Chairman,
Agrahayana 21, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Health and Family Welfare,
Rajya Sabha

ACRONYMS (NHM SECTOR)
AES : Acute Encephalitis Syndrome
ANM : Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
ASHAs : Accredited Social Health Activists
BCC : Behaviour Change Communication
CB-NAAT : Cartridge Based Nucleic Acid Amplification Test
CSS : Centrally Sponsored Schemes
CDSCO : Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
CEmOC : Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric Care
CHCs : Community Health Centres
CKD : Chronic Kidney Disease
COPD : Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Diseases
EAG : Empowered Action Group
EAP : Externally Assisted Projects
FIPV : Fractional Inactivated Polio Vaccine
FRU : First Referral Unit
GDP : Gross Domestic Product
Gol : Government of India
GNM : General Nursing and Midwifery
HMIS : Health Management Information System
HPDs : High Priority Districts
ICD : Integrated Finance Division
IFC : Information, Education, Communication
IMR : Infant Mortality Rate
INCHIS : Integrated Child Hood and Immunization Survey
IPHS : Indian Public Health Standards
IDSP : Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme
IPV : Inactivated Polio Vaccine
(iv)

JE : Japanese Encephalitis
JSSK : Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram
JSY : Janani Suraksha Yojana
LF : Lymphatic Filarisis
MCTS : Mother and Child Tracking System
MDA : Mass Drug Administration
MMR : Maternal Mortality Ratio
MoHFW : Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
MDGs : Millennium Development Goals
MO : Medical Officer
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding
MSG : Mission Steering Group
NAC : National Advisory Committee
NACO : National AIDS Control Organisation
NE : North East
NCDs : Non Communicable Diseases
NFHS : Nat ional Family Health Survey
NHM : National Health Mission
NHP : National Health Policy
NRHM : National Rural Health Mission
NGO : Non-Government Organization
NLEP : Na tional Leprosy Elimination Progaramme
NMR : Neonatal Mortality Ratio
NMSAP : National Multi-Sectoral Action Plan
NTCP : National Tobacco Control Programme
NUHM : National Urban Health Mission
NPHCE : National Programme for H ealth Care of Elderly
NIDDCP : National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme
NSSO : National Sample Survey Organisation
NOHP : National Oral Health Programme
(v)

NTBCP : National Trachoma and Blindness Control Programme
NPCDCS : National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer,
Diabetes, Cardio-Vascular Diseases and Stroke
NVBDCP : National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme
OCPs : Oral Contraceptive Pills
OOPE : Out of Pocket Expenditure
PG : Post Graduate
PFMS : Public Financial Management System
PHCs : Primary Healthcare Centres
PIPs : Programme Implementation Plans
PMSSY : Pradhan Mantra Swasthya Surakasha Yojana
POP : Progestogen Only Pills
PPFP : Post Partum Family Planning
PPH : Post Partum Haemorrhage
PPIUCD : Post Partum Intrauterine Contraceptive Device
PPP : Public Private Partnership
RBSK : Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakaram
RGI SRS : Registrar General of India - Sample Registration System
RKSK : Rashtriya Kishore Swasthya Karyakaram
RMNCH+A : Reproductive Maternal Newborn Child and Adolescent Health
RNTCP : Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme
RCH : Reproductive Child Health
RHS : Rural Health Statistics
RSBY : Rastriya Swasthya Bima Yojana
SDGs : Sustainable Development Goals
SHCs : Sub Health Centres
SCs : Sub-Centres
SHS : State Health Societies
SN : Staff Nurse
SPIP : State Programme Implementation Plan
(vi)

SRS : Sample Registration Survey
T AC : Transmission Assessment Survey
TB : Tuberculosis
TFR : Total Fertility Rate
TSP : Tribal Sub Pan
U5MR : Under 5 Mortality Rate
UIP : Universal Immunization Programme
UCs : Utilization Certificates
UHC : Universal Health Coverage
ULBs : Urban Local Bodies
UCHCs : Urban Community Health Centres
UNICEF : United Nations International Children Education Fund
UPHCs : Urban Primary Health Centres
UTs : Union Territories
WHO : World Health Organisation
WHS : World Health Statistics
ACRONYMS (HEALTH SECTOR)
AIIMS : All India Institute of Medical Sciences
AIDS : Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome
AD (HQ) : Additional Director (Headquarters)
ART : Anti Retroviral therapy
BCG : Bacillus Calmette-Guerin
BCGVL : Bacillus Calmette-Guerin Vaccine Laboratory
B E : Budget Estimate
CRI : Central Research Institute
CDL : Central Drug Laboratory
CD4 : Cluster of differentiation 4
CGMP : Current Good Manufacturing Practice
CoE : Centre of Excellence
CPWD : Central Public Works Department
(vii)

CDSCO : Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
CNCI : Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute
DPT : Diptheria, Pertusis and Tetanus
DCG (I) : Drug Controller General of India
DNIT : Detailed Notice Inviting Tender
DoNER : Ministry for Development of North Eastern Region
DoPT : Department of Personnel and Training
DoE : Department of Expenditure
DUAC : Delhi Urban Art Commission
DFG : Demands for Grants
Dr.RML : Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital
DGHS : Director General of Health Services
DHR : Department of Health Research
DMRC : Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
ETP & STP : Effluent Treatment Plant and Sewage Treatment Plant
ECG : Electro Cardiography
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee
EPF : Employees' Provident Fund
FWSs : Family Welfare Schemes
FSWs : Female Sex Workers
FSSAI : Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
GA VI : Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization
GIAs : Grant - in-aids
GNCTD : Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
HVPI : Haemo-Vigilance Programme of India
HV AC : Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
HSCC : Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation
HSSC : Healthcare Section Skill Council
HIV : Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HLL : Hindustan Latex Limited
(viii)

HITES : HLL Infra Tech Services Ltd.
HSS : HIV Sentinel Surveillance
IUCD : Intra uterine Contraceptive Device
INI : Institutions of National Importance
IUI : Intra uterine Insemination
IBBS : Integrated Behavioural and Biological Surveillance
IDU : Injecting Drug Users
IVF : In-vitro Fertilization
ICMR : Indian Council of Medical Research
JSY : Janani Suraksha Yojana
JPNATC : Jai Prakash Narayan Apex Trauma Centre (AIIMS)
KSCH : Kalawati Saran Children's Hospital
LHMC : Lady Hardinge Medical College
MoHFW : Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
MoU : Memorandum of Undertaking
MSM : Men who have Sex with Men
NIB : National Institute of Biologicals
NICPR : National Institute of Cancer Prevention & Research
NLCPR : Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources
NEIGRIHMS : North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and
Medical Sciences
NCC : National Coordinating Centre
NCA : National Centre of Ageing
NABL : National Accreditation Board Laboratory
NCR : National Capital Region
NCD : Non-Communicable Diseases
NDMC : New Delhi Municipal Council
NGO : Non- Government Organization
NPCDCs : National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer,
Diabetes, Cardio-vascular Disease and Stroke
(ix)

NACP : National AIDS Control Programme
NOTP : National Organ Transplant Program
NACO : National AIDS Control Organization
NBCC : N ational Buildings Construction Corporation
OT : Operation Theratre
OPD : Out-patient Department
OSD : Officer on Special Duty
PII : Pasteur Institute of India
PPIUCD : Post-partum Intrauterine Contraceptive Devices
PPFP : Postpartum Family Planning
PSUs : Public Sector Undertakings
PFMS : Public Fund Management System
PGI : Post-Graduate Institute
PGIMER : Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research
PORB : Pension and Other Retirement Benefit
PMSSY : Pradhan Mantri Swasthaya Suraksha Yojana
PLHIV : People Living with HIV/AIDS
RE : Revised Estimates
RR : Recruitment Rule
RIMS : Regional Institute of Medical Sciences
RIPANS : Regional Institute of Paramedical and Nursing Sciences
SCI : State Cancer Institute
SFC : Standing Finance Committee
SJH & VMMC : Safdarjung Hospital and Vardhaman Mahavir Medical College
SOFTel : Strengthening of Food Testing Laboratories
SACS : State AIDS Prevention and Control Societies
SSKH : Smt Sucheta Kriplani Hospital
TCCC : T ertiary Care Cancer Centre
TT : Tetanus Toxoid
TG : Transgender
(x)

UC : Utilization Certificate
UIP : Universal Immunization Programme
UPSC : Union Public Service Commission
UTs : Union Territories
UTI-TSL : UTI Infrastructure Technology and Services Limited
YFV : Yellow Fever Vaccine
(xi)

REPORT
PART - A (NHM)
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Ninety Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 42) of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2017-18.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the 99th Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) (Chapter I) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have been accepted by the Committee: 2.8, 2.9, 2.31, 3.3, 3.11, 3.23, 3.40,
3.42
Total - 8
(ii) (Chapter II) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the Government's replies: 2.18, 2.22, 2.23, 2.29, 3.5, 3.8, 3.9,
3.18, 3.19, 3.28, 3.37, 3.49, 4.4, 7.3
Total - 14
(iii) (Chapter III) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee: 2.10, 2.19, 2.28, 3.6, 3.13, 3.21,
3.27, 3.32, 3.33, 3.45, 5.2, 5.3, 6.4, 6.8
Total - 14
(iv) (Chapter-IV) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Total - Nil
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 The Committee notes that against the projected demand of ` 34,315.66 crore for 2017-18 under the
National Health Mission, the total allocation in BE 2017-18 is only ` 26,690.70 crore leaving a shortfall
of ` 7624.96 crore. In comparison to the RE 2016-17 allocation of ` 22197.95 crore, the increase in
BE 2017-18 is only ` 4492.75 crore which, in the opinion of the Committee, is insufficient. The
Committee notes the admission of the Department in its written submissions that though the resource
availability from State share has increased from 
` 4570.00 crore in Financial Year 2012-13 to
` 10,522.00 crore in 2016-17, the reduction in Central Plan allocation for NHM has not been fully
compensated by the increase in State Health Budgets due to revised Centre-State funding pattern from
75:25 to 60:40 post hike of the share of States in the Central Taxes divisible pool from 32% to 42%
in the form of untied funds. The Committee also notes the submission of the Department that the shortfall
in allocations for NHM for 2017-18 vis-a-vis its projected demand for funds will adversely impact a
number of health initiatives / programmes like upscaling of health facilities to Indian Public Health
Standards; establishing Sub-Health Centres, Primary Health Centres and Community Health Centres as
per norms; rolling out of Universal Health Coverage Pilots; scaling up of free drugs and free diagnostics
initiatives, etc. It would be pertinent to point out that though in his Budget speech, the Finance Minister
has proposed to transform 1,50,000 Health Sub-Centres into Health and Wellness Centres and "promote
use of generic drugs", there is no solid roadmap for ensuring adequate financial resources for these
initiatives and this is where the dichotomy of the Budget announcements gets reflected. It needs to be
highlighted that as per the latest National Health Accounts estimates (2013-14), 35.7% of the total
health expenditure is on medicine purchase and as per the NSSO data nearly 71% of the out-of-pocket
(OOP) burden is due to expenditure on medicines. The Committee is therefore of the view that the BE
2017-18 allocation of 
` 26690.70 crore is grossly inadequate. It is in this context that allocation of
additional financial resources for NHM for 2017-18 makes a compelling case. (Para 2.8)
Action Taken
1.2 Agreed. The approved Budget Estimate of `26690.70 crore against the projected demand of `34315.66
crore in National Health Mission, `1414.94 crore in Tertiary Care Programme and `2960 crore in Human
Resource for Health for the FY 2017-18 is inadequate. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare will
approach the Ministry of Finance to provide supplementary budget during the FY 2017-18.
Recommendation/Observation
1.3 Taking into consideration the submission of the Health Secretary made before it on 2nd March, 2017
that in order to undertake new initiative like Universal Health Coverage Pilots and scale up existing
2

3
initiatives, the minimum required increase in allocation for 2017-18 would be ` 4000.00 crore, the
Committee lends its support to the allocation of additional ` 4000.00 crore for NHM. (Para 2.9)
Action Taken
1.4 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare will take up this issue with Ministry of Finance and plead
for additional funds of `4000 crore at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage for increase in allocation for
2017-18 to undertake new initiative like Universal Health Coverage Pilots and scale up existing initiatives.
Recommendation/Observation
1.5 The Committee recommends that the Department should adopt a multi-pronged strategy to ensure
that there is no pendency of Utilization Certificates by the end of this financial year. The Committee
desires to be kept updated on pending Utilization Certificates (UCs). (Para 2.31)
Action Taken
1.6 The Department ensures that the subsequent Grant-in-aids are released to States/UTs only after
receiving the UCs of previous year keeping in view the GFR provision. Accordingly, UCs from all the
State Health Societies have been received up to 2015-16 and submitted to the Pay and Account of the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for settlement.
III. NA TIONAL RURAL HEALTH MISSION
A. RCH Flexible Pool including Routine Immunization Programme, Pulse Polio Immunization
Programme, Immunization Programme, National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control
Programme.
1.7 The Committee finds that out of 
` 6233.99 crore an amount of ` 4871.70 crore has been spent (upto
9th February, 2017) which comes to about 78% utilization. The Committee observes that RCH is a
critical area of intervention for the maternal and child health and therefore it is imperative that the funds
allocated are made an effective policy tool and used gainfully and optimally. The Committee, therefore,
desires to be updated on the actual expenditure figures for 2016-17. (Para 3.3)
Action Taken
1.8 The "actual -expenditure" figures for the FY 2016-17 under RCH Flexible Pool including Immunization,
NIDDCP is under:
Y ear Budget Estimate (B.E.) Revised Estimate Central % of of Release
(R.E.)** Release Releaseagainst against
B.E. R.E.
(` in crore)
2016-17 5932.99 6233.99 *5864.25 98.84% 94.07%
* The Release is updated up to 31.03.2017.
** RE was not received.

4
UNIVERSAL IMMUNIZATION PROGRAMME:
Recommendation/Observation
1.9 The Committee notes that though the country has made considerable improvement in immunization
under the Universal Immunization Programme and the full immunization coverage has reached 87.26%
as per Health Management Information System (HMIS) data as on 27th January, 2017, the country
accounts for 7.4 million children (as per UNICEF) who are not immunized and more than 20% of all
child mortality worldwide. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should identify the
challenges to immunization and chalk out a multi-pronged strategy to overcome them. The Committee
desires to be kept apprised in this regard. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the status
of full immunization in rural areas and urban areas separately. (Para 3.11)
Action Taken
CC&V
1.10 In order to increase the immunization coverage of the children, the MoHFW has launched Mission
Indradhanush on 7th April, 2015 which aims to increase the full immunization coverage to at least 90%
by 2020. Under this mission, focus is given on hard-to-reach, high risk areas and pockets of low
immunization coverage. Three phases of Mission Indradhanush have been completed and the fourth
phase is ongoing in 254 districts. A total of 528 districts across 35 States/UTs have been covered. As
on 22nd April, 2017, around 2.18 crore children have been reached of which 57.3 lakh children have
been fully immunized. Further, 58.5 lakh pregnant women have also been vaccinated with Tetanus toxoid.
As per the report of Integrated Child Hood and Immunization survey (INCHIS) the first two phases of
Mission Indradhanush have led to 6.7% increase in full immunization coverage which stands at 70.8%
(2015-16). Subsequent to the completion of two phases of Mission Indradhanush, the full Immunization
coverage in rural and urban areas stands at 68.9% and 75.9% respectively.
Statistics
1.11 According to National Family Health Survey (NFHS)-4 (2015-16) Percentage fully immunized
(BCG), measles, and 3 doses each of polio and DPT) Children age 12-13 months was 61.3% and 63.9%
in Rural and Urban areas respectively.
Unde -5 Mortality Rate (U5MR)
Recommendation/Observation
1.12 The Committee is of the view that the success of 18 States in U5MR can be replicated in the High
Focus States. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should ensure that 'template'
for ensuring U5MR in 18 States are formulated and implemented in these High Focus States to ensure
that these 'States' also achieve SDG goals. (Para 3.23)
Action Taken
CH&RCH
1.13 Under the National Health Mission, various interventions are being implemented across all the States
and UTs in order to improve child survival. These interventions are based on evidence and have been

5
designed to address the major causes of mortality and morbidity in the States. The High Focus States
are being followed up regularly and a roadmap for intensification of actions in the high priority districts
has also been prepared to reduce child and maternal mortality this will help guide the States to meet the
SDG targets. The States are also encouraged to adopt good/replicable practices from other States.
REVISED NATIONAL TUBERCULOSIS CONTROL PROGRAMME (RNTCP)
Recommendation/Observation
1.14 The Committee observes that the main challenges confronting RNTCP are prevalence of high levels
of disease transmission and increase in incidence of drug resistant TB. The Committee is of the view that
this is due to poor primary healthcare infrastructure in rural areas and unregulated private healthcare
leading to irrational use of first-line and second-line anti-tuberculosis drugs. Though in the Budget
Speech, 2017, the Government has set targets for elimination of TB by 2025, visible progress towards
eliminating TB would not be possible without addressing these issues of poor primary healthcare
infrastructure and unregulated private healthcare. The Committee would therefore like the Government
to focus their strategy on addressing these issues. (Para 3.40)
Action Taken
1.15 The Millennium Developments Goals (MDG) target for Tuberculosis, to half the prevalence and
mortality rates by 2015 compared with the baseline of 1990 was achieved by the Revised National
tuberculosis Control Programme as mentioned in the WHO's Global TB Report 2015. To know the exact
burden of Tuberculosis in India, a TB prevalence study is proposed to be held in 2017-18 for which
actions are underway. National Strategic Plan for Tuberculosis (2017-2025) elimination by 2025 has been
made and approved by MoHFW which focusses on addressing the issues of strengthening infrastructure
and service delivery and also to ensure active engagement with the private sector.
Recommendation/Observation
1.16 The Committee is concerned to note that despite passage of so much time since the launch of
RNTCP India continues to have the highest TB burden in the world and drug-resistant TB is 2.5% in
new cases and 16% in previously treated TB cases. The Committee is aware that the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare has rolled out a new TB drug- Bedaquiline to combat extremely drug resistant TB
which has been discovered after 40 years. The administration of Bedaquiline is however tightly controlled
and restricted to six Government hospitals, two at New Delhi and one each at Mumbai, Chennai,
Ahmedabad and Guwahati and access is decided by domicile. The Committee desires that the trials may
be completed at the earliest and if found effective, it may be rolled out for wider coverage.
(Para 3.42)
Action Taken
1.17 The newer drug Bedaquiline which is being used at 6 sites is being expanded across the country.
The trainings for the same has been initiated. The HIV testing rates for TB patients has increased to 88%
in 2016 from 45% in 2012. Steps are being undertaken to ensure that the HIV status is known for all
and then initiated for appropriate case management. The country at present has 628 CBNAAT machines
and an additional 107 are in the pipeline. Order for 400 more machines are under process. With the
increase of these testing facilities, the detection of Drug resistant TB is increasing and also its programmatic
management. These services are extended to the private sector also. Diagnosis and treatment of all forms
of Tuberculosis is provided free of cost by the Revised National Tuberculosis Control programme.

6
CHAPTER- II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee observes that despite India's healthcare falling way below the global benchmark and
the country lagging behind on health goals such as maternal and infant mortality and having a lowly
ranking even among the developing countries on healthcare parameters, our level of public spending on
health is one of the lowest in the world which has further exacerbated the dismal state of the healthcare
sector. Despite all key policy documents like the National Health Policy of 2002, the draft National
Health Policy of 2015, the Twelfth Five Year Plan and the Report of the High Level Expert Committee
emphasizing the need to reach 2.5% of GDP , India's total Government expenditure on health languishes
at 1.15% (as per the National Health Accounts 2013-14, a rigorous estimate on health expenditures in
the country) and is way less than the world average of 5.99% (Economic Survey-2016-17). The squeeze
of public finances has resulted in the appalling state of our healthcare system and given birth to
impoverishing out-of-pocket healthcare expenditure which is as high as 64% of the total health expenditure
due to which about 7% population is pushed below poverty threshold every year (NSSO 71st Round
data). India ranks 183 among 192 countries in terms of out-of-pocket healthcare expenditure as a per
cent of Total Health Expenditure and is just above Bangladesh (187) and Afghanistan (184). The Twelfth
Plan is concluding by 2016-17 end but India is nowhere near the target of 2.5%. It is, therefore, no
surprise that India continues to be an extreme outlier in terms of public health spend despite the sustained
high economic growth in the past two decades. The Committee is constrained to observe that despite
India being the fastest growing major economy in the world today with its economic growth pegged at
around 7% in the current fiscal year, it has squandered the opportunity to turn its economic success into
a better healthcare system for its population. This only goes to show that in the prioritization matrix of
the successive Governments, health has been accorded a lower priority. The Committee observes that
acceleration in economic growth by itself will not translate into higher public spending on health. The
Government will also have to demonstrate a strong political will to value health as societal imperative
for development and alter the Government health financing landscape in a fundamental way by way of
providing a much larger resource envelope for health financing. If countries like Thailand and Brazil
are close to achieving Universal Health Coverage for their population (Source : Draft National Health
Policy, 2015) there is no reason why India cannot accomplish this goal. But for that to happen, the
urgency of raising public health expenditure to 2.5 % should not be lost sight of. In this context the
Committee would like to draw the attention of the Government to its draft National Health Policy of
2015 which states that global evidence shows that unless a country spends at least 5-6% of its GDP on
health and major part of it is from Government expenditure, basic healthcare needs are seldom met. The
Committee would therefore like the Government to address this critical policy challenge of raising the
6

7
Government health spend to 2.5% of GDP and chalk out a solid roadmap for earmarking more financial
resources for the Health Sector. (Para 2.18)
Action Taken
2.2 The National Health Policy, 2017 rolled out in March, 2017 envisages raising public health expenditure
progressively to 2.5% of the GDP by 2025. State Governments would be incentivized to increase public
spending on health.
Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The Committee notes that against the approved outlay of 
` 193405.71 crore for the National Health
Mission in the Twelfth Plan, only ` 91022.00 crore has been allocated which in percentage terms works
out to measly 47% of the funding originally envisaged for the NHM in the Twelfth Plan. The Committee
also notes that the trend of expenditure in the first four years of the Twelfth Plan has been excellent
and the releases made have been utilized to the fullest, implying that the allocated amounts have been
utilized effectively. Even in the current fiscal (i.e. 2016-17), 75% expenditure has been incurred as on
31st January, 2017 and it is hoped that the entire amount will be spent by the time the financial year
ends. The Committee observes that had the Government allocated the entire Twelfth Plan approved
outlays for NHM, the country would have seen much improved health outcomes in terms of quality
primary healthcare services and reduced out-of-pocket health expenditure. (Para 2.22)
Action Taken
2.4 The trend of expenditure during the Twelfth Five Year Plan Period is as under:
(` in crore)
Y ear Budget Estimate Revised Estimate Central % of Release % of Release
(B.E.) (R.E.) Release over B.E. over R.E.
2012-13 20542 17000 16762.77 81.60% 98.60%
2013-14 20999 18100 18215.44 86.74% 100.64%
2014-15 21912 17627.82 18037.99 82.32% 102.33%
2015-16 18295 18295 18282.4 99.93% 99.93%
2016-17 19000 20000** 18886.55* 99.40% 94.43%
T
OTAL 1,00,748.00 91,022.82 86,346.24 85.71% 94.86%
** Revised Estimate (RE) for the FY 2016-17 could not be received.
* The Release is updated up to 31.03.2017 and is provisional.
Recommendation/Observation
2.5 The Committee observes that just committing resources for health financing is not enough and it
is equally important to ensure that the committed resources indeed get allocated and spent for the

8
intended purposes. The Committee would therefore like the Government to ensure that such an anomalous
situation does not recur in future and funds approved on paper for the National Health Mission are
released and utilized also. (Para 2.23)
Action Taken
2.6 During the financial year 2016-17 an amount of ` 18886.55 crore has been utilized out of ` 19000
crore allocated under Budget Estimate (BE). It indicate that 99.40% of the allocated funds have been
utilized for intended purposes. As observed by the Committee, the Government took up the matter with
all States/UTs to ensure that funds allocated/released are fully utilized by them. Further, Ministry consistently
perused with Ministry of Finance for additional funds at RE stage but the same could not be considered
by Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation/Observation
2.7 The Committee also recommends that the Department should ensure close and sustained monitoring
of the transfer of funds to State Health Societies and ensure that the current mechanism of fund transfer
does not result in low fund utilization because further delay would lead to reduction in funds allocation
in the coming years which in turn would adversely affect vital health programmes to be implemented.
The Committee takes note of the Department's submission that implementation capacity of many States
is slow and observes that this may be due to their low absorptive capacity which in turn may be an
outcome of chronic lack of investment on health infrastructure and lack of institutional capacities. The
Committee would, therefore, like the Department to work in close coordination with such States so that
their developmental deficits are removed and low utilization does not become a stumbling block in
increasing allocation to them. (Para 2.29)
Action Taken
2.8 The Ministry of Health and Family welfare closely and regularly monitors the transfer of funds from
State Treasury to State Health Societies. DO letters from the level of Union Minister, Secretary and
AS&MD have been sent to Chief Ministers, Chief Secretaries, Principal Secretary of States/UTs and
Mission Director for ensuring timely transfer of funds in State Health Society Bank account from State
Government Treasury.
III. NA TIONAL  RURAL  HEALTH  MISSION
Recommendation/Observation
2.9 The Committee notes from Demand No. 42 that as compared to Revenue allocation of 
` 6233.00
crore in RE 2016-17, ` 4566.00 crore has been allocated in BE 2017-18 for RCH Flexible Pool. When
asked to clarify, the Department has stated that on account of rationalization of components of Human
Resources for Health and Drugs, these components are now being reflected under the Health System
Strengthening under NRHM and NUHM. The Committee observes that there is an element of obfuscation
and non-transparency in the manner of presenting budget estimates for such an important component i.e.
RCH. The Committee apprehends that the desired outcomes of RCH, which a focused grant could yield,
may not be forthcoming due to such subsuming of specific schemes. The Committee therefore desires that
the Government should have a relook in the matter and address these concerns appropriately.  (Para 3.5)

9
Action Taken
2.10 To bring upon improvements in efficiency and effectiveness of expenditure, the Mission Steering
Group (MSG) of NHM has decided to rationalize the component of Human Resources. As a result, the
health human resource engaged in service delivery at a facility will belong to a facility and not to any
vertical programme, allowing common HR such as Lab Technician, Nurses, counsellors etc. to be utilized
across programmes for healthcare delivery in a facility. Further component of Drugs and IEC under
various vertical programmes have been reflected under the Flexible Pool of Health System Strengthening
under NRHM and NUHM. Thus, there is no reduction in budget for RCH activities. In fact, there has
been an increase of nearly 50% for RCH interventions in the financial year 2017-18, since all HR drugs
components of RCH have been budgeted under Health System Strengthening component of NRHM and
NUHM.
Recommendation/Observation
2.11 The Committee notes that out of 27,85,929 sterilizations carried out in 2016-17 (upto February,
2017), the number of female sterilization (27,27,046) far outnumber male sterilization (58,883). The
Committee is of the opinion that sterilization does not only mean female sterilization but also includes
male sterilization. The Committee desires that Government should take positive steps towards achieving
the objective of at least 10% of sterilization being male sterilization as indicated in the Twelfth Five
Year Plan Report. (Para 3.8)
Action Taken
2.12 Female sterilization is one of the common forms of family planning in India. The Family Planning
Programme in India is voluntary in nature and the Government promotes all family planning choices
including male and female sterilization equally. In a bid to promote male participation in family planning,
the Government is also organizing 'Vasectomy Fortnight' every year all across the country. It is the
prerogative of the clients to choose a family planning method as per their reproductive rights and
Government provides the services free of cost in all public health and accredited private/NGO facilities
as per the demand.
Recommendation/Observation
2.13 The Committee is happy to note that as compared to total reported deliveries, institutional deliveries
account for 89.5%. The Committee would, however, exhort the Department to focus on uncovered areas
where home deliveries cannot be avoided due to difficult terrain or some other cultural reasons/tribal
practices to ensure access to minimum standards of care is facilitated to the most underprivileged and
deprived sections of our population through ANM assisted home deliveries. (Para 3.9)
Action Taken
2.14 To address home deliveries, several initiatives are being taken under NHM. These are as under:
• Incentives are being given for SBA trained ANMs placed at such sub-centers so that they are
motivated to conduct home deliveries.

10
• States have also been told to identify and notify by name the Sub-centers covering hilly terrains
and non-motorable roads where home deliveries rate is > 20%, so that special strategies can
be adopted for such areas.
• In such areas States have been asked to implement advance distribution of Misoprostol
through ANM/ASHA to the beneficiary so as to prevent post-partum hemorrhage(PPH) in
home delivery which is one of the major medical cause of maternal mortality.
• Simultaneously, States have been adviced to do the following concurrent activities for converting
Home deliveries into Institutional Deliveries.
• Strengthening IEC/BCC for promoting institutional delivery in such areas.
• Special and innovative referral transport mechanism for such areas such as Palki/Doli in
Uttarakhand, Bike ambulance in Chhattisgarh so as to carry women up to a motarable road
and provision of assured transport for the nearest functional MCH Centre/PHC.
• Creating birth waiting homes in the CHC/FRU so that expectant mothers can be brought at
least one week before their due date.
• Strengthening Human resources and infrastructure of the health facilities located in these areas.
• These are in addition to JSY which incentivizes home deliveries and JSSK which provides for
free drugs, diagnostics, diet and referral and transport to pregnant women.
ADOLESCENT HEALTH
Recommendation/Observation
2.15 The Committee notes from the submission of the Department that the current pace of decline of
MMR indicates that India is likely to achieve the target of the Millennium Development Goal-5 (set by
WHO) of reducing MMR to 139 per 100000 live births. However, the fact that India still accounts for
15% of all maternal deaths worldwide is unacceptable. Equally disturbing is the fact that there are wide
inter-state disparities in terms of MMR. The Committee is of the view that a differential approach would
need to be taken to address MMR differentials across geographical region. The Committee desires to be
apprised of the strategy devised to overcome widespread inequities in MMR. The Committee also desires
to know as to how India compares with neighbouring countries like Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Nepal
on MMR indicators. (Para 3.18)
Action Taken
RCH
2.16 Regarding the observation of the Committee that India is lagging behind Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and
Nepal on MMR, the division comments are placed below:
2.17 As per the UN Inter-Agency Expert Group's MMR estimates in the publication "Trends in Maternal
Mortality: 1990 to 2015", MMR of Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Nepal is placed below, which clearly
indicate that MMR of India is less than that of Bangladesh and Nepal but higher than Sri Lanka.

11
Sl. No.  Country MMR
1. Sri Lanka 30
2. India 174
3. Bangladesh 176
4. Nepal 258
2.18 As far as addressing fundamental issues in bringing accelerated pace of decline in MMR is concerned
and strategy devised to overcome widespread inequities in MMR, there are fundamental issues related
to operationalization of First Referral Units (FRUs) for provision of emergency obstetric care services
and quality ante-natal care, high home deliveries in certain pockets and States have been advised to
develop specific strategies to increase the number of FRUs and also ensuring safe deliveries in certain
inaccessible areas where home deliveries are unavoidable. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW)
under NHM has taken several steps to address these issues including other measures for a faster pace
of decline of MMR as so as to achieve India's commitment for achieving the Sustainable Development
Goal of reducing MMR to 70 per 100,000 live births by 2030  i.e. post MDG which are as under:
2.19 Besides the key ongoing strategies for reduction of maternal mortality such as Janani Suraksha
Yojana (JSY), "Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram" (JSSK), Mother and Child Tracking System (MCTS)
and Mother and Child Tracking Facilitation Centre (MCTFC), MDR, safe Abortion services, Creation of
MCH wings, capacity building of doctors and Staff Nurses in basic and emergency obstetric care,
implementation of newer MH interventions etc., the other steps taken to address widespread equities in
MMR are:
• At least 25% of all districts in each State have been identified as High Priority Districts based
on a composite health Index, these include all Tribal and LWE affected districts.
• Harmonized technical assistance to States by Development Partners to strengthen implementation
of Interventions under RMNCH+A with a focus on High Priority Districts.
• Flexible funding mechanisms under NHM enable States to plan and implement innovative
strategies and interventions.
• Enhancing the availability of human resources particularly in HPDs through a slew of measures
like - improving retention of specialists, medical officers and nursing personnel, particularly
in difficult areas through special incentives; hiring of contractual personnel including MOs
and Nurses, particularly for operationalization of comprehensive RMNCH services at Delivery
Points.
• To sharpen the focus on the low performing districts, 184 High Priority Districts (HPDs) have
been prioritized for Reproductive Maternal New-born Child Health+ Adolescent (RMNCH+A)
interventions for achieving improved maternal and child health outcomes.
• Performance Based Incentives for the human resource working in these high priority
districts.

12
Statistics
2.20 Estimates of MMR of India and neighbouring countries like Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Nepal on
MMR are as follow:
Countries MMR ($)
India 167*
174$
Sri Lanka 30
Bangladesh 176
Nepal 258
Pakistan 178
Afghanistan 396
$ Trends in Maternal Mortality (1990 to 2015) - WHO, UNICEF, World Bank Group and the United Nations Population
  Division Estimates.
*As per the SRS report Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) by residence (SRS), for the period of 2011-13.
Recommendation/Observation
2.21 The Committee hopes that the target of MMR under (Sustainable Development Goals) SDG's has
factored into account the States where MMR is quite high. The Committee recommends that the Department
should make 'special efforts' in order to achieve the target it has fixed under SDG's for MMR.
(Para 3.19)
Action Taken
2.22 • Approximately 86.7% of maternal deaths take place in poor performing States like Bihar, U.P.,
Chhattisgarh, M.P., Odisha, Assam, Jharkhand and Uttarakhand. These are the States with a
number of governance issues and non-availability of trained and skilled human resource e.g.
doctors, nurses and other paramedical workers and their unwillingness to work in rural areas,
ill equipped facilities and poor absorptive capacities of these States to utilize funds efficiently.
• Besides the above mentioned strategies to attract and retain health professionals in Government
health facilities located in remote, inaccessible and difficult areas of the country which face
considerable shortage of ANMs, health workers, doctors, specialists and other health
professionals, States have taken measures like contractual appointment of specialists and other
manpower, provision of incentives to serve in rural areas like blended payments, difficult area
allowances, PG allowance, case based payments, improved accommodation arrangements,
block pooling of doctors in underserved areas etc.
• Recognizing the pivotal role of nurses in providing high quality maternal and child health
services, special measures have been initiated to improve both pre-service and in-service

13
training of nurses. These include setting up of skill labs, strengthening of physical infrastructure
and human resources at training sites and competency based curriculum.
• Government of India has established 5 National Skill labs "Daksh" at Delhi and in NCR region
with support from Maternal health division, Government of India and Liverpool School of
Tropical Medicine (LSTM). These National Skills labs have been attached to all the States and
UTs so that there is an optimum utilization of the National Skills Lab for training medical and
paramedical workers from the States and UTs.
• Operational guidelines for new initiatives have been prepared for screening of Gestational
Diabetes Mellitus, screening for Hypothyroidism for high risk group during pregnancy, Training
of General Surgeons for performing Caesarean Section, calcium supplementation during
pregnancy, de-worming during pregnancy, Medical Methods of Abortion, ensuring access to
safe abortion and addressing gender biased sex selection, birth companion during delivery,
Maternal Near Miss programme and Technical and operational Guidelines for screening for
Syphilis during pregnancy. All the new guidelines have been disseminated to the States for
implementation. These new initiatives will lead to decline in Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR)
and better health outcomes in pregnant women and newborns.
• States have been advised to initiate universal screening of HIV , Syphilis and gestational diabetes
mellitus for pregnant women during ANC. This will help in reduction of mother to child
transmission.
• Guidelines on standardization of labor room at Delivery Points for establishing uniform protocols
at all labor rooms and guidelines on Obstetric ICU/HDU to handle complicated pregnancies
have been disseminated to the States.
• Moreover, Guidance note on use of uterotonics during labour, guidance note on prevention and
management of Postpartum Haemorrhage have also been disseminated to the States for orienting
service providers on use of uterotonics during labour and managing PPH cases.
• The Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan (PMSMA) has been introduced with the aim
of conducting special ANC checkups for pregnant women (in their 2nd/3rd Trimesters of
pregnancy) in the country on 9th of every month by Medical Officer/OBGY specialist in the
Government health facilities and also through Private sector on voluntary basis.
• It is hoped that through the focus interventions as enumerated above, there will be a faster
pace of decline of MMR in these high focus States which will result in achieving the SDG
Goals of reduction of MMR to <70 per 100,000 live births by 2030.
B. HEALTH SYSTEM STRENGTHENING UNDER NRHM
Recommendation/Observation
2.23 The Committee also observes that all States may not have additional fiscal space for mobilizing
resources for Health and Wellness Centres. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Department should

14
hold deliberations especially with the more needy and backward states which are also weak on health
parameters and ensure that such states are provided 'additional support' to ensure the success of this
intervention. (Para 3.28)
Action Taken
2.24 Under the National Health Mission (NHM), allocation of fund to States is based on weightage on
account of socio-economic backwardness/health lag. The High Priority Districts are to receive higher
allocation per capita besides increased monitoring and supervision.
LYMPHATIC FILARIASIS, KALA-AZAR, LEPROSY
Recommendation/Observation
2.25 The Committee notes that though ambitions targets have been fixed for elimination of Kala-azar
and Filariosis by 2017 and Leprosy by 2018, the allocated resources do not match the intent and give
rise to an apprehension that desired outcomes may not be forthcoming. The Committee would like to
highlight the fact that Kala-azar was targeted to be eliminated by 2010 which was revised to 2015 and
further revised to 2017. This cannot be condoned. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Department
should be clear headed in its goals and should not keep on revising its targets. There appears to be some
inadequacy in implementing the plans due to which targets have not been achieved. The Committee
strongly recommends that practicable targets may be fixed and efforts may be made to achieve them .
(Para 3.37)
Action Taken
Lymphatic Filariasis
2.26 Lymphatic Filariasis (LF) is endemic in 256 districts of 16 states and 5 UTs. About 640 million
population in these 256 districts is at risk of developing lymphatic filariasis. Lymphatic Filariasis has been
targeted for elimination. Elimination is achieved when the number of microfilaria carriers is less than 1%
at community level and the children born after initiation of elimination activities are free from circulating
antigenaemia (presence of adult filarial worm in human body). Annual single dose of DEC and Albendazole
as preventive chemotherapy was initiated since 2004. Out of 256 endemic districts, 94 districts with
about 221 million population have successfully cleared Transmission Assessment Survey (TAS) and
stopped Mass Drug Administration (MDA) as Mf rate was <1% and antigenimia in children was below
the critical cut off and in 7 districts process of TAS is ongoing.
Kala-azar
2.27 The strategies adopted for elimination of Kala-azar have shown significant results as the number of
blocks reporting less than one case per 10,000 population at block level which is the target of elimination
has gone up to 539 during 2016 as against 492 reported during 2015. Similarly 6245 cases have been
reported during 2016 as compared to 8500 cases reported during the corresponding period of last year,
reduction of 27%. No death was reported during 2016 as compared to 5 deaths reported during 2015.
The target for elimination of Kala-azar has been revised to 2017. National Advisory Committee (NAC)
has been constituted in 2017 by GoI to review the progress on Kala-azar elimination and advise GoI on
remedial measures/corrective measures to achieve the goal of elimination.

15
STRENGTHENING OF STATE DRUG REGULATORY SYSTEM
Recommendation/Observation
2.28 The Committee observes that the present drug laboratories in the country are not fully equipped with
the state-of-the-art facilities for testing and analyzing complex formulations and detect spurious,
misbranded, substandard and adulterated drugs. Keeping in view the fact that India is the manufacturing
hub and pharmacy of the world, it is essential to put in place a vibrant and dynamic regulatory regime
so that the public could be safeguarded from substandard or unsafe drugs. It is in this context that
strengthening of testing and surveillance capacities in Centre and States is the need of the hour. Since
monitoring of the quality of drugs is primarily the responsibility of the State Drugs authorities supplemented
by CDSCO, without manpower augmentation and upgradation of State Drug Testing Laboratories, the
objective of ensuring availability of quality drugs to the people cannot be realized. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should process all the proposals received from State Governments
with a sense of urgency and promptitude and speed up their approval and help build regulatory systems
at par with international standards. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the physical progress
made in this regard. (Para 3.49)
Action Taken
2.29 The observations of the Committee have been noted. In the current financial year  i.e., 2017-18, an
amount of ` 52.35 crore has been made available in the Budget Estimates for strengthening State drug
regulatory system. The entire amount has been transferred to the State Governments. An amount of
` 29.01 crore had also been released during 2016-17. Further, the Central Drugs Standard Control
Organization has, with a view to ensure strengthening of State drug testing labs, prepared a list of
equipment alongwith specifications required for drug testing laboratories to ensure that States/UT
Government can take a decision expeditiously.
IV. NATIONAL URBAN HEALTH MISSION
Recommendation/Observation
2.30 The Committee has been closely following the implementation of NUHM since its take-off in 2013
after a protracted and long winding process. The Committee notes that the NUHM programme is a vital
component for meeting healthcare needs of the urban population with a focus on urban poor and is
oriented towards making available primary healthcare services and reducing their out-of-pocket expenditure
on health. The Committee therefore views with serious concern the reduction in allocation for NUHM
for 2017-18 (
` 752.05 crores) vis-a-vis 2016-17 ( ` 950.00 crore). The Committee, therefore, would like
the Government to devise the strategy in coordination with States to not only remove absorptive capacity
constraints but also focus on capacity building of the States to ensure effective utilization of the NUHM
funds. (Para 4.4)
Action Taken
2.31 NUHM was launched as a sub-mission of National Health Mission in 2013 and the details of
allocation, releases, expenditure and unspent balance are given as under:

16
(` in crore)
Year Allocation Release E xpenditure Unspent Balance
2013-14 1000 662.23 10.13 652.1
2014-15 1924.43 1345.82 431.34 914.48
2015-16 1386 725 747.79 -22.79
2016-17 950 491.37 764.38 * -273.01
2017-18 752.05
Total 6012.48 3224.42 1953.64 1270.78
*Exp. Upto 31.12.2016.
2.32 NUHM is new program which was launched in the year 2013-14. It may be seen from the details
given in the table above that so far an amount of ` 3224.42 crores has been released, however, as per
the absorption capacity of the States with regard to the release of funds, expenditure is to the tune of
` 1953.64 crore. It may be stated that utilisation of funds by the States under NUHM is low due to the
various reasons like recruitment and positioning of HR, operationalization of health facilities etc.
2.33 Recently, Orientation Workshops were held in Telangana on 9-10th December, 2016, Maharashtra
on 20.01.2017, Andaman and Nicobar Islands on 30-31st January, 2017 and in West Bengal on 10.2.2017
for orientation of the State/ ULB functionaries and elected members. Besides, a workshop was also
organised on 17.1.2017 in Delhi to orient the Directors/Principals of Collaborating Training Institutes
(CTIs)/ State Institute of Health and Family Welfare (SIHFWs) and State Health Resource Centres
(SHSRCs). Video-Conferences/Meetings were also held with the major States on 14.6.2016, 19.8.2016,
14.9.2016 and 25.11.2016 for review of NUHM implementation and expediting the pace of utilisation of
funds. Letters from Hon'ble Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare were also sent to Chief
Ministers and Urban Development Ministers of all States on 29.12.2016 and 30.12.2016 respectively
regarding coordination between Urban Development, State Health Departments and Urban Local Bodies.
Also letters from Joint Secretary (UH) were sent to Mayors and Municipal Corporations of States on
19.11.2016 regarding reviewing the progress of NUHM implementation. Besides, a Joint Video-Conference
between MoHFW, MoUD and HUPA was held on 3.2.2017 requesting the States for exploring the
convergence mechanism available with the on-going programmes of these Ministries.
2.34 For the capacity building of the NUHM Project Management Unit, Clinical and Paramedical staff,
a Capacity Development Framework has been developed for building capacities at National, State, City
and district level for implementation of NUHM. It also identifies the Institutions and Personals whose
capacities need to be enhanced with the step-wise activities to be undertaken for their capacity development.
Also five brochures viz. Quality Assurance, NUHM and Medical Colleges - "Collaboration to Strengthen",
Community Process under NUHM, IEC/BCC under NUHM, and NUHM Thrust Areas for States. Separate
PIP guidelines for facilitating the States in planning of NUHM PIP proposals have been disseminated to
all the States/UTs/. Also, Financial Management Guidelines under NUHM been issued to the States to

17
strengthen financial management system. An Orientation Module on NUHM covering the major thematic
areas is also in the process of finalization. The training and orientation of senior and mid-level functionaries
of the States is also being organised through IIM-Ahmedabad and ULB functionaries and officials will
be trained through ASCI, Hyderabad.
VII. DEFICIENCY OF HEALTH INFRA-STRUCTURE AND MANPOWER IN RURAL AREA
Recommendation/Observation
2.35 From the data supplied by the Department, out of 11262 sanctioned posts for specialists at Community
Health Centres (CHCs), 7359 are lying vacant; out of 2657 posts for Surgeons at CHCs, 1811 are lying
vacant; out of 34068 doctors at Primary Health Centres, 8774 are lying vacant. The Committee notes
that there are a large number of vacancies with respect to the specialists at CHCs and Doctors at Primary
Health Centres. The Department has informed that 'Public Health' being a State subject, the primary
responsibility to ensure doctors in public health facilities lies with the State Governments. The Committee
while agreeing with the view that 'Public Health' is a State subject, feels that the Centre cannot absolve
itself of the responsibility of ensuring accessibility and affordability of health to all citizens, which can
only happen when the Centre monitors the availability of manpower in States. The Committee, therefore
recommends, that the Department should encourage the States to carry out the reforms in the recruitment
process and fill the vacant posts. The Committee desires to be apprised of the efforts made and progress
achieved in this regard. (Para 7.3)
Action Taken
2.36 The Government has taken various steps to increase availability of doctors and specialists in the
country and also to encourage them to serve in rural and remote areas. These steps include:
(i) The ratio of teachers to students has been revised from 1:1 to 1:2 for all MD/MS disciplines
and 1:1 to 1:3 in subjects of Anaesthesiology, Forensic Medicine, Radiotherapy, Medical
Oncology, Surgical Oncology and psychiatry in all medical colleges across the country. Further,
teacher: student ratio in public funded Government Medical Colleges for Professor has been
increased from 1:2 to 1:3 in all clinical subjects and for Associate Prof. from 1:1 to 1:2 if the
Associate Prof. is a unit head. This would result in increase in number of specialists in the
country.
(ii) DNB qualification has been recognized for appointment as faculty to take care of shortage of
faculty.
(iii) Enhancement of maximum intake capacity at MBBS level from 150 to 250.
(iv) Enhancement of age limit for appointment/extension/re-employment against posts of teachers/
dean/principal/director in medical colleges from 65-70 years.
(v) Relaxation in the norms of setting up of Medical College in terms of requirement for land,
faculty, staff, bed/bed strength and other infrastructure.
(vi) Strengthening/upgradation of State Government Medical Colleges for starting new PG courses/
Increase of PG seats.

18
(vii) Establishment of New Medical Colleges by upgrading district/referral hospitals preferably in
underserved districts of the country.
(viii) Strenghening/upgradation of existing State Government/Central Government Medical Colleges
to increase MBBS seats.
(ix) Strengthening of districts hospitals to run DNB/CPS courses.
2.37 Further, in order to encourage doctors to work in remote and difficult areas, the Medical Council
of India, with the previous approval of Central Government has amended to Post Graduate Medical
Education Regulations, 2000 to provide:
(i) 50% reservation in Post Graduate Diploma Courses for Medical Officers in the Government
services, who have served for at least three years in remote and difficult areas; and
(ii) Incentive at the rate of 10% the marks obtained for each year in service in remote or difficult
areas as upto the maximum of 30% of the marks obtained in the entrance test for admissions
in Post Graduate Medical Courses.

19
CHAPETER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 The Committee observes that the Fourteenth Finance Commission has radically enhanced share of
the States in the Central divisible pool from 32% to 42% and according to the Ministry of Finance, all
States stand to gain in absolute terms from the new devolution formula. After the Fourteenth Finance
Commission award, the Government has instituted sharp cuts in the Central allocation for the Health
Sector assuming that 42 percent transfer of Central taxes to the States in the form of untied funds would
compensate for the shortfall in Central funds for Health. The Committee recognizes the fact that the
increased devolution of tax revenue to States is not bad in principle in a federal fiscal structure such
as ours and offers an excellent opportunity for the States to increase their health spending and implement
schemes as per aspirations of people. The Committee is, however, concerned to note from Annexure-IV
that despite the enhanced share in Central taxes divisible pool, all States/UTs have not increased their
health budgets commensurately in 2016-17. Albeit some of the State Health Budgets for 2016-17 have
registered negative growth as compared to 2015-16 {i.e. Assam (-7%), Chandigarh (-3%), Daman and
Diu (-15%), Karnataka (-2%), Manipur (-31%), Pondicherry (-1%)}. Some of the State Health Budgets
for 2016-17 have shown marginal increase in health allocation as compared to 2015-16. The Committee
on a perusal of 12th Plan average of State Health Budgets finds that States like Andhra Pradesh, Jammu
and Kashmir, Manipur, Nagaland and Sikkim have registered only single digit increase in percentage
terms. Thus the assumption that the enhanced share of the States/UTs in the Central divisible pool would
compensate for the sharp reduction in the Central allocation for Health has not been validated. The
Committee feels that unless all States increase their health budgets in commensurate with the enhanced
Central transfers, it would be difficult to attain affordable and equitable health care. The Committee
would, therefore, like the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to hand-hold the laggard States and
find out the underlying reasons for marginal or negative increase in their State Health Budgets and take
remedial measures accordingly so that the desired outcomes on health parameters are achieved and the
desired level of flow of funds to the Health Sector is ensured. The Committee would also like the Ministry
to develop a suitable Health Information System for tracking and reporting on health expenditures in
States on a real time basis and ensure that the additional State Health financing indeed gets allocated
and spent during 2017-18. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the action taken in this regard.
(Para 2.10)
Action Taken
3.2 It is not true that there has been a cut in Central Allocation for the health sector. On the contrary,
central allocation has increased.
19

20
3.3 A Statement showing state wise increase in Health budget in 2016-17 over the last year is placed
at Annexure-A. On the basis of information made available by the States, it has been observed that out
of 36 States/UTs, 23 States/UTs have increased their State Health Budget by 10% or more in FY
2016-17 compared to last Financial year 2015-16. To increase the State health budget, Ministry regularly
takes up the matter with the States/UTs to ensure increase in State Health Budget by at least 10% annually
as per the MOU signed with the states under NHM. As suggested by the committee, the Ministry will
follow-up with states to increase their health care spend and even incentivise states to increase their
healthcare spend.
3.4 Further, as advised by the Committee, the Ministry has implemented the Public Financial Management
System (PFMS), developed by Controller General of Accounts, Ministry of Finance to capture expenditure
and fund status on real time basis.
3.5 PFMS is being implemented in all 36 States/UTs. In India, out of 699,281 agencies to be registered
605,569 agencies have already been registered till date i.e.87% registration PAN India. Further, all the
36 States/UTs have started making payments through PFMS portal. The progress is at Annexure-B.
Further Recommendation
3.6 The Committee is amazed to note the assertion of the Department that the Central allocation
for health has increased. The Committee would like to remind the Department that the Secretary
(Health) during his deposition before the Committee on 30th March, 2015 in connection with
examination of Demand for Grants (2015-16) had submitted that for Health and Family Welfare
an allocation of ````` 24549.00 crore had been made in BE 2015-16 which was less than the BE
2013-14 provision of ````` 30,000.00 crore but more or less on the same level as the RE 2014-15
allocation of ````` 24,400.00 crore, elaborating further that this cut should be seen in the context
of the Fourteenth Finance Commission's recommendation whereby the share of State Government
in Central taxes had been increased from 32 per cent to 42 per cent and that the cut in the share
of the Central Government in Central taxes had translated into cuts in various sectors including
Health Sector. Similarly, the Health Secretary during his evidence before the Committee on the
22nd March, 2016 had informed that the total plan budget for Health and Family Welfare for
2016-17 was 31,000.00 crore out of which ````` 19,000.00 crore was on the National Health Mission
side and the balance on the Health side stating further that the increase in allocation for the
NHM was modest when compared to the 2015-16 budgetary provision of ````` 18,295.00 crore for
NHM. It is true that the Union Budget 2017-18 has sought to reverse this trend of under-
allocation by earmarkeing ````` 26,690.70 crore for the NHM, this increase appears noticeable only
because public expenditure in the previous years has been marginal or even negative in real
terms at constant prices. The Committee is, therefore, convinced that the Union Government's
allocation to health sector in the past years have witnessed steady decline in real terms at
constant prices. This exposes the hollowness of the Department assertion that the Central
allocation has increased. Given the fact that India has made phenomenal economic gains in the
last three decades which has resulted in widening the fiscal space significantly, the increase in
health budget is not commensurate with the net tax revenue with a current tax-GDP ratio of

21
17% of GDP . It, is, therefore, evident that the reply of the Department has not been formulated
with due diligence. The Committee would therefore advise the Department to carry out rigorous
analysis of the overall trend of budget allocation for the Health Sector before furnishing its
replies to the Committee and desist from skirting the crux of the issue raised by the Committee.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the increase into the total budget envelope for
the Health Sector since 2013-14 year-wise in real terms at constant 2011-12 prices after adjusting
for inflation.
Recommendation/Observation
3.7 The Committee is aware that in a federal fiscal structure such as India's, the goal of increasing
public spending on health to 2.5% of GDP would not be possible without the active involvement of State
Governments. The Committee would, therefore, like the Government to make an assessment as to how
much the Centre and States would need to increase their respective health spending to achieve the target
of 2.5% of GDP within a designated timeline and also suggest where the extra-resources for achieving
this level of health financing should come from. The Committee may be apprised of the assessment made.
(Para 2.19)
Action Taken
3.8 The expenditure on health as a proportion of GDP by the Centre and States for 2016-17(BE) is
1.18 % (as per Health Sector Financing by Centre and States, 2014-15 to 2016-17). The Centre-State
ratio on health spending for the year 2016-17 is 28:72. If the total Government health spending has to
reach 2.5% of GDP by the year 2024-25, States also have to increase their expenditure on health
substantially. Estimated Government (Centre and State) expenditure on Health in 2016-17 (as per Budget
Estimates) was ` 1,80,656.77 crores (Health Sector Financing by Centre and States, 2014-15 to 2016-
17). If the country is to reach the target of 2.5% of GDP as health expenditure by 2024-25, the spending
on health by Centre and States should grow at a compounded rate of 17.41% every year upto 2024-
25. (A growth rate of 7% in GDP is assumed every year, upto the year 2024-25). The GDP for 2016-
17 is `151,92,588 crores as per First Advance Estimates of MoSPI). The Government health expenditure
in 2024-25 should be ` 6,52,592.4 crores to reach the target. Resources for Health financing:
3.9 The Fourteenth Finance Commission has radically enhanced share of the States in the Central
Divisible pool from 32% to 42%. All states stand to gain from this. Increased spending on health by State
Governments should result in better health outcomes. Besides the need for states to increase health care
expenditure, there is also need to enhance efficiency in use of public resources. The Health Policy, 2017
envisages that the resource allocation to States will be linked with State development indicators, absorptive
capacity and financial indicators. The States would be incentivised for increasing State resources for
public health expenditure. General taxation will remain the predominant means for financing care.
3.10 The National Health Policy, 2017 has recommended that Government could consider imposing taxes
on specific commodities-such as the taxes on tobacco, alcohol and foods having negative impact on
health, taxes on extractive industries and pollution cess. Funds available under Corporate Social
Responsibility would also be leveraged for well-focused programmes aiming to address health goals.

22
Further Recommendation
3.11 The Committee observes that stepping up investments in public healthcare is vital to
sustaining India's economic growth. Though the Government has set a lofty target of raising
health spending to 2.5% of GDP by the year 2024-25 in the National Health Policy, 2017, the
quantum of provision for public healthcare as laid out in the Union Budget 2017-18 is just 29%
of GDP and does not instil much confidence. If the goal of public health spending of 2.5% of GDP
is to be achieved, 1% of it would need to come from the central expenditures. However, the
2017-18 allocation is not even one-third of that target. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that Central public funding of the health sector should be overhauled with substantial increase
in outlay in real terms. The Committee observes that a compelling case exists in India for
implementation of sin taxes on harmful products such as tobacco, alcohol etc. and the Government
should quickly move in this direction. The Committee would simultaneously exhort the Government
to ensure that the revenue generated through sin taxes is used for financing health programmes
and is not directed into the general revenue pool.
3.12 One of the key highlights of the National Health Policy, 2017 is to increase the targeted
public healthcare expenditure to 2.5% of GDP by the year 2025. Further, it aims to spend two
thirds or more of those resources towards Primary Health Care. Though expostulating two thirds
of resources towards primary health care is a laudable objective, the present crisis of doctors not
practising in rural areas still remains a challenge. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Department should not only strive towards allocating major proportion of resources to
primary care, it should also ensure availability of human resources at Primary and Community
Health Centres.
DELAY IN TRANSFER OF FUNDS
Recommendation/Observation
3.13 The Committee while noting the reduction in time period for transfer of funds to State Health
Society through treasury route, finds that there is still a time lag of 72 days in transfer of funds through
the Treasury mode and out of 
` 8145.03 crore released under the RCH Flexible Pool of NRHM during
2016-17, an amount of ` 2012.54 crore was still lying idle with State Treasury as on 31.01.2017. Taking
note of the unnecessary delay in transfer of funds through the Treasury route, and keeping in view the
fact that timely transfer of funds is extremely important as delayed transfers hamper fund utilization, the
Committee in its 93rd Report had recommended that if the cur rent fund flow architecture i.e. Treasury
Route continues to result in delay in transfer of funds, the Society route of funds should replace the
Treasury system. However, the Ministry of Finance has not agreed to reverting to the society mode of
transfer of funds. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons adduced by Ministry of Finance
for persisting with the Treasury Route. (para 2.28)
Action Taken
3.14 The Ministry had taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance for reverting to the mode of Society
transfer of funds but Finance Ministry did not agree to this. The reasons furnished by the Ministry of

23
Finance for pursuing with the treasury route is as under:
• Since Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) create a contingent liability on the legislative domain
of the State Governments, it was decided by the Union Cabinet (Following the recommendations
of the B. K. Chaturvedi Committee) that such transfer should be routed through the Consolidated
Fund of the States concerned. The Sub-Group of Chief Ministers Constituted by NITI Aayog
has also reiterated that funds for Centrally Sponsored Schemes should be routed through the
concerned State Treasuries.
• National Health Mission is Centrally Sponsored Scheme partly funded by the State Government.
In order to keep the spirit of co-operative federalism, it may not be desirable that the current
arrangement is disturbed.
Further Recommendation
3.15 The Committee is all for cooperative federalism and is not against the Treasury mode per
se. The Committee would support whichever system of fund flow is found robust and facilitates
speedy transfer of resources to Implementing Agencies. The Committee's only concern is that
in the Treasury mode, transfer of Central resources has been rendered slow as is evident from
the substantial amount of unspent funds. The Committee, therefore, urges the Department to
quickly remove procedural delays and administrative deficiencies in the fund release through the
Treasury mode through the development of a software and ensure that fund movement is paced
up and tracked at each successive stage starting with the initial release from the Centre till the
money reaches implementing Agencies. The Committee would also recommend that assets so
created in the system are accounted for.
III. NA TIONAL RURAL HEALTH MISSION
A. RCH Flexible Pool including Routine Immunization Programme, Pulse Polio Immunization
Programme, Immunization Programme, National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control
Programme.
Recommendation/Observation
3.16 The Committee also feels that there is a crucial need for the States to ramp up their investment for
reproductive and child health and the higher devolution recommended by the Fourteenth Finance
Commission to fill the resource gaps of the States, can certainly be deployed to good effect. It is pertinent
to mention here that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in a report titled 'A Strategic Approach
to Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn Child and Adolescent Health in India' published in 2013 had
estimated that "if the current unmet need for family planning could be fulfilled within the next five years,
India can avert 35,000 maternal deaths and 12 lakh infant deaths while saving more than 
` 4450 crore
of Indian currency. If safe abortion services are coupled with increase in family planning services, the
savings made to the country could be to the tune of ` 6500 crore." It is thus evident that more
government investments in RCH will give one of the best returns to society. The Committee would
therefore like the Department to impress upon States the immense benefits from enhanced spending on
RCH and devise arrangements for the States to step up their funding for RCH. (Para 3.6)

24
Action Taken
3.17 The Department from time to time impresses upon the States/UTs to enhance spending on RCH
activities by way of increase in State Health Budget and release the State Share on time for the smooth
implementation of activities under RCH Flexible Pool. Further, the Ministry shares with the states key
cost-effective interventions that provide maximum health and development gains per unit of expenditure.
Further Recommendation
3.18 The Committee would like to be apprised whether the States have paid heed to the
Department's advice to enhance spending on RCH activities and increased the aggregate level
of their own spending on RCH activities.
PULSE POLIO IMMUNIZATION
Recommendation/Observation
3.19 The Committee observes that though India has been declared as Polio free by WHO in March 2014
and has since maintained the status, ordinary prudence demands that all necessary precautions need to
be taken to obviate the possibilities of disruption of the supplies on account of an unforeseen crises in
commercial production of IPV . The Committee, therefore, desires to know the action plan of the
Department to tackle such an eventuality. The Committee desires to know the contribution of the public
and private sector in the supply of IPV to Pulse Polio Programme. The Committee also recommends that
the Government should keep a close watch on the immunization programme to ensure that Polio does
not resurface due to shortage of bulk ingredient required to produce the vaccine. (Para 3.13)
Action Taken
CC&V or RCH
3.20 As part of polio endgame strategy, India introduced single full dose IPV in November, 2015.
Country has now switched to fractional dose schedule which is dose sparing and maintains population
immunity. IPV supplies are closely monitored and states are supplied accordingly to minimize the wastage
of vaccine and maintain regular supplies. Apart from maintaining immunity against polio through IPV,
following steps are being taken by Government to check occurrence of new polio cases in the country:
• Two rounds of high quality National Immunization Day (Pulse Polio) is being conducted each
year and Two rounds of Sub National Immunization (SNID) rounds being implemented in high
risk areas of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi, Haryana, Punjab, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan,
Jharkhand, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Chandigarh and West Bengal.
• More than 100 vaccination posts are functioning along the international borders of India with
Nepal, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Myanmar and Bhutan to administer oral polio vaccine drops
throughout the year to all children below five years entering India. India has also made polio
vaccination a mandatory requirement for travelers coming from and going to 8 countries.
• Certification standard surveillance for acute flaccid paralysis is in place to detect importation
or emergence of polio case.
• Environmental surveillance through testing of sewage samples for polio is functioning strategically
at Mumbai, Delhi, Bihar, West Bengal, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Lucknow and Punjab.

25
Further Recommendations
3.21 The reply of the Department is silent about the contribution of the public and private sectors
in the supply of IPV to Pulse Polio Programme as asked for by the Committee. The Committee
therefore desires to be furnished with the requisite information. In order to ensure uninterrupted
supply of IPV for the Immunization Programme at affordable prices, the Committee also
recommends that most of the IPV should be sourced from public sector institutions.
ADOLESCENT HEALTH
Recommendation/Observation
3.22 The Committee notes that the Rural-Urban differential of IMR was 17 points in 2014 which is same
as in 2013. Therefore, there is no reduction in rural-urban differential of IMR from 2013 to 2014. The
Committee notes that the Gender differential has remained constant at 3 points at National Level. The
Committee observes that till there is a forward movement in Rural-Urban differential and Gender
differential, the gains achieved would not be enough to reach the target set. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should regularly monitor the Rural-Urban Differential and Gender
Differential to ensure that the targets set are achieved at the ground level. (Para 3.21)
Action Taken
CH&RCH
3.22 An analysis of the IMR data as obtained from the Sample registration System reports of the RGI
shows that since the inception of National Rural Health Mission in 2005, the Rural urban differential of
IMR has declined from 22 in 2005 to 16 in 2015. However, the Gender Differential has remained
constant. As suggested, MoHFW is regularly monitoring the IMR as well as the rural-urban and gender
gaps. The issue is also taken up regularly with States/UTs for their attention and action during reviews
and monitoring activities. In addition, stress is being laid upon the strengthening of care at sub-district
level.
Further Recommendation
3.23 The Committee expresses serious concern that the Gender Differential has remained constant
and rural urban divide has also decreased by only 6 points in a decade which is non-condonable.
The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should handhold poor performing
States on priority basis to ensure that the targets set are actually achieved and do not remain
a paper statistic.
HEALTH SYSTEM STRENGTHENING UNDER NRHM
Recommendation/Observation
3.24 The Committee fully supports the initiative taken by the Government to ensure 'last mile connectivity'
in health and wellness, by converting sub-centres into Health and Wellness Centres as this would provide
easy and timely access to quality healthcare and take the healthcare closer to people. The Committee is
however concerned about the fact that there are huge constraints of skilled manpower and it would be

26
very difficult to bridge this gap. The Committee would therefore like the Department to indicate a
roadmap to address the huge gap in terms of availability of skilled manpower for the proposed Health
and Wellness Centres. (Para 3.27)
Action Taken
3.25 The reply is as under:
• The Health and Wellness centers are envisaged to be manned by a team comprising of ANM(s)
and the ASHAs that already deliver services to the population covered by the Sub-Centre, a
mid-level health care provider {B.Sc (Community Health), Nurse or Ayurveda Practitioner
trained in public health and primary care}.
• Accordingly, MoUs have been signed with IGNOU for developing and implementing Bridge
Programmes in Community Health for Ayurveda Practitioners and Nurses, which will be 6
months courses including theory and practical training. For this course, identified District
Hospitals have been strengthened to act as Programme Study Centres and are notified by
IGNOU. As per MoU, States have to sponsor eligible candidates for the programme under
NHM.
• Bridge Programme (Certificate) in Community Health for Nurses is rolled out in 11 States
through 20 Programme Study Centres. A total of 329 candidates have been admitted in the 1st
batch. Selection process for the 2nd batch is ongoing in States.
• Bridge Programme (Certificate) in Community Health for Ayurveda Practitioners is expected
to be rolled out in 2nd/3rd Quarter of 2017-18. States have been informed to initiate preparatory
activities in this regard.
Further Recommendation
3.26 The Committee while appreciating the efforts being made by the Department to ensure
skilled manpower for Health and Wellness Centres, however, feels that the present measures are
not adequate keeping in view the huge size of our country. The Committee therefore, recommends
that these programme courses should be widened to all States, to ensure greater availability of
human resources and if need be, more funds can be sought from the Finance Ministry for the
purpose.
C. FLEXIBLE POOL FOR COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
Recommendation/Observation
3.27 The Committee in the earlier part of this Report has lent its support to an additional allocation
of 
` 4000.00 crore for NHM for 2017-18 which the Committee hopes would take care of the shortfall
of funds under Flexible Pool for Communicable Diseases. According to some reports, communicable
diseases contribute 52% of all disease burden and more than 60% of deaths in the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends even at the cost of repetition that a sufficiently higher magnitude of
funds should be allocated for this Pool. (Para 3.32)

27
Action Taken
3.28 As a result of regular reviews and continuous monitoring, the proposals of expenditure from the
concerned programme divisions in r/o available funds were obtained, processed for IFD's concurrence
to book expenditure. The details of allocation of funds are as under:-
Programme Proposed for RE 2016-17 Allocated for RE 2016-17
(Plan) & BE 2017-18 (Plan) (Plan) & BE 2017-18 (Plan)
RE BE RE BE
2016-17 2017-18 2016-17 2017-18
NVBDCP 784.87 1065.78 505.65 884.13
RNTCP 1000.00 1 100.00 740.00 1840.00
NLEP 51.51 121.00 46.00 46.00
IDSP 75.00 1 10.00 68.35 68.35
3.29 Markedly, low allocation is seen even in EAP component under NVBDCP (wherein allocation is not
being made as per Grant signing agreement even demand was raised in proper manner) which may
adversely affect the programme implementation.
Recommendation/Observation
3.30 The Committee notes that out of 
` 1373.00 crore allocated at RE 2016-17, an expenditure of only
` 904.25 crore has been spent till 10th February, 2017. While, the Committee is all with the Department
for the need for increasing funds in its fight against communicable diseases, it simultaneously recommends
that the Department should ensure expenditure monitoring and fiscal discipline and avoid rush of
expenditure before the fiscal end. (para 3.33)
Action Taken
3.31 Actual expenditure under Flexible Pool for Communicable Diseases against R.E. 2016-17 are as
under:
(` in crore)
Programme R.E. 2016-17 (Plan) Actul Expenditure till 31.3.17
NVBDCP
Plan 505.65 428.70 (Prov.)
Non Plan 13.00 12.88 (Prov.)
RNTCP* 740.00 677.78 (Prov.)
NLEP 46.00 27.79 (Prov.)
IDSP 68.35 63.05 (Prov.)
* RE approved but additional allocation of amount of `100.00 crore was not re-appropriated by MoF till 31.03.2017.

28
3.32 The progress of expenditure was reviewed and monitored by JS level from time to time.
Further Recommendations
3.33 The Committee cannot reconcile to the paradox that on the one hand, the Department asks
for more funds, on the other hand, it squanders the gains made in shape of Parliamentary
support by putting up a lackluster performance in spending. The Committee therefore, strongly
recommends the Department to pull up its socks and ensure sound utilization of funds allocated,
otherwise not only will the future fund allocation by Ministry of Finance decrease, such fund
crunch would seriously derail the communicable disease programme of the country.
D. FLEXIBLE POOL FOR NON-COMMUNICABLE DISEASES, INJURY AND TRAUMA
Recommendation/Observation
3.34 The Committee notes from the Department's reply that the revenue allocation of 
` 955.00 crore for
financial year (2017-18) falls woefully short of the proposed budget of ` 3498.00 crore. Even though
the Department has stated that besides NCD flexi pool, the health systems strengthening under the NRHM
and NUHM is helping to address the NCD diseases, the Committee strongly feels that in view of the
increasing burden of non-communicable diseases in the country, fund constraint should not be the reason
for increase in disease burden. The Committee therefore strongly supports the Department's contention to
increase the budget allocation and recommends that the Department may approach the Ministry of
Finance for seeking the desired allocation at RE stage. (Para 3.45)
Action Taken
NHM-Finance
3.35 The programme for Population level Screening for common NCDs has been initiated. 100 districts
are identified for implementation. The intervention for COPD and CKD have also been included in the
National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetic, Cardiovascular diseases and Stroke.
Funds will be demanded as per need.
PH-I
3.36 The District and Sub-district level activities of the National Mental Health Programme (NMHP) are
funded under the Flexible Pool for Non-Communicable Diseases, Injury and Trauma. The PIPs of the
States/UTs for support under District Mental Health Programme are examined as per guidelines for
implementation of the District Level activities under the NMHP and the recommendations of the Division
thereon are communicated to the National Health Mission (NHM) Division for issuing final ROPs. Funds
for implementation of the above activities are released to the States/UTs by the NHM Division out of the
Budget Allocation for Flexible Pool for Non-Communicable Diseases, Injury and Trauma.
Further Recommendation
3.37 The Committee would like to be apprised of the criteria adopted for selection of 100 districts
for population level screening of common NCDs. The Committee further recommends that the
screening programme must be expanded to all districts of the country and a time-frame of the
same should be put in place expeditiously.

29
V. TERTIARY CARE PROGRAMMES
National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases
and Stroke (NPCDS)
Recommendation/Observation
3.38 The Committee observes that the diseases like cardiovascular diseases, cancer, chronic respiratory
diseases, diabetes etc. are the leading causes of deaths in India and despite the launch of NPCDS in
2010, the efforts against the growing burden of these diseases are grossly insufficient and a lot more
needs to be done to cater to these challenges. The Committee would therefore like the Department to
quickly move towards implementation of the National Multi-sectoral Action Plan so that the outreach
of NPCDS could be made universal. (Para 5.2)
Action Taken
3.39 The risk factors of Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) are multi factorial and the interventions
to prevent and control NCDs are Multi-sectoral in nature. A National Multi-sectoral Action Plan (NMAP)
has been prepared in coordination with WHO and shared with 39 Central Government Ministries/
Departments. Draft NMAP has been approved by the Ministry and committee of Secretaries have been
approached for approval.
Further Recommendation
3.40 The Committee notes that the draft National Multi-sectoral Action Plan (NMAP) for prevention
and control of Non Communicable Diseases (2016-22) is still at approval stage even though 2017
is nearing its end. The Committee expresses dismay that the same is still stuck in approval
stages. At this rate the implementation of the plan (2016-22) looks tardy. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should fix a deadline for the implementation of the
National Multi-sectoral Action Plan.
Recommendation/Observation
3.41 Since the above diseases often require life-long management, the Committee is of the view that
AYUSH has huge potential for safe and cost-effective management of NCDs. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should exploit AYUSH strengths for the management of above NCDs.
(Para 5.3)
Action Taken
3.42 A Pilot project on 'Integration of AYUSH with NPCDCS' has been initiated in six districts  viz.
Darjeeling (West Bengal) and Krishna (Andhra Pradesh) for Homoeopathy; Gaya (Bihar), Bhilwara
(Rajasthan) and Surendranagar (Gujarat) for Ayurveda; and Lakhimpur Kheri (Uttar Pradesh) for (Unanit).
Further Recommendation
3.43 The Committee would like to be apprised of the success of this pilot project and whether
the same will be replicated, district-wise.

30
VI. HUMAN RESOURCES FOR HEALTH AND MEDICAL EDUCATION
(i) District Hospital - Upgradation of State Government Medical College (PG seats)
Recommendation/Observation
3.44 The Committee notes that the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech has made a call for 5000 more
postgraduate seats. India is witnessing the rapidly rising burden of communicable and non-communicable
diseases. Besides, several new medical institutions are facing challenges in getting faculty to train
doctors. The Committee is therefore baffled to note the submission of the Department that the Scheme
is to be wound up by 2018-19. The Committee desires that the scheme be reviewed and assessed and
revamped instead of being closed. (Para 6.4)
Action Taken
3.45 The Budget Announcement was to take step to increase 5000 PG seats. A total of 3632 PG seats
have been increased this year. The new PG seats include 2990 PG seats increased in clinical subject in
135 medical colleges pursuant to the revision of teacher student ratio. Further, 642 PG seats in 71
Medical Colleges are permitted in Medical Colleges under Section 10 A of IMC Act, 1956 for Academic
Year 2017-18. The DNB seats, which are equivalent to MD/MS, have increased by 2147 in the last one
year. Thus, approximately 5800 PG seats have been increased and announcement is already fulfilled.
3.46 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is implementing a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for
"strengthening and upgradation of State Government Medical Colleges for starting new Postgraduate
disciplines and increasing postgraduate seats". The Scheme was approved in 11th Five Year Plan with
the objective to increase 4058 PG seats and out of which a total of approximately 940 PG seats have
been increased so far. Under the scheme, an amounting of ` 745.78 crore has been released to 72 State
Government Medical Colleges in 21 States/UTs till date and balance amount of approximately ` 230 crore
is required to be released. During the year 2017-18, ` 165 crore will be released and balance in
2018-19.
3.47 It has been decided to transfer this Scheme to PMSSY Division. The further continuation of the
Scheme will now be decided by PMSSY Divison.
Further Recommendation
3.48 The Committee observes that the further continuation of this scheme will be decided by
PMSSY Division as it has been transferred to the Division. The Committee desires to be kept
apprised of the final decision taken in the matter.
(ii) Establishing New Medical Colleges (upgrading District Hospital)
Recommendation/Observation
3.49 The Committee observes that there is a huge shortfall in the number of MBBS doctors in the country
and at the present rate of production, the shortfall will not be met for many years. The Committee,
therefore, welcomes the substantial increase in allocation to 
` 3300.00 crore under "Establishment of New
Medical Colleges (upgrading District Hospitals) as the increase in allocation would help augment human

31
resources in the health sector and improve the quality of healthcare delivery. The Committee is however,
concerned at the snail's pace of progress made in adding 82 more medical colleges in Phase II of the
Scheme. A year has passed since the Phase II was conceptualized, but the Expenditure Finance Committee
is yet to accord its approval to Phase II. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should sort out all the pending issues within a specified time-frame and hasten the formulation of a
policy. (Para 6.8)
Action Taken
3.50 Under the Scheme, as on 11.5.2017, 53 proposals had been approved and funds to the tune of
`3224.42 crore have been released to the States/UTs till date. An EFC note for continuation of ongoing
Scheme beyond 13th Five Year Plan and taking up 82 more District Hospitals in Phase-II of the Scheme
has been submitted for seeking necessary approval.
Further Recommendation
3.51 The Committee desires to be apprised of the physical progress made towards operationalizing
53 proposals for upgrading District Hospitals as Medical Colleges.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
- NIL -
32

REPORT
PART B - HEALTH SECTOR
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Ninety Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 42) of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2017-18.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the 99th Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) (Chapter I) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have been accepted by the Committee: 1.16, 2.4, 2.5, 4.5, 4.6, 5.4, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4,
6.5, 6.6, 8.4, 9.4, 11.3, 11.4, 15.8, 17.9, 17.14
Total - 18
(ii) (Chapter II) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the Government's replies: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.12, 1.13, 2.2, 2.3, 2.7, 2.6,
4.8, 5.6, 8.5, 11.5, 11.7.2, 12.6, 12.9, 13.4, 15.3, 15.6, 15.7, 15.10, 17.11.
Total - 22
(iii) (Chapter III) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee: 1.4, 1.11, 1.14, 1.20, 2.8, 2.10, 3.3,
3.4, 4.3, 4.4, 5.5, 6.6, 6.7, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 10.3, 11.6, 13.3, 14.4, 14.5, 14.6, 14.7,
16.3, 16.4, 17.18
Total - 26
(iv) (Chapter-IV) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: - 0
Total - Nil
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
33

34
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 From the scrutiny of the above table, it is evident that during 2016-17, there has been considerable
under-utilization of funds in almost all the major schemes except AIIMS and NCDC. In view of this trend
of under-utilization of funds, the Department needs to justify seeking enhanced funds for 2017-18
especially when the allocated funds at RE 2016-17 have not been fully utilized. The Committee is
surprised to note the increase in funds of 
` 4984.22 crore allocated to major Central Medical Institutes
and Hospitals despite the fact that in the year 2016-17, a sum of ` 2383.00 crore at BE was enhanced
to ` 2693.08 crore at RE stage and only ` 1850.08 crore could be utilized as on 2nd February, 2017
leaving a considerable shortfall in expenditure. Similarly, for CGHS, only 60% of the funds have been
used and yet an increase in allocation has been sought for 2017-18. The Committee recommends that
the Department should formulate an pragmatic action plan for ensuring judicious utilization of financial
resources vis-a-vis set physical targets along with a robust monitoring mechanism to ensure that allocated
funds do not remain idly parked and to minimize the amount of savings. The Committee would also like
to suggest to the Department to set realistic targets that can be achieved in a time-bound manner so as
to ensure that spill over of the activities is avoided. (Para 1.16)
Action Taken
1.2 NCD: Noted. However, more than 100 % of the RE (2016-17) funds have been utilized for
strengthening of TCCC.
PMSSY:
               2015-16 2016-17
Scheme B E A E % of AE w.r.t. B E A E % of AE w.r.t.
of BE of BE
PMSSY 2206.00 1577.83 71.52 2450 1953.30** 79.73
**up to 31st March, 2017.
1.3 It is shown from the above table that the percentage of expenditure with respect to BE has been
increased in 2016-17 as compared to the year 2015-16 in respect of PMSSY scheme. The earlier
percentage for the financial year 2016-17 was up to 2nd Feb, 2017. However, the new percentage is
79.73 up to 31st March, 2017.
1.4 Several corrective process related measures and stringent monitoring mechanism have been
implemented to adhere to projected timeline like:
34

35
(i) Keeping involvement of Ministry at bare minimum to expedite decision making process by
Executing Agencies and Procurement Support Agent.
(ii) Introduction of PRIMA VERA for online monitoring directly from project sites.
(iii) Creation of Dashboard to strengthen online monitoring Appointment of OSD/Director in early
stage as nodal persons for faster decision making Regular progress review undertaken.
(iv) Apart from above, it is pertinent to mention that.
(v) Construction activities for upgradation in 36 out of 39 Government Medical Colleges under
Phase-III of PMSSY is going on full swing.
(vi) Procurement activities in synchronization mode with construction activities for these colleges
have also been started
(vii) In case of newly announced AIIMS under Phase IV , tendering activities for construction has
been initiated and construction activities is expected to pick up within 2-3 months time.
SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL AND VARDHMAN MAHA VIR MEDICAL COLLEGE (SJH AND
VMMC), NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
1.5 The Department has further informed that the projected demand under Capital and Revenue head
was ` 130.50 crore and ` 1127.44 crore, respectively in the financial year 2017-18. However, the funds
allotted to it was ` 200.50 crore and ` 905.19 crore respectively. The allocated funds will be utilized
for the smooth functioning of the hospital for patient care services including the procurement of equipments,
completion of project (re-development plan), procurement of vehicles for the hospital, and construction/
upgradation/repair of staff quarters. It has also been informed that after implementation of Emergency
Block there may be a shortage of funds.
1.6 The Committee notes that the budgeted funds for the financial year 2017-18 would be utilized to
complete the ongoing civil and procurement activities only as no new projects are in the pipeline for the
hospital. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should make all out efforts to
achieve the physical targets in time to avoid their spillage to the next year. Moreover, in case of the
implementation of the Emergency Block, in case additional funds are required then the Department
should approach the Ministry of Finance for enhanced allocation at RE stage. (Para 2.4 & 2.5)
Action Taken
1.7 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE (LHMC)
Recommendation/Observation
1.8 To the query regarding actual expenditure incurred in 2016-17 alongwith status of the physical
targets and achievements, the Committee notes that four projects are a spill over activity from the last
financial year viz. Establishment of Human Milk Bank; Renovation of Female Surgical Ward; New

36
toilets as part of Swaachh Bharat Abhiyan Public address system in Auditorium; Provision of lifts for
disabled person. And the remaining other projects viz. Provision of lifts for disabled person, addition
of horticulture services, additional parking space in KSCH and Student cafe are new proposals to be
started in the financial year (2017-18). The Committee has also been informed that the allocation of
` 382.069 crore (Revenue Head) and ` 24.40 crore (Capital Head) at BE 2017-18 is as per the projected
demand.
1.9 In view of the spillover activities from the previous year and new initiatives proposed for the year
2017-18, the Committee observes that the Hospital has substantial number of projects to be completed
for the current year. The Committee is of the opinion that the Department should do prudent assessment
of fund requirements and expedite pre-project formalities for operationalization of various projects as
envisaged. (Para 4.5 & 4.6)
Action Taken
1.10 Status of spill over activities from the last financial year:
1. Establishment of Human Milk bank has been achieved. The Human Milk bank was inaugurated
on 6th June, 2017 and has now started functioning.
2. Renovation of Female surgical ward is also nearing completion.
3. New toilet complexes under Swachh Bharat Abhiyan have been completed and are being used
by the patients. These toilet complexes have separate toilets for differently abled persons.
4. Public Address System in Auditorium: The renovation work of Auditorium has been completed
and action has been initiated for putting in place public address system in the Auditorium.
1.11 Status of the new proposals started in the year 2017-18:
1. Provision of the lifts for disabled persons: CPWD has been asked to submit the cost estimate.
The electrical division of CPWD has submitted the estimate and the estimate is awaited from
the civil division of SSKH division of LHMC and associated hospital.
2. Addition of Horticulture services: Horticulture services have been started by CPWD in LHMC
and associated hospitals. The aim is to make the institution greener and improve the ambience
of the institution.
3. Additional Parking: Further action is being taken to create additional parking in hospital area.
4. Students' Cafe: Civil work on the Students' has been completed and the electrical component
will be completed shortly. The procedure to hire vendors to run the students' cafe is under
way. The Students' cafe is likely to be completed shortly.
1.12 The advice of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted for compliance.
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS), NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
1.13 The Committee recommends that all out efforts should be made for the projects under planning stage
to be brought to take off stage expeditiously and measures should be taken to expedite the process of

37
getting departmental approvals from concerned authorities to increase the pace of implementation of the
projects. The Department should also set in place an intensive monitoring mechanism to ensure successful
execution of the projects within the approved cost and designated timelines. The Committee is extremely
concerned to note that the faulty tendering process led to selection of the wrong executing agency, and
thus caused execution cost overruns and other delays. The Committee recommends that the track record
of the company especially in case of construction related projects should be made an important criterion
to avoid recurrence of such instances. The Committee recommends for roping in of reputed construction
companies with a proven track record for execution of such projects within a time frame. (Para 5.4)
Action Taken
1.14 Process has been initiated by the Institute to take approval of the competent authorities for starting
the projects presently under planning stage.
1.15 As regards roping in reputed construction companies with a proven track record for execution of
such projects within a time frame, it is humbly submitted that in the last five years the construction
projects of the Institute are already being handled by reputed PSUs such as HSCC, HLL and NBCC.
POSTGRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES AND RESEARCH (PGI), CHANDIGARH
Recommendation/Observation
1.16 The updated details of the ongoing projects in PGI, Chandigarh is given at Annexure C. The
Committee notes that out of nine ongoing projects, three projects viz. setting up of Satellite Centre of
PGIMER at Sangrur (Punjab); Replacement of Air Cooling System with Air Conditioning (HVAC)
system in New OPD Block; Upgradation of HVAC System of Operation theatre Complex, Nehru Hospital,
PGIMER, Chandigarh have shown some progress. However, the remaining six projects have been progressing
at a snails' pace.
1.17 The Committee notes that out of the remaining six projects, except for upgradation of HVAC system
of the operation theater complex, Nehru Hospital, no expenditure has been reported till December, 2016.
All these projects are still at formulation stage and in waiting for approvals from the concerned authorities.
1.18 The Committee notes that despite the availability of financial and physical resources, the projects
at PGI, Chandigarh could not be pushed ahead due to inordinate delays caused due to bureaucratic
procedures. Moreover, as per canons of financial propriety, the more quickly a project gets implemented,
the lesser it results in cost and time overruns. The Committee while deprecating this slow progress in the
six projects recommends that the Department should closely monitor the activities being undertaken and
fast track these projects to ensure that no cost or time overruns are reported. (Para 6.2, 6.3 & 6.4)
Action Taken
1.19 The project is being monitored at the level of Director PGIMER and to fast track the project regular
meetings with implementing agencies are being held.
1.20 In addition, the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) of the Institute chaired by Secretary, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare monitors the progress of all projects during the meeting of SFC on regular
basis.

38
Recommendation/Observation
1.21 As regards the progress made towards the three projects i.e. Advance Cardiac Centre (Phase I);
Modernization of Research 'A' and 'B' Block and Modernization of Nehru Hospitals the details are as
under:
Sl. Name of Project Project Outlay/ Expenditure Updated status with corrective measure
No. Estimated Upto Dec. taken for implementation of project
cost 2016
(` in Cr.) ( ` in Crore)
01. Advanced Cardiac 13.67 3.06 A warded work of Civil, Electrical and
Centre (Phase-II) HV AC component has been completed. The
work of installation of Lifts has been
awarded. Detailed Estimate and DNIT of
Medical gases are under approval of the
competent authority.
02. Modernization of 48.33 4.83 After finalization of schemes submitted
Research A and B by NBCC for Upgradation of External
Block. Engineering Services of Research Block A
& B by Monitoring Committee, the tender
by NBCC for Upgradation of External
documents submitted by NBCC were
scrutinized and deficiencies were pointed
out. NBCC has submitted final tender
documents of Electrical work and
documents of other services are awaited
from them.
03. Modernization of 87.82 8.78 The scheme submitted by NBCC has
Nehru Hospital been finalized by Monitoring Committee.
The tender documents are being prepared
at the end of NBCC. Further action shall
be initiated after receipt of tender
documents from them.
1.22 The Committee notes the progress made in these three projects and observes that all these projects
are at nascent stage and under approvals of the competent authorities. In this regard, the Committee
would like to reiterate its recommendation made in its 93rd Report on DFG (2016-17) which is as under:
"The Committee is constrained to observe that all the three projects, i.e. Advance Cardiac Centre
(Phase II), Modernisation of Research 'A' and 'B' Block and Modernisation of Nehru Hospital were
targeted to be completed during the Eleventh Five Year Plan but are nowhere close to execution
even after the lapse of four years of the Twelfth Plan period. The Committee expresses its displeasure

39
at the tardy progress of implementation of the above projects and recommends that the factors
responsible for the inordinate delay in the implementation of the projects may be gone into in detail
and corrective measures taken accordingly so that the implementation of projects is speeded up with
sustained monitoring." (Para 6.5 & 6.6)
Action Taken
1.23 To expedite the projects regular meetings with implementing agencies are being held by the Institute.
The present status of these projects is given at Annexure-IV.
NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND MEDICAL
SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG
Recommendation/Observation
1.24 As regards the status of recruitment of faculty Group A, B, C posts at the Institute, the Committee
notes that out of sanctioned strength of 1332 posts in various categories, 934 posts are filled and 398
posts are lying vacant. The vacancies are mainly due to delay in administrative procedures and approvals.
(Para 8.4)
Action Taken
1.25 The Institute is having a sanctioned strength of 1521 posts comprising of faculty, Group A, B &
C posts. As on 19.04.2017 a total of 1208 posts have been filled up and remaining 313 posts are vacant.
FAMILY WELFARE SCHEMES (FWS)
Recommendation/Observation
1.26 On scrutiny of the budgetary allocation, the Committee is concerned to note that out of 
` 02.51crore
at BE stage, only an amount of ` 0.664 crore has been spent which is a merely 33% of the budgetary
fund with respect to RE. The Committee is disappointed to find the substantial mismatch between the
activities proposed and funds actually spent. As family planning is an integral component of the
population control programme, the Committee is of the view that there must be a proactive approach on
the part of the Department to properly monitor the utilization of funds for various activities as envisaged
under the programme. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should shed
its lackadaisical attitude and closely monitor the utilization of funds. (Para 9.4)
Action Taken
1.27 Funds could not be released to IIT Kharagpur under the head 'Technology in Family Welfare' upto
Dec., 2016 as the recommendation of the Department of Health Research(DHR) on the proposal to
release the funds was received as late as on 29.12.2016. After receiving the recommendations of DHR,
the funds were Sanctioned  vide Order No. M.11011/1/2017-FP-II dated 01.02.2017 for releasing the
amount of ` 1,00,00,000/-(one crore only). Hence after considering this expenditure, total expenditure
for the year 2016-17 comes out to be 1.664 crore which is 66.29% of BE and 82.78% of RE. However,
the recommendations of the Committee are noted for future compliance and necessary action.

40
SERA AND VACCINE MANUFACTURING UNITS
Recommendation/Observation
1.28 The Committee notes the consistent trend of substantial amount of funds remaining unutilized at
CRI, Kasauli in the last three years. When the facility is producing commercial batches of TT in bulk
after achieving cGMP compliance, unutilized funds indicate some lacunae in the process of bulk production.
The Committee would suggest the Department to undertake an assessment of the unit and identify the
shortcomings and take remedial measures to ensure the smooth running of the vaccine production unit.
(Para 11.3)
Action Taken
1.29 The funds remaining unutilized were due to non receipt of material and supplies from vendors and
non-receipt of technical estimates for various work from CPWD. The suggestion of the Committee has
however been noted for future compliance.
Recommendation/Observation
1.30 The Committee also observes that at CRI, Kasauli and BCGVL, Guindy, upgradation work has been
completed and both the units have been made cGMP compliant since long. The commercial production
of TT vaccines and BCG vaccines has already commenced at the respective units. As regards, PII,
Coonoor, civil construction is nearing completion and cGMP compliant facility would be fully completed
by June, 2017. The Committee would like to suggest the Department to speed up the activities to make
PII, Coonoor, cGMP compliant unit to utilize its vaccine production output to make Universal Immunization
Coverage a success with increased supply of vaccines at low cost. (Para 11.4)
Action Taken
1.31 The suggestion of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHAYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY)
Recommendation/Observation
1.32 The Committee is also concerned to note that a large number of medical equipments are bought
routinely by regional AIIMS on the basis of proprietary technology and proprietary certificate. The
Committee recommends for more transparent mechanism for purchase of capital equipment. The Committee
also recommends that proper upkeep of capital equipment be ensured in all AIIMS. (Para 15.8)
Action Taken
1.33 An advisory has been issued to six AIIMS-Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Jodhpur, Patna, and Raipur and
Rishikesh under Phase-I of PMSSY for compliance of the observations/recommendations of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee. A copy of the advisory is attached.
1.34 Also as a matter of good practice all equipments are now being procured with 05 years warranty
and 05 years CMC so as to ensure proper upkeep for full life of the equipment.
NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL ORGANISATION (NACO)
Recommendation/Observation
1.35 The Committee is constrained to note that while the Planning Commission had recommended total
outlay of 
` 11394.00 crore for the NACO for the Twelfth Plan Period, the total RE allocation made

41
by the union Government in the five years of the Twelfth Plan period (i.e. 2012-13 to 2016-17) was
` 7944.61 crore only which works out to 69.72 % of the funding envisaged by the Planning Commission.
Given the fact that overall NACO expenditure are reasonably high with about 90 % of the funds released
for NACO between 2012-13 and 2016-17 being utilized as on 31st January, 2017, the Committee
observes that the actual allocation of fund for NACO was done in an arbitrary fashion. Despite India's
progress in reduction of HIV prevalence, the country still had an estimated 21.17 lakh HIV infected
people in 2015 which is third largest in world. Hence, it is evident that the budgetary cuts instituted by
the Government would have impacted various interventions under National AIDS Control Programme.
The Committee would exhort the Government to ensure that such a trend does not recur in future and
funds approved on paper get allocated and spent also. (para 17.9)
Action Taken
1.36 This recommendation of Committee is noted by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for guidance
and further action.
UTILISATION CERTIFICATES
Recommendation/Observation
1.37 The Committee is constrained to note the unspent cash balances with SACS. The Committee believes
that unspent balances indicate poor financial planning and discipline. The Committee strongly recommends
that NACO should direct all SACS to undertake a quarterly review of unspent cash balances and initiate
steps to liquidate the unspent cash balances on quarterly basis instead of reviewing at the end of the
financial year. The Committee would also like the Department to ensure proper fiscal planning and
discipline. (Para 17.14)
Action Taken
1.38 The concern of the Committee is noted and quarterly review of the unspent Cash Balance monitored
at the time of release of each instalment of GIA to SACS, with direction to them to update the
expenditure invariably. As regards ensuring proper fiscal planning and discipline an effective tool for
internal check through audit is made out.
Viz:
• Internal audit of SACS by NACO appointed Internal Auditors (CA firms)
• Internal Audit of NGOs by CA firms
• Statutory audit of SACS by CA firms
Audit of SACS by State AG.
Further:
• Constitution of Audit Committee at SACS level
• Vetting of expenditure by the Executive Committee of SACS.

42
CHAPTER- II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The projected demand of the Department of Health and Family Welfare for 2017-18 for both
Capital and Revenue funds and extent of shortfall is as under:
Projection of estimate 2017-18 Actual allocation 2017-18 Shortfall in allocation
Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital T otal
24809.29 4692.05 29501.34 21239.47 3483.81 24723.28 3569.82 1208.24 4778.06
2.2 The Department has informed that owing to shortfall in allocation, implementation of the Programmes/
Schemes in the Health Sector shall not be affected as the same would be offset by way of projection of
Supplementary Demands for Grants in the first batch of the Supplementary demands. Further, it has also
been submitted that to ensure optimal utilization of funds for different development activities, utilization
of funds is reviewed by various committees formed at different levels to ensure fiscal discipline. Meetings
are also held regularly to review utilization of funds and these are attended by implementing agencies.
During review, the physical and financial progress is taken into account and realistic assessment is done.
Budget is revised in accordance with this assessment during the first Supplementary, during RE/BE
exercise, Second Supplementary, Third Supplementary and Final Estimates Stage. All efforts are made
to utilize all funds and to ensure that least funds are surrendered.
2.3 It can be seen from the above table that for the year 2017-18, 
` 24723.28 crore has been allocated
against the projected demand of ` 29501.34 crore leaving a shortfall of ` 4778.06 crore. The Department
has committed that shortage of funds would not impact the implementation of projects/schemes in the
Health Sector and fiscal discipline would be maintained while utilization of funds and all efforts would
be made to ensure optimum utilization. The Committee, however, is of the view that since there has been
consistent underutilization of funds during the preceding years, the Department should ensure the completion
of administrative pre requisites for the implementation of projects/schemes in a time bound manner and
design an action plan using financial yardsticks to achieve the targets set for the year 2017-18. Also,
stringent monitoring machinery be evolved to keep track of the activities being undertaken within a set
timeline. (Para 1.1, 1.2 & 1.3)
Action Taken
2.4 NCD :The suggestion given by the Committee noted.
42

43
PMSSY
(` in crore)
Projection of estimate 2017-18 Actual allocation 2017-18 Shortfall in allocation
Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital T otal
1562.95 3935.00 5497.95 1355.00 2620.00 3975.00 207.95 1315 1522.95
2.5 There is no debilitating shortfall with respect to Budgetary demand and Budgetary provision. The
budgetary demands were submitted after careful consideration of projected demands. However, the
allocation is more or less sufficient to meet the demands without any major shortfall. If any shortfall
at later stage is detected then demand for further funds will be submitted.
Recommendation/Observation
2.6 From the information furnished by the Department about the extent of expenditure vis-a-vis allocations
made in BEs and REs for 2015-16 and 2016-17 under different schemes, the attention of the Committee
has been drawn towards the few schemes wherein there has been erratic trend of utilization of funds:
(` in crores)
Schemes 2015-16 2016-17
B E A E % of AE B E A E % of AE
w.r.t BE w.r.t. BE
PMSSY 2206.00 1577.83 71.52 2450.00 1402.08** 57.23
CNCI 67.00 37.00 55.22 70.00 12.50* 17.86
RIP ANS, Aizwal 65.00 29.00 44.62 75.00 28.60** 38.13
FSSAI 72.00 54.88 76.22 72.00 30.01** 41.68
CDSCO 122.50 76.86 62.74 184.70 63.20* 34.22
NOTP 10.00 06.35 63.50 15.00 03.00** 20.00
Development of 13.00 01.03 07.92 06.00 01.74** 29.00
Nursing Services
* upto 5th January, 2017.
** upto 2nd Feb., 2017.
2.7 As regards PMSSY; RIP ANS, Aizwal; FSSAI; CDSCO, the percentage of expenditure with respect
to BE has been reduced in 2016-17 as compared to the year 2015-16. As regards CNCI and NOTP there
has been a drastic reduction in utilization of allocated funds. For Development of Nursing Services, no
marked improvement is seen. The Committee would like to know the reasons for the flaws in planning
and the corrective steps taken by Department to improve its budgetary analysis. (Para 1.12 & 1.13)

44
Action Taken
2.8 Nursing : Under the scheme of Development of Nursing Services, an amount of ` 6.00 cr. was
earmarked as BE 2016-17. Out of allocated fund, an amount of ` 1.84 cr. was released. The rest of fund
could not be released due to pending Utilisation Certificates from the State Government and instructions
of DoE OM dated 14th September, 2012 where it is mentioned that no funds will be released, if the UCs
is pending under any scheme of the Ministry. However, this Ministry has asked the State Government
time and again for early submission of pending Utilisation Certificates, so that further funds can be
released.
2.9 FSSAI: FSSAI had an unspent balance of `23.69 cr. as on 1.4.2016. Accordingly, while releasing
funds to FSSAI during 2106-17, as a practice, the said unutilised amount, was adjusted while releasing
funds to FSSAI upto December, 2016. However, subsequently, having regard to the expenditure made
by FSSAI, total fund amounting to ` 59.61 Cr* was released to FSSAI during 2016-17. Accordingly,
as against ` 83.30 Cr. comprising of grant of `59.61 cr. released during the year 2016-17 + unspent
balance of year 2015-16 i.e. ` 23.69 Cr., an expenditure of ` 76.95 cr. (Provisional) was made in
2016-17.
2.10 CNCI: The building work for second campus of CNCI is in progress and likely to be completed
by the September, 2018. So far as CNCI is concerned, during 2016-17 BE and RE was ` 70.00 crore
(Plan ` 50 Cr. and Non-plan ` 20 Cr.) and expenditure was ` 47.72 crore under Plan Head and `20cr
under Non-Plan head. Hence total expenditure was 96.74% of the BE/RE. Saving of ` 2.29 crore of
CNCI was got re-appropriated from Ministry of Finance for NPCDCS (TCCC Health component).
Hence, 100% funds of CNCI was utilised during 2016-17.
2.11 CDSCO: In so far as CDSCO is concerned, the percentage of expenditure with respect to Budget
Estimates reduced during year 2016-17 as compared to the year 2015-16 due to following reasons:
1. An amount of `105.70 crores had been allocated in the year 2016-17 for Revenue Expenditure
(Major Head-2210) of DSCO. However, Budget allocation was reduced to `73.50 crores only
in the Revised Estimates 2016-17 by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and 95% of
allocated budget in Revised Estimates has been incurred during the year 2016-17. Major
reasons for the reduced expenditure under the 'Revenue' head were delay in filling up of posts
of Drug Inspectors, delay in acquiring land for construction of building at Chennai and delay
in availability of land for construction work at Baddi in Himachal Pradesh and Bhubaneswar
in Odisha.
2. An amount of `79.00 crore was allocated during 2016-17 for Capital Expenditure of CDSCO;
`45 crore for major works and `34 crore for procurement of Machinery and Equipment for
upgradation of various Laboratories of CDSCO. V arious construction projects were started
during the financial year 2016-17 but expected expenditure could not be booked mainly due
to delay in the availability of land free of cost from the State Governments/other agencies and
also non-utilization of the allocated amount on the part of CPWD/HITES, the implementing
agencies.
* ` 5 cr. were released to FSSAI on 31.03.2017, but credited into accounts of FSSAI on 6.4.2017.

45
3. The lesser expenditure in NOTP was mainly due to failure of the tenders being non-responsive
or only single bids being received.
SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL AND VARDHMAN MAHA VIR MEDICAL COLLEGE (SJH AND
VMMC), NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
2.12 It was found that the fund allocation in BE was ` 592.00 crore which was further enhanced to
` 918.58 crore but the actual expenditure upto 11/02/2017 remained at ` 494.51 crore, leaving substantial
funds unutilized.
2.13 The Committee is dismayed to observe the considerable amount of unutilized funds in view of
various developmental activities going on at SJH and VMMC as this clearly indicates poor fiscal
planning and execution on the part of the Department leading to a large amount of allotted funds lying
idle, resulting in cost escalation. The Committee recommends that the Department should take corrective
measures to arrest the shortfall in utilization of budgeted funds and monitor the activities being undertaken
to ensure their timely completion. (Para 2.2 & 2.3)
Action Taken
2.14 Enhanced funds of RE stage were not made available for release during 2016-17. The allotted BE
of ` 592.0 cr. was reduced to ` 584 cr. and the actual expenditure was ` 578.81 cr. Funds to the extent
of ` 5.19 Cr. on account of manpower (salary) could not be utilized as New Emergency Block was not
made functional during the year.
Recommendation/Observation
2.15 The Committee is disappointed to note that the creation of additional infrastructure at VMMC is
still on paper and is pending for approvals from concerned authorities. The Committee would like to
know the details of these activities and the progress made in this regard. (Para 2.7)
Action Taken
2.16 The necessary clearance from NDMC has already been obtained. The proposal has been received
from Safdarjung Hospital for obtaining administrative and financial approval of the competent authority.
DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL (RML), NEW DELHI AND PGIMER, DR. RML
HOSPITAL
Recommendation/Observation
2.17 The Committee notes that despite efforts made to fill up the vacant posts at the hospital; vacancies
still exists in various categories which would be having adverse impact on the functioning of the
hospital. The Committee notes with concern the non revision of the Recruitment Rules since 1973-74 and
recommends for immediate revision in context of present day requirements. Also, abolition of the vacant
Group 'C' (Ministerial) category with 96 vacancies posts and erstwhile Group D posts with 415 vacancies
may be considered so that the funds could be utilized to create more technical/para-medical vacancies

46
viz. physiotherapist, occupational therapist, dialysis technician, optometrists, speech pathologist, respiratory
therapists and prosthetic technicians emerging medical technical professionals so as to offer a wider
variety of human resource trained to fulfill present day health care needs. The Committee, therefore, also
recommends that the matter be taken up on priority basis to expedite the administrative procedures and
process of getting approvals so as to step up the efforts to fill up the various posts at the Dr. RML
Hospital. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. To save on the
administrative process, the Committee strongly recommends for a collaborative approach with the Ministry
of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship which is running a successful flagship programme through
the Healthcare Sector Skill Council (HSSC). (Para 3.6)
Action Taken
2.18 The recommendations along with suggestions of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
It is submitted that in an effort to fill up the vacant posts in RML Hospital, the selection and recruitment
in respect of 76 posts which were lying vacant in various categories have been made. These posts
include posts of Physiotherapist, OT Assistant, X-ray Assistant, Occupational Assistant, Audiometry
Assistant and MTS. Further, as suggested by the Committee, proposal for creation of additional posts
in various categories is under pipeline.
2.19 As re gards, revising pending Recruitment Rules (RRs), it is submitted that the draft proposal for
effecting amendments in RRs in various categories have been prepared by the Hospital and are under
consideration/examinations in the Dt.GHS/Ministry. The finalisation of these RRs would require consultation
and approval from other Departments/Organisation like DoPT, UPSC, Department of Law, Department
of Expenditure, Ministry of Law and Justice, etc. which would be taken up expeditiously.
2.20 So far as creation of various technical/paramedical vacancies by abolishing groups C and D posts
since lying vacant, it is submitted that 48 categories of erstwhile group D staff have been merged into
8 broad categories for which draft RRs have also been prepared and is under examination. With regards
to other technical posts, the proposals are under examination in the hospital.
2.21 As regards initiative under skill development programme, it is mentioned that RML hospital has
started Medical Record Technician Training Course for a duration of 6 months and first batch has already
been passed out. Candidates for the second batch have been recruited. Further, in order to supplement
the availability of technical manpower, the Hospital has also started various training courses for laboratory
technicians, M.Phil (Psychology), OT technicians, etc. in collaboration with other colleges.
LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE (LHMC)
Recommendation/Observation
2.22 The Committee has observed that 53 faculty posts are vacant out of the sanctioned strength of 298.
As regard the vacancies in other categories like technical and non-technical, the Department has informed
that the matter is under consideration of DGHS. In Nursing Cadre, out of 831 sanctioned posts, 320 posts
are vacant in various categories. The Committee is concerned to note such a huge gap in the nursing
workforce and its likely impact on the functioning of the hospital. Although vacancies in faculty posts
are less but any extent of shortfall in faculty and other staff would overburden the existing workforce.
The Committee strongly recommends for a collaborative approach with the Ministry of Skill Development

47
and Entrepreneurship which runs a successful flagship programme under the Healthcare Sector Skill
Council (HSSC) for meeting paramedical/technical manpower requirements. (Para 4.8)
Action Taken
2.23 For filling up vacant posts of teaching sub-cadre, requisition were/have been sent to UPSC and on
the basis of recommendation received from UPSC, candidates have been given offer of appointment.
Joining of many of them is awaited. In some specialties, the recommendations of UPSC is under process
and the recommended candidates shall be offered the posts in due course. Recommendations in some
specialties are awaited. With these steps, incumbency position is likely to improve in future. Pending
filling up of the posts on regular, Institutes have been authorized to fill up posts on contractual basis.
However, the position regarding the incumbency vis-a-vis sanction strength in various categories is given
in the Table below:
Name of Sanctioned Inposition V acant              Remarks Abolished
the post Strength
Faculty 301 243 58 Meanwhile, MoHFW  has  approved filling
of the vacant posts on contract  basis, till
the regular a ppointment to the vacant posts
is made. The Institution has conducted the
interview for the selection of  Asstt. Prof.
(Faculty)  for   50   posts   in   various
departments. The process for appointment
on  contract  basis  has been started and
will be completed shortly.
Nursing
Personnel 831 503 319 Pending regular appointment against vacant 09
posts as indicated in column 4, 266 Staff
Nurse have been appointed on contractual
basis.
Paramedical 19 11 08 08
staff and Non-
Technical Post
Technical Posts 299 100 199 Proposal for revision of  recruitment rules 40
in under consideration. 13 Lab Technicians
(including  Blood  Bank  Technicians & 3
Dark  Room  Assistants)  are working on
contract  basis.  Institute  has been given
approval  to  fill  the  posts  of  41  OT
Technicians,  17  Lab  Assistants, 37 Lab
Technicians & 5 Radiographers on contract
basis. The process of their recruitment is
in final stage.

48
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS), NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
2.24 As regard the updated status of Burns Unit at JPNATC, the Department has stated that the work
has been awarded to L1 bidder on 25th May, 2016. The Committee notes that matter has been hanging
fire since last 2 years and no forward movement has taken place. The Committee is apprehensive that
if this is the pace of progress, the project may not be initiated even during the financial year 2017-18
unless the issue is taken up at a higher level. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Department should firm up all pre and post-project approvals and ensure that the project is initiated
before the end of this financial year. (Para 5.6)
Action Taken
2.25 As regards the status of Burn & Plastics Surgery unit at JPNATC, the work commenced at site
on 13th February, 2017 and 7% progress has already been made.
NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND MEDICAL
SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG
Recommendation/Observation
2.26 The Committee is constrained to note the huge shortage of staff and feels that this would eventually
cripple the functioning of the Institute while over burdening the existing workforce. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should take up this matter on a priority basis and fill up the
posts at the earliest. (Para 8.5)
Action Taken
2.27 The Institute is making all efforts to fill up the remaining vacant posts. The present status of
recruitment of Faculty, Group A, B & C posts are as under.
A. Recruitment of Faculty:
2.28 The Institute floated an advertisement in May 2016 inviting applications for the following 61 (sixty
one) faculty posts advertised vide Advertisement No. NEIGR-E.II/19/2004/Pt. XVI. The last date for
submission of application was 30.6.2016. In response to the advertisement issued by the Institute, a total
of 56 (fifty six) applications were received till 30.06.2016. The Screening Committee constituted to
screen the applications met on 26.10.2016 and shortlisted 42 (forty two) eligible applicants for faculty
posts.
2.29 The interviews for Faculty posts of NEIGRIHMS were held on 2 (two) phases i.e. 1st phase on
19th & 20th December 2016 and 2nd phase on 13th February 2017 at ICMR, New Delhi which was
conducted by the Standing Selection Committee for Group 'A' of the Institute.
2.30 Altogether 23 (twenty three) candidates (including 7 in waiting list) were recommended by the
Standing Selection Committee for appointment to faculty posts in various departments. On completion
of the interview process, the recommendations were submitted to the Ministry of Health & Family

49
Welfare, Govt. of India for obtaining approval of the Hon'ble Minister HFM who is also the appointing
authority for Group A posts in NEIGRIHMS. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare vide letter F. No.
12012/27/2016-NE dated 21.3.2017 & letter No F. No. 12012/27/2016-NE dated 11.4.2017 conveyed the
approval of the competent authority for appointment of the faculty members on obtaining the approval,
the Institute vide Notification No. NEIGR-E.II/19/2004/Pt-XVII-A dated 22.3.2017 & 17.04.2017 declared
the results and offer of appointments were issued to 16 (sixteen) selected candidates. Of the 16 (sixteen)
selected candidates, 12 (twelve) candidates have response to the offer and 3 (three) candidates have not
responded to the offer. Out of 12 (twelve) 3 (three) candidates have joined their posts, 1 (one) candidate
have declined to join, and the remaining selected candidates are expected to join their respective posts
very shortly.
2.31 After all the selected faculty members joined their posts, the remaining vacant posts will be re-
advertised.
B. Recruitment of Group A posts
2.32 The Institute has floated advertisement vide No. NEIGR-E.II/9/2012/Pt dated 29.7.2016 to fill up
the following Group 'A' posts on direct recruitment.
1. Deputy Medical Superintendent  - 1
2. Dental Officer - 2
3. Junior Medical Officer - 1
2.33 In response to the above advertisement, the Institute received 3 (three) applications for the post of
DMS, 51 (fifty one) applications for Dental Officer and 2 (two) applications for JMO. Screening of
applications for the post of Dental Officer has been completed and 32 (thirty two) applicants were found
eligible for the post. In respect of the post of DMS, no candidates fulfill the eligibility criteria for the
post. Screening for the post of JMO is under process.
2.34 In January 2017, the Institute also floated advertisement vide No. NEIGR-E.II/9/2012/Pt to fill up
1 (one) Group 'A' post of Executive Engineer (Electrical) on direct recruitment. In response to the
advertisement a total of 31 (thirty one) applications were received. Screening of applications is under
process.
2.35 After completion of the screening process, the Institute will conduct the interview for the above
Group A posts tentatively in the month of May-June 2017.
2.36 The Institute had also issued an advertisement vide No. NEIGR.E.II/9/2012/Pt dated 02.3.2017 to
fill up the following Group A posts reserved for Persons With Disabilities (PWDs) on direct recruitment.
The last date for submission of applications was 04.04.2017.
1. Dental Officer - 1 (HH)
2. Statistical Officer - 1 (VH)
3. Medical Physicist - 1 (PH)

50
2.37 Till the closing date of applications, no applications were received from applicants belonging to
Persons With Disabilities (PWDs) category. The posts are under process to be re-advertised.
2.38 The Present Status for Recruitment of Group 'A' posts is enclosed at Annexure - D
C. Recruitment of Senior Resident Doctors and Junior Resident Doctors.
2.39 The Institute is conducting walk-in interviews for recruitment of Senior Resident Doctors and
Junior Resident Doctors at regular intervals. From April 2016 to date, the Institute had conducted 6 (six)
walk-in interviews. Altogether 28 (twenty eight) Senior Resident Doctors and 101 (one hundred one)
Junior Resident Doctors were recommended by the Selection Committees during the above period.
2.40 At present there are 71 (seventy one) Senior Resident Doctors and 70 (seventy) Junior Resident
Doctors in position as on date.
2.41 The next walk-in interview for recruitment of Senior Resident Doctors and Junior Resident Doctors
will tentatively be held in the month of May 2017, to enable the Institute to fill up the remaining vacant
posts of Senior Resident Doctors & Junior Resident Doctors.
D. Recruitment of Group B posts
2.42 The Present Status for Recruitment of Group 'B' posts is enclosed at  Annexure-E.
E. Recruitment of Group C posts
2.43 The Present Status for Recruitment of Group 'C' post is enclosed at Annexure-F.
SERA AND VACCINE MANUFACTURING UNITS
Recommendation/Observation
2.44 The Committee notes that the public sector vaccine manufacturing units are established to supply
quality vaccines for the Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) of the Government of India. The
production capacity of these units is barely able to meet the requirement of the programme. The Committee
is dismayed to note that the production of yellow fever vaccine has been suspended in CRI Kasauli since
2012. The Committee notes with concern that a premier vaccine manufacturing unit like the CRI has
been relegated to the sidelines by stopping its production on one ground or the other. The Committee is
appalled at this state of affairs which ultimately led to our dependency on private vaccine manufacturers
for meeting the demand for vaccine under UIP . The Committee also notes that once GMP specifications
to manufacture DPT vaccine were achieved by CRI Kasauli, it is being replaced by Pentavalent Vaccine.
(Para 11.5)
Action Taken
2.45 Once the public sector vaccine manufacturing units are made fully operational it would meet
considerable requirement of UIP for DPT group of vaccine and BCG vaccine. This will reduce dependency
on private manufacturing units thereby strengthen the vaccine security of the country. There were
various factors behind suspension of production of yellow fever vaccine (YFV) in CRI, Kasauli. The
financial implication to revive the YFV facility under cGMP compliance is estimated at ` 129 crore (this

51
excludes the manpower costs and other expenses which is requires to make the facility functional). The
annual requirement of YFV in country, in cost term is approximately ` 1.37 crore. In view of extensive
investment in reviving the facility vis-a-vis quantum of vaccine requirement, it is not financially prudent
to revive the facility currently. Various steps have been taken by the Department to upgrade the facilities
in CRI, Kasauli after revocation of suspension of manufacturing license in 2010. There is also emphasis
to make the Anti-sera facility (anti-snake venom, Rabies etc.) cGPM compliant which will cost about
`176 crore and the proposal has already been initiated to revive the same.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF BIOLOGICAL (NIB)
Recommendation/Observation
2.46 The Committee undertook an in depth analysis of the increasing dependence of NIB on budgetary
support even though when NIB was expected to generate 80% of its recurring expenditure from internal
resources. The Committee is concerned to note the ever increasing requirement of budgetary support to
NIB specifically during the last five years. The Committee is of the opinion that NIB is exceeding its
mandate by duplicating the work done by CDL Kasauli resulting in wastage of scarce public funds as
CDL Kasauli is already engaged in the testing of vaccines, sera, solution of serum proteins for injections,
toxins, antigens, anti toxins, surgical ligatures, bacteriophages and oral vaccines. The Committee
recommends for greater scrutiny of the functioning of NIB by ICMR specifically in context of its role
and achievements in the area of research. The Committee is also concerned to note the involvement of
private sector vaccine manufacturers in the general body of the NIB and recommends for suitable
amendments in the NIB bye laws so that there is no involvement of private sector vaccine or biological
manufacturer. The Committee recommends for NIB to ensure that there is no duplication in the setting
up of laboratories/testing infrastructure with the already existing facilities available within the same
ministry. The Committee also recommends that NIB should adhere to its original mandate instead of
trying to be another regulator . (Para 11.7.2)
Action Taken
2.47 The National Institute of Biologicals is an autonomous body under the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare. The Institute has two Policy Making Bodies viz; the General Body and the Governing Body. Both
the Bodies inter alia , include DG, ICMR (Now Secretary, DHR and DG, ICMR) as their member. The
powers and functions of both these bodies have also been laid down in the Bye-Laws. In its 26th meeting
held on 19.12.2016, the Governing Body of the NIB has decided that NIB will take up R&D activities
in various emerging/frontier areas like Proteomics, Glyco-biology, Genomics, Molecular Diagnostics,
Newer Diagnostics and Technological Platforms for research and preparation of National Reference
Standards for biologicals. Further action in pursuance of this is being taken by the Institute.
2.48 NIB will take up R&D activities in the specified fields. It will be ensured that NIB does not
undertake activities already being taken up by ICMR and NIB and ICMR collaborate and cooperate with
each other in all areas wherever, it is feasible.
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS)
Recommendation/Observation
2.49 The Committee is surprised to note that after year 1985-86, no regular AYUSH facility has been
added to CGHS. However, the Committee appreciates that the Department has taken up this matter with

52
Ministry of AYUSH. But still, no concrete action has been taken. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department should firm up and complete the proposal regarding strengthening of infrastructure
facility, manpower, and maintenance of AYUSH facility in CGHS. (Para 12.6)
Action Taken
2.50 Comments of Hon'ble committee are noted. CGHS is in the process of preparing a comprehensive
proposal for consideration of competent authority.
Recommendation/Observation
2.51 The Committee notes that many hospitals have de-empanelled themselves from CGHS. The Committee
is of the view that the de-panelment of some very good CGHS approved Hospitals is a major cause of
concern and inconvenience to the CGHS patients. The Committee observes that the de-empanelment of
these Hospitals is mainly due to non-settlement of their dues by the Government. The recent decision of
the Department to allow online processing by UTI-TSL is a welcome step but it needs to be regulated
and checked from time-to-time for desired results. The Committee also recommends introduction of a
dedicated CGHS wing in all Government Hospitals and also to ensure that there should be CGHS
empanelled hospital in each district of the country. It also recommends putting in place an effective
mechanism of quality assurance of the drugs supplied through CGHS. (Para 12.9)
Action Taken
2.52 CGHS has not depanelled many Hospitals. Even now many hospital and diagnostic centres seek
empanelment under CGHS. More than ` 450 crore have been paid to empanelled hospitals during
2016-17. The payments are regularly monitored by Senior officers and periodic review meetings are held
in this regard. Most of the Government hospitals are under control of State Government and they are
already overwhelmed with general patients. Hospitals are empanelled only in cities covered under CGHS.
In non CGHS covered areas Government empanels private hospitals under CS (MA) Rules.
CENTRAL DRUGS STANDARD CONTROL ORGANISATION (CDSCO)
Recommendation/Observation
2.53 The Committee would like to draw attention of the Government to its 93rd Report on the DFG
(2016-17) wherein the status of vacancies in CDSCO has been reflected in Table No. 30. The Committee
recommends for immediate filling up of vacancies in CDSCO especially in context of the enhanced role
as a regulatory body for medical devices consequent to the recent notification of Medical Devices Rules
2017 which shall come into force w.e.f. 01/01/2018. The Committee is concerned to note that the topmost
head of CDSCO i.e the DCG(I) continues to function in a very adhoc manner with additional charge.
The Committee strongly recommends for a suitable full time DCG (I) and also would like to be updated
about the status of action taken in this regard. The Committee recommends for a quarterly update on
the progress made in the strengthening of the drug regulatory framework, vacancy position and engagement
of a full time DCG (I). The Committee suggests that the entire regulatory framework for regulating the
Medical Device industry should be in place in CDSCO before 1st January, 2018. (Para 13.4)

53
Action Taken
2.54 As a result of a number of steps taken by the Ministry, a large number of vacancies have since
been filled up and as on date, against 454 sanctioned posts excluding those which have been declared
as dying cadre, 362 officials, are already, in position. In many other cases, the appointment formalities
are being completed. In all other cases, recruitment process has been initiated. The appointment of full
time DCGI is pending as the matter regarding Recruitment Rules for the post of DCGI has been
challenged and a stay order has been issued by Hon'ble Madras High Court. The recommendation of the
Committee regarding putting in place the framework for regulating medical devices has been noted and
all required steps are being taken for the purpose.
PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHAYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY)
Recommendation/Observation
2.55 The Committee observes that there has been a shortfall in the utilization of the budgeted funds
majorly in 2016-17. Out of allocated funds of 
` 2450.00 only ` 1586.00 crore has been utilised upto
14.02.17. With multiple project related activities in pipeline, the funds remaining unutilized shows
imprudent attitude of the Department in financial planning vis-a-vis physical targets. Had the Department
paid heed to the Committee's earlier recommendations, the achievement at the end of the 12th Five Year
Plan would have been different. It has been noted that six AIIMS in the Phase I are still underway and
are at various stages of their completion and it would take some time to make them fully functional with
regard to construction of medical college, hospital complex, residential complex, electrical services, estate
services and procurement of equipments. This indicates poor assessment of time and cost by the Department
that has left the funds unused. (Para 15.3)
Action Taken
2.56 The recommendation of the Departmental Parliamentary Standing Committee are always considered
with high regards and suitably incorporated for faster execution of the project. However, iInitially, there
were many unforeseen contractual Issues and Project consultants (PC) at several sites had abandoned
work. In absence of Project Consultants some disputes and issues at site with contractors also arose
leading to slowing of pace of execution of works. The issue has been resolved now by engaging the
M/s. HITES and M/s. HSCC as Project Consultant. Substantial decision making power like EoT, Variation,
Deviation, RA Bill matters etc. have been delegated to respective AIIMS to simplify the process so as
to expedite completion of works. At present work is going at good pace and expected to be substantially
completed and all health services functional in the current financial year.
Recommendation/Observation
2.57 On the perusal of the reply furnished by the Department regarding the reasons for delay and the
measures taken to remedy the situation in PMSSY, the Committee finds that there is no tangible progress
and the status remains the same as was reported earlier to the Committee. The Committee, therefore, is
of the view that had the Department taken steps to seriously monitor the performance of the committees
formed at local level, tangible progress would have taken place in the completion of Phase I and II.
Keeping in view the status of six AIIMS in Phase I & II, the Committee recommends that the Department

54
should strive towards concluding the civil and up gradation work at all the six AIIMS like Institutions
under Phase I & II for making them fully operational so that the focus of the Department can be shifted
on the activities pertaining to Phase III & IV of PMSSY. Completion of Phase I & II brooks no delay
and year 2017-18 should see the institutes functioning. (Para 15.6)
Action Taken
2.58 Several corrective process and stringent monitoring mechanism have been implemented to adhere
to projected timeline like:
Keeping involvement of Ministry at bare minimum to expedite decision making process by Executing
Agencies, Procurement Support Agent and respective institutes. Creation of Dashboard to strengthen
online monitoring, appointment of faculty, Doctors, Nurses and Supporting staff are also being
expedited to make the Institutes fully functional as soon as possible. The Ministry is making every
possible effort to complete the remaining works of 6 AIIMS and upgradation projects linked to
Phase I and II of PMSSY.
Recommendation/Observation
2.59 The Committee is distressed to note that the tendering process in almost all PMSSY process has led
to a situation where projects remain incomplete. Besides this, the Ministry in itself lacks the expertise
to execute such projects. The Committee recommends that large hospital projects be handled by reputed
companies with a past track record of on time and quality delivery. The Committee is of the opinion that
to tackle the issue of L1 rates in tenders reputed companies may be roped in on the same terms and
transfer prices as quoted by the in-house agencies. (Para 15.7)
Action Taken
2.60 Since the Ministry lacks the expertise to establish infrastructure projects, the projects are now being
implemented through Executing Agencies. Further a panel of Executive Agencies (PSUs having good
experience in constructing hospitals) has been formed and the works are now being assigned to them
fully empowering them to take decisions on all contractual matters. As per the decision taken by cabinet
in the recent approvals of AIIMS, the global competitive bids for design and architecture are called by
Executing Agency to get best international design practices while ensuring that local flavour/architecture
in design and architecture is maintained.
Recommendation/Observation
2.61 The Committee observes that out of 305 sanctioned faculty posts at each of these AIIMS, not even
half are filled up in any of these Institutes. As regards the non-faculty posts, the no of posts filled on
regular basis is pathetically poor. At Jodhpur and Rishikesh, out of sanctioned strength of 3776, no
regular posts are filled and contractual arrangements have been done by filling 98 and 174 posts,
respectively. The Committee feels that infrastructure and manpower go hand in hand for running of any
institute/hospital successfully. A sound mix of manpower from all areas of expertise and fields including
faculty, paramedical, technicians and support staff are required for all the Institutes. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should fill up the sanctioned posts under all categories at the
earliest so that a permanent and adequate manpower is in place in a premier institute like AIIMS. The

55
Committee would also like to voice its concern regarding the students who have joined the courses and
are suffering due to shortage of faculty and non-faculty staff. (Para 15.10)
Action Taken
2.62 Recruitment to various positions is done on need basis keeping in view the additional services and
facilities planned to be added in the hospitals. Vacant faculty posts are being advertised regularly by the
Institutes depending on their requirement. However, as high standards have to be maintained in selection,
keeping in view the stature of these Institutes of National Importance, all the advertised positions could
not be filled up. Institute wise details of vacant posts of Faculties against the sanctioned posts are given
in Annexure-G. Various positions of Senior Resident and Junior Resident are also advertised and filled
up on need basis by the respective AIIMS. The position of vacant posts of Senior Residents and Junior
Residents is given in Annexure-H.
2.63 To facilitate expeditious filling up of vacancies, separate Standing Selection Committee (SSCs) have
been constituted for each of the aforesaid six AIIMS. The upper age limit for direct recruitment against
the posts of Professor and Additional Professor in the six AIIMS has been raised from the present 50
years to 58 years. This will make available experienced willing faculty of various Government Medical
Colleges where the retirement age is 58/60 years. Contractual appointment of Faculty is also permitted
as a stop gap arrangement. All the six AIIMS have been advised to take up another drive to fill up
vacancies of faculty and Doctors. Presently all the vacant faculty positions totalling 1285 in the six
AIIMS have been advertised.
NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL ORGANISATION (NACO)
Recommendation/Observation
2.64 The Committee observes that funding from external sources has contributed substantially in supporting
the National AIDS Control and Support Programme interventions. But in the light of global economic
slowdown, external funding for the Programme is certain to shrink considerably and there is, therefore,
an imperative need to balance the financing strategy of NACP IV by way of generating more funds from
domestic sources so that the reach of existing NACP Interventions is sustained and the cost of clinical
care and treatment to people living with HIV is provided for. Though the recent HIV estimates highlight
an overall reduction in HIV prevalence, there are significant inter-state variations and some States like
Maharashtra, Chandigarh, and Tamil Nadu have shown estimated adult prevalence greater than the
national average (i.e. 0.26 %). Besides HIV epidemic due to MSM, transgender, migration and IDU are
being identified in greater number across the country and hence pose enormous challenges. Taking all
these facts into consideration, the Committee lends its support to the Department's demand for additional
funds and recommends that an additional amount of 
` 400.00 crore be allocated for NACO for
2017-18. (Para 17.11)
Action Taken
2.65 NACO will place the demand for additional funds in Supplementary Demands for allocation of more
funds as the allocation under BE 2017-18 is of ` 2000.00 crore against projected BE of ` 2466.00 crore.
To implement the activities envisaged under National AIDS and STD Control Programme certainly more
funds are required. Further statutory liabilities like payment of Duties and Taxes on ARV drugs and EPF
contribution for the eligible contractual staff of the SACS is also to be accommodated within this 2000.00
crore.

56
CHAPETER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 The Committee's attention has been drawn to media reports stating that India ranks very low on
basic health parameters as around 400 million people do not have access to essential health services with
the problem becoming acute in rural India. Health care in India continues to be a major challenge even
when compared to many developing nations as India has just over 0.9 hospital beds per 1,000 people,
which is abysmally low when compared to the world average of around 4 hospital beds per 1,000 people
which is a pointer to the inadequate public health system. These gross deficiencies in health infrastructure
and qualified health care providers are result of low spending on the health sector for decades. Public
health care facilities do not cover the country extensively and most of them are poorly equipped and
understaffed, while a few relatively better ones are overcrowded with the problem getting aggravated by
non-availability of secondary or tertiary care ser vices in rural areas. National Sample Survey numbers
show a decrease in the use of public hospitals over the past two decades. More than half of Indian's
rural population depends upon private healthcare, which is four times as expensive as public healthcare.
Also, the shortage of expert medical professionals in public health centers has arisen posing another
challenge to the Indian health care sector. It would also be pertinent to mention here that the expenditure
in healthcare technology is considerably low in India and hospitals in India need to increase their
spending on technology upgradation considerably to provide for improved patient-centric services.
Investment in Indian healthcare sector is the need of the hour alongwith appropriate audit and financial
monitoring, capacity building and judicious resource allocations. The Committee is of the view that the
health sector should get substantially more allocations and, therefore, the Committee strongly recommends
the Department to approach the Ministry of Finance with their proper planning and synergized action
plans to seek enhanced allocations in coming years. (Para 1.4)
Action Taken
NCD :
3.2 The achievements of the National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes,
Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS) in the last two years are as follows:
1. Infrastructure Status Till Date:
State NCD Cell 36
District NCD Cells 377
District NCD Clinics 367
56

57
Cardiac Care Units (CCU) 124
District Day Care Centres 71
CHC NCD Clinics 2,072
2. Summary of Screening
Total Screened Diabetic Hypertensive
6.41 crore 52.98 lakh 64.5 lakh
3. Along with different forms of media, social media  is also being used to generate awareness about
prevention and control of NCDs. To leverage mobile technology, an application called mDiabetes has
been launched to generate awareness, to promote adherence of treatment and to inculcate healthy habits
among the masses with special focus on target groups.
4. Two studies have been commissioned with the Indian Council of Medical Research for undertaking
surveillance and monitoring of burden of diseases and for survey on prevalence of risk factors of NCDs.
PMSSY:
3.3 To bridge the deficit of population vis healthcare ratio PMSSY has embarked on setting up of 20
AIIMS and upgradation of 73 Government Medical College and Institutions (GMCIs). At this point of
time, 6 AIIMS are operational, each having 42 Specialties/Super Specialties and sanctioned bed strength
of 960 beds per AIIMS out of which all Major Super Specialities are functional to varied extent &
operational bed strength per AIIMS is mentioned as under:
Statistics of May, 2017
Name of Institute Total number Average OPD Major surgery Number of Number of
of surgeries attendance performed IPD Patients Beds
performed per day
during the
month
AIIMS Raipur 212 668 122 437 400
AIIMS Patna 305 1037 227 344 150
AIIMS Jodhpur 555 1910 454 1092 400
AIIMS Rishikesh 346 1406 286 934 416
AIIMS Bhubaneswar 1602 1628 570 1469 546
AIIMS Bhopal 122 1145 81 373 307
3.4 Further, each AIIMS has 100 seats of MBBS from 2012 and 60 seats of Nursing from 2013
onwards.
3.5 Further 13 more AIIMS are coming up which will substantially add bed capacity, MBBS and
Nursing intake, Super Speciality Facilities etc.

58
3.6 As far as upgradation of Govt. Medical Colleges are concerned there have been addition of nearly
3880 beds including 106 ICU Beds in Phase I and II of PMSSY .
3.7 In Phase III concerning upgradation of 39 Govt. Medical Colleges around 7147 beds and 2379 ICU/
Emergency beds are scheduled to be added.
3.8 Operationalisation of all projects under PMSSY  i.e. 20 AIIMS and upgradation of 73 Govt. Medical
Colleges will substantially alter the current health facility scenario in the country.
3.9 Apart from addition of Beds and Super Specialities these AIIMS and upgraded Govt. Medical
Colleges will substantially add to qualified Medical Healthcare personnel in the country. Including Delhi
AIIMS, the total output of all functional six AIIMS is 700 MBBS Graduates and above 400 Nurses per
year. This will get augmented further when all AIIMS become operational.
Further Recommendation
3.10 The Committee is not entirely satisfied with the achievements listed out by the Department
with respect to NPCDCS and PMSSY. India is called the diabetes capital of the world with 50
million people suffering from type-2 diabetes and 30 million heart patients in the country as per
media reports. Similarly, around 2.5 million people are suffering from cancer as per the statistics
of National Institute of Cancer, Prevention and Research (NICPR), an institute under ICMR.
Keeping in view the large number of people being affected by such diseases, the Committee feels
that a lot more needs to be done under the NPCDCS. The Committee would like to highlight that
the main objectives of this Programme are health promotion and prevention, early diagnosis and
disease management providing support for diagnosis and cost effective treatment at primary,
secondary and tertiary levels of health care system, support for development of database of NCDs
through a robust surveillance system and to monitor NCD morbidity, mortality and risk factors.
Therefore, the focus of the Department should also be on research and development in this area
and more studies should be commissiond with ICMR so that the reasons for occurrence of such
diseases and their effective management could be done. Further, the scheme needs to be popularized
so that timely, affordable and accurate diagnosis/treatment is given to the patients suffering
from it.
3.11 The Committee takes note of the fact that the Government has targeted to set up 13 more
AIIMS apart from the six AIIMS set up in the first phase. The Committee is, however, constrained
to note that six AIIMS at Rishikesh, Bhubaneswar, Bhopal, Jodhpur, Raipur and Patna are still
not operational fully due to several reasons like-vacant faculty posts, inadequate and incomplete
development of infrastructure, number of functioning departments quite less compared to
sanctioned ones, lack of quality teaching, non-functional blood bank and emergency and casualty
services, lack of pathology, pharmacology services etc. At a time when the Department should
have been engaged in sorting out issues concerning setting up of 13 more AIIMS, it is still
grappling with these basic issues of six AIIMS set up in the first phase. Building infrastructure
without the appropriate facilities would yield no gains in healthcare facilities of the country. The
Committee is, therefore, of the firm view that efforts need to be made in filling up vacant posts

59
especially faculty posts so as to maintain standard of teaching at the six functional AIIMS outside
Delhi. Also, the provisions of emergency services, blood bank, pathology labs need to be put in
place on a priority basis. The Committee would also like to reiterate that regular monitoring of
the work done under PMSSY needs to be done in order to ensure completion of projects on time.
Recommendation/Observation
3.12 On analysis of the expenditure trends, the Committee finds a substantial mismatch in the financial
projections leading to sub-optimum utilization. The Committee is dismayed to note the casual approach
of the Department in framing the unrealistic financial projections vis-a-vis targets set for the 12th Plan
period. The Committee recommends that the Department undertake a thorough analysis of the fund
requirements for implementation of projects/schemes, identify bottlenecks and reassess them so as to avoid
any under utilization of the allocated funds in future. Besides, there is strong need to prioritize various
projects/schemes so that funds which could be deployed elsewhere do not lapse due to under utilization.
(Para 1.11)
Action Taken
NCD:
3.13 The suggestion given by the committee noted. During the financial year 2016-17 amount allocated
for the NPCDCS (Tertiary care health component) has been utilized 100%. Budget of the CNCI Kolkata
has also been utilized 100%.
PMSSY:
3.14 The under utilisaton of budgetary allocation in case of PMSSY projects can mainly be attributed due
to disputes arising out of contractual and procurement related matters which cannot be factored in at
the time of projection of demands. However over time, these issues have been streamlined and percentage
of utilization of funds is showing a steady increase indicating better fiscal management. Also the gross
fund utilization showing quantum leap over last three years is brought out below :
Year Allocation/Budget Utilization Percentage w.r.t. % increasse w.r.t.
Estimates (B.E) Allocation previous year
2014 - 15 1456 812.39 55.80
2015 - 16 2206 1578.12 71.54 94.26
2016 - 17 2450 1953.3 79.73 23.77
Further Recommendations
3.15 The Committee observes that though there is improvement is utilization of budgeted funds
for PMSSY over the years, yet the fact remains that the Actual Expenditure incurred during
2015-2016 and 2016-17 was ````` 1578.12 crore and ````` 1953.30 crore respectively which is less than
the BE of the respective years viz. ````` 2206.00 crore and ````` 2450.00 crore respectively. The Committee
would like to remind that these Institutes are of national importance and vital for bridging the

60
gaps in our healthcare system. The Committee is, therefore, dismayed to note the persistent
under-utilization under PMSSY and recommends that the Department resolve all pending issues
hindering utilization of funds proactively and ensure that the issue of under-utilization of budgeted
funds is addressed squarely.
Recommendation/Observation
3.16 The Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute (CNCI), Kolkata, an important Regional Cancer Center
working has been working in the area of biology of cancer particularly oral cancer and uterine cancer
for more than six decades. The Committee is dismayed at the underutilization of funds by CNCI and
recommends that the Institute should draw up a clear roadmap to emerge as a global cancer research
facility and treatment center for the entire Eastern India and streamline its administrative processes which
have been primarily responsible for the underutilization of allocated resources. (Para 1.14)
Action Taken
3.17 To prevent, control and treat Cancer, it is required to create tertiary care facilities with capacity to
do research. CNCI is an institute of its own kind which focuses on research and treatment both. Above
all, development of second campus of CNCI will fulfill much needed requirement of tertiary care in
eastern India. The broad objectives of the scheme include to set up new Hospital block with provision
for 460 beds and all ancillary departments, to enhance Clinical and Translational Research, training &
Human Resource Development in various fields of cancer diagnostics, screening, prevention and control.
Construction of the 2nd Campus of CNCI has been started and fund for the same has been released so
far by the GoI to the tune of ` 96 crore.
Further Recommendation
3.18 The Committee desires to be apprised of the total project cost of development of second
campus at CNCI and the timeline set for its completion.
Recommendation/Observation
3.19 The Committee notes that out of a total 2410 Utilization Certificates in health sector, 66 UCs
pertaining to NACO have been pending for an amount of 
` 303874.58 lakh and ` 6237.44 lakhs
respectively with the oldest pending UCs dating back to 1993-94. The Committee also notes that during
DFG 2016-17, the Department had furnished that the oldest UCs dates back to 2005-06 with an amount
of 
` 67.40 crore involved therein. The Committee takes serious exception to the manner in which the
information is furnished to the Committee and impresses upon the Department to provide correct and
factual information. The Committee is deeply concerned about the huge amount of funds involved therein
as this would adversely impact the implementation of the various schemes and developmental projects.
The Committee appreciates the Department's efforts in implementing PFMS and is hopeful that with this,
pendency of UCs would come down and funds can be utilized appropriately. The Committee also suggests
that having an exercise of continuous monitoring of the performance of PFMS to find gaps, if any, in
the implementation of this software may also be evolved. The Committee would like to be apprised in
this regard on a regular basis. (Para 1.20)

61
Action Taken
3.20 The reply is given as Annexure I, J and K
Further Recommendations
3.21 The Committee observes that 2415 UCs amounting to ````` 31,950,311,324 remains unliquidated.
The Committee while expressing its strong displeasure at such state of affairs would expect the
Department to accomplish the liquidation of pending UCs in a stipulated time period and apprise
the Committee about the same. Also, the Committee would like to be updated on the performance
of the PFMS in reducing the pendency of UCs and the challenges faced by the Department in
working with PFMS, if any.
SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL AND VARDHMAN MAHA VIR MEDICAL COLLEGE (SJH AND
VMMC), NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
3.22 On the issue of the vacancy positions in SJH & VMMC, the Committee notes that out of sanctioned
strength of 5457 posts under various categories, 1543 posts are lying vacant. In Group A & B categories,
out of 3408 sanctioned posts, 1015 posts are lying vacant. The Committee is aware of the fact that
Safdarjung Hospital witnesses a huge number of OPD patients and with such heavy patient load along
with persistent shortage of workforce, the smooth functioning of the hospital is bound to get affected.
The Committee would like to know the reasons for the persistent shortage of staff and strongly recommends
that the Department should expedite the process of filing up of the vacancies on priority basis.
(Para 2.8)
Action Taken
3.23 As on 01.04.2017, the vacancy position of this hospital is as under:
Group Sanctioned Filled V acant
A 642 419 221
Tenure 877 808 69
B(Gaz) 72 33 39
B(Non-Gaz) 1821 1377 444
C 795 670 125
C (Erst. D) 1247 881 366
Total 5454 4188 1264
3.24 A committee has been constituted under the chairmanship of Medical Superintendent which has
already devised action to fill up of vacant posts in Safdarjung Hospital on priority basis. Against the
vacant post, Safdarjung Hospital has recruited persons on outsourced basis/contract basis till the posts
are filled on regular basis. In addition, 159 posts for Group B (Non-Gazatted) have also been created

62
under Redevelopment Plan of SJH in June 2016 and the same are vacant from amongst the 444 posts.
Since these posts are specifically created for Emergency Block and Super Specialty Block, the action
to fill up these posts could not be initiated earlier till the blocks are operational. As the blocks are expected
to be functional soon, the action to fill up the said posts have already been initiated wherever notified
recruitment rules are available and the same shall be filled shortly on regular basis.
3.25 It is submitted that filling of vacant posts in the hospital is a continuous process and proposals as
and when received from the hospital are considered on priority. For filling up Teaching sub-cadre vacant
posts, requisitions were/have been sent to the UPSC and on the basis of recommendations received from
UPSC, candidates have been given offer of appointment. Joining of many of the candidates is awaited.
In some specialties the recommendations of UPSC is under process and the recommended candidates
shall be offered the posts in due course. Recommendations in some specialties are awaited. With these
steps, incumbency position is likely to improve in future. Pending filling up of the posts on regular,
Institutes have been authorized to fill up posts on contractual basis.
Further Recommendations
3.26 The Committee is surprised to note that a whopping 1264 vacancies exist across various
groups of posts. The Committee in its Report on Demands for Grants has been exhorting the
Department to fill up vacant posts but no appreciable progress has been made in this direction.
If the hospital is functioning without more than one-third of its required manpower, it raises
serious doubts about its performance and standards of care. The Committee, therefore, once
again reiterates that the issue of shortage of manpower at SJH be addressed on a priority basis
and progress made towards filling vacancies across all group/categories be intimated to the
Committee.
Recommendation/Observation
3.27 The Committee notes that Intrauterine Insemination (IUI) is not a time bound procedure and requires
constant monitoring under a team of experts. Given the high incidence of people opting for IVF and
simultaneous mushrooming of IVF centers in private sector, patients are taken for a ride and exploited
in terms of money and physical well being. Therefore, IVF facility in a government set up would certainly
be a boon for childless couples where they can undergo the treatment at a comparatively low cost.
Therefore, strengthening of the IVF lab and making it fully functional should be on utmost priority.
(Para 2.10)
Action Taken
3.28 It is stated that retendering of Technical bid for equipment has already been started and pre-bid
meeting was held on 08.05.2017. For recruitment of Embryologist and Clinical Embryologist on contractual
basis till the permanent posts are filled, these posts have been advertised. General equipments like OT
Table & Pharmaceutical refrigerator have already been purchased.
Further Recommendations
3.29 The Committee is perturbed with the state of affairs at the Safdarjung hospital in setting
up of the IVF unit. Despite Committee's persistent recommendations in its previous 39th, 54th,

63
67th, 82nd & 93rd reports, this project is still far from being a fully functional set up. The
Committee deprecates the Department for inordinate delay in setting up of IVF facility at
Safdarjung hospital. Therefore, the Committee once again recommends the Department to finalize
all pending issues on priority basis and complete this project by the end of this financial year.
Also, the Department should make the concerned authorities accountable for the delay in
operationalization of the project within set timelines.
DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL (RML), NEW DELHI AND PGIMER, DR. RML
HOSPITAL
Recommendation/Observation
3.30 With respect to the ongoing and new projects in Dr. RML Hospital (Annexure A), the Committee
notes that out of 4 projects at Dr. RML Hospital, only the Dharamshala project has been completed and
made operational w.e.f. 5th Jan, 2017. The project of construction of Super Specialty Block, the project
is still at examination stage, Modern Maternal Center is dwelling in process of vacation of land and
the construction of doctors' hostel is waiting for administrative clearances from the competent authorities.
The dates for commencement for these projects have not been decided yet. (Para 3.3)
3.31 The Committee expresses its displeasure at the tardy progress of execution of the above projects and
recommends the Department to identify and resolve the factors responsible for the inordinate delays in
getting departmental approvals and in eviction of land for maternal center at the earliest so as to move
forward in implementing such critical projects as delay in execution of projects would ultimately lead to
time and cost escalations. Therefore, the Committee suggests to the Department to analyze the timeframes
along with deliverables for implementation of the projects so as to avoid financial and physical slippages.
(Para 3.4)
Action Taken
3.32 The updated status of ongoing and new projects is as under:
(A) Doctor's Hostel:  A plan of construction of fully air conditioned Doctors Hostel having 824
rooms for married and unmarried (Male & Female) doctors with parking and Wi-Fi facility has
been approved at an estimated cost of `178.0 crore. In this regard, the contract has been
signed with HSCC. Necessary statutory clearances are being obtained before starting the work
of the project. The construction work is likely to be started shortly. Since this hostel facility
is meant for male and female doctors, there is now no proposal for separate lady doctors'
hostels.
(B) Construction of Super Specialty Block: A proposal has been received from the hospital by
this Department for obtaining the approval of the competent authority.
3.33 Modern Maternal Care Centre: This land measuring 2.01 acre at Old R.K. Ashram Marg is
occupied by the Jhuggies dwellers. An amount of ` 1.83 Cr. has been released to Govt. of NCT for
eviction and resettlement of Jhuggi Dwellers. The matter is being constantly pursued with Govt. of NCT.

64
Further Recommendations
3.34 The Committee notes that the construction of Super Speciality Block is still at proposal
stage. As regards the project of modern maternity care centre, it has been informed that an
amount of ````` 1.83 crore has been released to Government of NCT for eviction and resettlement
of Jhuggi Dwellers and the matter is being constantly pursued with Government of NCT. The
Committee notes that both these projects were proposed in 2010-11 and till date, they have not
seen the light of day. The Committee is dismayed with the slow pace of Department in getting
the pre-requisites completed in case of these two projects and strongly recommends that the
progress of these projects may be reviewed at the highest level in the Department with a view
to remove the stumbling blocks.
LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE (LHMC)
Recommendation/Observation
3.35 On review of the chain of events that occurred at LHMC with respect to the Redevelopment Plan,
the Committee notes that that there must have been cost escalations and wastage of budgeted funds. The
Committee is dismayed to note that the Department has not taken Committee's recommendation in 93rd
report of DFG (2016-17) seriously as under and the project is still hanging fire for approvals even after
a gap of one year.
"The Committee observes that the originally approved cost of the Redevelopment Plan of LHMC
and associated hospitals was 
` 586.49 crore and the project was targeted to be completed by May/
June 2014. But due to breaches of terms and conditions and delay on the part of M/s. Unity
Infraprojects Ltd., the contract has been terminated. Much delay has already taken place and it is,
therefore, imperative on the part of the Department to resolve at the highest level all procedural
and operational matters including approval of cost estimates expeditiously, and execute the
Redevelopment Plan within the approved cost and shortest possible time frame. The Committee also
recommends that a fool-proof mechanism be devised to address operational performance of the
contractor and take appropriate policy decision to address the critical issues concerning the execution
of the Redevelopment Plan. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made towards
executing the Redevelopment Plan." (Para 4.3)
Action Taken
3.36 After termination of the contact with M/S Unity Infraprojects Ltd and forfeiting their bank guarantees,
HSCC was advised by the Ministry to prepare the revised cost estimate for the balance works. The
revised proposal has since been prepared for consideration and obtaining approval of competent authority.
Further Recommendation
3.37 The Committee would like the Department to pursue implementation of the Redevelopment
Plan of LHMC with a sense of urgency and promptitude as much delay has already taken place.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the revised project cost and timeline for
execution of the Redevelopment Plan.

65
Recommendation/Observation
3.38 The Committee is dismayed at the lackadaisical approach of the Department with respect to the
Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan and maintenance work of LHMC and associated hospitals. The
Committee is concerned to note that wrong selection of the company. i.e. M/s Unity Infraprojects and
M/s SAM Buillt (I) is the prime reasons for the delay, cost escalations and execution related difficulties.
This sort of arrangement and consequential delays has been noted in several other projects. In these
circumstances, the Committee recommends that reputed infrastructure companies with a proven track
record should be roped in to execute construction and infrastructure related projects. The Committee also
recommends for blacklisting of the errant companies. The Committee is disappointed to note that as such
no progress has been made in the Redevelopment Plan of the Institute and the likelihood of its completion
in near future seems very bleak. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department
should make all out efforts to complete the procedural issues involved therein and make the concerned
authorities accountable for timely completion of the project. The Committee may be updated of the
progress made in this regard. (Para 4.4)
Action Taken
3.39 The selection of the construction agencies was done by the Project Management Consultant (PMC)
i.e. HSCC through open tender as per established Government guidelines. M/s SAM (India) (P) Ltd. were
selected for construction of residential quarters and the work was completed by the agency in time.
M/s. Unity Infraprojects Ltd. were also selected through open tender for construction of hospital
buildings. However, the agency abandoned the site without completing the project. The revised Cost
Estimate proposal has since been prepared and approval of competent authority is being obtained. Proper
care would be taken in selection of the Executing Agency as per laid down procedure.
Further Recommendations
3.40 The Committee strongly recommends that the project should not get stuck in administrative
and procedural delays. Efforts should be made to expedite the process of getting approvals on
priority basis. The Committee also recommends that the Department should devise a plan of
action considering the available physical and financial resources and set realistic timeframe for
the completion of project. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this
regard.
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS), NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
3.41 On being asked about the vacancies as on date in the Institute, the Department has informed that
at present, 73 Professors and 106 Assistant Professors seats are vacant at the All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi. As regards recruitment process for the posts of Professor, a litigation on
the issue of seniority between the Professors appointed under the mode of Direct Recruitment vis-a-vis
those who were promoted under Assessment Promotion Scheme is pending before the High Court of Delhi.
Unless, the issue of seniority is resolved, the process of filling up of the vacant posts of Professor could

66
not be initiated. However, efforts are constantly being made to fill up the vacant faculty posts of
Assistant Professor. In the year 2016, appointments letters were issued to 85 candidates, out of which,
74 candidates have already joined. Process for filling up the vacant posts of Assistant Professor will be
initiated once the previously recruited candidates join their posts. The Committee notes that though the
number of vacant faculty posts has reduced from 232 to 179 as compared to last year, the Department
needs to put in additional efforts for further reducing the number of vacancies keeping in view the
increasing workload at the Institute. The Committee is of the view that a complete team of paramedical
professionals including technical staff is sine-qua-non for the efficient functioning of any hospital set
up. For a premier institute like AIIMS, gaps in the workforce would definitely affect the smooth running
of the hospital. The Committee therefore recommends that to maintain the status of Institute of national
importance, the Department should strive to plug these gaps in the medical/paramedical sanctioned posts
by expeditious filling up of all vacancies in various categories. A collaborative approach with the
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship may also be considered for manpower requirements.
(para 5.5)
Action Taken
3.42 The Institute is regularly monitoring the vacancy position in various categories and taking action for
filling up of the vacant posts on regular basis. Applications received against 263 posts of various
categories are being scrutinized. The whole process of recruitment would be completed in 3-4 months.
Further Recommendations
3.43 The Committee is alarmed to note that despite its exhortation in the past, the issue of
manpower shortage in the AIIMS has not been addressed so far and seems to have become
endemic which is a matter of serious concern as it has a direct bearing on the quality of care
at the premier Institute which is a boon for poor patients as it offers them treatment, free of
cost. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the manpower shortage at AIIMS be sorted
out in a time bound manner so that the resources available there could be made full use of. The
Committee also desires to be apprised of the updated status of vacancies across all categories of
posts.
POSTGRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES AND RESEARCH (PGI), CHANDIGARH
Recommendation/Observation
3.44 On query regarding vacancy position vis-a-vis sanctioned strength, the Committee notes that nearly
twenty percent seats are vacant in the institute as out of 8771 sanctioned strength under various categories,
1616 posts are lying vacant.
3.45 The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should undertake a time-bound exercise
to fill the vacancies of medical/paramedical/nursing/technical staff. The Committee is of the opinion that
with increasing automation, there is a distinct possibility for reduction in requirement of the administrative
staff and the resources can be channelized in favor of paramedical/technical staff. (para 6.7 & 6.8)

67
Action Taken
3.46 As regards the vacant posts, the Institute is undertaking recruitment of all the vacant posts including
faculty, paramedical, nursing, technical etc. on regular basis. It has already been decided that recruitment
to faculty posts will be undertaken twice a year. Also, the vacancies pertaining to Jr./Sr. Residents etc.
is also undertaken twice a year. Recruitment is an ongoing process and the Institute is taking steps to
recruit the people on all the vacant posts. With the setting/upcoming of the Speciality Centres at present
as well as in future, the requisition of additional staff of all categories including administrative will be
needed. The reduction of posts in any category will adversely affect the functioning of the Institute as
well as patient care at large.
Further Recommendations
3.47 The Committee notes that though the Department has inter alia submitted that 'Recruitment
is an ongoing process and the Institute is taking steps to recruit the people on all the vacant
posts' but has not indicated the headway made towards filling up the vacancies at PGIMER,
Chandigarh. The Committee treats the reply unsatisfactory. The Committee, therefore, desires
to be apprised of the achievement in terms of filling up of vacant posts vis-a-vis sanctioned posts
at PGIMER, Chandigarh during the last one year. The Committee also wishes to be apprised
whether the funds allocated for expected filling up of vacancies have been utilized or not during
the year 2017-18.
REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (RIMS), IMPHAL
Recommendation/Observation
3.48 The Department has informed that the fund allocation of 
` 190.00 crore under Revenue Head in
BE 2017-18 is not as per the projected demand of the Institute which was ` 460.57 crore. The reason
for reduced allocation as compared to ` 269.00 crore during 2016-17 is not known to the Institute. It
has been informed that the allotted fund of ` 190.00 crore under BE 2017-18 will not be sufficient for
the activities at the Institute. Projected salary amount for the year 2017-18 alone is ` 250.01 crore after
taking into account the implementation of 7th Pay Commission recommendations. If the allotted amount
of 
` 190.00 crore under BE 2017-18 is not enhanced, no fund will be available with the Institute for
any expenditure for creation of capital assets and hospital related expenditure. (para 7.1)
Action Taken
3.49 The fund allocation of ` 190.00 crore under Revenue Head in BE 2017-18 is not as per the projected
demand of the institute. The projected demand made by the institute vide letter No. AC-1/Budget/RIMS-
2016 dt. 14/9/2016 was ` 460.57 crore. The institute will propose for adequate fund in the RE stage
to meet the requirements of the Institute.
Recommendation/Observation
3.50 The Committee notes the list of projects and proposed initiatives at the Institute. The work of
construction of PG Gents and Ladies Hostel, Nursing Hostel and Internee Hostel and construction of
OPD Block is at standstill and there has been time and cost overruns too. The present status of work

68
is only 38%. As regards the construction activities for increase of UG seats from 100 to 154, the
Committee is informed that only 5% of the work has been done. The slow progress is due to prolonged
economic blockade in the National Highways of Manipur for the last three months. The Committee was
given to understand that there is no time and cost escalations for this programme. It has also been stated
that no separate funds are allocated for these programmes but expenditure is met from routine Grant-
in-aid provided by the Ministry. (para 7.2)
Action Taken
3.51 NIT has been floated 3 (three) times by HSCC (I) Ltd., Noida for execution of the balance works.
HSCC has sought approval from RIMS, Imphal for floating NIT for the 4th time. HSCC has been
conveyed on 25/4/2017 to float tender again.
Recommendation/Observation
3.52 The Committee feels that the present status of constructional activities at RIMS, Imphal appears
to be worrisome since the work was started in 2012 and the stipulated time of completion was October,
2013. The work was stopped after the agreement between HSCC and the work agency was declared null
and void in March, 2015. This sorry state of affairs indicates a lackadaisical attitude of Department
towards healthcare needs of the North-Eastern Region. The Committee strongly recommends that Department
should take up the matter on priority basis and resolve all the administrative and technical bottlenecks
to resume the projects and complete them in the shortest possible time. Since the funds as per the
projected demand has not been given to the Institute, the Committee is of the view that the ongoing and
proposed initiatives at the Institute would bear the brunt of shortfall of funds. Therefore, the Committee
supports the Department to call for more funds at RE stage to meet the demands of the Institute. The
Committee also advocates for greater coordination with the DONER Ministry so that plan schemes
(capital outlay) for RIMS, Imphal can be supported through Non-lapsable Central Pool of resources
(NLCPR). The Committee is concerned to note the opaque administrative process followed in the
procurement process during the last few years by RIMS, Imphal and strongly recommends for greater
central scrutiny and monitoring with respect to capital spending by RIMS, Imphal specifically in context
of procurement of medical equipments. (para 7.3)
Action Taken
3.53 In addition to this institute's response to Para 7.1 above, the following may also be considered:
For procurement of medical equipments and construction activities, the institute is in the process
of implementing e-tender through NIC. A formal letter for implementing e-tender has been sent to
NIC on 17th April 2017 following which any procurement activity and construction works of value
above ` 2.5 lakh will be published in the website accordingly. This will enhance a transparent
bidding process for procurement and construction activities that will be coming up in the institute.
Nodal Officer for e-tender has been nominated. Obtaining digital signature of the related officials
is under process.
Further Recommendations
3.54 Though, the Committee appreciates the Department's effort to have a more transparent
administrative process for procurement of medical equipments and construction activities at the

69
institute, it seems that the Department has missed the boat on the deliverable required to
expedite the capital projects at the Institute. The Committee observes that the basic pre-requisite
to start an institute is development of infrastructure. The Committee finds the pace of work
extremely slow resulting to cost and time overruns which cannot be overlooked at any cost. The
Committee would like the Department to furnish the reasons for the same.
NATIONAL ORGAN TRANSPLANT PROGRAMME (NOTP)
Recommendation/Observation
3.55 The Committee observes that actual expenditure during 2015-16 was just 63% with respect to RE
of 
` 10.00 crore only leaving unutilized resources. During 2016-17, funds at RE was further reduced to
` 7.13 crore from ` 15.0 crore at BE stage, wherein the actual expenditure as on 13/2/2017 was just
` 4.12 crore. The Committee takes a serious note of the under-utilization of funds under the scheme in
both the years. The Committee is of the view that Department should evaluate the scheme and its scope
of expansion to utilize the available physical and financial resources to avoid under-utilization of funds.
(Para 10.3)
Action Taken
3.56 The under utilisation of the funds allocated to the programme was mainly due to delay in procurement
of equipments as in most cases, single bids were received. The scheme is proposed to be evaluated as
desired by the committee.
Further Recommendations
3.57 The Committee hopes that the evaluation of the NOTP would have been carried out and the
loopholes plugged by now. The Committee desires to be updated in this regard. The Committee
simultaneously observes that the re-evaluation of the Program would not have be necessitated
had it been conceive d empirically during the initial stage itself.
SERA AND VACCINE MANUFACTURING UNITS
Recommendation/Observation
3.58 Besides the Committee is concerned to note that the DCG (I) has been repeatedly not approving
the GMP facilities of CRI on one pretext or another. The Committee would like to draw the attention
of the Government to its 38th report on major issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs,
namely CRI Kasauli, The Pasteur Institute of India (PII) Coonoor and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory
(BCGVL), Chennai and would like to reiterate its earlier recommendations so that the dependency on
private vaccine manufacturing units can be reduced by utilizing the installed capacity at public sector
vaccine manufacturing units to their optimum. The Committee is also concerned to note the evasive
manner in which the department has avoided giving details of the market share of public sector vaccine
manufacturing units vis-a-vis the private sector vaccine manufacturers. (Para 11.6)
Action Taken
3.59 The new cGMP facility of CRI, Kasauli for production of DPT, TT, DT vaccines has been
commissioned and validated in August 2012. Thereafter, DCG (I) has approved the new cGMP facility

70
in December, 2012. Production has commenced from June, 2014. The Ministry is making sincere efforts
in optimum utilization of the installed capacity of the three vaccine producing institutes. However, once
the vaccine producing institutes upgraded to cGMP standards are fully made operational it will reduce
considerable dependency on private manufacturers for the requirement of DPT group of vaccines and
BCG vaccine for UIP. It is submitted that the three vaccine producing institutes do not sell their product
in open market. It is thus, difficult to provide the market share of public sector vaccine manufacturing
institutes vis-a-vis the private sector vaccine manufacturers. However the data of procurement of DPT,
TT and BCG vaccine during the year 2014-15 and 2015-16 is as under:
(in lakh doses)
2014-15 2015-16
BCG T T DPT BCG T T DPT
Total requirement 1768.16 1447.87 1350.00 785.63 1 176.74 697.37
Vaccine supplied by -- 32.00 133.00 -- 78.00 66.00
Vaccine institutes*
Procured from open 1768.16 1447.87 1250.00 785.63 1 176.74 697.73
market
*The entire production of Vaccine institutes' has been utilized.
Further Recommendations
3.60 From the information submitted by the Department, the Committee could gather that out
of total requirement of vaccines of BCG, TT,DPT for the years 2014-15 & 2015-16, vaccine
supplied by these vaccine institutes is way less compared to procurement of vaccines from the
open market. The Committee is of the firm view that these vaccines producing institutes at
Kasauli, Coonoor and Chennai should meet most of the vaccine requirement of the country so
that the supplies on account of any unforeseen crisis in private commercial production is not
disrupted and the health security of the citizens is ensured.
CENTRAL DRUGS STANDARD CONTROL ORGANISATION (CDSCO)
Recommendation/Observation
3.61 The Committee strongly recommends that the execution of the project for strengthening of the drug
regulatory system be done immediately in accordance of the approvals given by the Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) in a strict time bound manner. The Committee recommends for setting up a regular
consultative mechanism with the State Governments so as to prevent inordinate delays. Efforts may be
done to sign MoUs with the remaining States/ UTs. (Para 13.3)
Action Taken
3.62 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. The funds made available
in current year's Budget Estimates have been sanctioned for release to the State Governments. The

71
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has also finalised a list of equipment required and their specifications
for different sizes in drug testing laboratories. Technical Officers of CDSCO labs also provide required
guidance to the states, where requested. The progress of the strengthening of drug regulatory structures
will be reviewed through the mechanism of Drug Consultative Committee.
Further Recommendations
3.63 The Committee observes that onus of monitoring drug quality rests primarily with State
Drug regulatory Authorities. However, many State Governments have not modernized their drug
regulatory framework despite the fact that the competence of their drug regulatory infrastructure
is not of the desired level. Hence, it is imperative that the State Drug regulatory apparatus is
upgraded to enable them to perform their assigned functions efficiently and transparently. It is
in this context that the revamping of the existing drug regulatory structure assumes added
significance and needs to be addressed on priority basis. Though the Department in its reply has
stated that the recommendation regarding the strengthening the drug regulatory system has
been noted for compliance, no solid roadmap has been indicated for implementation of the
assurance. The Committee would like to have a detailed status note on the measures proposed
to be taken for improving the drug regulatory system in the country.
FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARD AUTHORITY OF INDIA (FSSAI)
Recommendation/Observation
3.64 The Committee observes that there is consistent trend of under utilization of funds during the years
2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17. The Committee is of the view that safety and standardization of food
is a neglected area in India and the Department needs to focus more in this field. The Food Safety and
Standard Authority of India was established in 2006. The status of safety, regulation, manufacturing,
processing, distribution, sale and import of food items for human consumption shows a dreary picture
in the country. Slow progress of the developmental activities and initiatives would hamper the quality
of work being rendered in context of safety and standardization of food items across the country. Since
there are numerous domains under the Food Safety and Standard Authority of India, under utilization
of budgeted funds indicates negligence in this area and poor financial planning on the part of the
concerned authority. (Para 14.4)
Action Taken
3.65 As against ` 83.30 Cr. comprising of grant of ` 59.61 Cr. released during the year 2016-17 +
unspent balance of year 2015-16  i.e.  ` 23.69 Cr., available with FSSAI during 2016-17, an expenditure
of ` 76.95 Cr. (Provisional) was made, leaving an unspent balance i.e. ` 6.35 Cr. (including `5 Cr.
released to FSSAI on 31.03.2017, but credited into accounts of FSSAI on 6.4.2017)
Further Recommendations
3.66 The Department's reply reflects budgetary figures only and does not mention the achievements
of target of FSSAI during the last financial year. Therefore, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the tangible work undertaken by the FSSAI separately in the fields of safety and

72
regulation of the food items for human consumption against ````` 76.95 crore spent on these two
accounts. The Committee would also like the FSSAI address the lingering issue of time-lag in
utilization of allotted funds.
Recommendation/Observation
3.67 The Committee expects the Department to take appropriate measures to arrest shortfall in utilization
of budgetary funds and ensure that the strengthening of Food Testing Systems/ laboratories is done in
a time-bound manner . (Para 14.5)
Action Taken
3.68 A Central Sector Scheme for "Strengthening of the Food Testing System in the country including
provision for Mobile Food Testing Labs" (SOFTeL), with an outlay of ` 481.95 crore ( `400.40 crore-
Non recurring Plus ` 81.55 crore - Recurring) has been rolled out by the Government during 2016-17.
The Scheme is to be completed within a period of three years starting from 2016-17. Implementation
of the Scheme has commenced from 2016-17 itself. A suitable work plan with budgetary requirements
has been prepared to achieve the target subject to availability of fund for the Scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
3.69 The Committee would like to emphasize upon the need for ample provisioning of Mobile Food
Testing Labs (SOFTeL) in the country. This would certainly go a long way in ensuring awareness
regarding precautionary measures so that diseases spreading through contaminated/ sub-standard food are
minimized. Therefore, to improvise the food testing across the country, more number of food testing labs
need to be started. (Para 14.6)
Action Taken
3.70 FSSAI is now fully geared to implement the scheme and, if required, additional funds will be sought
during the financial year.
Further Recommendations
3.71 The Committee would like to reiterate the importance of the scheme for 'Strengthening of
the Food Testing System" in the country including provision for Mobile Food Testing Labs which
would go a lay way in ensuring the availability of safe food for common people. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that concerted efforts need to be made by the Department to kick-start
the scheme at the earliest with adequate budgetary requirements given the vital importance of
the objective of the Scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
3.72 The Committee recommends that the results of all the food items being tested should be made public
through advertisement, newspaper and other electronic, print and social media to make public aware
about the same. The Committee, also recommends the Department to set desirable and achievable targets
and seek additional funds depending upon the implementation of the scheme at later stage .
(Para 14.7)

73
Action Taken
3.73 All test reports would, when INFLONET is fully operational, be available on the network. The
FSSAI, in collaboration with the Department of Consumer Affairs, brings out regular advertisements in
print and electronic media. In the meantime, Safe Water portal has been started through which consumer
can view the test reports of water samples based on license number given by FSSAI. Further, the test
results of water samples conducted by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) will also be part of the portal.
Further Recommendations
3.74 The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Department of Safe Water Portal through
which consumer can view that test reports of water samples based on licence number of FSSAI.
This portal has been amplified as a 'confidence building exercise' for the packaged drinking water
and reaffirms the right of the consumer that the packaged water purchased is safe and of high
quality. The Committee is of the view that a similar portal for all packaged food items can be
designed entailing all information and test reports of the food products so as to educate and
inform the consumer about their quality and safety. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
work in this aspect be expedited. Further, the Committee would like to be apprised about the
details of INFLONET and its objectives.
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF CANCER, DIABETES,
CARDIOV ASCULAR DISEASE AND STROKE (NPCDCS)
Recommendation/Observation
3.75 The Committee notes that there are still several States which do not even have any single State
Cancer Institute/TCCC, despite the pressure that is faced by Tertiary Care hospitals. The Committee
strongly recommends for regular follow up with the State Governments/Institutions for rectifications of
deficiencies, if any in the proposals sent by them so that the cancer treatment infrastructure in the country
is strengthened.
3.76 The Committee also recommends that priority be given to States which do not have a single State
Cancer Centre/TCCC. The Committee would like to be updated about the progress made in this regard.
(Para 16.3 & 16.4)
Action Taken
3.77 The suggestions given by the committee are noted and more vigorous follow up will be done with
the State Government and institutions for compliance of Deficiency. At present approvals for setting up
of 12 SCIs and 13 TCCCs are given. First installment of the Government of India share has been
released. The projects are underway at different stages. 32 more proposals have been received which
have been examined and the deficiencies have been communicated to the State Governments for fulfillment.
State Governments are being reminded from time to time for fulfillment of the deficiencies in the
proposals.
Further Recommendations
3.78 From the replies given by the Department, the Committee observes that approval for
setting up of 12 State Cancer Institutes and 13 Tertiary Care Centres have been given and the

74
projects are underway at different stages. The Committee would like to be apprised of the list
of States where these Cancer Centres have been approved and status of these projects at present.
Also, the physical targets and the dedicated timelines for these projects may also be provided.
Secondly, the Committee also wishes to know which States have sent their proposals for establishing
State Cancer Institutes and Tertiary Care Centre and what kind of deficiencies have been
identified by the Centre Government in their proposals. Also, the list of States who have reverted
back with the revised proposals may also be given. The Committee is of the view that the since
cancer is a life threatening disease, it not only takes toll on physical health but shudder the
patient's emotional and financial stability. If cancer treatment is made available to every needy
patient in his nearby areas, it would be easier for them to manage their physical well being. The
Committee is of the opinion that the Department should contemplate to make adequate
modifications in the guidelines for setting up of the SCI/TCCCs in the States. The Department
may also consider the option of public private partnership (PPP) method by allowing the private
hospitals to set up their Cancer Care Centres in selected States where there is no cancer
treatment facilities available, thereby providing state of art cancer treatment facilities to the
needy people. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the data on number of people
attending to and getting treatment at SCC/ICCCs in the States since the day these centres are
made operational.
NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL ORGANISATION (NACO)
METRO BLOOD BANK PROJECT
Recommendation/Observation
3.79 The Committee is constrained to note the tardy progress made towards establishing Metro Blood
Banks in Chennai and Delhi. The Department had made a provision of 
` 404 crore in RE 2015-16 and
`  404 crore in RE 2016-17 but nothing was spent, leading to idle parking of the funds and the eventual
surrendering of the entire budgeted funds for this scheme for 2015-16 and 2016-17. The surrendering
of the budgeted funds is indicative of the fact that the Department has not played its role as a facilitator
well in implementing the Scheme that has a significant bearing on improving the NACP interventions.
Also, at a time when the Government is striving for fiscal consolidation, such ritualistic allocations
which remain on paper only, are unacceptable to the Committee. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that all hindrances in establishing Metro Blood Banks be ironed out early so that such instances of
blockage of funds earmarked for this Scheme do not recur. The Committee desires to be kept apprised
of the progress made towards operationalizing this Scheme. (Para 17.18)
Action Taken
3.80 Metro Blood Bank Project was concurred as a central sector scheme for setting up Metro Blood
Banks initially in two locations i.e. Delhi and Chennai in Phase I with budget outlay of ` 404 crore to
be implemented over 07 years. The progress made in the project so far may be summarized as:
1. MoU signed with Tamil Nadu Govt. on 14th June 2016.
2. Constant communications were sent to GNCTD to expedite the process and sign the MoU.
However, no progress was attained and GNCTD stated that matter remained pending with LG.

75
3. Since land allocation could not be finalized in Delhi and West Bengal showed keen interest in
initiating the establishment of Metro Blood Bank in Kolkata, the MBB Project in Phase I has
been shifted from Delhi to Kolkata with due approval of Component Authority.
4. Copy of MoU has been shared with WBSACS to initiate the process of establishment of MBB
in Kolkata.
Further Recommendations
3.81 The Committee notes that the Department has informed that setting up Metro Blood Bank
project was initially proposed in two locations i.e. Delhi and Chennai in phase I with budget
outlay of ````` 404.00 crore to be implemented over 7 years. However, land allocation in Delhi could
not be finalised due to which the matter remained pending with LG and it has been shifted to
Kolkata as West Bengal Government showed keen interest in it. The Committee is constrained
to observe that despite the passage of considerable time since its approval, the project of Metro
Blood Banks is stuck in a limbo since 2014-15. The Committee apprehends that the gains
achieved in managing AIDS may be frittered due to inordinate delay in setting up of four Metro
Blood Banks which has now been scaled down to two. The Committee is equally disappointed that
Metro Blood Banks in Delhi had to be shelved due to bureaucratic red tape which does not auger
well for maintaining the tempo of success achieved so far in managing AIDS epidemic in India.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should pull up its socks
and ensure that four Metro Blood Banks are set up within a dedicated time frame, and for this
a strong monitoring mechanism should be put in place to ensure completion of the scheme.

76
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
- Nil -
76

77
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
PART A (NHM)
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Further Recommendation
The Committee is amazed to note the assertion of the Department that the Central allocation
for health has increased. The Committee would like to remind the Department that the Secretary
(Health) during his deposition before the Committee on 30th March, 2015 in connection with
examination of Demand for Grants (2015-16) had submitted that for Health and Family Welfare
an allocation of ````` 24549.00 crore had been made in BE 2015-16 which was less than the BE
2013-14 provision of ````` 30,000.00 crore but more or less on the same level as the RE 2014-15
allocation of ````` 24,400.00 crore, elaborating further that this cut should be seen in the context
of the Fourteenth Finance Commission's recommendation whereby the share of State Government
in Central taxes had been increased from 32 per cent to 42 per cent and that the cut in the share
of the Central Government in Central taxes had translated into cuts in various sectors including
Health Sector. Similarly, the Health Secretary during his evidence before the Committee on the
22nd March, 2016 had informed that the total plan budget for Health and Family Welfare for
2016-17 was 31,000.00 crore out of which ````` 19,000.00 crore was on the National Health Mission
side and the balance on the Health side stating further that the increase in allocation for the
NHM was modest when compared to the 2015-16 budgetary provision of ````` 18,295.00 crore for
NHM. It is true that the Union Budget 2017-18 has sought to reverse this trend of under-
allocation by earmarkeing ````` 26,690.70 crore for the NHM, this increase appears noticeable only
because public expenditure in the previous years has been marginal or even negative in real
terms at constant prices. The Committee is, therefore, convinced that the Union Government's
allocation to health sector in the past years have witnessed steady decline in real terms at
constant prices. This exposes the hollowness of the Department assertion that the Central
allocation has increased. Given the fact that India has made phenomenal economic gains in the
last three decades which has resulted in widening the fiscal space significantly, the increase in
health budget is not commensurate with the net tax revenue with a current tax-GDP ratio of
17% of GDP . It, is, therefore, evident that the reply of the Department has not been formulated
with due diligence. The Committee would therefore advise the Department to carry out rigorous
analysis of the overall trend of budget allocation for the Health Sector before furnishing its
replies to the Committee and desist from skirting the crux of the issue raised by the Committee.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the increase into the total budget envelope for
the Health Sector since 2013-14 year-wise in real terms at constant 2011-12 prices after adjusting
for inflation. (para 3.6)
The Committee observes that stepping up investments in public healthcare is vital to
sustaining India's economic growth. Though the Government has set a lofty target of raising
77

78
health spending to 2.5% of GDP by the year 2024-25 in the National Health Policy, 2017, the
quantum of provision for public healthcare as laid out in the Union Budget 2017-18 is just 29%
of GDP and does not instil much confidence. If the goal of public health spending of 2.5% of GDP
is to be achieved, 1% of it would need to come from the central expenditures. However, the
2017-18 allocation is not even one-third of that target. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that Central public funding of the health sector should be overhauled with substantial increase
in outlay in real terms. The Committee observes that a compelling case exists in India for
implementation of sin taxes on harmful products such as tobacco, alcohol etc. and the Government
should quickly move in this direction. The Committee would simultaneously exhort the Government
to ensure that the revenue generated through sin taxes is used for financing health programmes
and is not directed into the general revenue pool. (para 3.11)
One of the key highlights of the National Health Policy, 2017 is to increase the targeted
public healthcare expenditure to 2.5% of GDP by the year 2025. Further, it aims to spend two
thirds or more of those resources towards Primary Health Care. Though expostulating two thirds
of resources towards primary health care is a laudable objective, the present crisis of doctors not
practising in rural areas still remains a challenge. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Department should not only strive towards allocating major proportion of resources to
primary care, it should also ensure availability of human resources at Primary and Community
Health Centres. (para 3.12)
DELAY IN TRANSFER OF FUNDS
The Committee is all for cooperative federalism and is not against the Treasury mode
per se. The Committee would support whichever system of fund flow is found robust and facilitates
speedy transfer of resources to Implementing Agencies. The Committee's only concern is that
in the Treasury mode, transfer of Central resources 96 has been rendered slow as is evident from
the substantial amount of unspent funds. The Committee, therefore, urges the Department to
quickly remove procedural delays and administrative deficiencies in the fund release through the
Treasury mode through the development of a software and ensure that fund movement is paced
up and tracked at each successive stage starting with the initial release from the Centre till the
money reaches implementing Agencies. The Committee would also recommend that assets so
created in the system are accounted for. (para 3.15)
III. NA TIONAL RURAL HEALTH MISSION
A. RCH Flexible Pool including Routine Immunization Programme, Pulse Polio Immunization
Programme, Immunization Programme, National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control
Programme.
The Committee would like to be apprised whether the States have paid heed to the
Department's advice to enhance spending on RCH activities and increased the aggregate level
of their own spending on RCH activities. (para 3.18)

79
PULSE POLIO IMMUNIZATION
The reply of the Department is silent about the contribution of the public and private sectors
in the supply of IPV to Pulse Polio Programme as asked for by the Committee. The Committee
therefore desires to be furnished with the requisite information. In order to ensure uninterrupted
supply of IPV for the Immunization Programme at affordable prices, the Committee also
recommends that most of the IPV should be sourced from public sector institutions.
(para 3.21)
ADOLESCENT HEALTH
The Committee expresses serious concern that the Gender Differential has remained constant
and rural urban divide has also decreased by only 6 points in a decade which is non-condonable.
The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should handhold poor performing
States on priority basis to ensure that the targets set are actually achieved and do not remain
a paper statistic. (para 3.23)
HEALTH SYSTEM STRENGTHENING UNDER NRHM
The Committee while appreciating the efforts being made by the Department to ensure
skilled manpower for Health and Wellness Centres, however, feels that the present measures are
not adequate keeping in view the huge size of our country. The Committee therefore, recommends
that these programme courses should be widened to all States, to ensure greater availability of
human resources and if need be, more funds can be sought from the Finance Ministry for the
purpose. (para 3.26)
C. FLEXIBLE POOL FOR COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
The Committee cannot reconcile to the paradox that on the one hand, the Department asks for
more funds, on the other hand, it squanders the gains made in shape of Parliamentary support
by putting up a lackluster performance in spending. The Committee therefore, strongly
recommends the Department to pull up its socks and ensure sound utilization of funds allocated,
otherwise not only will the future fund allocation by Ministry of Finance decrease, such fund
crunch would seriously derail the communicable disease programme of the country.(para 3.33)
D. FLEXIBLE POOL FOR NON-COMMUNICABLE DISEASES, INJURY AND TRAUMA
The Committee would like to be apprised of the criteria adopted for selection of 100 districts
for population level screening of common NCDs. The Committee further recommends that the
screening programme must be expanded to all districts of the country and a time-frame of the
same should be put in place expeditiously. (para 3.37)
V. TERTIARY CARE PROGRAMS
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF CANCER, DIABETES,
CARDIOV ASCULAR DISEASES AND STROKE (NPCDS)
The Committee notes that the draft National Multisectoral Action Plan (NMAP) for prevention
and control of Non-Communicable Diseases (2016-22) is still at approval stage even though

80
2017 is nearing its end. The Committee expresses dismay that the same is still stuck in approval
stages. At this rate the implementation of the plan (2016-22) looks tardy. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should fix a deadline for the implementation of the
National Multi-sectoral Action Plan. (para 3.40)
The Committee would like to be apprised of the success of this pilot project and whether
the same will be replicated, district-wise. (para 3.43)
VI. HUMAN RESOURCES FOR HEALTH AND MEDICAL EDUCATION
The Committee observes that the further continuation of this scheme will be decided by
PMSSY Division as it has been transferred to the Division. The Committee desires to be kept
apprised of the final decision taken in the matter. (para 3.48)
(ii) Establishing New Medical Colleges (upgrading District Hospital)
The Committee desires to be apprised of the physical progress made towards operationalizing
53 proposals for upgrading District Hospitals as Medical Colleges. (para 3.51)

81
PART B (HEALTH)
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee is not entirely satisfied with the achievements listed out by the Department
with respect to NPCDCS and PMSSY. India is called the diabetes capital of the world with 50
million people suffering from type-2 diabetes and 30 million heart patients in the country as per
media reports. Similarly, around 2.5 million people are suffering from cancer as per the statistics
of National Institute of Cancer, Prevention and Research (NICPR), an institute under ICMR.
Keeping in view the large number of people being affected by such diseases, the Committee feels
that a lot more needs to be done under the NPCDCS. The Committee would like to highlight that
the main objectives of this Programme are health promotion and prevention, early diagnosis and
disease management providing support for diagnosis and cost effective treatment at primary,
secondary and tertiary levels of health care system, support for development of database of NCDs
through a robust surveillance system and to monitor NCD morbidity, mortality and risk factors.
Therefore, the focus of the Department should also be on research and development in this area
and more studies should be commissioned with ICMR so that the reasons for occurrence of such
diseases and their effective management could be done. Further, the scheme needs to be popularized
so that timely, affordable and accurate diagnosis/treatment is given to the patients suffering
from it. (para 3.10)
The Committee takes note of the fact that the Government has targeted to set up 13 more
AIIMS apart from the six AIIMS set up in the first phase. The Committee is, however, constrained
to note that six AIIMS at Rishikesh, Bhubaneswar, Bhopal, Jodhpur, Raipur and Patna are still
not operational fully due to several reasons like-vacant faculty posts, inadequate and incomplete
development of infrastructure, number of functioning departments quite less compared to
sanctioned ones, lack of quality teaching, non-functional blood bank and emergency and casualty
services, lack of pathology, pharmacology services etc. At a time when the Department should
have been engaged in sorting out issues concerning setting up of 13 more AIIMS, it is still
grappling with these basic issues of six AIIMS set up in the first phase. Building infrastructure
without the appropriate facilities would yield no gains in healthcare facilities of the country. The
Committee is, therefore, of the firm view that efforts need to be made in filling up vacant posts
especially faculty posts so as to maintain standard of teaching at the six functional AIIMS outside
Delhi. Also, the provisions of emergency services, blood bank, pathology labs need to be put in
place on a priority basis. The Committee would also like to reiterate that regular monitoring of
the work done under PMSSY needs to be done in order to ensure completion of projects on time.
(para 3.11)
Recommendation/Observation
On analysis of the expenditure trends, the Committee finds a substantial mismatch in the
financial projections leading to sub-optimum utilization. The Committee is dismayed to note the
81

82
casual approach of the Department in framing the unrealistic financial projections vis-a-vis
targets set for the 12th Plan period. The Committee recommends that the Department undertake
a thorough analysis of the fund requirements for implementation of projects/schemes, identify
bottlenecks and reassess them so as to avoid any under utilization of the allocated funds in
future. Besides, there is strong need to prioritize various projects/schemes so that funds which
could be deployed elsewhere do not lapse due to under utilization. (Para 3.12)
The Committee observes that though there is improvement is utilization of budgeted funds
for PMSSY over the years, yet the fact remains that the Actual Expenditure incurred during
2015-2016 and 2016-17 was ````` 1578.12 crore and ````` 1953.30 crore respectively which is less than
the BE of the respective years viz. ````` 2206.00 crore and ````` 2450.00 crore respectively. The Committee
would like to remind that these Institutes are of national importance and vital for bridging the
gaps in our healthcare system. The Committee is, therefore, dismayed to note the persistent
under-utilization under PMSSY and recommends that the Department resolve all pending issues
hindering utilization of funds proactively and ensure that the issue of under-utilization of budgeted
funds is addressed squarely. (para 3.15)
The Committee desires to be apprised of the total project cost of development of second
campus at CNCI and the timeline set for its completion. (para 3.18)
The Committee observes that 2415 UCs amounting to ````` 31,950,311,324 remains unliquidated.
The Committee while expressing its strong displeasure at such state of affairs would expect the
Department to accomplish the liquidation of pending UCs in a stipulated time period and apprise
the Committee about the same. Also, the Committee would like to be updated on the performance
of the PFMS in reducing the pendency of UCs and the challenges faced by the Department in
working with PFMS, if any. (para 3.21)
SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL AND VARDHMAN MAHA VIR MEDICAL COLLEGE (SJH & VMMC),
NEW DELHI
The Committee is surprised to note that a whopping 1264 vacancies exist across various
groups of posts. The Committee in its Report on Demands for Grants has been exhorting the
Department to fill up vacant posts but no appreciable progress has been made in this direction.
If the hospital is functioning without more than one-third of its required manpower, it raises
serious doubts about its performance and standards of care. The Committee, therefore, once
again reiterates that the issue of shortage of manpower at SJH be addressed on a priority basis
and progress made towards filling vacancies across all group/categories be intimated to the
Committee. (para 3.26)
The Committee is perturbed with the state of affairs at the Safdarjung hospital in setting
up of the IVF unit. Despite Committee's persistent recommendations in its previous 39th, 54th,
67th, 82nd & 93rd reports, this project is still far from being a fully functional set up. The
Committee deprecates the Department for inordinate delay in setting up of IVF facility at
Safdarjung hospital. Therefore, the Committee once again recommends the Department to finalize

83
all pending issues on priority basis and complete this project by the end of this financial year.
Also, the Department should make the concerned authorities accountable for the delay in
operationalization of the project within set timelines. (para 3.29)
DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL (RML), NEW DELHI AND PGIMER DR. RML HOSPITAL
The Committee notes that the construction of Super Speciality Block is still at proposal
stage. As regards the project of modern maternity care centre, it has been informed that an
amount of ````` 1.83 crore has been released to Government of NCT for eviction and resettlement
of Jhuggi Dwellers and the matter is being constantly pursued with Government of NCT. The
Committee notes that both these projects were proposed in 2010-11 and till date, they have not
seen the light of day. The Committee is dismayed with the slow pace of Department in getting
the pre-requisites completed in case of these two projects and strongly recommends that the
progress of these projects may be reviewed at the highest level in the Department with a view
to remove the stumbling blocks. (para 3.34)
LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE (LHMC)
The Committee would like the Department to pursue implementation of the Redevelopment
Plan of LHMC with a sense of urgency and promptitude as much delay has already taken place.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the revised project cost and timeline for
execution of the Redevelopment Plan. (para 3.37)
The Committee strongly recommends that the project should not get stuck in administrative
and procedural delays. Efforts should be made to expedite the process of getting approvals on
priority basis. The Committee also recommends that the Department should devise a plan of
action considering the available physical and financial resources and set realistic timeframe for
the completion of project. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this
regard. (para 3.40)
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS), NEW DELHI
The Committee is alarmed to note that despite its exhortation in the past, the issue of
manpower shortage in the AIIMS has not been addressed so far and seems to have become
endemic which is a matter of serious concern as it has a direct bearing on the quality of care
at the premier Institute which is a boon for poor patients as it offers them treatment, free of
cost. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the manpower shortage at AIIMS be sorted
out in a time bound manner so that the resources available there could be made full use of. The
Committee also desires to be apprised of the updated status of vacancies across all categories of
posts. (para 3.43)
POSTGRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES AND RESEARCH (PGI), CHANDIGARH
The Committee notes that though the Department has inter alia submitted that 'Recruitment
is an ongoing process and the Institute is taking steps to recruit the people on all the vacant
posts' but has not indicated the headway made towards fdling up the vacancies at PGIMER,

84
Chandigarh. The Committee treats the reply unsatisfactory. The Committee, therefore, desires
to be apprised of the achievement in terms of filling up of vacant posts vis-a-vis sanctioned posts
at PGIMER, Chandigarh during the last one year. The Committee also wishes to be apprised
whether the funds allocated for expected filling up of vacancies have been utilized or not during
the year 2017-18. (para 3.47)
REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (RIMS), IMPHAL
Though, the Committee appreciates the Department's effort to have a more transparent
administrative process for procurement of medical equipments and construction activities at the
institute, it seems that the Department has missed the boat on the deliverable required to
expedite the capital projects at the Institute. The Committee observes that the basic pre-requisite
to start an institute is development of infrastructure. The Committee finds the pace of work
extremely slow resulting to cost and time overruns which cannot be overlooked at any cost. The
Committee would like the Department to furnish the reasons for the same. (para 3.54)
NATIONAL ORGAN TRANSPLANT PROGRAMME (NOTP)
The Committee hopes that the evaluation of the NOTP would have been carried out and the
loopholes plugged by now. The Committee desires to be updated in this regard. The Committee
simultaneously observes that the re-evaluation of the Program would not have be necessitated
had it been conceive d empirically during the initial stage itself. (para 3.57)
SERA AND VACCINE MANUFACTURING UNITS
From the information submitted by the Department, the Committee could gather that out
of total requirement of vaccines of BCG, TT,DPT for the years 2014-15 & 2015-16, vaccine
supplied by these vaccine institutes is way less compared to procurement of vaccines from the
open market. The Committee is of the firm view that these vaccines producing institutes at
Kasauli, Coonoor and Chennai should meet most of the vaccine requirement of the country so
that the supplies on account of any unforeseen crisis in private commercial production is not
disrupted and the health security of the citizens is ensured. (para 3.60)
CENTRAL DRUGS STANDARD CONTROL ORGANISATION (CDSCO)
The Committee observes that onus of monitoring drug quality rests primarily with State
Drug regulatory Authorities. However, many State Governments have not modernized their drug
regulatory framework despite the fact that the competence of their drug regulatory infrastructure
is not of the desired level. Hence, it is imperative that the State Drug regulatory apparatus is
upgraded to enable them to perform their assigned functions efficiently and transparently. It is
in this context that the revamping of the existing drug regulatory structure assumes added
significance and needs to be addressed on priority basis. Though the Department in its reply has
stated that the recommendation regarding the strengthening the drug regulatory system has
been noted for compliance, no solid roadmap has been indicated for implementation of the
assurance. The Committee would like to have a detailed status note on the measures proposed
to be taken for improving the drug regulatory system in the country. (para 3.63)

85
FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARD AUTHORITY OF INDIA (FSSAI)
The Department's reply reflects budgetary figures only and does not mention the achievements
of target of FSSAI during the last financial year. Therefore, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the tangible work undertaken by the FSSAI separately in the fields of safety and
regulation of the food items for human consumption against ````` 76.95 crore spent on these two
accounts. The Committee would also like the FSSAI address the lingering issue of time-lag in
utilization of allotted funds. (para 3.66)
The Committee would like to reiterate the importance of the scheme for 'Strengthening of
the Food Testing System" in the country including provision for Mobile Food Testing Labs which
would go a lay way in ensuring the availability of safe food for common people. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that concerted efforts need to be made by the Department to kick-start
the scheme at the earliest with adequate budgetary requirements given the vital importance of
the objective of the Scheme. (para 3.71)
The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Department of Safe Water Portal through
which consumer can view that test reports of water samples based on licence number of FSSAI.
This portal has been amplified as a 'confidence building exercise' for the packaged drinking water
and reaffirms the right of the consumer that the packaged water purchased is safe and of high
quality. The Committee is of the view that a similar portal for all packaged food items can be
designed entailing all information and test reports of the food products so as to educate and
inform the consumer about their quality and safety. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
work in this aspect be expedited. Further, the Committee would like to be apprised about the
details of INFLONET and its objectives. (para 3.74)
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF CANCER, DIABETES.
CARDIOV ASCULAR DISEASE AND STROKE (NPCDCS)
From the replies given by the Department, the Committee observes that approval for
setting up of 12 State Cancer Institutes and 13 Tertiary Care Centres have been given and the
projects are underway at different stages. The Committee would like to be apprised of the list
of States where these Cancer Centres have been approved and status of these projects at present.
Also, the physical targets and the dedicated timelines for these projects may also be provided.
Secondly, the Committee also wishes to know which States have sent their proposals for establishing
State Cancer Institutes and Tertiary Care Centre and what kind of deficiencies have been
identified by the Centre Government in their proposals. Also, the list of States who have reverted
back with the revised proposals may also be given. The Committee is of the view that the since
cancer is a life threatening disease, it not only takes toll on physical health but shudder the
patient's emotional and financial stability. If cancer treatment is made available to every needy
patient in his nearby areas, it would be easier for them to manage their physical well being. The
Committee is of the opinion that the Department should contemplate to make adequate
modifications in the guidelines for setting up of the SCI/TCCCs in the States. The Department
may also consider the option of public private partnership (PPP) method by allowing the private

86
hospitals to set up their Cancer Care Centres in selected States where there is no cancer
treatment facilities available, thereby providing state of art cancer treatment facilities to the
needy people. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the data on number of people
attending to and getting treatment at SCC/ICCCs in the States since the day these centres are
made operational. (para 3.78)
NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL ORGANISATION (NACO)
METRO BLOOD BANK PROJECT
The Committee notes that the Department has informed that setting up Metro Blood Bank
project was initially proposed in two locations i.e. Delhi and Chennai in phase I with budget
outlay of ````` 404.00 crore to be implemented over 7 years. However, land allocation in Delhi could
not be finalised due to which the matter remained pending with LG and it has been shifted to
Kolkata as West Bengal Government showed keen interest in it. The Committee is constrained
to observe that despite the passage of considerable time since its approval, the project of Metro
Blood Banks is stuck in a limbo since 2014-15. The Committee apprehends that the gains
achieved in managing AIDS may be frittered due to inordinate delay in setting up of four Metro
Blood Banks which has now been scaled down to two. The Committee is equally disappointed that
Metro Blood Banks in Delhi had to be shelved due to bureaucratic red tape which does not auger
well for maintaining the tempo of success achieved so far in managing AIDS epidemic in India.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should pull up its socks
and ensure that four Metro Blood Banks are set up within a dedicated time frame, and for this
a strong monitoring mechanism should be put in place to ensure completion of the scheme.
(para 3.81)

87
MINUTES

II*
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 12th December, 2017 in Committee Room 'A',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
3. Shri Jairam Ramesh
4. Shri Ashok Siddharth
5. Shri K. Somaprasad
6. Dr. C. P . Thakur
7. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
8. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey
LOK SABHA
9. Shri M. K. Raghavan
10. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
11. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
12. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
WITNESSES
** *
* Minutes of first meeting relate to other matters.
*** Relate to other matter
89

90
Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed the Members that the meeting has been convened to : (i)
consider and adopt the draft 103rd, *** and *** Action Taken Reports pertaining to Departments of
Health and Family Welfare, Health Research and Ministry of AYUSH respectively; and ***.
3. The Committee first took up for consideration the draft 103rd, *** and *** Action Taken Reports
pertaining to Departments of Health and Family Welfare, ***. After some discussion, the Committee
adopted the said Reports. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence Shri Jairam
Ramesh, M.P. (Rajya Sabha) and in their absence Dr. Vikas Mahatme, M.P. (Rajya Sabha) to present the
Reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, M.P . (Lok Sabha) and in his absence Shri M.K.
Raghavan, M.P. (Lok Sabha) to lay the Reports in Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2017.
4. * * *
Oral evidence of the Additional Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. The Committee then adjourned at 4.47 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

91
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE -A
(` in crore )
Sl. States Health 2015-16 T otal 2016-17 T otal % of
No. Budget Increase
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan
1       2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1. Andaman and 205.83 73.24 279.07 199.89 80.91 280.80 1%
Nicobar Islands
2. Andhra Pradesh 1986.81 3741.42 5728.23 3170.03 2933.73 6103.76 7%
3. Arunachal Pradesh 302.52 337.59 640.11 465.87 426.10 891.97 39%
4. Assam 2656.52 1374.33 4030.85 2270.53 1490.72 3761.25 -7%
5. Bihar 2363.00 2621.93 4984.93 5337.18 2897.52 8234.70 65%
6. Chandigarh 167.07 193.07 360.14 135.77 215.12 350.89 -3%
7. Chattisgarh 2542.01 697.40 3239.41 3163.05 810.43 3973.48 23%
8. Dadra and Nagar 67.35 9.89 77.24 89.82 0.00 89.82 16%
Haveli
9. Daman and Diu 52.60 10.09 62.69 42.43 11.15 53.58 -15%
10. Delhi 3138.00 1649.00 4787.00 3200.00 2059.00 5259.00 10%
11. Goa 178.29 205.21 383.50 391.71 236.51 628.21 64%
12. Gujarat 6193.85 1627.78 7821.63 6505.00 1707.05 8212.05 5%
13. Haryana 1845.88 1 182.73 3028.61 2595.43 1321.51 3916.94 29%
14. Himachal Pradesh 309.01 1099.48 1408.49 312.91 1251.69 1564.60 11%
15. Jammu and 144.26 1822.10 1966.36 264.00 2004.31 2268.31 15%
Kashmir
16. Jharkhand 1875.43 838.14 2713.57 2129.18 920.49 3049.67 12%
17. Karnataka 4026.90 2421.10 6448.00 4237.82 2065.23 6303.05 -2%
18. Kerala 1457.31 3707.48 5164.79 1524.06 4171.72 5695.78 10%
19. Lakshadweep 36.50 19.97 56.47 40.00 24.16 64.16 14%
20. Madhya Pradesh 2418.69 2289.37 4708.06 2985.89 2623.61 5609.50 19%
21. Maharashtra 4557.21 3490.50 8047.71 4561.65 3837.19 8398.84 4%
93

94
1       2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
22. Manipur 304.04 213.75 517.79 131.78 224.32 356.10 -31%
23. Meghalaya 380.74 202.12 582.86 470.00 258.88 728.88 25%
24. Mizoram 21 1.25 166.81 378.06 226.25 188.03 414.28 10%
25. Nagaland 2.00 316.12 318.12 4.50 334.45 338.95 7%
26. Odisha 2107.44 1774.90 3882.34 3252.98 1983.83 5236.81 35%
27. Puducherry 309.50 212.91 522.41 297.10 219.00 516.10 -1%
28. Punjab 990.43 2013.53 3003.96 1308.28 2100.88 3409.16 13%
29. Rajasthan 4975.88 3265.27 8241.15 6046.14 3491.25 9537.39 16%
30. Sikkim 199.23 108.60 307.83 192.61 119.52 312.13 1%
31. Tamil Nadu 3837.37 5234.25 9071.62 4098.19 4974.53 9072.72 0%
32. Telangana 2459.00 2472.54 4931.54 2462.83 3504.05 5966.88 21%
33. Tripura 497.20 410.89 908.09 572.66 425.98 998.64 10%
34. Uttar Pradesh 9073.84 6854.27 15928.11 11667.92 7877.66 19545.58 23%
35. Uttarakhand 677.22 811.54 1488.75 786.88 893.67 1680.55 13%
36. West Bengal 2588.90 3536.03 6124.93 2999.22 3936.73 6935.95 13%
T
OTAL 65139. 08 57005.35 122144.42 78139.57 61620.92 139760.49 14%

95
ANNEXURE-B
State/UTs-wise Status of Agency Registration and Expenditure
Filing (DBT and non-DBT) Payment
Sl. State/UT To be Actual % of Status of DBT Status of
No. Registered Registered Registration payment Expenditure
made in 36 Filing other
States/UTs  than DBT
done by 36
States/UTs
12 3 4 5 6 7
Good Performing States/UTs above 75%
1. Gujarat 28724 28724 100% Y es Yes
2. Tamil Nadu 28919 28919 100% Y es Yes
3. Assam 33525 33542 100% Y es Yes
4. Punjab 17364 17370 100% Y es Yes
5. Chandigarh 47 47 100% Y es Yes
6. Puducherry 234 234 100% Y es Yes
7. Madhya Pradesh 54976 54971 100% Y es Yes
8. Odisha 53867 53860 100% Y es Yes
9. Andhra Pradesh 21829 21718 99% Y es Yes
10. Daman and Diu 64 63 98% Y es Yes
11. Haryana 9447 8772 93% Y es Yes
12. Telangana 14760 13607 92% Y es Yes
13. Maharashtra 52849 48402 92% Y es Yes
14. Uttarakhand 17644 16137 91% Y es Yes
15. Jammu and Kashmir 9888 8972 91% Y es Yes
16. Manipur 4622 4086 88% Y es Yes
17. Bihar 20118 17636 88% Y es Yes
18. Uttar Pradesh 76941 64392 84% Y es Yes
19. Karnataka 37983 31778 84% Y es Yes
95

96
12 3 4 5 6 7
20. Goa 291 243 84% Yes Yes
21. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 132 107 81% Yes Yes
22. Jharkhand 34547 26886 78% Yes Yes
23. Tripura 2137 1658 78% Yes Yes
24. Rajasthan 60583 45943 76% Yes Yes
25. Chhattisgarh 25318 19001 75% Yes Yes
Average Performing States/UTs below 75%
26. Lakshadweep 35 26 74% Yes Yes
27. Mizoram 1271 941 74% Yes Yes
28. Meghalaya 6930 5026 73% Yes Yes
29. Delhi 785 541 69% Yes Yes
30. West Bengal 45136 30609 68% Yes Yes
31. Sikkim 823 527 64% Yes Yes
32. Andaman And Nicobar 427 265 62% Yes Yes
Islands
33. Kerala 25014 14788 59% Yes Yes
34. Arunachal Pradesh 4259 2096 49% Yes Yes
35. Himachal Pradesh 5948 2852 48% Yes Yes
36. Nagaland 1844 830 45% Yes Yes
G
RAND T OTAL: 699281 605569 87%

97
ANNEXURE-C
Reference Para 6.6 of 99th Report of Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
Sl. No. Name of Project Updated status with corrective measure taken for
speedy implementation of project with
sustained monitoring
1. Advanced Cardiac Centre (Phase-II) A warded work of Civil, Electrical and HV AC
components has already been completed. The work
of installation of lifts is underway. After approval of
DNIT and Technical sanction of the Detailed Estimate
by the competent authority, the tender for the balance
work of Medical Gas Pipeline and related works has
been floated. The target date for completion of work
is March, 2018.
2. Modernization of Research A and B Block NBCC has submitted the tendered document for up-
gradation of 11 KV Electrical Sub-station and
Distribution System amounting to ` 11.17 crore in
March, 2017. After scrutiny, the Institute has
conveyed its concurrence to NBCC on 01.05.2017.
NBCC has been requested to submit tendered
document on the remaining scheme immediately.
3. Modernization of Nehru Hospital The scheme submitted by NBCC has been finalised
by the Monitoring Committee. NBCC is preparing
tender document.
97

98
ANNEXURE-D
Statement showing the Sanctioned posts, Filled-up and Vacancy position of
Group A Posts (as on 31.03.2017)
Sl. Posts Sanction Group Sanctioned In V acancy Remarks
No. Posts position Position
1 2 3456 7
1. Superintending Engineer A 1 0 1 Promotion/Deputation
2. Medical Officer Health- A 2 0 2 Post proposed for re-
cum-Lecturer designation
3. Epidemiologist-cum-Lecturer A 1 0 1 Post proposed for re-
designation
4. Deputy Financial Advisor A 1 0 1 Post advertised status of
recruitment pending with
Ministry
5. Prof.-cum-Principal (Nursing A 1 0 1 Advertisement sent to DA-
College) VP for estimate, reply
awaited
6. Prof.-cum-V . Principal A 1 0 1 Advetisement sent to DA VP
(Nursing College) for estimate, reply awaited
7. Registrar A 1 0 1 Promotional Post
8. Dy. Medical Superintendent A 1 0 1 Post advertsied on Direct
Recruitment
9. Dental Officer A 3 1 2 Post advertised on direct
recruitment basis,
screening completed, date
of interview yet to be fixed
10. System Analysist A 1 0 1 Deputation/Promotion
11. Chief Dietician and Nutrition A 1 0 1 Deputation/Promotion
Officer
12. Chief Physiotherapist A 1 0 1 Promotional Post
13. Sr. Statistical Officer A 1 0 1 RR Not available
14. Dy. Registrar A 1 0 1 Promotional Post
15. Sr. Accounts Of ficer A 1 0 1 Deputation/Promotion
98

99
1 2 3456 7
16. Jr.Medical Officer BB A 1 - 1 Direct Recruitment
17. Statistician-cum-Lecturer A 1 0 1 Post proposed for re-
designation
18. Programmer A 1 0 1 Promotional/Deputation
19. Statistical Officer A 2 0 2 Direct Recruitment/
Deputation
20. Medical Physicist A 3 2 1 Deputation/Direct
Recruitment
21. Accounts Officer A 1 0 1 Promotional Post

100
ANNEXURE-E
Latest position of Group 'B' Posts in as on date in the Institute
Sl. No. Name of post Sanctioned In-position Vacancy Remarks
Strength
12 3 4 5 6
1. Ward Sister 62 56 6 Promotional post
2. CSSD Officer 1 0 1 Promotional post
3. Pharmaceutical Chemist/ 3 1 2 Promotional post
Suptd. Pharmacist
4. Staff Nurse 350 327 23 Offers of appointment were issued
to 22 (twenty two) selected
candidates, l(one) reserved post for
PWD against HH category has been
re-advertised due to non availability
of eligible candidates in earlier
advertisements.
5. Assistant Engineer (E) 1 0 1 Promotional post
6. Dietician 1 0 1 Promotional post
7. Chief Technician 1 0 1 Due to non availability of approved
RR, draft RR sent to Ministry for
approval. Approval is still awaited.
8. Radiology Supervisor/ 3 0 3 Promotional post
CT Scan/GE Radiology/
Radiographer
9. Hindi Officer 1 0 1 Promotional post
10. Radiation Supervisor 2 0 2 RR approval is awaited.
11. Estate Manager 1 0 1 Post is to be re-advertised due to
non availability of eligible candidates
in earlier advertisements.
12. Office Superintendent/OA 13 7 6 Proposal for amendment of RR sent
to Ministry. Approval is still awaited.
13. Sr. Lab Technician 11 9 2 Promotional post
100

101
12 3 4 5 6
14. Medical Social Worker 5 3 2 Proposal for upgradation of 1 (one)
post sent to Ministry. Approval is
still awaited, l(one) post reserved
for PWD against VH category has
been re-advertised due to non
availability of eligible candidate in
earlier advertisements.
15. Sanitary Superintendent 1 0 1 Promotional post
16. Transport Incharge 1 0 1 Promotional post
17. CSSD Supervisor 2 1 1 Proposal for amendment of RR sent
to Ministry. Approval is still awaited.
18. Jr. Accounts Officer/ 4 1 3 Proposal for amendment of RR
Accountant sent to Ministry. Approval is still
awaited.
19. Chief Fire Guard 1 0 1 Proposal for amendment of RR sent
to Ministry. Approval is still awaited.
20. Store Superintendent 2 0 2 Proposal for upgradation/re-
designation sent to Ministry.
Approval is still awaited.
21. Sr. Stenographer/ 27 25 2 W ritten test conducted on
Stenographer 04.03.2017 and skill test will be
conducted on 08.04.2017.
22. Warden/Lady Warden 6 4 2 Posts are to be re-advertised due to
non availability of eligible candidates
in earlier advertisements.
23. Health Inspector 4 1 3 -do-
24. Health Educator 3 0 3 -do-
25. Jr. Perfusionist 2 0 2 -do-
26. Radiographer 12 7 5 -do-
T
OTAL 520 442 78

102
ANNEXURE-F
Vacancy Status of Group-C Posts- NEIGRIHMS, Shillong (As on 6.4.2017)
Sl. No Post to be filled up No. of Post(s) Remarks
by Promotion
1 Registration Clerk 1
2 UDC 1
3 LDC 6 (Reserved for promotion from MTS Staff
as per RRs of LDC)
T
OTAL 8
Posts already advertised and yet to filled up
1. Artist 1 Advt.No.NEIGR.E.III/15/2014/Pt
Dt. 19.1.2015 and Date of Written test yet
to be fixed by Examination Cell
2. Jr. Hindi Translator 1
3. DPA Gr-ll 3 Screening completed and written exam to
be conducted.
4. Gas Officer 1 Advt.No.NEIGR-GAD(RC)/35/2013/Pt
Dated 22.11.2016.
5. Hoover Operator 5 -do-
6. Radiotherapy Technician 5 -do-
7. Technical Assistant (Cath Lab) 1 -do-
8. CSSD Gr-I 2 -do-
9. Record Clerk 6 -do-
10. Motor Mechanic 1 -do-
11. Wireman 1 -do-
12. O.T. Assistant Gr-ll 2 -do-
13. Library Assistant 1 (Advertisement of this post cancelled due
to amendment of Model RRs issued by the
DOPT.
14. Technical Assistant (PWD) 2 Advt. No. NEIGR. E.II/9/2012/Pt
Dt.13.1.2017. Last date of receipt of
application is 13.2.2017. The posts are
being re-advertised again.
15. House Keeper (PWD) 1
T
OTAL 33
102

103
Sl. Posts to be re-advertised/ No. of Post(s) Remarks
No. advertised
1. Technical Assistant 29
2. Sanitary Inspector 6
3. Pharmacist 1
4. Jr. Lab. Technician 2
5. Dental Hygienist 1
6. Dental Mechanic 3
7. Driver Gr-III 2
8. LDC 10
9. House Keeper 7
10. CSSD Asst Gr-II 2
11. Modeller 1 RRs yet to be approved by the Ministry
12. Medical Social Worker (Blood 1 -do-
Donor Organizer)
13. Reprographic Technician 2 The proposal for 50% by Promotion and
50% by Direct Recruitment has not been
agreed by the Ministry vide their letter
no.U.12012/37/2015/NE dated 26.9.2016.
T
OTAL 67

104
ANNEXURE-G
Summary Report of Faculty Post in Six New AIIMS for the Month of April, 2017
Name of Institute No of Faculty Filled up on Filled up on Total Filled Posts
Post Sanctioned Regular basis contract basis up Advertised
AIIMS Bhubaneswar 305 135 Nil 135 170
AIIMS Bhopal 305 52 09 61 244
AIIMS Raipur 305 74 Nil 74 231
AIIMS Jodhpur 305 105 Nil 105 200
AIIMS Rishikesh 305 85 Nil 85 220
AIIMS Patna 305 55 Nil 55 250
Summary Report of Non - Faculty Post in Six New AIIMS for the month of April, 2017
Name of Institute No. of Non- Filled up on Filled up on Filled up on Total Filled
Faculty Post Regular contract Outsource up
Sanctioned basis basis basis
AIIMS Bhubaneswar 3776 204 187 279 670
AIIMS Bhopal 3776 03 163 Nil 166
AIIMS Raipur 3776 209 444 Nil 653
AIIMS Jodhpur 3776 32 93 Nil 125
AIIMS Rishikesh 3776 01 165 Nil 166
AIIMS Patna 3776 304 239 Nil 543
104

105
ANNEXURE-H
Summary Report of Sr. Residents/Residents in Six New AIIMS for the month of April, 2017
Name of Institute Number of Sr. Number of Number of Sr. Number of
Residents Residents Residents Residents
Sanctioned Sanctioned
Bhubaneswar 327 307 100 29
AIIMS Bhopal 327 307 73 106
AIIMS Raipur 327 307 78 37
AIIMS Jodhpur 327 307 107 82
AIIMS Rishikesh 327 307 65 73
AIIMS Patna 327 307 98 82
105

106
ANNEXURE-I
State-wise and Year-wise outstanding UCs report as per demanded by Rajya Sabha Secretariat
As on 17/04/2017
Y ear State No. of UCs Amount
2005-06 Andaman and Nicobar Islands 1 1301000
Andhra Pradesh 9 57106580
Assam 6 30503014
Bihar 1 3295000
Chandigarh 1 1701000
Chhattisgarh 2 2000000
Delhi 10 36350959
Gujarat 1 1000000
Haryana 1 100000
Himachal Pradesh 3 24900000
Jammu and Kashmir 2 5029122
Jharkhand 2 16000000
Karnataka 5 13700000
Kerala 8 81025000
Madhya Pradesh 3 52300000
Maharashtra 5 86632960
Manipur 5 2494505
Meghalaya 1 2500000
Mizoram 1 191321
Nagaland 3 4828000
Odisha 3 1004885
Rajasthan 2 15700000
Tamil Nadu 5 45797355
Tripura 1 17200000
Uttar Pradesh 8 95040055
Uttarakhand 1 6200000
West Bengal 9 54996639
106

107
Y ear State No. of UCs Amount
2006-07 Andhra Pradesh 9 121429341
Arunachal Pradesh 1 3 11435
Assam 1 700000
Bihar 1 15000000
Chandigarh 6 20559000
Chhattisgarh 2 5600000
Daman and Diu 1 1600000
Delhi 19 153116126
Gujarat 4 12768000
Haryana 1 1000000
Himachal Pradesh 1 1000000
Jammu and Kashmir 3 19060000
Jharkhand 16 7400000
Karnataka 21 85939000
Kerala 9 37668000
Madhya Pradesh 2 16000000
Maharashtra 14 136119556
Mizoram 3 5631000
Odisha 2 30000000
Puducherry 3 240000
Punjab 1 500000
Rajasthan 2 2500000
Tamil Nadu 7 8715000
Uttar Pradesh 40 97000000
Uttarakhand 1 2850000
West Bengal 22 71218433
2007-08 Andhra Pradesh 16 91546650
Arunachal Pradesh 1 742000
Assam 9 15485543
Chandigarh 3 3108300

108
Y ear State No. of UCs Amount
Chhattisgarh 1 300000
Delhi 30 714052646
Gujarat 4 23460000
Himachal Pradesh 1 15000000
Jharkhand 6 7050000
Karnataka 2 7500000
Kerala 2 5980000
Madhya Pradesh 3 2004000
Maharashtra 9 27730000
Manipur 3 530000
Meghalaya 3 1 1776000
Mizoram 5 12441000
Nagaland 3 16182000
Puducherry 3 380000
Rajasthan 3 29157700
Sikkim 4 713300
Tamil Nadu 9 34452764
Uttar Pradesh 6 11678450
Uttarakhand 2 339600
West Bengal 6 19161825
2008-09 Andhra Pradesh 19 157677290
Assam 3 3698678
Bihar 4 434160000
Chandigarh 2 179775
Chhattisgarh 1 5000000
Delhi 25 419044676
Gujarat 3 10491000
Haryana 2 7500000
Himachal Pradesh 1 10000000

109
Y ear State No. of UCs Amount
Jammu and Kashmir 1 300000
Jharkhand 3 7212000
Karnataka 3 12000000
Kerala 4 23800000
Madhya Pradesh 2 20000000
Maharashtra 10 144362080
Manipur 5 8.3395
Meghalaya 1 300
Nagaland 1 90
Odisha 3 13316000
Punjab 2 85100
Rajasthan 5 27000000
Sikkim 2 310800
Tamil Nadu 6 35549204
Uttar Pradesh 10 545446600
Uttarakhand 4 6157400
West Bengal 4 11690000
2009-10 Andhra Pradesh 7 147360000
Assam 5 33539542
Bihar 10 69000000
Chandigarh 1 2050000
Chhattisgarh 5 6983600
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 1 330600
Delhi 5 40905305
Gujarat 4 16649000
Haryana 2 3233694
Himachal Pradesh 1 10000000
Jharkhand 2 8750000
Karnataka 4 24000000

110
Y ear State No. of UCs Amount
Kerala 5 16151833
Madhya Pradesh 4 46928330
Maharashtra 9 95216249
Manipur 1 1920000
Punjab 2 2542657
Rajasthan 1 300000
Tamil Nadu 7 24226669
Uttar Pradesh 6 23765000
Uttarakhand 1 2055000
West Bengal 3 6500000
T
OTAL (A) 637 5040982544

111
ANNEXURE-J
Health
State-wise and Year-wise Outstanding UCs repor t as per demanded by Rajya Sabha Secretariat
As on 17/04/17
Y ear State No. of UCs Amount
2010-11 Andhra Pradesh 10 149461400
Assam 7 54457400
Bihar 10 146643600
Chandigarh 7 287840800
Chhattisgarh 4 18758500
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 1 330600
Delhi 6 84490815
Gujarat 6 57135300
Himachal Pradesh 3 61 14200
Jharkhand 2 284670000
Karnataka 9 130805200
Kerala 13 226502900
Madhya Pradesh 7 127967800
Maharashtra 2 12460000
Meghalaya 1 3155000
Nagaland 1 1 157100
Odisha 5 22364800
Punjab 4 26145700
Sikkim 1 882800
Tamil Nadu 5 11430000
Tripura 2 2641100
Uttar Pradesh 7 237451000
Uttaranchal 9 23756700
West Bengal 10 173863000
2011-12 Andaman and Nicobar Islands 4 5461000
111

112
Y ear State No. of UCs Amount
Andhra Pradesh 37 586112555
Arunachal Pradesh 5 20306000
Assam 37 484837050
Bihar 37 565010000
Chandigarh 30 279318288
Chhattisgarh 24 87814600
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 4 10234000
Daman and Diu 2 2745000
Delhi 5 12720349
Goa 1 94856
Gujarat 19 201609125
Haryana 3 46235000
Himachal Pradesh 30 97005600
Jammu and Kashmir 24 316696048
Jharkhand 17 191667000
Karnataka 17 213020600
Kerala 27 223009400
Madhya Pradesh 29 246945000
Maharashtra 41 1653652100
Manipur 11 134190000
Meghalaya 6 17816000
Nagaland 2 85900000
Odisha 27 386624400
Puducherry 4 52455568
Punjab 17 112194000
Rajasthan 24 187951500
Sikkim 34 55017700
Tamil Nadu 16 266043458

113
Y ear State No. of UCs Amount
Tripura 11 23178324
Uttar Pradesh 13 190799962
Uttaranchal 28 71789800
West Bengal 27 498569953
2012-13 Andaman and Nicobar 5 9852000
Andhra Pradesh 13 224957000
Arunachal Pradesh 13 88145000
Assam 15 90990212
Bihar 14 175794000
Chandigarh 8 157371000
Chhattisgarh 12 84370165
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 12 12074000
Daman and Diu 7 2680000
Delhi 2 15464994
Goa 12 145419000
Gujarat 20 438069320
Haryana 7 34346000
Himachal Pradesh 8 51267500
Jammu and Kashmir 4 4297343
Jharkhand 10 143539000
Karnataka 13 159767000
Kerala 20 154646660
Lakshadweep 4 2955000
Madhya Pradesh 4 77074000
Maharashtra 13 265630829
Manipur 13 33755554
Meghalaya 10 171380000
Mizoram 11 30866000
Nagaland 10 95205050

114
Y ear State No. of UCs Amount
Odisha 10 96117600
Puducherry 6 12885000
Punjab 17 86494384
Rajasthan 17 252102623
Sikkim 9 54704500
Tamil Nadu 17 369612178
Tripura 5 34398884
Uttar Pradesh 23 491454953
Uttaranchal 8 40732452
West Bengal 37 985355928
2013-14 Andaman and Nicobar 14 8220000
Andhra Pradesh 5 71091000
Arunachal Pradesh 23 133014000
Assam 24 717212507
Bihar 18 598559000
Chandigarh 14 8722000
Chhattisgarh 9 73125000
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 12 3745000
Daman and Diu 19 2862000
Delhi 25 286650051
Goa 21 15933000
Gujarat 10 93921729
Haryana 6 9932000
Himachal Pradesh 10 24695196
Jammu and Kashmir 11 17987408
Jharkhand 20 156525000
Karnataka 12 218624799
Kerala 8 1 17045000
Lakshadweep 11 1003000
Madhya Pradesh 23 458226000

115
Y ear State No. of UCs Amount
Maharashtra 26 210000356
Manipur 7 23732000
Meghalaya 20 82097718
Mizoram 22 138371500
Nagaland 17 405590000
Odisha 14 527697000
Puducherry 17 1 1617365
Punjab 13 343383000
Rajasthan 19 53182714
Sikkim 9 8126800
Tamil Nadu 19 214975000
Tripura 19 111656000
Uttar Pradesh 22 508056806
Uttaranchal 1 49500000
West Bengal 19 343783502
2014-15 Andhra Pradesh 2 1689814
Bihar 1 390000000
Chandigarh 1 771902
Chhattisgarh 1 390000000
Delhi 14 138496010
Gujarat 1 431232
Karnataka 1 336748
Madhya Pradesh 3 820000000
Maharashtra 1 2045861
Meghalaya 1 187000
Mizoram 1 107700000
Odisha 4 294320482
Puducherry 2 150532833
Rajasthan 1 390000000

116
Y ear State No. of UCs Amount
Sikkim 5 1738000
Tamil Nadu 4 154000000
Uttar Pradesh 2 13400000
Uttaranchal 2 680000000
2015-16 Assam 2 4400000
Chhattisgarh 1 1000000
Delhi 8 599896542
Karnataka 8 1507000000
Maharashtra 2 105000000
Manipur 1 2750000
Mizoram 3 50700000
Puducherry 1 2000000
Tamil Nadu 5 420000000
Uttar Pradesh 6 70783825
West Bengal 1 50000000
T
OTAL(B) 1778 26909328780
GRAND T OTAL(A+B) 2415 3195031 1324

117
ANNEXURE-K
NACO
State-wise and Year wise Outstanding UC's report as per demanded by
Rajya Sabha Secretariat as on 11/04/2017
Financial State No. of UC Pending UC Amount Pending
Year
12 3 4
2008-09 Assam 2 20,450,000.00
Delhi 12 66,949,578.00
Jharkhand 1 2,000,000.00
Kerala 2 540,000.00
Maharashtra 2 585,000.00
Nagaland 1 60,000,000.00
Odisha 1 270,000.00
Rajasthan 3 544,000.00
Tamil Nadu 4 1,184,250.00
Tripura 1 15,500,000.00
Uttar Pradesh 3 1,023,000.00
West Bengal 1 270,000.00
2009-10 Andhra Pradesh 1 495,900.00
Delhi 8 30,887,372.00
Karnataka 1 375,038.00
Maharashtra 1 504,300.00
Sikkim 1 3,151,000.00
Tamil Nadu 1 239,985.00
West Bengal 2 100,000.00
2010-11 Uttar Pradesh 1 30,000.00
2012-13 Delhi 1 2,036,558.00
Karnataka 4 81,922,704.00
117

118
12 3 4
Maharashtra 1 2,257,405.00
2013-14 Gujarat 1 5,222,000.00
Jammu and Kashmir 2 6,509,000.00
Karnataka 1 15,404,881.00
Maharashtra 1 2,590,478.00
2015-16 Delhi 1 4,745,543.00
Total 61 325,787,992.00
The position of pending UC in r/o NACO has been ascertained from PAO and the position of
pending UC as on 03.05.2017 is as under:
Total No. of UC pending Amount of outstanding UC pending ( ` in crore)
       60 30.40 (with old UC's pertaining to 2008-09 and 2009-10)
As regard the settlement of the pending UC, NACO is taking steps to settle the same. Number of
UC pending has come down from 67 reported in May 2017 to 58 now.