Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th December, 2013)
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Sixty-seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
REPORT NO. 
78
SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Sixty-seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  18 th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  18 th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)-(vi)
Part–A (Health Sector)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—48
Chapter–I – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee .......................... 2—21
Chapter–II – Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................ 22—26
Chapter–III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 27—44
Chapter–IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................... 45—48
Part–B (National Health Mission)
REPORT ................................................................................................................................... 49—87
Chapter–I – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee .......................... 50—65
Chapter–II – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ...... 66—70
Chapter–III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 71—86
Chapter–IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................... 87
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 88—93
(Part A–Health Sector) .................................................................................................... 88—91
(Part B–National Health Mission) ....................................................................................... 92—93
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 95—100
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 10 1—135
Part–A (Health Sector) ........................................................................................................ 101—122
(Part–B (National Health Mission) ..................................................................................... 123—135
8. L IST OF R EPORTS P RESENTED E ARLIER ............................................................................... 136—141

(i)
& Vacant vide disqualification as a member of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) w.e.f. 19 th September, 2013.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shrimati B. Jayashree
4. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
 
&7. Shri Rasheed Masood
8. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
9. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
10. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
14. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
15. Shrimati Priya Dutt
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
18. Dr. Monazir Hassan
19. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
20. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
hereby present this Seventy-eighth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee’s Sixty-seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2013-14.
2. The Sixty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
26
th April, 2013. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report,
received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare were considered by the Committee at
its meetings held on the 16
th and 17 th December, 2013.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
the 17 th December, 2013.
BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 17, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
26 Agrahayana 1935 (Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare.

ACRONYMS
(PART A–HEALTH SECTOR)
AIIMS – All India Institute of Medical Sciences
CGHS – Central Government Health Scheme
CPWD – Central Public Works Department
CHS – Central Health Services
CDSCO – Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
CAG – Comptroller and Auditor General
CTRI – Central Tobacco Research Institute
CCEA – Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
DUAC – Delhi Urban Arts Commission
DGHS – Director General of Health Services
DMHP – District Mental Health Programme
EFC – Expenditure Finance Committee
GDP – Gross Domestic Product
GFR – General Financial Rules
IPD – In-Patient Department
IVF – In-vitro Fertilization
JPNATC – Jai Prakash Narayan Apex Trauma Centre
MRC – Medical Reimbursement Claims
NCR – National Capital Region
NMHP – National Mental Health Programme
NRHM – National Rural Health Mission
NUHM – National Urban Health Mission
OPDs – Out Patient Departments
PIP – Programme Implementation Plan
PPP – Public Private Participation
PMSSY – Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana
SOPs – Standard Operating Procedures
UPSC – Union Public Service Commission
U C – Utilisation Certificate
(iv)

(PART B–NATIONAL HEALTH  MISSION)
ARI – Acute Respiratory Illnesses
ABER – Annual Blood Examination Rate
API – Annual Parasite Incidence
ASHA – Accredited Social Health Activists
B E – Budget Estimates
CTD – Central TB Division
CFR – Case Fatality Rate
CHCs – Community Health Centres
CDRI – Central Drug Research Institute
CPSMS – Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System in NRHM.
CRMs – Common Review Missions
DSUs – District Surveillance Units
DOTS – Directly Observed Treatment, Short Course
DR-TB Centre – Drug Resistant Tuberculosis Centre
EDL – Essential Drugs List
EAG – Empowered Action Group States
FRUs – First Referral Units
GDP – Gross Domestic Product
HIV – Human Immunodeficiency Virus
ICTC/ART centres – Integrated Counseling and Testing Centre/Anti Retroviral Treatment
IDSP – Integrated Disease Surveillance Project
IMR – Infant Mortality Rate
ICT – Information Communication Technology
IEAG – India Expert Advisory Group on Polio
ISRO – Indian Space Research Organization
JSY – Janani Suraksha Yojana
JSSK – Janani-Shishu Suraksha Karyakram
JE – Japanese Encephalitis
JRMs – Joint Review Mission
MDR-TB – Multiple Drug Resistant Tuberculosis
MDGs – Millennium Development Goals
MMR – Maternal Mortality Rate
NRHM-RCH – National Rural Health Mission-Reproductive and Child Health
(v)

NUHM – National Urban Health Mission
NHM – National Health Mission
NIC – National Informatics Centre
NDC – National Development Council
NSS – National Sample Survey
NLEP – National Leprosy Eradication Programme
NPCB – National Programme for Control of Blindness
NIDDCP – National Iodine Deficiency Disorder Control Programme
NIDSP – National Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme
NTBCP – National TB Control Programme
NVBDCP – National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme
NTAGI – National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization
NIMC – National Inspection and Monitoring Committee
NGOs – Non-Governmental Organisations
PMDT – Programmatic Management of Drug-resistant Tuberculosis
PITC – Provider Initiated HIV Testing and Counselling
PIP – Project Implementation Plan
PHCs – Primary Health Centres
PMO – Prime Minister Office
RMNCHA – Reproductive, Maternal, New-born, Child and Adolescent Health Strategy
RE – Revised Estimate
RRT – Rapid Response Teams
RNTCP – Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme
PC&PNDT Act – Pre-Conception and Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques Act
SSO – State Surveillance Officer
SSUs – State Surveillance Units
SSH – Sentinel Surveillance Hospital
TB – Tuberculosis
TFR – Total Fertility Rate
UT – Union Territory
UCs – Utilization Certificates s
(vi)

1
REPORT
Part-A — Health Sectors
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in Sixty-Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 47) of
the Department of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2013-14.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
been accepted by the Committee: 2.2, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.13, 2.15, 3.3, 3.5, 3.7,
3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 3.16, 3.18, 3.20, 3.23, 4.7, 5.4, 5.8, 8.4, 9.2, 9.7, 9.9,
10.5, 13.4, 14.5, 15.8, 15.10, 16.5, 16.10, 17.4, 18.3, 18.5, 18.9
Total–37 (Chapter-I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: 2.14, 4.5, 5.10, 7.3, 11.4, 19.3, 19.5, 20.5, 22.2,
22.5
Total–10 (Chapter-II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 2.4, 2.6, 2.8, 4.9, 4.10, 5.2, 5.5, 5.6, 6.1, 6.2,
6.3, 8.6, 9.5, 9.6, 9.7, 11.5, 12.3, 12.5, 13.6, 13.7, 14.3, 14.8, 15.2, 15.3, 16.3,
17.2, 18.8, 20.3, 21.2
Total–29 (Chapter-III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are
still awaited: 3.6, 3.8, 3.24, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 8.3, 9.4, 16.7, 16.12, 16.13, 16.14, 16.15
Total–13 (Chapter-IV)
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 From a glance of the above Table, the Committee notes that the funds allocated over the
period of Eleventh Plan and Annual Plan 2012-13 has increased steadily. However, the Committee
is constrained to observe that in a time of increasing demand due to demographic pressures, public
expectations and medical advances there was substantial and persistent under-utilization of the
budgeted funds during the Eleventh Plan and Annual Plan of 2012-13. The Committee desires that
the processes of allocation and utilization of funds should be mutually reinforcing instead of being
parallel. That the savings occurred under the Plan head underlines the fact that the development
activities might have been adversely affected in the health sector. The Committee, accordingly
impresses upon the Department that in future utilization must reflect the allocation policy objectives
to the extent possible. (Para 2.2)
Action Taken
1.2 Noted for compliance.
Recommendation/Observation
1.3 The Committee’s examination of the following major heads of account as per the
background material furnished by the Department has revealed recurrent and persistent sub-optimal
utilization of budgetary provisions (Plan) during the last three Financial years (Annexure-A).
Actual expenditure incurred in respect of some of the major Institutions/projects/initiatives
of Department for the last three financial years is as under Annexure-B. (Para 2.7)
Action Taken
1.4 Matter of Record.
Recommendation/Observation
1.5 From a perusal of the above Tables, the Committee observes that with such level of
underutilization of funds, the financial objectives and target achievement of the Department would
suffer to a large extent. The Department has informed that during the Eleventh Plan the extent of
savings on the Capital Account has been Rs.2883.25 crore. Most of the savings were due to slow
progress of capital work and slow pace of procurement of equipments. The Committee observes
with deep concern that savings under the Capital section implies that it will impede the
2

3
developmental activities. Slow progress in capital work would critically hamper both the quality of
care provided and the ability of the system as a whole to respond to increased demand in this
sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take concrete steps to
address this issue by means of prudent assessment of the fund requirement and design effective
mechanism to make a balance between spending and savings. (Para 2.8)
Action Taken
1.6 The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 The Committee desires to be apprised of the hurdles faced by the Department in the path
of utilization of allocated funds and delivering the objectives and the steps initiated and pursued by
the Department to streamline formulation of the budgetary requirements in a realistic fashion and
also to expedite necessary approvals for operationalization of various formulated schemes/projects.
(Para 2.9)
Action Taken
1.8 Major hurdle in the path of utilisation of funds during 2012-13 was economy instructions
of Ministry of Finance dated 14
th November, 2012 which necessitated submission of all UCs under
all the Schemes of Government of India. To overcome this hurdle, the Ministry has taken action
and has appointed Nodal Officers to the various States for settlement of pending UCs so that
allocated funds are optimally utilised during the current year.
Recommendation/Observation
1.9 Taking all the above factors into consideration, the Committee recommends that the
Department should once again assess its fund requirements realistically and thereafter move the
Planning Commission for augmentation of financial resources for health sector for 2013-14 at RE
stage. The Committee would like to be apprised of the follow-up action taken in this regard.
(Para 2.10)
Action Taken
1.10 The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. The appropriate action
in this regard is being taken and all the Programme Divisions are being requested to re-assess their
requirement so that the revised proposals can be submitted to Ministry of Finance for consideration
at RE stage.
Recommendation/Observation
1.11 The Committee is deeply concerned that a large number of UCs are still pending under both
the Centrally Sponsored and Central Sector Schemes. The additional measure taken by the
Department by organizing reconciliation week has also not resulted in optimizing the liquidation of
UCs. The Committee desires to be informed of the reasons given by the States for non-submission
of UCs. The Ministry should also verify the physical progress matching the utilization. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department needs to have a prudent assessment of
the reasons for pendency of such a large number of Utilization Certificates and reframe action plans
for liquidation thereof. (Para 2.13)

4
Action Taken
1.12 The reframed action plan for the clearance of large number of pending UCs is as under:
1. The Ministry of Health and FW has appointed Additional Secretaries/Joint Secretaries/
Directors as nodal officers from divisions of this Ministry, releasing grant to the
States, to visit the concerned States to settle the pendency of related UCs and submit
their reports to the competent authority.
2. A calendar is being prepared by the sanction issuing authority to call the State
Government officials to reconcile their pending UCs and provide details of expenditure
and audited accounts.
Recommendation/Observation
1.13 The Committee in para 1.21 of its fifty-fourth Report had recommended for a speedy action
on the observations as contained in audit paras. Reiterating the recommendation, the Committee
would further suggest that audit paras should not be neglected. Timely action should be taken on
audit paras. (Para 2.15)
Action Taken
1.14 The position of pending ATNs is monitored regularly by holding Special Audit Committee
Meetings in the Ministry.
● The Audit Office has been requested to expedite vetting comments on ATNs already
sent to them.
● The matter is being followed up regularly with DGACE by deputing officer concerned
to that office.
III. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME
Recommendations/Observations
1.15 The Committee is disappointed to note the continuous trend of under-utilization of Plan
Funds during the Eleventh Plan and in the year 2012-13, more so when the Department has sought
enhanced funds at RE stage during the Eleventh Plan and 2012-13. The actual expenditure figures
also indicate that the Department could not even utilize the funds allocated at BE stage except
during 2009-10. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should devise
strategies to utilize the allocated funds optimally before proposing the revised estimate so that the
funds are not unnecessarily blocked and remain unspent. The Committee could not understand why
such higher allocation was sought during successive years inspite of under-utilisation in the earlier
years. The Department should look into the matter. (Para 3.3)
1.16 Despite continuous under-utilization of funds during the Eleventh Five Year Plan, there is
enhanced allocation in Plan funds to Rs. 89.92 crore in 2013-14 from Rs. 85.26 crore in RE
2012-13. The Committee has been informed that the enhanced funds allocation under Plan Head
will be utilized for meeting the expenditure on account of salary and wages, purchase of medicines
and all other administrative expenses to be incurred by some CGHS cities for which budgets are
allocated under Plan head only. Cities where CGHS Wellness Centres are being run under Plan Head
are: Chandigarh, Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Guwahati, Shillong, Dehradun, Jabalpur, Ranchi and
Thiruvananthapuram. The Committee is of the view that for ensuring optimum utilization of funds
in CGHS the Department needs to undertake a lot of ground work. (Para 3.5)

5
Action Taken
1.17 The point made by the Hon’ble Committee has been noted. The Department shall make all
possible efforts to ensure maximum utilization of plan funds, especially the funds allocated for
Capital Works and funds earmarked for NE regions. The plan funds allocated for Capital Works
are generally placed at the disposal of CPWD which takes its own time for selection of contractor
and execution of work. The time involved in completing such mandatory process by CPWD as per
the laid down provisions of GFR results in under-utilization of plan funds. This issue has been
taken up in past with CPWD to expedite the process. The Department shall make further efforts
with CPWD to get the things expedited to ensure maximum utilization of funds. The Department
shall also take necessary steps to ensure maximum utilization of recurring funds allocated under
plan funds.
Recommendation/Observation
1.18 On a query regarding the current pendency of settlement of Medical Reimbursement Claims
(MRC) of CGHS beneficiaries, the Committee has been apprised that a total of 4061 claims
involving about Rs.16.36 crore were under process in CGHS all over the country, at the end of
December, 2012. It has also been informed that a maximum time limit of 45 days has been fixed
for settlement of Medical Reimbursement Claims (MRC) and that a report of the MRCs pending
beyond 45 days will be sent by the respective Additional Directors to the Directorate on a monthly
basis. The Committee welcomes the efforts made by the Department to bring about a significant
reduction in pendency of reimbursement claims and hopes that the Department would be able to
bring this pendency further down with its sincere efforts. The Committee likes the Department to
diligently monitor the effective implementation of the said procedure to protect the interests of the
beneficiaries. (Para 3.7)
Action Taken
1.19 Department is making continuous efforts to make reimbursement of medical claims of the
pensioners/CGHS beneficiaries hassle free and in the shortest possible time. Sometimes the
settlement of Medical Reimbursement Claims (MRC) takes a longer time for want of requisite
documents from the beneficiary and also opinion from specialists of Government hospitals.
However, Instructions have been issued to settle the Medical Reimbursement Claims within the
shortest possible time. A maximum time-limit of 45 days has been fixed for this purpose within
which the claim should be settled. The Department shall continue its endeavour to address the
MRC related issues on priority.
Recommendation/Observation
1.20 The Committee notes that the initiatives taken by the Department so far to combat the
serious problem of shortage of doctors and staff in CGHS Wellness Centres have not been enough.
The Committee strongly feels that to deal with the issue of perennial shortage of doctors, CMOs
and other supporting staff in CGHS Wellness Centres, initiatives should be taken to design a
framework for optimum utilization of the available resources to fill up the vacancies and then
sustain that level so as to deal with the problem in an efficient manner. (Para 3.10)
Action Taken
1.21 There is an overall shortage of medical and paramedical professionals in the country and
the Government is making efforts to address this problem. CGHS, like other Government

6
institutions is also facing the shortage of doctors. So far as fresh recruitments are concerned UPSC
makes recommendations every year for direct appointment of doctors and also for filling vacancies
of promotional posts. However, many of the selected candidates against direct recruitment do not
join CGHS. Retired doctors have been hired on contract basis against some of the vacant posts
to manage the operations depending on the immediate need. The existing CGHS Wellness Centres
and other formations are working in efficient manner with the human resources available at present.
However, the point made by the Hon’ble Committee is noted and the Department shall make further
efforts to fill up the vacancies and strengthen the human resources wherever required to improve
the functioning of CGHS.
Recommendations/Observations
1.22 The Committee was apprised that timings of CGHS dispensaries have been revised so as
to provide extended hours of the Wellness Centres. The Department has informed that to overcome
the problem of shortage of doctors and paramedical staff and ensure optimum utilization of scarce
manpower resources, it was decided to change the working hours of the CGHS dispensaries from
the current timings of 7.30 AM to 1.30 PM to 8.00 AM to 3.00 PM with 30 minutes of lunch
break. The new timings have been implemented in Delhi NCR with effect from 1st April, 2013.
However, six dispensaries (including the VIP dispensaries), which are operational for 24 hours, are
not covered under the revised timings. The Department has also informed that with the
computerization of all CGHS dispensaries and universal application and portability of CGHS cards,
one can easily avail the CGHS facilities from any dispensary/First Aid Post near to his residence
or place of work as per his/her convenience and there is no compulsion to go to his parent
dispensary for medical consultation and medicines. The proposed working hours will rather be
more convenient for the serving employees as it will provide longer effective working hours for
availing the facilities. (Para 3.11)
1.23 The Committee is dismayed by the contradictory information received from many
beneficiaries that their grievances were not heard in Wellness Centres other than the parent CGHS
dispensaries. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should ensure
that effective implementation of the new initiative taken; otherwise it would be a futile exercise on
papers. The Committee also feels that double shifts in CGHS Wellness Center would be more
beneficial for a large number of beneficiaries as well as the staff. The beneficiaries need not take
leave from their offices to visit the dispensary and larger number of patients can be covered in
a day and the burden will get distributed between the shifts so as to make it easier on the staff.
(Para 3.12)
Action Taken
1.24 The Department had introduced the complete portability of CGHS cards across the country
vide its OM dated 16-03-2011 enabling CGHS beneficiaries to avail medical consultation and
medicines from any CGHS wellness Centre. Instructions have also been issued vide Circulars dated
17-12-2012, 08-02-2013 and 22-05-2013 directing the CMO I/Cs and other officers concerned to
enforce it scrupulously without any discrimination. They are also being sensitized regularly through
periodic meetings by the senior officers to implement the orders in letter and spirit.
1.25 So far as introduction of double shifts in CGHS wellness centres is concerned, it is to
mention that double shifts were introduced in August 2011 in CGHS Wellness Centres at Noida,
Gurgaon and Faridabad and the response received was not encouraging. Keeping in view the
scarcity of the professionally qualified medical and paramedical human resources in CGHS,
introduction of double shifts may not be a feasible proposition.

7
Recommendations/Observations
1.26 On the query of the Committee on the steps being taken to ensure that the instructions
issued to the CMO in charge of all the Wellness Centres to stop the pilferage of medicines is being
scrupulously followed, the Department informed that CMOs in-Charge are expected to adhere to
the detailed instructions issued to them in this regard. To ensure that the instructions are followed
by them properly, the following steps have been taken:
(a) The CMOs In-charge are sensitized about it regularly by the Additional Director of the
concerned zone/ city in the monthly meetings.
(b) Surprise Inspections are carried out by the superior officers to verify the stock of
drugs/medicines in the dispensary stores /counters.
(c) Internal Audit Unit of Vigilance Division of CGHS does surprise visits to know as to
whether the guidelines to stop pilferage of medicines are being adhered to.
(d) Appropriate actions are taken in case of non-compliance of the instructions.
(e) To exercise an effective check on pilferage of medicines from the CGHS Wellness
centres, an ‘SMS Alert system’ has been introduced. A system generated message is
sent to the CGHS beneficiaries indicating that he/she has been issued medicines from
the CGHS dispensary. Registration of Mobile number has also been made compulsory.
(Para 3.13)
1.27 In this regard the Committee recommends that in addition to the steps already taken by the
Department, it should also be ensured that there is no leakage at the transit stage. Comparable
measures of quality should also be worked out at the earliest. (Para 3.14)
Action Taken
1.28 The following measures have been taken to ensure quality of medicines supplied to CGHS
and to prevent pilferage of CGHS medicines;
1. Whenever medicines are procured by MSD through sources other than HSCC or under
Pilot Project, in-house analysis report of the drugs is submitted by the Manufacturer/
Distributor. As far as procurement through HSCC is concerned, a joint team of HSCC
and CGHS draws random 2
nd samples from the supplied drugs under inspection and
sent to pre-designated authorized Laboratories and Govt. Laboratories for mandatory
testing.
2. Same procedure is followed for Pilot project drugs, except for the samples for
2
nd analysis are drawn by the CMO In-charges.
3. For Life Saving Drugs and supplies by authorized local chemists, quality control
measures are taken by state Drug Control Department.
In addition, the following steps are taken in the Medical stores Depot, CGHS to ensure
transparency and accountability;
● Proper maintenance of stock records.
● Stock position/availability of medicines can be viewed online by the CMO I/Cs for
proper utilisation of medicines.
● Short supplies/over supplies of medicines are looked into immediately for taking
remedial measures.

8
However, the suggestion made by Hon’ble Committee about checking pilferage of medicines
is noted and CGHS will ensure that no leakage takes place at any stage. CGHS is also committed
for ensuring supply of quality drugs and medicines to its beneficiaries.
Recommendation/Observation
1.29 The Committee would like to be apprised of the details on how the Department would utilize
the non-plan allocation for improving the quality of medicines being provided to the beneficiaries.
(Para 3.16)
Action Taken
1.30 In addition to the measures indicated in the previous para, the following measures have also
been taken to enforce quality assurance in the medicines supplied to CGHS beneficiaries;
1. Random Samples of pilot project drugs, sent to approved labs to ensure quality of
drugs.
2. Bar coding of all the supplies received has been introduced to stop pilferage and ensure
quality.
Recommendation/Observation
1.31 The Committee feels that still much is required to be done in this direction as the feedback
generally received by the Committee as regards the satisfaction level of beneficiaries is not positive.
A serious introspection as regards the sufficiency of efforts made, is required. Besides, the
Committee is of the opinion that effective communication strategies should be designed to
encourage positive partnership among the different levels of officials so as to generate
organizational support for reforms. The Committee desires that patient satisfaction level should
regularly be reviewed. (Para 3.18)
Action Taken
1.32 A new format of Inspection report for wellness centres is being devised with inputs from
the concerned authority.
Beneficiaries are participating indirectly in the management and operation of CGHS Wellness
Centres through their representatives in the Local Advisory Committees set up at the Wellness
Centre level under the chairmanship of the CMO In charges. In addition to the Help line, a ‘Help
Desk’ has recently been set up to provide answers to the queries of the beneficiaries. The FAQs
have also been made exhaustive and more informative to help beneficiaries availing CGHS facilities
in a better manner.
The Department shall continue its endeavour to make CGHS more user friendly and service
oriented.
Recommendation/Observation
1.33 Any policy for revising the rates should be based on long- term perspectives instead of
emphasizing on the cost containment with a short- term perspective. The Committee recommends
that the Department may revisit its policies on revising the rates and rationalize the new package
rates so that the CGHS beneficiaries are no longer deprived of highly specialized medical care and
diagnostic facilities. The rates should be so fixed to attract the best hospitals in the private sector.
(Para 3.20)

9
Action Taken
1.34 These valuable suggestions are noted and DGHS will be requested to keep these in mind
while finalizing the package rates for various treatment procedures under CGHS.
Recommendation/Observation
1.35 The Committee is of the opinion that the Department should take measures to set up
CGHS Wellness Centres in all those States where there is concentration of Central Government
employees/pensioners. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that at least one CGHS
Wellness Centre should be set up in all the States where CGHS is presently not in operation.
(Para 3.23)
Action Taken
1.36 The Department of Health and Family Welfare has already mooted a proposal for setting up
of at least one dispensary in the capital city of each of those States where CGHS is not currently
in operation. The proposal has been sent to the Ministry of Finance for consideration.
IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
1.37 The Committee is very concerned with the persisting vacant positions in different categories
of posts at the Hospital and VMMC. The Committee is surprised as to how the college is running
with more than 50% vacancies in the sanctioned strength. The Committee strongly feels that the
present strength of teaching staff is not sufficient. The Committee fails to understand that though
the DNB issue has since been resolved, why UPSC has not accepted requisition for the vacant
posts. The Committee accordingly recommends upon the Department to take up with the UPSC for
expediting filling up of all the vacant posts. The Committee recommends that steps should be taken
to gain permanent solution and not conceal underlying deficiencies.  (Para 4.7)
Action Taken
1.38 As far as CHS Doctors are concerned, it is submitted that the vacant posts of CHS doctors
at VMMC and Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi are required to be filled by Teaching sub-cadre of
CHS cadre. There had been delay of more than one year in placing/accepting requisitions with the
UPSC due to some clarifications on equivalence of DNB qualifications and experience with MD,
MS, DM and M.Ch. qualifications of respective speciality or super-speciality. Now the issue has
been resolved and the requisitions are being placed with the UPSC. At present, out of 154 positions
of CHS doctors at VMMC and Safdarjung Hospital, 71 positions are vacant. However, 35 doctors
are working on contract basis against CHS posts so that teaching activity and patient-care may not
suffer. Ministry has already placed requisition with the UPSC for 154 vacancies, including that of
VMMC and Safdarjung Hospital of various specialities and the Commission has so far advertised
92 vacancies. The process is continuing. It is hoped that within 8 to 10 months almost all the
vacancies would be filled up on regular basis.
As far as other posts are concerned, filling up the vacant post is a continuation process
and is taken up in accordance with the vacancies arising on account of retirement, creation of new
posts, resignation, etc. The process of filling up of the vacant posts is under process, which
includes conducting meeting of DPC, framing of Recruitment Rules, etc. The details of vacant
posts and their status of recruitment etc. are given in Annexure-II.

10
Moreover, there are 106 nursing posts also lying vacant for which recruitment is under process.
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL
Recommendation/Observation
1.39 The Committee is deeply concerned about the slow progress of construction work. The
Committee wants to be apprised of the progress made in the purchase of new equipments at the
earliest and hopes that the allocated funds will be used judiciously within dedicated timelines with
target achievement.  (Para 5.4)
Action Taken
1.40 As regards the annual procurement of equipment during the current financial year, the
purchase Department, as per practice, has already invited requisitions from various departments of
Dr. RML Hospital for procurement of the equipment for their respective departments. These
requisitions, after screening from the designated committee and approval of the Medical
Superintendent/competent authority (depending upon the estimated cost of equipment/s) will be
processed and tenders will be invited for their procurement. The various Committees formed by
Dr. RML hospital in the purchase of equipment are guided by the timeframes laid down by the
Procurement Cell, Directorate General of Health Services.
Apart from annual demand for procurement of various equipments, the Hospital has also
formulated the policy of Interim Procurement plan. Under this, if a demand for equipment arises
from any department due to condemnation of previous equipment or urgent requirement, with the
approval of competent authority, the Purchase Department (hospital) invites tenders either open or
limited depending upon the cost of the equipment for its procurement.
Regarding the procurement of equipment for the upcoming New Emergency Care Centre,
the 24 contracts for procurement of equipment for this building had been signed and forwarded
to this Hospital. Out of 24 equipments, the hospital has already got the supply of 22 equipments.
The rest of the equipments will be supplied soon.
Procurement Cell, Dte. GHS has also invited tenders for three remaining equipment required
for New Emergency Care Centre. Tenders were opened but contracts have not been received. As
soon as the contracts are received, procurement for these equipments will be done immediately.
Recommendation/Observation
1.41 The Committee is disappointed by the reasons cited for delay, e.g., non-compliance with the
required seismic safety standards, fire resistant work not being planned earlier etc. as it reflects
the inadequacies at the planning and designing stages. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
a prudent assessment of the deficiencies should again be done before the final stage so as to rule
out any major deficiency. The Committee hopes that the projects will be completed within the
timeline framed. The Committee would like to be apprised of the constraints, if any, in adhering
to the fresh target. (Para 5.8)
Action Taken
1.42 The strengthening of the structure has been carried out as suggested by IIT Delhi. The
Government have also appointed an independent Project Management Consultant, M/s DTTDC Delhi
to look into the technical aspects of the project in details and the same is being carried out
accordingly.

11
VIII. LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE
Recommendation/Observation
1.43 The Committee also observes that the Department does not have any concrete framework
for utilization of allocated funds and is apprehensive and expecting underutilization of funds.
Moreover, there was cost overrun during 2012-13. The Committee fails to understand the under-
utilization of funds in a situation of increasing cost pressure and demand. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that the Hospital should draw a definite action plan for achieving targets
and monitor construction of new hospital and other related buildings scrupulously.
(Para 8.4)
Action Taken
1.44 The BE for the year 2013-14 has been prepared carefully keeping in mind the expenditure
incurred during last financial year 2012-13 and additional requirements during 2013-14. The funds
may be utilized as per requirement projected. The LHMC will utilize the allocated funds during the
financial year 2013-14 as per projected requirement. The expenditure is being maintained/ monitored
according to the guidelines of the Ministry. The details are as below:-
(A) Expenditure plan for financial year 2013-14 under Major Head 4210-M&E (PLAN)
FIRST QUARTER – Amount spent – Rs.2.26 crores
SECOND QUARTER – Likely Expdt. – Rs.0.45 crores
THIRD AND FOURTH QUARTER
(i) Equipment for which tenders have been floated and are to be procured tentatively by
third quarter (meetings of purchase committee are in progress) for Rs.0.26 crore.
(ii) Demands are being screened and tenders to be floated for Rs.17.71 crore.
(B) The construction under Phase-1 of Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan underway is being
executed by agencies under the supervision and monitoring of HSCC (India) Ltd., a Public
Sector Undertaking under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The budget for this
work is being used from Oversight Committee Budget.
(C) The maintenance of LHMC and Associated Hospitals, for which budget under head 4210,
4216 and 2210 is utilized, is undertaken by CPWD. CPWD Civil and Electrical Division has
submitted action plan for financial year 2013-14.
IX. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS)
Recommendation/Observation
1.45 As per the information furnished by the Department Rs.476.00 crore and Rs.788.70 Crore
has been allocated under Plan and Non-Plan respectively for the financial year 2012-13. Out of
Plan allocation, Rs.247.24 crore has been expended till February, 2013. However, as per the
information furnished by the Department vide its OM dated 4
th April, 2013 the utilization till
March 31, 2013 was Rs. 470.00 crore. The Committee fails to understand as to how a huge
amount was expended in the last month of the financial year. The Department needs to explain
this. However, the Committee observes that the allocation under Non-Plan has been fully utilized.
(Para 9.2)

12
Action Taken
1.46 Out of the allocation Rs.476 crore, grant released to the Institute was Rs. 470 crore only
under Plan for the year 2012-13. Expenditure incurred till March 31, 2013 was Rs.423.13 crore,
out of which Rs.247. 24 crore was expended till Feb.2013. Expenditure of Rs.175.89 crore under
Plan during the month of March is because of various stages involved in procurement process and
execution of capital projects, which are specified hereunder;
The requirement of Machinery and Equipment of each Centre/Department in AIIMS is
assessed by Assessment Committee in the beginning of the financial year. On the basis of detailed
presentation made by Heads of Departments/Chief of Centres before the Assessment Committee
chaired by Director, allocation of funds is made. This exercise is generally completed by Ist week
of May.
The Institute faculty has summer vacation in two groups from 16
th May-15 June and the
16th June-15 th July. The majority of the technical specifications are made available to the Store
section only during August when all the faculty joins after availing the summer vacation. For the
equipments where the threshold value is more than Rs.30 lakh, external experts are also associated
in preparation of specifications and these are made available to the store section for floating the
tender by mid-September.
The institute floats about 700-800 tenders for different equipments. Wide publicity of
tenders is given and tender submission requires about 1-1/2 month’s time. Thereafter, the analysis
of bids is carried out. Technical evaluation including demonstration of the equipments, wherever
required, also takes about 1-1/2 month’s time. Then, the Store Purchase Committee meetings, Price
Bid Opening meetings, Negotiations Meetings are held and also concurrence of Finance Division
and approval of Competent Authority is obtained before award of contracts, which takes another
about 2-3 months time.
In some cases, re-tendering has to be done due to single bid or single shortlisted bid with
a view to generate more competition for which specifications are also sometimes re-visited and
made more broad based. Thus, majority of contracts are finalized during the last quarter only.
In case of indigenous equipments or imported equipments offered in Indian Rupees,
generally a lead time of 1-2 months is to be given to suppliers to supply the stores and accordingly
the supplies are received in the months of February-March. After the receipt of supplies and
issuance of Inspection Notes, the payments are released.
In case of imported equipments in foreign currency, the letters of credit is established
through the State Bank of India Foreign Exchange Division and they also require some processing
time. Majority of the letters of credit are opened in the month of March only.
Expenditure on capital works is generally made on circumstantial need in line with the
project/work status. Payments made were against works already completed and for works which
were taken up at the end of 2012-13.
Recommendation/Observation
1.47 On the query about the reasons for not considering the proposal of starting burns unit at
AIIMS despite Committee’s constant recommendations, the Department has informed that there is
no proposal for setting up of Burns Unit at AIIMS, as yet. The Committee recommends that the
Department should reassess the requirement of Burns Unit at AIIMS and apprise the Committee of
the reasons for not considering the proposal till now at the earliest. (Para 9.7)

13
Action Taken
1.48 The Ministry of Health and FW was informed that the proposal for creating 20 beds (10
ICU and 10 General Beds) for burn unit at JPNATC are in the process of planning and the same
should be placed before the Governing Body. Accordingly, a proposal to this effect was placed
before the SFC in its meeting held on 07.05.2008 and the same was approved in toto .
The minutes of the SFC meeting held on 07.05.2008 was duly ratified by the Governing
Body in its meeting held on 13.08.2008 and are presently under submission to the Ministry.
Recommendation/Observation
1.49 The Committee is extremely disappointed with the vacancy position in different categories
of posts in AIIMS. The Committee fails to understand the manner in which the premier Institute
is being run when there is such a large number of vacancies existing. The Committee strongly feels
that the shortage of faculty in the long run is bound to adversely affect the standard of education
imparted by the Institute which would result in poor quality of health care services. The Committee
recommends that every possible step should be taken to fill up the vacancies at the earliest.
(Para 9.9)
Action Taken
1.50 A to tal number of 99 appointments in faculty posts were made in 2012. Further, 148 vacant
positions of Assistant Professor/Lecturer in Nursing for various disciplines have been advertised
and the matter is under process.
Apart from this, 37 posts of Professors in various disciplines had been advertised under
direct recruitment. However, it has been decided that the advertisement issued by AIIMS for
appointment of Professor under direct recruitment be kept in abeyance and no action pursuant to
it be taken until further orders. A committee under the Chairmanship of Sh. P.K. Pradhan, former
Secretary (H&FW) is exploring the possibility of resolving the issues arising out of direct
recruitment. The report of the Committee is awaited. The selection process in respect of remaining
vacant faculty positions will be initiated in phase manner in due course of time.
The following recruitments were successfully completed during the financial year 2012-13:–
On Regular Basis
Post Name No. of Posts
Sister Gd-II 638
Medical Physicist 06
Mechanic A/C 11
Technician Radiology Gd-II 37
Medical Social Service Officer Gd-II 09
Manager (HRD) 01
Assistant Controller of Examination 01
Child Psychologist 01
Plumber 02
Operation Theater Assistant 166
T
OTAL : 872

14
On Contract Basis
Post Name No. of Posts
Personal Assistant 10
Technician (Laboratory) 42
Assistant Dietician 02
Physiotherapist 03
Perfusionist 05
Scientist (Deptt. of Paediatrics) 01
Scientist (Genetic Unit – Deptt. of Paediatrics) 02
Scientist (Deptt. of Reproductive Biology) 02
Consultant (Fire Officer) 01
Sister Gd-II 52
T
OTAL: 120
The process to fill up the following posts is in progress:–
Post Name No. of Posts
Ophthalmic Technician Gd-I 10
Dental Technician Gd-II 08
Lab. Attendant Gd-II 78
Lower Division Clerk 96
Stenographer 19
Data Entry Operator Gd ‘A’ 05
Operation Theater Assistant 43
Educationalist 01
Registrar 01
Senior Biochemist 01
Senior Chemist 01
Senior Veterinary Officer(Surgeons) 01
Biochemist 01
Chemist 02
Clinical Psychologist/Psychologist 02
Medical Physicist 03
Besides above the process of recruitment in respect of all vacant posts are in progress.

15
X. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND NEURO SCIENCES (NIMHANS),
BENGALURU
Recommendation/Observation
1.51 The Committee welcomes the continuing trend of target achievement by the Institute
However, the Committee recommends for rendering greater services integration on both quality and
efficiency grounds. (Para 10.5)
Action Taken
1.52 Noted for compliance.
Recommendation/Observation
1.53 From the information furnished, the Committee gathers that under PMSSY construction is
going on for Medical College and Residential Complexes for setting up of 6 AIIMS like institutions
and work is going on in different phases. Upgradation of Government Medical College in second
phase of PMSSY has also been started. The Committee strongly feels that the projects under
PMSSY are suffering a set back due to less funding, under-utilization of allocated funds and slow
pace of work causing delay which in turn causes cost overruns. The Committee would, therefore,
expect the Department to urgently initiate appropriate corrective measures to arrest shortfall in
utilization of the budgeted amount for PMSSY as also to meet the dedicated timelines projected for
different projects so that the institutions start functioning at the earliest. (Para 13.4)
Action Taken
1.54 Construction of Medical College and hostels at six new AIIMS are almost complete and
construction activities on Hospital, electrical services, estate services etc. are on fast track.
Progress of these activities is as follows:
Name of site Medical Hospital Residential Electrical Estate
College Complex Complex Services Services
(%) (%) (%) (Package-III) (Package-IV)
(%) (%)
Bhopal 87 70 Completed 59 17
Bhubaneswar 90 78 24% (Ph.1) 35 12
21% (Ph.2)
Jodhpur 77 83 Completed 81 42
Patna 94 54.5 Completed 85 16
Raipur 70 62 Completed 86 17.5
Rishikesh 79.5 87 99 80 30
The progress of work on various activities is being closely monitored and periodically
reviewed. A three-tier monitoring mechanism i.e. at Project Site, Project Monitoring Unit in the
Ministry and Project Management Committee at highest level is in place. It is mentioned that OPDs
in all six AIIMS have been made functional and IPD facility at Hospital is expected to start during
2013-14. Hospital facilities are also likely to become functional during 2013-14.

16
XIV. DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES
Recommendation/Observation
1.55 The Committee recommends that additional funds be allocated at RE  Stage so that lack of
funds does not hamper the developmental activities undertaken by the Department. The Committee
is disappointed with the slow pace of upgradation of RAK  College on account of one reason or
the other. The Committee feels that the Department should have acted in a prudent manner to get
the Utilization Certificates in right time. (Para 14.5)
Action Taken
1.56 Noted for compliance.
Recommendations/Observations
1.57 The Committee is constrained to note the huge shortage of qualified manpower and is of
the opinion that the steps taken to address the problem are not sufficient and lack effective
implementation. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for delay in initiation of academic
sessions in the identified Institutes. The Committee recommends that the Department should
diligently pursue the matter and ensure that the sessions can be started this year. The Committee
reiterates the recommendation made in its Fifty-Fourth Report that the Department needs to take
proactive approach and try to bring all the States on board for effective implementation of the
programme besides having regular interactions with them. It is high time that the problem areas
hampering implementation of the programme are identified and suitable and timely action is taken
accordingly. (Para 15.8)
Action Taken
1.58 Academic Session in 6 of the 11 Centers of Excellence in the field of mental health had
already commenced from the session 2012-13 and more Institutes will start their academic sessions
in the current year after getting the approvals of the various regulatory authorities like Medical
Council of India, Nursing Council of India, and Rehabilitation Council of India etc. Apart from 11
Centre of Excellence and 27 PG Departments already supported during the Eleventh Five Year Plan,
the Department has proposed to support 10 more Centres of Excellence and 93 more PG
Departments in the field of mental health during the Twelfth Five Plan. Till date a total of 312 PG
seats in mental health specialties have been created in the Institutes supported under Manpower
Development Schemes. The latest status of seats created in the Institutes supported under
Manpower Development Schemes is at Annexure-IX.
1.59 The Department notes the Committee’s recommendation to bring all the States on board for
effective implementation of the programme besides having regular interactions with them. The
Department will ensure participation of the State Health machinery on a much larger scale in the
implementation of the National Mental Health Programme during the Twelfth Five Year Plan as
compared to the previous plan periods to identify the problem areas hampering the implementation
of the programme and take suitable and timely corrective action.
Recommendation/Observation
1.60 The Committee expresses its displeasure to note that although the proposal to expand DMHP
in all the districts across the country is still awaiting approval. The Committee wants to be apprised
of the action taken by the Department on its recommendation as contained in its Fifty-fourth
Report. With the existing pace of progress the targets would be impossible to achieve in the near

17
future. The Committee would like to be apprised of the results achieved by the Department’s
efforts made in this direction. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
revisit its policy regarding the matter and rectify the deficiencies at the earliest. (Para 15.10)
Action Taken
1.61 The Department has planned to expand the District Mental Health Programme to more than
550 Districts during the Twelfth Five Year Plan in a phased manner which has already been
approved by the Empowered Programme Committee on NRHM. The States have already been
informed to send proposals for seeking financial assistance for implementation of District Mental
Health Programme (DMHP) in their Districts. Guidelines for implementation of the DMHP have
been issued to all the State Governments.
1.62 Action taken on the recommendations of the Committee as contained in its Fifty-fourth
Report are as under:
(i) The problem areas hampering the implementation of NMHP in the States are discussed
with the concerned State Authorities and corrective steps are taken on case to case
basis and also if certain changes are required to be made in the manner in which
various schemes are being implemented in the country.
(ii) The Department has commissioned a nation-wide survey through NIMHANS, Bangalore
to ascertain the availability and requirement of mental health resources in the country
and magnitude of the problem of mental illness.
(iii) The Institutes supported under Manpower Development Schemes are constantly
supported and guided to implement the scheme in an effective manner and the
Department helps them in solving the problems coming their way in achieving the
objectives of the scheme.
(iv) The Institutes can start the courses once the necessary infrastructure is in place and
faculty positions have been approved by the State Governments which is also based
on the approval of concerned regulatory bodies like Medical Council of India,
Rehabilitation Council of India, Nursing Council of India etc. The Department is
making constant efforts to ensure that the Institutes have the necessary infrastructure
and faculty positions in place to start their academic sessions on time and at the
earliest. Also, meetings are held with the heads of the Institutes funded under the
Manpower Development schemes in Delhi and at the Institutes to identify loopholes
and difficulties faced in the implementation of the scheme and also to suggest the best
possible course of action for filling in the loopholes and ensuring smooth progress of
the scheme.
XVI. CENTRAL DRUGS STANDARD CONTROL ORGANISATION (CDSCO)
Recommendation/Observation
1.63 The Committee is of the opinion that the expenditure plan should be more realistic rather
than allocation for abstract targets. Some of the heads of expenditure are still at a planning stage
and actual work is yet to start. Some heads like recruitment of 90 additional drug inspectors is
pending for a long time. Even now the updated status provided by the Department states that in
spite of the best efforts taken so far only four candidates have joined. The matter has been taken
up with the State Government authorities for expediting the process. In such a situation optimum
utilization of funds in efficient way is not possible. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the

18
Department should make realistic assessment of targets and seek funds accordingly with specific
outlay for different stages of each project. The allocation may be revisited at RE stage after
reviewing the position.  (Para 16.5)
Action Taken
1.64 The Ministry has always planned in advance before seeking funds for specific requirements.
However, it will keep the observations of the Hon’ble Committee in view. The Ministry assures that
it will make every effort for optimum utilisation of funds. As regards the appointment of 100 Drug
Inspectors, the process of their recruitment by the UPSC has been completed and the Commission
has made available its recommendations in respect of 90 posts. Results of 10 posts have been
withheld due to a court case. The CDSCO is taking necessary action for completing mandatory
formalities for appointment of the selected Drug Inspectors. These formalities include police
verification by District Administrations of the concerned States of residential and other information
furnished by the candidates in their declaration form to the UPSC, verification/authentication of
their educational qualifications, verification/authentication of experience shown by the candidates
from the concerned offices/companies where the candidates have worked earlier and their medical
examination. 45 selected candidates have already joined so far.
Recommendation/Observation
1.65 The C ommittee takes a serious view of the fake, substandard, spurious and adulterated
medicines being detected in such large number of cases. This amounts to playing with the lives of
the people. This can not be tolerated. All the States should be asked to prosecute all the cases. The
CDSCO may regularly review the progress and apprise the Committee. The Committee recommends
that research should be undertaken for synthesizing international experience on the key issues and
technology advancement. The Committee also recommends that Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs) for approval of new drugs and clinical trials should be expedited. (Para 16.10)
Action Taken
1.66 A survey to assess the extent of spurious drugs in the country was conducted in the
year 2009 by the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO). The survey was
statistically designed by the Indian Statistical Institute, Hyderabad. Under the study, 24,136 samples
of 62 brands of drugs were drawn from different outlets spread over the country. The survey
revealed that the extent of drugs found spurious was 0.046% only. Further, as per the information
made available by the State Drugs Controllers in respect of the drugs samples tested during
last three years, the percentage of substandard drugs varied from 5.70% in 2008-09 to 4.54% in
2011-12.
1.67 Notwithstanding these figures, the Government has taken the following measures to check
Spurious/Sub-standard Drugs in the country:
1. The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 was amended by the Drugs and Cosmetics
(Amendment) Act, 2008 to provide for more stringent penalties for manufacture and
trade of spurious and adulterated drugs. Certain offences have also been made
cognizable and non-bailable. 
2. The Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Act, 2008 has also enabled setting up of
special designated courts for speedy disposal of cases to deal with the cases of
offences under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act. 16 States/UTs have already set up these
special Courts. 

19
3. Guidelines for taking action on samples of drugs declared spurious or not of standard
quality in the light of enhanced penalties under the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)
Act, 2008 have been forwarded to the State Drugs Controllers for implementation. 
4. A Whistle Blower Scheme has been initiated by the Government to encourage vigilant
public participation in the detection of movement of spurious drugs in the country.
Under this scheme, the informers would be suitably rewarded for providing concrete
information in respect of movement of spurious drugs to the regulatory authorities. 
5. On the basis of an Order of the Hon’ble High Court of Allahabad in the Criminal
(Misc.) Writ Petition No. 16212/2008 – Brahmaji vs. State of UP and Others, the
Government had constituted a Task Force to examine the feasibility of networking and
tracking the drugs distribution system in the country from the manufacturer to the
retailer to secure the entire supply chain and detect spurious drugs available in the
market. Different options through the use of information technology were considered
by the Task Force, including providing bar code on the label of the drugs, for
identifying and tracking their movement from the manufacturer to the consumer. On
the basis of the recommendations of the Task Force and further consultation with the
stakeholders, the Government conducted a study with the help of the National
Informatics Centre to examine the feasibility of networking and tracking the drugs
distribution system in the country from the manufacturer to the retailer by the use of
modern information technological tools to detect spurious drugs available in the market.
6. Overseas inspections of drug manufacturing sites to ensure quality of imported bulk
drugs were started in 2011.
7. 216 additional posts were created in 2008 and 2009 for strengthening CDSCO
headquarters and ports/zonal offices. It has further, been proposed to create 1045
additional posts in the CDSCO on regular basis to strengthen it. The proposal has been
recommended by the Working Group on Drug Sector, constituted by the Planning
Commission in 12th Five Year Plan under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare. In the first phase, a proposal for creation of 365 posts in
CDSCO has already been sent to the Department of Expenditure.  The labs also
similarly need strengthening. A proposal for creation of 283 posts in labs has also been
sent to the Department of Expenditure. The 283 posts do not include additional posts
for Central Drugs Laboratories at Kolkata and Kasauli as their organisational structure
need to be evaluated. There may be the need for around 60 additional personnel for
these two labs. The CDSCO and labs need strengthening and upgradation of their
physical infrastructure also. The labs need new and sophisticated equipments. Several
new labs need to be opened. Similarly existing zonal/sub-zonal/port/airport offices of
CDSCO need upgradation of their physical infrastructure. The such offices also need
to be opened. The CDSCO also need to open its offices abroad to monitor imports.
All these areas are proposed to be covered during the 12th Five Year Plan for which
the CDSCO has been allocated Rs.1800 crore.
During the Twelfth Five Year Plan, a provision of Rs.1200 crore has also been made for
strengthening of the drug regulatory system of the states.
XVII. SERA AND VACCINE MANUFACTURING UNITS
Recommendation/Observation
1.68 The Committee is disappointed to note that some discrepancies have been found which need

20
to be rectified immediately in CRI, Kasauli on account of which the new facility is yet to become
operational. With regard to BCGVL, Guindy and PII, Coonoor also progress of upgradation work
is not satiafactory. The Committee recommends that the Department should take all possible steps
to accelerate the pace of upgradation work and rectify discrepancies in all the three Institutes to
meet the ever increasing demand of vaccine/sera and for reducing dependency on private players
which would have a visible impact on the cost of vaccines. (Para 17.4)
Action Taken
1.69 Ministry and Institute are making every effort to make the new facility functional at CRI,
Kasauli. Most of the technical faults have been rectified recently. However, some of them are yet
to be rectified. All the concerned authorities have been instructed to take corrective action urgently.
In so far as production and supply of DPT group of vaccines during the year 2012-13 are
concerned, supply of DPT vaccines for Universal Immunization Programme was less than the given
targets during the year under review, as the staff who were working in old DPT vaccine
production facility had also been engaged in the new DPT facility.
1.70 Approval of the civic/local authorities had to be obtained including the height increase
related matter as well as for provision for a stair case in so far as the building to be constructed
at the PII, Coonoor  is concerned. Necessary approval for the construction of new buildings for
the manufacturing of DPT group of vaccine at PII, Coonoor  from the local planning authorities
i.e. Coonoor Municipality, Coonoor has been received on 4.5.2013. Demolition of building which
will not be required is in the process of being carried on by the project consultant. As far as supply
of DPT vaccine is concerned, the Institute has supplied 251.41 lakh doses so far against demand
of 269.11 lakh doses.
1.71 As regards, BCGVL, Guindy , all the required approvals from the Chennai Metropolitan
Development Authority (CMDA) and the local body of the Chennai Corporation have been obtained.
Civil works have started in August, 2012. Internal inspection, preparation of validation plan and
process validation are going on. Internal training on cGMP standards/documentation/SOP is being
imparted to all the BCGVL staff. Samples of 9 batches of BCG vaccine (approx. 12.57 lakh doses)
sent for testing have been found to be of standard quality by CDL Kasauli. Samples of 15 batches
of BCG vaccine have been sent during the last week of April, 2013 for testing and release at CDL
Kasauli (approx. 20.56 lakhs doses). Presently, the Institute is in position to supply 10.00 lakh
doses ( i.e. 9 batches cleared by CDL Kasauli).
XVIII. ASSISTANCE FOR CAPACITY BUILDING
Recommendation/Observation
1.72 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the casual approach in the matter which led
to such drastic underutilization of funds for such an important Scheme. The Committee does not
understand the reasons due to which the institutions/hospitals are not coming forward to get the
grants or utilize it. The Department should go into the details and find solutions. The Committee
recommends that the Department should take stringent measures to ensure timely submission of
UCs by the Institutions being given grant under the scheme. The Committee recommends that the
Department should monitor utilization of funds allocated from time to time so that the funds
allocated could be released in time. The Committee may be apprised of the measures adopted by
the Department in this regard. (Para 18.3)
Action Taken
1.73 To overcome the under-utilization of fund and timely submission of audited UC, in the

21
Twelfth Plan an independent monitoring cell in DGHS has been proposed for effective co-
ordinations with the respective State Government/Grantee Institutions for timely procurement of
equipments, recruitment of manpower and submission of audited UCs and SOEs. To overcome the
shortage of Doctors like Neuro Surgeon a six month training course for General Surgeon in Neuro
Surgery has been developed.
Recommendation/Observation
1.74 The Committee impresses upon the Department to review the reasons for under-
performance of the Scheme during the Eleventh Plan and take abundant precautions to see that the
same are not repeated in the current financial year too. The Committee recommends that the work
in the unfinished projects may be accelerated. The scheme needs to be continued in Twelfth Plan
and EFC approvals may be sought for the purpose. The new initiatives proposed should be
identified and related developmental work should be started without undue delay . (Para 18.5)
Action Taken
1.75 The recommendation of the committee has been noted for the compliance. After approval
of the EFC required action will be initiated.
Recommendation/Observation
1.76 The Committee is of the opinion that the Department should play a proactive role in
implementation of the scheme so that, the target, as envisaged under the Eleventh and Twelfth Plan,
can be achieved. (Para 18.9)
Action Taken
1.77 This has been noted and will be undertaken through monitoring cell and through inspection
at regular intervals by designated nodal officer of this Ministry so as to achieve the targets with
regard to functioning of trauma centers identified in the Eleventh as well as Twelfth Plan.

22
22
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee observes that around 24 audit paras in CAG Report on matters relating to
the Department are under various stages of pendency and some of them date back to the period
2008-09. Committee’s attention has been especially drawn by the following pending Audit paras:–
(Para 2.14) Annexure-C
Action Taken
2.2 The current Status of the pending audit paras is at Annexure-I . Two paras have been settled
and in respect of 5 paras vetting comments of Audit are awaited.
IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The Committee is apprehensive that in view of the various expansion activities proposed to
be undertaken by the Hospital, the allocated funds may not be sufficient. Therefore, the Committee
urges the Department to approach the Planning Commission and Department of Expenditure to
increase allocation at RE stage 2013-14. (Para 4.5)
Action Taken
2.4 The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted and if required, the
competent authority may be approached for increase in allocation.
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL
Recommendation/Observation
2.5 The Committee is of the opinion that with persistent shortage of staff in various
categories, the health services provided would suffer both qualitatively and quantitatively. The
Committee recommends that the Department should consider necessary steps to expedite the
process of filling up of newly created posts of senior residents and nursing category on priority
basis. (Para 5.10)
Action Taken
2.6 The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted. It is submitted that the
post of SR gets vacant on routine basis as it is a tenure post of three years. The recruitment
process of Senior Resident is underway and vacancies will be filled shortly.

23
2.7 The vacancies in Nursing Cadre arising due to retirement, resignation, creation of new
posts, etc. are promotional posts except that of Staff Nurse. The necessary action to fill up these
posts of Staff Nurse is being carried out in consultation with Dte. GHS. Meanwhile, to meet the
shortage, 67 Staff Nurses have already been appointed on contract basis and the necessary action
for rest of the post to fill up on contract basis is being done till the regular posts are filled up.
As regards other promotional posts, the necessary DPC would be held time to time when the
candidates becomes eligible from feeder cadre.
VII. KALAWATI SARAN CHILDRENS HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
2.8 The Committee fails to understand the reasons for underutilization of Plan funds during the
last financial year. The Committee wants to be apprised of the on-going schemes and the steps
taken to fill up the existing vacancies at the earliest. (Para 7.3)
Action Taken
2.9 Steps taken to fill up the vacancies
● Posts advertised will be filled soon as the work in connection is under pipeline and
interview letter will be dispatched to the candidates as and when approval received.
● Vacancy position of the Staff Nurses has been clubbed with LHMC and S.K. Hospital
and their filling up is under process.
● Posts sanctioned against upgradation of staff under 27% reservation under CR Plan
will also be filled at the time when the construction of infrastructure would reach
nearly completion stage.
XI. THE POST-GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH
Recommendation/Observation
2.10 The Committee notes that the actual utilization of Plan funds in the year 2012-13 was
Rs.118.23 crores as against the reduced allocation of Rs.150.00 crores at RE Stage. The
Committee is concerned about the savings in Plan funds that too, for the reasons like delay in
approvals etc. However, adequate preparation and assessment should be done for funding so as to
avoid delays and loss of efficiency at later stages of implementation. The Department should take
initiatives to address this problem. Allocation under Salary and Pension head needs to be increased
at RE stage in view of the expenditure. (Para 11.4)
Action Taken
2.11 In this regard it is submitted that the Institute had demanded an amount of Rs.229.00
crores for the financial year 2012-13 under Plan Grant against which an amount of Rs.161.00
crores was allocated at BE stage. Keeping in view BE and the unspent balance of Rs.42.77 crores
of the year 2011-12, the Ministry had released a fund of Rs.118.23 crores (Rs.161.00 crores
minus Rs.42.77 crores) till January, 2013. Out of total funds of Rs.161.00 crores (Rs.118.23
crores + Rs.42.77 crores), an amount Rs.158.10 crores has been utilized during the financial
year 2012-13.

24
XIX NATIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
2.12 The Committee notes with concern that even 30% of the allocated funds could not be
utilized. A review should be made on the reasons for such underutilization of funds. The Committee
is also concerned that Rs.50.00 crores allocated for 2013-14 may remain unutilized keeping in view
the dismal utilization figures in the year 2012-13. Under the present circumstances the Committee
recommends that sincere efforts should be made for judicious and optimum utilization of the
allocated funds to attain the desired objectives. (Para 19.3)
Action Taken
2.13 A review has been made on the reasons for underutilization. The Ministry is making sincere
efforts for optimum utilization of allocated funds in 2013-14 by taking appropriate remedial
measures.
Recommendation/Observation
2.14 The Committee wants to be apprised of the current status of the implementation of
alternative cropping including rehabilitation of tobacco growers and the extent of funds required for
that purpose. The Committee recommends that effective execution of strategies for ban of use of
tobacco is essential to achieve the targets envisaged. The Committee may be apprised of the
developments in this regard. Improvement in the components, as proposed, may be done at the
earliest and the Committee may be apprised accordingly. (Para 19.5)
Action Taken
2.15 In 2008-09 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in collaboration with Central Tobacco
Research Institute (CTRI), Ministry of Agriculture had launched a pilot Project on alternative
cropping systems to tobacco growing in five different agro-ecological zones of the country. The
research project has suggested a combination of crops that can be grown in lieu of tobacco in
different agro-ecological zones of the country.
2.16 A ‘National Consultation on Economics of Tobacco’ was organized by Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare in December, 2012. The consultation has come up with a set of
recommendation which inter-alia includes restructuring the mandate of the Directorate of Tobacco
Development to “Directorate of Crop Diversification Board  for Food Security”  which would
provide technical and institutional support to farmers to shift to alternate crops.
2.17 Secretary, Health and Family Welfare convened a meeting of the Agriculture Secretaries of
the States of West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Karnataka to discuss the supply side
concerns related to tobacco farming.
2.18 A delegation led by Joint Secretary (Tobacco Control) which met the Hon’ble
Agriculture Minister in April, 2013 and appraised him about the issue and also discussed the
issue of restructuring of the Directorate of Tobacco Development. Secretary, Health and FW
has written to Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation to work out schemes
for providing alternative crops to tobacco farmers in their ongoing schemes under the
Twelfth Five Year Plan.

25
XX. THE NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR HEALTH CARE OF THE ELDERLY (NPHCE)
Recommendation/Observation
2.19 The Committee, however, is of the firm opinion that the paucity of funds should not block
the progress of the proposed projects under such a vital programme and if need be, Department
should seek more funds, if required, for the timely completion of the projected endeavors at RE
stage. The Committee would also like to know whether the Geriatric OPD opened in 5 Institutes
till date are sufficient to meet the need for the growing elderly population. (Para 20.5)
Action Taken
2.20 From the year 2013-14 onwards, it has also been decided to continue NPHCE under NCD
Flexipool within the overall umbrella of National Health Mission. A total amount of Rs.150.00 crores
has been earmarked for the year 2013-14 out of which an amount of Rs.50.00 crores is earmarked
for NPHCE under the NCD Flexipool for carrying out different activities up to the district hospital
level. All the State Governments/UT Administrations have since been requested to prepare and
submit the Programme Implementation Plan (PIP) under NCD Flexipool so as to enable the Ministry
to release the funds to them at the earliest. More funds will be sought at RE/FE stage if there is
overwhelming response from the States/UTs. Here, it is submitted that implementation of the
programme at the district level and below is the responsibility of the State Government/UT
Administration as Health is the State Subject.
2.21 Besides the Geriatric OPD in 5 Institutes, Geriatric OPD is also being provided by the
district hospitals in 100 districts where the programme has been funded.
XXII. HUMAN RESOURCES FOR HEALTH
Recommendation/Observation
2.22 The framework for utilization of funds allocated in 2013-14 shows only broad target
allocation. Thus, utilization at various sub-levels needs to be monitored under proper co-ordination
and concrete design. The Committee also recommends that both physical and financial targets
should be achieved. (Para 22.2)
Action Taken
2.23 It is proposed to set up a Monitoring Committee in the Ministry to ensure proper
implementation and timely execution of the new schemes for increase in MBBS seats. Similarly, a
monitoring committee at the State level is also proposed to monitor the progress and facilitate
execution of the project and submit its periodical report to the Central Government.
2.24 All efforts would be made to ensure that the physical and financial targets are achieved.
Recommendation/Observation
2.25 The Committee while appreciating the steps already taken and proposed to be taken by the
Department, comments that there should be regular and frequent evaluation of the implementation
of the scheme proposed to increase the availability of doctors in the country. Setting up of new
medical colleges and increasing seat strength in the existing colleges is the need of the hour. An
early action should be taken to implement the schemes. The Department may also explore PPP
mode in implementing the schemes. (Para 22.5)

26
Action Taken
2.26 For regular monitoring of the new proposed schemes, it is proposed to set up a Monitoring
Committee in the Ministry. Similarly, a monitoring committee at the State level is also proposed to
monitor the progress and facilitate execution of the project and submit its periodical report to the
Central Government.
2.27 In so far as early implementation of these schemes is concerned, immediate steps would
be taken for implementation once the schemes are approved by the competent authority. In the
meantime, States have already been requested to furnish the list of district hospitals/medical
colleges which could be covered under these schemes so as to save time in identification of
hospitals/colleges after approval of the scheme.
2.28 As r egards PPP approach, the existing MCI regulations do not permit setting up of medical
colleges in PPP mode. Further, these schemes are to be executed by the State governments.

27
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 With this trend of allocation of funds and persistent under-utilization, the Committee is
concerned that the Department needs to tackle the problems of shrinking resources, rising demand
and under-utilization of allocated funds in a balanced manner. Utilization status of the Eleventh Plan
and for 2012-13 reveals inability of the Department to utilize the allocated funds efficiently. During
2012-13 only 52.26 percent of allocated funds have been utilized till 31.12.2012, thus leaving the
balance to be utilized in the last quarter of the financial year. The Committee is disappointed by
this evident lack of fiscal discipline and strongly recommends that the Department should seek
target oriented allocation in sync with the ability to utilize the allocated funds; instead of indicative
allocation of funds. The Committee, further opines that a token provision of Rs.1 crore for National
Urban Health Mission during 2013-14 on account of limited availability of funds would further
impact the health indicators of poor people residing in urban slums and recommends that the
Department should approach the Planning Commission for enhanced allocation at RE stage.
(Para 2.4)
Action Taken
3.2 Noted for compliance
Recommendation/Observation
3.3 The Committee is constrained to note 41% shortfall in allocation of funds vis--a-vis the
proposed outlay for 2013-14 that too at a time when the Government has committed itself to
raising its expenditure on health from roughly 1.29% of the GDP to 2.5% of the GDP by the end
of Twelfth Plan. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to overcome the financial
constraints the Department should make efforts to achieve efficiency gain in utilization each year
and also to convince the Planning Commission and the Department of Expenditure for enhancing
the Annual Plan allocation for the remaining years of the Twelfth Plan and also at RE 2013-14 so
as to achieve the ultimate target for expenditure of 2.5% of GDP in health sector. (Para 2.6)
Action Taken
3.4 Noted for compliance
Further Recommendation
3.5 While making its recommendation in para 2.4 of its 67th Report, the Committee had
expected the Department to outline a roadmap for fiscal discipline and prudence for the
purpose of more efficient utilization of the available resources and also raising the
government expenditure on health as a percentage of GDP and apprise it of the same.
27

28
Instead of furnishing a detailed action taken reply, the Department has merely chosen to
state “noted for compliance”. The Committee is, therefore, surprised at the Department’s
silence on addressing the key concerns pointed out by it. The Committee, therefore, would
like the Department to apprise it in specific terms of the steps taken/ contemplated to be
taken to ensure fiscal discipline and to achieve efficiency gain in utilisation of the available
resources. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the reaction of Planning
Commission for enchancing allocation of funds for NUHM.
Recommendation/Observation
3.6 The Committee observes that with high level of underutilization of funds, the financial
objectives and target achievement of the Department would suffer to a large extent. The
Department has informed that during the Eleventh Plan the extent of savings on the Capital Account
has been Rs.2883.25 crore. Most of the savings were due to slow progress of capital work and
slow pace of procurement of equipments. The Committee observes with deep concern that savings
under the Capital section implies that it will impede the developmental activities. Slow progress in
capital work would critically hamper both the quality of care provided and the ability of the system
as a whole to respond to increased demand in this sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department should take concrete steps to address this issue by means of prudent
assessment of the fund requirement and design effective mechanism to make a balance between
spending and savings. (Para 2.8)
Action Taken
3.7 The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
3.8 The Committee observes that while making its recommendation in para 2.8 of its 67
th
Report it had expected the Department to take steps to prevent and control savings on the
Capital Account and apprise the Committee accordingly. The Committee is constrained to
note that the Department has made a generic reply and not shed any light on the measures
taken or contemplated to be taken to control savings on the Capital Account. The
Committee, therefore, desires that the Department should use greater care while
formulating its replies in future and instead of making replies of generic nature should
invariably indicate the measures taken/contemplated to be taken in pursuance to the
recommendations/observations of the Committee.
IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
3.9 The Committee is dismayed that despite continuous increase in patient load, Safdarjung
Hospital had no corresponding increase in bed strength in the past thirty years. As a result, hospital
services have become over stretched. The current average bed capacity is 143 percent meaning
thereby that one bed in the hospital is occupied by more than one patient. Alongside, surgical
waiting time is one year. Patient load is rising and is expected to rise by another 25 percent during
the coming five years itself. In such a backdrop the original re-development plan approved during
Eleventh Plan had been shelved. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for the
same. And now with the new proposal for the Twelfth five year plan, the current status is that
the proposal is being prepared for seeking approval of the competent authority. The Committee also
desires that the requirements of future patient load should also kept in view while formalizing re-

29
development Plan. The Committee strongly believes and recommends that for transformational
change the policies need to redefined with modification for effective and timely implementation. The
Committee recommends that the Department may take all out measures to adhere to the timelines.
(Para 4.9)
Action Taken
3.10 The proposal for redevelopment of Safdarjung Hospital was prepared in 2008-09. This
envisaged addition of 1500 beds with total estimated project cost of Rs.4821.17 crores (Non-
Recurring Rs.3645.39 crores and Recurring Rs.1175.78 crores). The project was scheduled to be
completed in eight years. It required demolition of several existing structures and to rebuild in their
place 9 inter connected tower blocks, 37 operation theatres and a host of other facilities. The
proposal was discussed and approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) under the
Chairpersonship of Secretary (Expenditure) on 22.9.2009.
The proposal was subsequently reviewed by the Minister of Health and Family Welfare and
it was considered prudent that scarce financial resources should be spread more evenly.
Accordingly, the proposal for redevelopment of Safdarjung Hospital was revised, which
envisages addition of 1307 beds with total cost of Rs.1605 crore. The estimated project completion
time is 47 months, inclusive of 12 months commissioning and stabilizing medical care operations
in the two new proposed blocks from zero date. Proposal comprises a 807 bed Super Specialty
cum Paid Ward block and a 500 bed Emergency block. This project is to be constructed on the
land allotted to Safdarjung Hospital by L& DO. M/s. HSCC has been appointed Project Management
Consultant so that the process of seeking clearances/approval of various authorities and other
preliminary work is started in advance and timely execution of the project ensured.
This has been apprised by EFC in its meeting held on 18.1.2013 and recommended with
certain observations. Subsequently, the proposal was revised and submitted for seeking approval of
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs, which has approved the proposal of this Ministry for
Phase-I of the redevelopment of Safdarjung Hospital with total cost of Rs.1333 crore.
It has been proposed that the progress of the proposal may be monitored by a Committee
under Additional Secretary in charge of Hospital so that adherence to the time line may be ensured.
The present Re-development plan has taken cognizance of the future patient load and in
view of constraints (technical/feasibility issues), the plan is being carried out in phased manner. In
phase one, the super-specialty block, private ward block and emergency block is planned.
Further Recommendation
3.11 The Committee notes with concern that even the phase one is under the planning
stage. The Committee is constrained to note though the proposal for redevelopment of
hospital has been cleared by EFC and Cabinet Committee on Economic Affair no headway
has been made in the direction till date. The Committee would like to be apprised regularly
about the status of the project as also what concrete action has been contemplated to be
taken to adhere to the timelines proposed for the project.
Recommendation/Observation
3.12 In the context of setting up of In-vitro Fertilization (IVF) Unit, the Committee has been
informed that the new site has been visited by CPWD and feasibility verified. Proposal for setting
up IVF unit on turn-key basis has been prepared and submitted and the same has been accepted
in principle. Pre-bid meeting of potential supplier is being arranged. Procurement of equipments

30
have been started. In this connection, the Committee would like to draw attention of the
Department to its observations and recommendations made in respect of IVF unit in its 39 th Report
and 54 th Report of the Committee which is quoted below:-
39th Report
4.8. The Committee has for several years now been monitoring the progress made in the
projects relating to establishment of..................and In Vitro Fertilization (IVF) clinic in
Obs. and Gynae Department of the Hospital..............Site (2nd floor of Old Cardiology
Wing) for setting up of IVF Unit has been inspected in August, 2009. Orders were issued
for carrying out necessary renovations.
4.9. The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department to the following
status of the two projects furnished to it two years back:- “.................As regards IVF Unit,
a proposal has been submitted by the HOD, Obs.& Gynae for approval in principle.”
4.10. The Committee is extremely disappointed with the persisting slow progress made by
the Department w.r.t. .............setting up of IVF Unit. The Committee recommends to the
Department to remove all bottlenecks in setting up of the..........IVF Unit at the earliest.
The Committee would like to have a status note on the same inter-alia containing details
regarding the original timeline set, reasons for inordinate delay, resultant cost escalation
and fresh timeline set with special efforts taken to meet the timeline this time.
54
th Report
3.13. The Committee expresses its displeasure at unjustifiable delay in setting up of IVF
Unit in SJH arising out of conflicting statements provided by the Department in this
regard. The Committee feels that the development work has been carried out at snail pace
and has failed miserably. The Committee would like to draw the attention towards
Department’s statement as mentioned in 39th Report on DFG 2010-11 wherein it has
been stated that second floor of old Cardiology Wing had been selected as site for setting
up of IVF Unit and inspection was also carried out in August, 2009 along with the go-
ahead for carrying out necessary renovation work. Now, the Committee has been
informed that space constraint is hampering operationalization of IVF Unit. This clearly
shows lack of accountability on part of Department and improper planning and
mismanagement of resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Department
should channelize its efforts in doing realistic assessment to remove all the bottlenecks
in setting up of IVF Unit and chalk out a time bound action plan with regard to funds
allocated for the purpose. (Para 4.10)
Action Taken
3.14 Previous selected site (2
nd floor of old cardiology block) in 2009 had to make way for
disaster preparedness for commonwealth games in 2010 and therefore new site was sought. Due
to ground coverage issues, new structures could not be erected. Old Gynea OPD/GRR has now
been selected for remodelling and renovation as in-vitro fertilization centre. The architects have
submitted the drawing after discussion with nodal officer in Vitro Fertilization. The same has been
forwarded to CPWD for framing up of estimates etc.
New Site was inspected by Chief Architect on 15.4.2013 and has advised few more
modifications. Infrastructural requirement for IVF lab/ART lab has been submitted to Chief
Architect for preparation of site plan.
Proposal for requirement of additional manpower is under process.

31
IUI lab, which is the first step of IVF, has already been started in the Department of Obst.
and Gynae., Safdarjung Hospital.
Further Recommendation
3.15 The Committee recommends that work related to setting up of IVF unit must be
completed and made operational in a dedicated time-frame so as to benefit those people who
cannot avail the expensive facilities in private hospitals. The Committee would also like to
be apprised of cost escalation due to delay in setting up of the Unit.
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL
Recommendation/Observation
3.16 The Plan funds allocation in respect of Dr. RML Hospital in BE 2011-12 was Rs.155.00
crore which was decreased to Rs.140.85 crore at RE stage and against this the actual
expenditure was Rs.128.51 crore. During 2012-13 the actual expenditure was Rs.162.39 crore
against an allocation of Rs.193.22 crore at RE stage. The Committee is concerned about the
underutilization of funds at a stage when various expansion and developmental activities are being
carried out. The Committee recommends that the Department should deal with this issue
diligently and rectify the causes for under-utilization of funds and accelerate the pace of
developmental activities. (Para 5.2)
Action Taken
3.17 The underutilization of funds under capital head has been on account of delay mainly in
utilization of funds for New Emergency Care Building (NECB) and Dharamshala projects. In this
regard, the meeting of the concerned Officers and contractor has been convened and he has been
advised to accelerate the work of construction of NECB and completed by the end of July, 2013.
Similarly, CPWD has been advised to complete the Dharamshala project at the earliest.
With these efforts it is expected that the funds allocated for the purpose would be utilized
during the current financial year.
Further Recommendation
3.18 The Committee observes that the measures taken thus far have had only limited
impact on ensuring optimal utilisation of the funds allocated under this head. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the status of the NECB and Dharamshala projects
and whether the targeted timeline for the projects could be achieved.
Recommendation/Observation
3.19 The Committee was apprised that keeping in view the increased patient load and outdated
infrastructure in the existing building of the Dr. RML Hospital, Government has prepared an EFC
proposal regarding redevelopment of plan for construction of Super Specialty and Paid Ward at Dr.
RML Hospital. In the first phase, it has been planned in consultation with M/s. HSCC (the Project
Consultant) that a Super Specialty Block and Paid Ward in the vacant land at G Point would be
developed at the estimated cost of more than Rs.700 crores. This new block would add the bed
strength of 447. The draft EFC of the proposal was circulated to all the Departments/Ministry
concerned for seeking their comments. The comments received so far have been under
compilation. (Para 5.5)

32
3.20 The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of the project. The Committee
recommends that a timeline and expenditure framework be designed after a realistic assessment of
the facts and status and thereafter, the Hospital should strictly conform to the physical and financial
targets. (Para 5.6)
Action Taken
3.21 Keeping in view the increased patients load and outdated infrastructure in the existing
building of the Dr. RML Hospital, Government has prepared an EFC proposal regarding
redevelopment of plan for construction of Super Specialty and Paid Ward at Dr. RML Hospital. In
the first phase, it has been planned in consultation with M/s. HSCC (the Project Consultant) that
a Super Specialty Block and Paid Ward in the vacant land at G Point would be developed at the
estimated cost of more than Rs.700 crores. This new block would add the bed strength of 447.
Further Recommendation
3.22 The Committee notes that everything is in a planning stage till date. The Committee
proposes that execution of projects in whatever phases decided should take off as early as
possible. There must be a time limit for the same. Proper framework defining each stage
and adherence to time frame is much needed for executing plans and target achievement.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the Status of projects. The Department has
merely repeated the proposals which were apprised at the time of consideration of Demands
for Grants to the Committee. No further proposers has been made in the projects
envisaged.
VI. CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY (CIP), RANCHI
Recommendations/Observations
3.23 The Central Institute of Psychiatry is a premier Institute in the field of Mental Health in
India. It provides clinical services for mental and neurological disorders, trains manpower in the
field of mental health and carries out various research programmes. The Institute has a bed
capacity of 643. Apart from Drug therapy, various Psychotherapies, Behavior therapy, Group
therapy and Family therapy are routinely employed. During the Financial year 2012-13 upto
January, 2013 a total number of 59565 patients have utilized the services of OPD; 3050 patients
were hospitalized for indoor treatment. 16362 and 1642 patients have utilized special clinics and
extension clinics respectively. (Para 6.1)
3.24 The Committee was informed that the total Budget Allocation under Plan and Non-Plan was
Rs.45.74 crore and Rs.30.00 crore respectively at the BE Stage and Rs.43.80 crore and Rs.29.00
crore respectively at the RE Stage in 2012-13. Out of this the actual expenditure till 31
st march,
2013 is Rs.17.15 crore (Plan). The Department has further informed that during 2012-13 major
equipments such as Hematology Auto Analyzer, Chemilucent Analyzer, 40-TB SAS storage systems
have already been added. The construction of 210-bedded hostel and 15-married resident flats are
under construction and likely to be completed by the end of this financial year. (Para 6.2)
3.25 The Committee notes that the expenditure during 2012-13 shows marked under-utilization
of allocated funds. The Committee fails to understand the reasons therefor inspite of the capital
work being undertaken and machinery procured. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
reasons for the savings under the head and resultant impact on the Health Care Services provided
by the Institute. (Para 6.3)

33
Action Taken
3.26 A sum of Rs.1.25 crores had been earmarked in B.E. Plan (Revenue) for 2012-13 for the
creation of 140 plan post and subsequent appointment of incumbent on these post. But the creation
of above posts has not been finalised by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure yet.
A sum of Rs.16.00 crores were made for the purchase of fMRI under the sub-head
‘Machinery and Equipment’ of the Plan (Capital) 2012-13. The open tender bids were invited and
quotations have been received. The purchase of same is likely to be finalized shortly.
The budget provision of Rs.23.84 crores (Rs.22.34 crores under head 4210 and Rs.1.50
crores under head 4216) was made in B.E. (Plan Capital) 2012-13 under the sub-head ‘Major
Works’ for the construction of Family Ward etc. The construction of the Family Ward etc. could
not be undertaken due to cost escalation. Now a fresh SFC proposal for construction of 54 Nos.
of Family Ward is under consideration in this Ministry and a meeting of SFC has been scheduled
on 13.06.2013.
(Rs. in crore )
Budget Provision 2012-13
Head BE RE FE
Plan (Revenue) 1 1.90 11.90 11.46
Plan (Capital) 4210- M & E 10.00 16.00 0
4210- Major Works 22.34 15.00 15.00
4216- Major Works 1.50 0.90 0.90
Plan (Capital) T
OTAL: 33.84 31.90 15.90
Further Recommendation
3.27 The Committee notes with concern that under utilisation of allocated funds has been
mainly due to delay in various projects. Further due to undue delay there has been cost
escalation also. Measures should be taken to check any further cost escalation due to delay
in execution of projects envisaged.
VIII. LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE
Recommendation/Observation
3.28 The Committee impresses upon the Department to take up the matter with the UPSC for
expediting the recruitment process and also urges the Department to clarify the debated issues with
UPSC at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised about the preparatory steps taken
so far to fill up the additional sanctioned 409 posts. The Committee hopes that the vacancies in
both the posts of Senior and Junior Resident would be filled up at the earliest to avoid the problems
arising due to shortage of manpower in delivering efficient health services. Since these are teaching
posts, the impact will also be there on the students. (Para 8.6)
Action Taken
3.29 The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted and it is submitted that
the process has already been initiated for filing-up of 409 vacant posts.

34
Subsequent to the last submission before the Hon’ble Committee, the Institute initiated the
process for filling up 79 posts of Assistant Professor (contractual), 90 posts of Senior Resident
and 63 posts of Non-PG Junior Resident. The updated status is as follows:
As far as CHS doctors are concerned, it is submitted that the vacant posts of CHS doctors
at Lady Hardinge Medical College (LHMC), New Delhi ( a teaching institute ) are required to be
filled by Teaching sub-cadre of CHS cadre. There had been delay of more than one year in placing/
accepting requisitions with the UPSC due to some clarifications on equivalence of DNB
qualifications and experience with MD, MS, DM and M.Ch. qualifications of respective speciality
or super-speciality. Now the issue has been resolved and the requisitions are being placed with the
UPSC. At present, out of 290 positions of CHS doctors at LHMC, 105 positions are vacant.
However, 30 doctors are working on contract basis against CHS posts so that teaching activity and
patient-care may not suffer. Ministry has already placed requisitions with the UPSC for 154
vacancies, including that of LHMC of various specialities and the Commission has so far advertised
92 vacancies. The process is continuing. It is hoped that within 8 to 10 months almost all the
vacancies would be filled up on regular basis.
Senior Resident  – In the grade of Senior Resident 90 posts in different discipline were
advertised. After the walk-in interview 42 numbers of candidates have been selected and appointed.
At present the number of vacant posts is 112. The current vacancy is attributed to the fact that
SRs are appointed for a tenure post of 3 years and most of them are completing their SRship
between May and September 2013. Thus the appointment of SR is a regular phenomenon.
Though every effort is made to fill the post but in the Senior Resident posts the turn-over
rate is very high. Because of high demand of post graduate doctors in private sectors, increasing
desire of post graduate medical students to go for super specialty, vacancy in super specialized
fields (Neuro-anaesthesia etc.) in institute like AIIMS, PGIMER; personal circumstances etc. are
factors because of which the senior residents leave the institute mid-way. Thus institute always
struggles for 100% filling up posts of Senior Resident.
Non-Postgraduate Junior Resident (Non-PG JR)  – In the grade of Non-PG JR, out of
63 posts advertised, 56 candidates accepted the offer and given appointment in different discipline.
At present there are 44 Non-PG JR working leading to vacancy of 21 posts. This is due to the
fact that Non-PG JR prepare for admission to PG course and mid-way they offer their resignation.
Thus like SRs the attrition rate in Non-PG JR is also high.
Further Recommendation
3.30 The Committee is constraint to note the continuous vacancies in all the grades and
the effects on the services provided and standard of education imparted. The Committee
regrets to note that the steps taken by the Ministry have not overcome shortage of
manpower at LHMC. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to take all out
measures in filling all the vacancies in the period targeted and informed to the Committee.
IX. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCE (AIIMS)
Recommendation/Observation
3.31 The Committee observes that out of 21 projects envisaged to be completed during Eleventh
Plan, only a few projects namely installation of additional lifts, air conditioning in main hospital,
RPC lift, and Phase-I covering of Nallah could be completed. However, the status of other projects

35
indicate that more than 5 projects are still at the planning stage. Moreover work is at preliminary
levels for some of the projects. (Para 9.5)
3.32 The Committee recommends that the Department should take appropriate initiatives to either
abolish those stages with regard to developmental work which have been causing delays and
redesign new time efficient modules, or come out with appropriate solutions to them. The
Committee further recommends that the Department should time to time evaluate its plans and
projects and determine its future actions accordingly to deal with the issues of delay in completion
of projects and utilization of funds. (Para 9.6)
Action Taken
3.33 Out of the 21 projects slated to be completed in the XI Plan, the updated position along
with the reasons for the delay are enclosed at Annexure-III.  In nut shell the status of the said
projects vis-à-vis completion are as below:
Total Projects – 23
Completed –  10
In progress more than 60% –  01
In progress less than 60% – 01
Shelved – 03
Held up on account of low priority – 04
Held up on a/c of non-clearance of statutory bodies – 04
To expedite take off of the projects contained in the above said list and as are under way
the Cabinet Secretariat had taken a suo moto notice of the issues concerned and meeting was held
on 22.2.2013 in the chamber of Additional Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat wherein it was decided
that the Cabinet Secretary shall hold a meeting of committee of secretaries on the various issues
pertaining to AIIMS on account of which the projects are being delayed/held up with various
agencies. Thereafter the Cabinet Secretariat vide their letter dated 13.3.2013 asked Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of Urban Development to convene a regular meeting with
NDMC officials to resolve the issues pertaining to grant of approval for various AIIMS projects.
Subsequent to that the following meetings took place:–
Sl. Date of AIIMS issues
No. Meeting
12 3
1 22.2.2013 Meeting taken by A.S. Cabinet Secretariat Shri Upendra Tripathy on
various issues of AIIMS.
2 13.3.2013 Cabinet Secretariat issues a letter for resolving AIIMS issues as are
pending with NDMC. Joint Secretary (UD), Joint Secretary (H&FW)
and NDMC Chairperson asked to meet on day to-day basis before
matter is put up to Committee of Secretaries.
3 02.4.2013 Meeting taken by Joint Secretary (L&W) with officials of AIIMS,
NDMC and Ministry of H&FW to expedite the clearances.

36
12 3
4 12.4.2013 Meeting with NDMC officials held by Joint Secretary (SKN) Ministry
of Health and FW and time lines fixed for processing various AIIMS
projects as were with NDMC.
5 18.4.2013 Meeting taken by Joint Secretary (L&W), Ministry of H&FW with
officials of AIIMS, NDMC to expedite the clearances.
6 22.4.2013 Meeting taken by Joint Secretary (SKN) with officials of AIIMS,
NDMC and HSCC to expedite the clearances.
7 02.5.2013 Meeting taken by Joint Secretary (SKN) with officials of AIIMS,
NDMC and HSCC to expedite the clearances.
8 03.5.2013 Meeting taken by Joint Secretary (L&W) Ministry of H&FW with
officials of AIIMS, NDMC to expedite the clearances.
Significant progress has been made in the status of approvals of various projects and
NDMC has referred most of the cases to Delhi Fire Services and Delhi Urban Arts Commission.
On 02.5.2013 AIIMS had written to Chairman, Delhi Urban Arts Commission (DUAC) for
expediting grant of approvals for the projects referred to it. In the meeting taken by Joint Secretary
(L&W) on 20.5.2013 decided to call Director, Delhi Fire Services to expedite the approvals of
AIIMS projects. Thus AIIMS is making due efforts for expediting the projects.
Further Recommendation
3.34 The Committee takes note that out of 23 projects only 10 have been completed,
3 have been abandoned. The Committee also notes that many projects are being delayed due
to non-clearance from statutory bodies. The Committee feels that this would result in cost
escalation and delay in providing services to the patients. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Ministry to take steps to ensure that pending issues on project
approvals, sanctions etc are sorted out urgently.
Recommendation/Observation
3.35 On the query about the reasons for not considering the proposal of starting burns unit at
AIIMS despite Committee’s constant recommendations, the Department has informed that there is
no proposal for setting up of Burns Unit at AIIMS, as yet. The Committee recommends that the
Department should reassess the requirement of Burns Unit at AIIMS and apprise the Committee of
the reasons for not considering the proposal till now at the earliest. (Para 9.7)
Action Taken
3.36 The Ministry of Health and FW was informed that the proposal for creating 20 beds
(10 ICU and 10 General Beds) for burn unit at JPNATC are in the process of planning and the
same should be placed before the Governing Body. Accordingly, a proposal to this effect was
placed before the SFC in its meeting held on 07.05.2008 and the same was approved in toto.
The minutes of the SFC meeting held on 07.05.2008 was duly ratified by the Governing
Body in its meeting held on 13.08.2008 and are presently under submission to the Ministry.

37
Further Recommendation
3.37 The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made towards starting
Burns Unit at Jai Prakash Narayan Apex Trauma Center (JPNATC.)
XI. THE POST-GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH
Recommendation/Observation
3.38 The Committee has been informed that the Institute has already submitted a detailed
proposal for creation of 2745 posts of various categories which is lying with the ministry for
taking necessary action. Regarding, the existing vacant posts the Institute has already taken the
steps for filling up of these posts. The Committee takes note of the measures taken by the Hospital
to fill up the vacancies in different categories. The Committee would appreciate if these vacancies
get filled up as scheduled. (Para 11.5)
Action Taken
3.39 With regard to the proposals for creation of posts at various categories in PGIMER,
Chandigarh, the matter is already under process.
Further Recommendation
3.40 The Committee would like the Department to take necessary step to overcome the
manpower shortage. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress in this regard.
XII. NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND
MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG
Recommendation/Observation
3.41  The Committee recommends that the Department should facilitate the settlement of the
queries at the earliest so that the proposed projects can proceed with consistency and co-
ordination. (Para 12.3)
Action Taken
3.42 There has been a time gap between the conceptualization/formulation of the three projects
and their final approval. The Institute with the new regular Director in Office reconsidered the
three Projects. The revised estimated cost of each Project is as under:-
● Establishment of under graduate college — Estimated cost of Rs.211.28 crores.
● Establishment of Regional Cancer Centre — Estimated cost of Rs.130.00 crores.
● Expansion of Nursing College and Hostel — Estimated cost of Rs.60.33 crores.
The Detailed Project Reports in respect of above Projects, as prepared by the Project
Management Consultant, were placed before the meeting of the 35 th Standing Finance Committee
of the Institute, in its meeting held on 3 rd June, 2013 at NEIGRIHMS, Shillong. The Committee
approved the DPRs in principle and directed the Institute to resubmit the Projects to the Ministry
for obtaining approvals of the competent authority. The Projects are expected to be appraised and
approved by the end of this year.

38
Further Recommendation
3.43 The Committee in its various Reports on Demands for Grants has been impressing upon the
Department to ensure that all pre-project activities/approvals are completed/ obtained on time so
that the projects are not plagued with delays for want of approval and time and cost overruns are
minimized. The Committee is however, constrained to note that due to delay in approval, the
proposed projects of NEIGRIHMS have led to upward revision of costs of the projects. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should widen its ambit of monitoring and
ensure implementation of the projects at the earliest.
Recommendation/Observation
3.44 The Committee is happy to note that the Department has chalked out a defined plan for
the recruitment process. The Committee recommends that the vacancies should be filled up at
the earliest for efficient delivery of health services. The Committee would like the Institute to
frame a time bound Action plan for recruitment and minimize the time spent on planning stage.
As advised by the Ministry, the Institute may undertake special recruitment drive at the earliest.
(Para 12.5)
Action Taken
3.45 In pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee to take up Special Recruitment Drive
for early filling up of vacancies, NEIGRIHMS has drawn an Action Plan for Recruitment of
Faculty, Group A, B and C post. The details of the Action Plan are at Annexure-IV to VII .
Further Recommendation
3.46 The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard.
XIII. PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY)
Recommendation/Observation
3.47 The Committee observes that in respect of new six AIIMS and upgradation of medical
colleges under PMSSY, the work is still pending and the completion has spilled over to 2013-14.
Regarding the status of Medical Colleges and hospitals under PMSSY , some projects in phase I are
yet to be completed and those under phase II are either in preliminary stage or yet to be started.
The Committee is disappointed to note the slow pace of implementation of Pradhan Mantri
Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) scheme. The Committee recommends to the Department to
streamline and revisit the policy on implementation of the projects for timely completion and ensure
that infrastructure development and technology acquisition is consistent with the projects in both
the phases so as to avoid any inconvenience at later stages. The students should not suffer for
want of infrastructure. (Para 13.6)
Action Taken
3.48 Out of 13 medical colleges taken up for upgradation in the first phase of PMSSY , civil work
at seven medical college institutions ( viz. Trivandrum Medical College; Salem Medical College;
Bangalore Medical College; SGPGIMS, Lucknow; NIMS, Hyderabad; Jammu Medical College; and
Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS), Ranchi has been completed .
In respect of Kolkata Medical College, construction of OPD Block, Academic Block taken
up in the 1
st stage of construction has been completed and for the Super Specialty Block, which

39
is to be taken up in the second stage of construction, tender process has been initiated. 98% of
work has been completed at IMS, BHU, Varanasi; and 88% at Srinagar Medical College. In regard
to Sree Venkateswara Institute of Medical Sciences (SVIMS), Tirupati; Grants Medical College,
Mumbai and B.J. Medical College, Ahmedabad, where upgradation involves mostly procurement of
medical equipments, the procurement process is likely to be completed by August, 2013. It may
be mentioned that most the upgradation work under Phase-I has either been completed or are at
advance stage of completion.
Further Recommendation
3.49 The Committee notes that the there is need for acceleration of rate of work in all
the projects and to devise strategies for successful running of these institution. Bottlenecks
at various stages of work should be removed with proper co-ordination among all the
concerned agencies. There must be effective monitoring of the status of the projects and the
monitoring agencies may be made accountable for day to day update on the projects.
Recommendation/Observation
3.50 From the perusal of the information provided, the Committee notes that percentage of work
completed in respect of upgradation of State Government Medical colleges in phase II is well below
the targeted deadline. The Committee fails to understand how the deadline of August, 2013 can be
maintained in the case of Amritsar, Tanda and Aligarh Medical Colleges when the progress made
is only 32%, 42% and 54% respectively. Similarly, only 9% work has been done in Rohtak Medical
College and the deadline for completion has been fixed at May, 2014. The Committee recommends
that the Department should explore and establish a monitoring mechanism so as to identify and
rectify the factors causing delay at regular intervals. Practical reassessment of timeframe is also
recommended. (Para 13.7)
Action Taken
3.51 It is mentioned that with the constant monitoring, site visits by officers of the Ministry, the
pace of the work has picked up considerably. Out of 6 Medical College institutions taken up for
upgradation in the second phase, civil work started at the following four medical colleges and
progress is as follows:
Sl. Institution Progress (%)
No.
1 R.P. Government Medical College, Tanda 60
2 Jawaharlal Medical College, AMU, Aligarh 65
3 Government Medical College, Amritsar 35
4 Pt. B.D. Sharma Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Rohtak 16
At Nagpur Medical College, upgradation programme involves only procurement of
equipments and entire procurement work is being undertaken by the Institute/State Government. In
respect of Madurai Medical College, due to change in location for the new Super Specialty Block,
plan needed to be modified by the State Government. The State Government has since revised the
DPR and made the same available to the Ministry very recently. The Ministry has examined and
approved the DPR for project implementation.

40
Further Recommendation
3.52 The Committee observes that the above projects are formulated and funded by the
Department. Therefore, the onus of completing them within the specified time-frame and
ensuring better financial performance lies with the Department. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Department to widen its monitoring ambit and ensure that the projects
under PMMSY are not plagued with time and cost overruns.
XIV. DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES.
Recommendation/Observation
3.53 From the perusal of the physical targets set vis-a-vis achievements made, it can be seen
that the Department has missed all the targets. The Committee feels that desirable and achievable
targets should be fixed, given the available capacity, under-utilization of funds and efficiency
constraints. The Department may review the scheme in this light. (Para 14.3)
Action Taken
3.54 Noted for compliance. The target has been fixed for Twelfth Plan period considering the
progress made during Eleventh Plan period.
Further Recommendation
3.55 The Department should fix a high standard for achievement and strictly adhere to
the time-frame and achieve targets.
Recommendation/Observation
3.56 The Committee does appreciate the efforts made by the Department to augment the Nursing
force. The Committee is however, of the opinion that shortage of nurses is a perennial problem.
Thus, it is an overarching responsibility on the Department to go beyond meeting particular yearly
targets for efficient delivery of healthcare services. The Committee has been given to understand
that teaching standard in private nursing institutions is very poor. The Department should address
this aspect very seriously . (Para 14.8)
Action Taken
3.57 Noted for compliance. The Indian Nursing Council is the statutory body to maintain the
quality of nursing education including permission, renewal etc. both for Govt. and Private sector.
As per Indian Nursing Council, each Institution has to be evaluated for quality every five years.
Further Recommendation
3.58 The Committee notes that more needs to be done in this area than what is being
done at present to maintain a minimum standard in the private nursing institutions. A new
evaluation policy should be framed to balance the demand and quality.
XV. NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
3.59 The Department has informed that the allocation of funds at BE and RE was Rs.130 crore

41
and Rs.100 crore respectively and actual expenditure was Rs.51.91 crore only. Physical
Achievements during 2012-13 is as below:
● Continuation of Support to 11 Centres of Excellence and 27 PG Departments in Mental
Health Specialties
● Support to 12 DMHPs
● IEC Awareness campaign on Mental Health
● Support to 1 State Mental Health Authority
In regard to non-utilisation of funds, it was stated that the Division has not been able to
release funds due to non-submission of Utilization Certificate.
3.60 The Committee hopes that the funds allocated for the programme would be sufficient to
achieve the proposed targets. The Committee also recommends that the reasons for underutilization
of funds in the previous year may be evaluated minutely and all possible measures be taken to see
that those hurdles do not recur in utilization of allocated funds. The States may be impressed upon
the need to submit UCs timely. (Para 15.2)
3.61 The Committee recommends that the Department should enlist the targets missed during
2012-13 and also the reasons for the same, and reassess its policy to achieve these targets as early
as possible. (Para 15.3)
Action Taken
3.62 The Department could not utilize the funds allocated during the year 2012-13 due to non-
submission of Utilization Certificates by the States and non-submission of proposals for financial
assistance under Scheme B of Manpower Development Schemes. This year, teams of officials of
this Department have been formed to personally visit the States (who have not submitted Utilization
Certificates) and collect the Utilization Certificates for the funds released under National Mental
Health Programme. Further, States are being encouraged to submit proposals for financial
assistance under Scheme B of Manpower Development Schemes.
The targets set and achieved during the year 2012-13 are at Annexure-VIII.
Further Recommendation
3.63 The Committee is dismayed to note that gross under-utilisation of allocated funds has
become a persistent trend under this head and that the Department has sought to shift the
onus on the State Governments for non-submission of utilisation certificates. The Committee
would like the Department to closely monitor the pace of implementation of the schemes of
NMHP at the S tate level for the sake of better financial performance under this head.
Recommendation/Observation
3.64 The Committee is deeply concerned about the underutilization of funds and would like the
Department to provide reasons for such massive under-utilization. The Committee further
recommends that the Department should take necessary steps for optimum utilization of funds and
improve the quality of delivery of services with strict emphasis on monitoring of allocated funds.
(Para 16.3)
Action Taken
3.65 The under utilisation of funds allocated for CDSCO has primarily been for the reason of

42
fulfilling of unavoidable mandatory requirements of financial propriety and transparency, various
financial procedures associated with procurements and associated strict approval process, which
take much time. In this process many-a-times the financial year ends. The concerned work is,
therefore, undertaken next year. It has made every effort at optimum utilisation of funds and will
continue to do so.
Further Recommendation
3.66 The reply of the Department that the underutilisation of funds has primarily been
for the reason of fulfilling of unavoidable mandatory requirement of financial propriety, is
untenable and reflects poorly on the functioning of the Department. The Department should
focus more on devising ways of ensuring optimum utilisation of allocated funds than relying
on alibis for financial underperformance.
XVII. SERA AND V ACCINE MANUFACTURING UNITS
Recommendation/Observation
3.67 The Committee fails to understand under-utilization of funds in a situation when so many
activities are being undertaken in CRI, Kasauli and BCG, Guindy. The under-utilization of funds
reflect lack of preparatory stage for realistic targets achievement. The Committee hopes that the
Department would formulate new strategies in co-ordination with the Institutes to attain optimum
utilization of funds, and for revival of the units as per envisaged targets. (Para 17.2)
ActionTaken
3.68 In CRI, Kasauli, an amount of Rs.2.2 crore was kept for purchase of 6 R Glass vials
used for filling of the vaccines but procurement could not be made in time. Rs.70 lakhs was
kept for purchase of rubber stoppers and despite going for open tender, no bids were received.
Rs.1.95 crore was kept for VVM labels. However, procurement could not be finalized. In addition
to this, some funds were kept for procurement as well as repair/maintenance of various
equipments. However, these could not be procured due to various reasons of furnishing of
inappropriate technical specification by the user department and also non receipt of sufficient
number of bids. Further, The job of construction of Roof Top Rain Water Harvesting Structure
was awarded to IPH Department of Himachal Pradesh and was supposed to be completed within
one year, but due to Legislative Assembly Election and enforcement of code of conduct in the
State, tender process could not be finalized by the IPH Deptt. in time. Hence the payment could
not be made.
3.69 In addition to this, some funds were allocated for purchase of Machinery and Equipments
for Anti Sera Division, Yellow Fever Division and Quality Control Division at the Institute but could
not be procured due to non-receipt of appropriate bids. The upgraded vaccine manufacturing
facility at the Institute is expected to function shortly in full capacity and at that time funds will
be utilized optimally and in a planned way.
As far as BCGVL, Guindy is concerned, due to non-procurement of Vaccine Vial Monitor
for Rs.1.00 crore, non-procurement of vial caps, aluminium seal, funds allocated in R.E. stage
could not be utilized optimally. An amount of Rs.2.03 crore sanctioned under Plan Capital head
could not be spent for want of approval in time. Further, certain civil work to be done by CPWD
in BCG staff quarters amounting to Rs.73 lakh was not taken up due to delay in submission of
estimates and pending approval and expenditure sanction from Dte.GHS. Thus, the funds could not
be utilized optimally.

43
Further Recommendation
3.70 The reply of the Ministry is deafeningly silent about main recommendation of the
Committee, i.e., to formulate new strategies to attain optimum utilisation of funds and revival
of CRI, Kasauli and BCGVL, Guindy. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation
and desires that strategies be formulated to ensure optimum utilisation of funds under this
above head. The Committee desires to be apprised of the details of the progress made towards
making the sera and vaccine manufacturing units GMP compliant and operational.
XVIII. ASSISTANCE FOR CAPACITY BUILDING
Recommendation/Observation
3.71 The Committee desires that a review may be undertaken on the implementation of the
programme in the 16 States. The Committee recommends that urgent steps should be taken to
cover the remaining States under the programme for all round coverage of the country. (Para 18.8)
Action Taken
3.72 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The review of the trauma centre
in 16 states will be undertaken in due course of time.
Further Recommendation
3.73 The Committee notes that the issue is of utmost importance and must be taken up
on priority basis and work in this regard must be started as early as possible.
XX. THE NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR HEALTH CARE OF THE ELDERLY (NPHCE)
Recommendation/Observation
3.74 The Committee expresses its concern over gross underutilization of funds in 2012-13. This
needs to be rectified. Number of elderly people is going to increase in the country and this
programme needs to be effectively implemented. (Para 20.3)
Action Taken
3.75 The entire budgetary allocation of Rs.150.00 crores could not be utilized due to non-
inclusion of 100 new districts and 4 new Regional Geriatric Centres in 2012-13 as the approval
of Twelfth Plan allocation was not decided. Further, Department of Expenditure vide their orders
dated 14
th November, 2012 banned the release of grant-in-aid to State Health Societies which could
not submit Utilization Certificates in respect of funds released to them up to the year 2010-11,
under any scheme/project/programme of this Ministry. Moreover, all of the 21 State Health
Societies and 8 Regional Geriatric Centres had huge amount of unspent balance with them as on
1.4.2012. The Ministry has been requesting the State Governments/State Health Societies to
accelerate the implementation of the Programme during 2012-13 in order to enable them to claim
more funds during 2013-14.
Further Recommendation
3.76 The Committee notes that the issues giving rise to under-utilization have not been
addressed and thus the Ministry should pursue the matter diligently. The Committee feels
that there is lack of proper planning for fund utilisation and targets are not properly

44
defined. The Department needs to work efficiently in this regard and take up with the
states.
XXI. DISTRICT HOSPITALS
Recommendation/Observation
3.77 The Committee recommends that the Department should hold frequent meetings with the
States and impress upon them to submit UCs. Unless these grants are released and utilized by the
States, increased PG seats will go waste. The Committee recommends that the Department should
act diligently and take preparatory steps to avoid situations where funds could not be released. The
Committee is of the opinion that the Department should reassess the requirement of funds and
request at the RE stage for an enhanced allocation, if necessa ry. (Para 21.2)
Action Taken
3.78 Noted.
Further Recommendation
3.79 The Committee is constrained to observe that this is yet another example of causal
reply of the Ministry. No mention has been made regarding measures taken or contemplated
to be taken for holding frequent meetings with the States and impress upon them to submit
UCs on time. The Committee would therefore like the Ministry to take tangible action in
this regard and apprise the Committee accordingly.

45
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
III. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME
Recommendation/Observation
4.1 The Committee notes that the earmarked funds for 2013-14 under the scheme are not in
tune with the projected demand of the Department. From the figures made available to the
Committee it is evident that Rs.694.00 crore have been allocated against projected demand of
Rs.918.48 crore under non plan Head and Rs.62.47 crore against the projection of Rs.80.54 crore
under Plan head. The Committee is given to understand that this deficit in allocation may adversely
affect procurement of medicines and any new initiatives/projects proposed under CGHS during
2013-14, i.e., construction of own CGHS buildings, where plots are already allotted, opening of
already sanctioned dispensaries in Delhi and NCR. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should try its best to convince the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance, for
enhancement of allocation at RE stage so as to ensure required procurement of medicines and also
appropriate funding for proposed initiatives/projects. (Psara 3.6)
Action Taken
4.2 The Committee’s observation is noted. The funds allocated for 2013-14 for CGHS under
respective heads are apparently inadequate. The Department will take up this issue with the Ministry
of Finance for enhancement of allocation at RE stage as advised by the Hon’ble Committee.
Recommendation/Observation
4.3 The Department has stated that for inclusion of the proposed Health Insurance Scheme for
the Central Government employees and pensioners in the Twelfth Plan an amount of Rs.2061
crores has been provisionally indicated as outlay. The proposal needs to be placed before the
Expenditure Finance Committee and the Cabinet for approval. The Committee desires to be
informed of the final decision taken in the matter. (Para 3.8)
Action Taken
4.4 The Department is in process of finalising the proposal in respect of the proposed Health
Insurance Scheme for the Central Government employees and pensioners for consideration of the
Expenditure Finance Committee. Final decision in the matter will be taken in due course with the
approval of Union Cabinet.
Recommendation/Observation
4.5 The Committee recommends that the “CGHS-Vision 2020” should review, redefine and
reassess cost packages of core health services for each level of care and prioritize allocation of
resources accordingly. The Department should review the operation of the policies governing the
45

46
expenditure, both revenue and capital so that optimum utilization of funds takes place. The
Department should also focus on policies and initiatives for efficiency gain. (Para 3.24)
Action Taken
4.6 The Committee constituted for preparing a vision document “CGHS -Vision 2020” will
consider the invaluable suggestions of Hon’ble Committee while preparing the vision plan for
CGHS.
VI. CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY (CIP), RANCHI
Recommendation/Observation
4.7 The Committee observes that the Plan allocation for the Institute shows increase from
Rs.43.80 crore in RE 2012-13 to Rs.50 crore in BE 2013-14. The Department has informed that
the enhanced allocation is proposed to be utilized for various infrastructure works like construction
of Family Ward, OT Block, Diagnostic Centre, Pharmacy Block, OPD Block, Neurology Block and
CSSD Block which have to be undertaken by CPWD. Machinery and Equipments such as 3D
Neuro Navigational system for rTMS Coil, ENMG, Matlab 7.13 software, Anti Plagiarism Software,
ECT Machine, Ultra Low Freezer, 256-channel ERP, computers, work station for digital EEG etc.
will likely to be added. 140 plan posts to be created and incumbent will be appointed on the post.
In view of this plan allocation has been increased. (Para 6.4)
4.8 The Department has informed that an amount of Rs.17.56 crores has been approved by
EFC for the purpose of manpower development. As per approved EFC regarding 140 additional
posts (including 21 posts of Junior Resident and 6 posts of Senior Resident), the proposal was
referred to the Ministry of Finance which stated that since CIP, Ranchi is managing its workload
without these posts for so long, it can continue to manage without these posts. The Department
is again requesting Ministry of Finance to reconsider its stand and provide approval for creation
of these posts as these are indispensable for day to day functioning of the Institute which has been
hampered for so long. Besides, EFC has approved Capital Works amounting to Rs.70.27 crores.
An amount of Rs.12.17 crores has been approved for procurement of equipment. (Para 6.5)
4.9 The Committee recommends that the Department may take up the matter for creation of
additional posts with Ministry of Finance for reconsideration. The Hospital is expanding and new
posts in any case will be required for meeting the increasing patient load. (Para 6.6)
Action Taken
4.10 A proposal for creation of 140 posts in Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi has been sent
again for reconsideration of the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure as these are
indispensable for day to day functioning of the Institute. Further post creation will be taken up with
the Deptt. of Expenditure on request of the Institute depending upon their workload.
VIII. LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE
Recommendation/Observation
4.11 On a query that in what manner the enhanced allocation of Rs.195.00 crore for 2013-14
is proposed to be utilized, the Department has informed that a sum of Rs.74.75 crores was
requested under ‘Plan’ in Budget Estimates for 2013-14. However, a sum of Rs.195 crores was
allocated. The funds may be utilized in 2013-14 as per requirement projected and unutilized fund

47
will be surrendered at RE stage. The Committee would like the Department to clarify the
reasons for higher allocation than asked for. (Para 8.3)
Action Taken
4.12 The allocation will be reviewed at the RE stage.
IX. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCE (AIIMS)
Recommendation/Observation
4.13 The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should approach the Planning
Commission at the RE stage for an enhanced allocation for the Institute so that the new projects/
initiatives can be completed within the timeframe without any budget constraints. The Committee
is apprehensive that budget constraints may lead to compromise in the services rendered by the
Institute. Hence, a realistic assessment of funds requirement is urgently required. (Para 9.4)
Action Taken
4.14 Institute will re-assess the requirement under creation of capital Assets. Additional allocation
if needed will be asked at RE stage.
XVI. CENTRAL DRUGS STANDARD CONTROL ORGANISATION (CDSCO)
Recommendation/Observation
4.15 The scheme is still at initial stage and only the States have been requested to send details.
The Committee is not sure that the scheme will take off in the current year. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the status of the scheme of “Strengthening of States’ Drug Regulatory
System” as envisaged. The Committee recommends that the Department should work to obtain all
required approvals timely so that the scheme could be implemented as targeted. (Para 16.7)
Action Taken
4.16 V arious State Governments have already provided information about the gap areas in their
regulatory infrastructure. The Ministry is, however, continuing to obtain more detailed information
from the States in a uniform proforma. The Ministry has also forwarded the Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) proposal to the Planning Commission for its comments/approval.
Recommendations/Observations
4.17 The Committee in this connection would like to be apprised of the upgraded status of
supply of generic drugs in Government Hospitals and dispensaries. (Para 16.12)
4.18 The Committee was informed by the Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals during the
course of his disposition before it on 3rd June, 2012 that his Department was preparing a revised
business plan to expand the Jan Aushadhi programme in which 600 plus Jan Aushadhi stores are
targeted to be established within the next two years and 3000 stores in four years depending upon
the response from the State Governments. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made
in this regard.  (Para 16.13)
4.19 The Committee also urges upon the Department to take a proactive approach in promotion
and availability of generic medicines in all the States. The Committee also recommends that the

48
Department may work in close coordination with the Department of Pharmaceuticals in ironing out
hindrances in establishing Jan Aushadhi stores and addressing the inadequacies from which the Jan
Aushadhi Programme suffers. (Para 16.14)
4.20 The Committee in its 58
th Report had commented about revival of Public Sector Pharma
Units so that the all-important objective of access to affordable and quality medicines to all could
be realized. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
(Para 16.15)
Action Taken
4.21 The recommendations have been referred to the Department of Pharmaceuticals in the
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers for their comments.

49
REPORT
Part-B — National Health Mission
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in Sixty-Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 47) of
the Department of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2013-14.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
been accepted by the Committee: 2.8, 2.13, 4.7, 5.5, 5.7, 5.8, 5.13, 5.16, 5.20, 5.27,
5.28, 5.29, 5.30, 5.31, 5.33, 5.34, 5.35, 5.38, 5.39, 5.41, 6.4, 7.2, 7.4, 7.6, 7.7, 8.4,
8.6, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 12.5
Total–31 (Chapter-I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government's replies: 2.1, 2.3, 5.25, 5.26
Total–4 (Chapter-II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 2.2, 2.6, 2.10, 3.2, 5.4, 5.14, 5.21, 9.6, 9.11,
9.13, 10.4, 10.5, 10.7, 11.5, 12.1, 12.2, 13.3
Total–17 (Chapter-III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are
still awaited: 5.22, 5.23
Total–2 (Chapter-IV)
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

50
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 The Committee feels that funds should not be a constraint with respect to vital Schemes
like NRHM-RCH Flexible Pool, NUHM-Flexible pool, National Programme for control of Blindness,
Health Care for Elderly, National Programme for Control of Deafness, National Tobacco Control
Programme, National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular
Diseases and Stroke. No allocation has been made for assistance to States for Capacity Building
(Burns) under the NHM. Similarly the funds allocated to the Family Welfare- Central sector is quite
less than the funds sought. The Committee, therefore recommends to the Department that in order
to convince the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission, it needs to put in place a strong and
effective physically and financially prudent system which is able to absorb the funds allocated to
it, which does not seem to be the case now in view of the persistent underutilization of the funds
allocated to it year after year under NRHM. The Committee recommends that the Department’s
vision to undertake Universal Health Coverage should not suffer due to non-allocation of funds for
NUMH and dropping of implementation thereof. The Committee is very much concerned with the
sorry state of affairs of healthcare facilities presently available to urban poor particularly those
living in urban slums. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should make all
out efforts to get more funds at RE stage for implementation of some of the schemes under
NUHM. Besides, the funds meant for NRHM should not be directed for NUHM. (Para 2.8)
Action Taken
1.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. It is informed that
the Finance Minister, vide letter dated 13
th May, 2013, has informed that funds would be made
available for NUHM. Internally also efforts are being made to mobilize resource towards NUHM.
Recommendation/Observation
1.3 The Committee feels that the total Expenditure by Government (Central and State
Governments combined) as a percentage of GDP has merely increased from 1.27 in 2007-08 to
1.29 in 2011-12 which is a very telling comment on the state of affairs of public spending on
Health which directly translates into high Out-of-Pocket expenses for a majority of population. The
Committee observes that given the fact that a significant percent of India’s population is
impoverished every year due to illness of a family member, there is an imperative need to increase
the total expenditure at the Centre and the States level to at least 3% of GDP. Since the States
are themselves under fiscal stress, it is for the Centre to assign a significant part of its resources
towards health care. The Committee hopes that the Department would be able to live up to the
contention of the Planning Commission for increasing the total Government expenditure, both at
centre and state level as a proportion of GDP in the Twelfth Plan from 1.94 percent in the last
year of the Eleventh Plan to 3.04 percent in the corresponding year of the twelfth Plan given the
dismal utilization figures of the Department in the Eleventh Plan. (Para 2.13)
50

51
Action Taken
1.4 The States account for approximately two third (2/3 rd) of the total health expenditure while
Centre accounts for one third (1/3 rd). As expenditure incurred is circumscribed within the budgetary
allocation approved by Planning Commission, an enhanced allocation provides space for incurring
higher expenditure. The phasing of the year-wise allocation within the Twelfth Plan period is also
of importance in increasing utilization of Government expenditure, as front loading of total year-
wise allocation in the Twelfth Five Year Plan help better financial planning and utilization of funds
during the period. Delay in approval of the Twelfth Five Year Plan (in late 2012) resulted in token
provisions under some schemes during 2012-13. Department of Health and Family Welfare would
strive for better utilization of funds to enhance Government expenditure on health as percentage of
GDP.
IV. NATIONAL URBAN HEALTH MISSION-FLEXIBLE POOL
Recommendation/Observation
1.5 The Committee is aware of the grave repercussions the massive urbanisation would
have on the health and well-being of the vast masses of population residing in the urban areas.
The Committee notes that NUHM was recommended by the EFC on 9 th October, 2012 for
approval of the Cabinet. However, the Cabinet is yet to approve the proposal and consequently
the NUHM which is targeted to address health needs of urban poor and other disadvantaged
and vulnerable sections, is yet to be made operational. The Committee is unable to comprehend
the reasons for not getting the required approval even after the lapse of more than six months
since the EFC approval. The Committee also recommends the Department to take up the matter
with the Government at appropriate level with alacrity in order to obtain the necessary
approvals for landmark sub-mission which would complement and supplement NRHM. The
Committee would further like the Department to adopt a coordinated approach with regard to
the operations of the two sub-missions, i.e.  NRHM and NUHM, so that the beneficiaries of
each of these two sub-missions are clearly identified and their objectives do not conflict with
each other. (Para 4.7)
Action Taken
1.6 The National Urban Health Mission has been launched as a sub-mission of the National
Health Mission. The resolution in this regard issued on 15 th May, 2013 states that the National
Urban Health Mission and National Rural Health Mission will be two distinct sub-missions of the
overarching National Health Mission.
V. FLEXIBLE POOL FOR COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 The Department has further informed that the total funds allocated in BE 2013-14 for
NVBDCP is Rs.572 crores (including NE States) and efforts will be made to emphasize on the
states for timely submission of SOEs/UCs for cash grants and the procurement agencies for timely
procurement and supplies. Further, additional HR will be engaged to strengthen the monitoring and
supervision of the programme activities. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details
regarding all the activities which would be undertaken under the programme with the expected
time-lines for completion thereof. The Committee would also like to be informed of the detailed
efforts proposed to be taken, for reducing the number of UCs.  (Para 5.5)

52
Action Taken
1.8 The main activities for prevention and control of vector borne diseases with timelines are
as under:
1st quarter (April–June) : Sensitization, implementation of 1 st round of spray and continued
surveillance and treatment.
2nd quarter  (July–Sept.) : 2nd round spray and observance of anti-dengue month in July,
preparatory activities for Mass Drug Administration for filaria elimination and continued
surveillance and treatment.
3
rd quarter  (Oct.–Dec.) : Review and Monitor physical and financial performance and
preparation of next annual plan and continued surveillance and treatment.
4th quarter  (Jan.–March) : Consolidation of previous year’s physical and financial
achievement and plan for next year and continued surveillance and treatment.
The financial monitoring has been integrated under NRHM and the funds are released to the
health society and the utilization certificate/SOEs are sent by them.
Recommendation/Observation
1.9 The Department has informed that the major policy reform undertaken during 2012-13
includes:
1. Mandatory notification of all TB cases by all Health Establishments in the country, both
public and private sectors.
2. Introduction of case based web based system of electronic recording and reporting of
TB cases (NIkshay)
3. Early diagnosis of drug resistant TB cases by expansion of MDR-TB suspect criteria
to include all retreatment smear positive TB cases and positives on any follow up.
4. Introduction of CD-NAAT for early and additional case detection on pilot basis.
5. Policy to offer voluntary counselling and testing to all TB suspects for early diagnosis
of HIV in TB patients(in high prevalence areas)
6. Pilot for cross-referral of TB and diabetes patients for early diagnosis of both the
diseases.
7. Revision of dosing for paediatric TB cases with increasing the number of weight bands
for optimal dosage. (Para 5.7)
Action Taken
1.10 Matter of Record.
Recommendation/Observation
1.11 The Committee notes that though the Department has highlighted the major policy reform
undertaken during 2012-13, there is no mention of the results achieved therefrom. It has been
noticed that the policy reforms often remain on paper and their implementation is not there on the
ground. The Committee would, therefore, expect the Department to delineate the implementation
strategy adopted to translate the policy into action. The Committee would also like to be apprised
of the quantifiable results achieved in this regard. (Para 5.8)

53
Action Taken
1.12 Mandatory notification of all TB cases by Health Establishments in country, both public and
private sectors
● Guidance tool with mechanism for TB Notification was developed by Central TB
Division (also available on tbcindia website)
● Contact details of nodal officers for TB notification in each district in the country was
compiled (also available on tbcindia website)
● Sensitization of State and District TB Officers and Health staff was conducted across
the country to initiate TB notification.
● Wide publicity was given for TB notification by printing the copy of Government
Order in leading national and local newspapers throughout the country.
● Till date over 54000 Health Establishments (both public and private) have reported /
notified 12,33,170 TB cases.
1. Introduction of case based web based system of electronic recording and reporting of TB
cases (Nikshay)
● Central TB Division (CTD) in collaboration with National Informatics Centre (NIC)
developed Case based web based system of electronic recording and reporting of TB
cases (Nikshay) which was launched on 15th May, 2013 after quick testing of
feasibility. More than 3500 users have been created with login IDs at different levels
including Tuberculosis Unit (TU), District, States/UT and national level. 38000 health
facilities have been mapped from which details of TB cases are entered in the
software.
● User manuals were developed and master trainers trained at national level and software
was launched in May, 2012. Rapid training cascade was completed in training of
provincial level (50), district level (668) and block level (~8000) data entry operators
using training videos in English and Hindi, user manual and demonstrations. All health
officers and TB Officers were sensitized by August, 2012.
● The application is used for monitoring and tracking of individual patient notified to the
Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme. Till now, we have 1.2 million cases
entered in this application. This ensures appropriate and effective treatment of all TB
cases to prevent drug resistant TB. This application also includes details of Multi-Drug
Resistant (MDR) patients and HIV associated Tuberculosis. Auto generation of
Programme reports and epidemiological analysis is also being done.
2. Early diagnosis of drug resistant TB cases by expansion of MDR-TB suspect criteria to
include all re-treatment smear positive TB cases and positives on any follow up.
● RNTCP has conducted appraisal of all districts implementing DOTS for rolling out
PMDT services and state has been provided the appraisal report with recommendation
for the district. All districts throughout the country started PMDT services by March
2013.
● Laboratory capacity in state and treatment capacity at DR-TB center has been
expanded across the country and more and more districts are expanding MDR-TB
suspect criteria to include all re-treatment smear positive TB cases.

54
● Currently 470 districts are following MDR-TB suspect criteria to include all re-
treatment smear positive TB cases and positives on any follow up to ensure early
diagnosis of drug resistant TB cases.
3. CB-NAAT for early and additional case detection.
● RNTCP is conducting the pilot feasibility study with objective of potential impact of
introducing CB-NAAT for the detection of TB and Rifampicin resistance at TU level to
generate evidence for RNTCP scale-up for CB-NAAT at 18 sites across 12 states.
● The impact will be measured by additional number of cases of TB and MDR-TB
detected compared to the sputum smear microscopy across the 18 sites across
12 states.
4. Early diagnosis of HIV in TB patients (in high prevalence areas).
● Provider Initiated HIV Testing and Counselling (PITC) among Presumptive TB cases
(TB suspects) is now a policy which is being implemented on priority in High HIV
prevalent states/settings. In low HIV prevalent states/settings – HIV testing among
presumptive TB cases should be routinely implemented in the age-group of 25-54 years
at places where there are co-located TB and HIV testing facilities.
● The state of Karnataka was implementing PITC among TB suspects in 2012 as a
feasibility study which was subsequently continued after the study. Out of the
31 districts, the proportion of of presumptive TB cases knowing their HIV status was
nearly 46% (range 10-3% and 9% range (9-29%) were found to be HIV positive.
● During the supervision and monitoring visits, it was observed that there was significant
proportion of TB suspects who know their HIV status or were referred from ICTC/
ART centres. The other high HIV prevalent states like Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and
Maharashtra are in the process of implementation.
5. TB and diabetes patients for early diagnosis of both the diseases
● A state-wide representative sample of TB patients in Kerala was conducted. Wherein
out of 552 TB patients screened 243 (44%) patients were found to be having Diabetes
Mellitus.
● Subsequently a pilot project was undertaken for bi-directional screening within the
routine healthcare setting across the country at eight tertiary care hospitals and eight
tuberculosis units.
● The study has shown that out of 8109 TB patients who were tested for Diabetes
Mellitus 1084 (13%) were found to have Diabetes Mellitus. Whereas, 254 (1.9%) TB
patients were detected out of 13,961 diabetic patients screened for TB.
● Based on the result the programme has made a policy to screen all TB patients for
Diabetes in 100 districts where National Programme for Prevention and Control of
Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS) is being implemented.
With the expansion of NPCDCS programme to other districts screening of all TB
patients will also be extended to those districts.
Revision of dosing for paediatric TB cases with increasing the number of weight bands for
optimal dosage has already been done and was disseminated to all concerned.

55
Recommendation/Observation
1.13  The Committee expresses its dismay at the delay in approval of EPC and Twelfth Five Year
Plan outlay. In para 1.23 of its 54 th Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13), the Committee had
recommended to the Government to hasten the approval of the Twelfth Plan outlay and related
proposals. However, it seems that desired attention was not paid to the above recommendation. The
Committee deprecates the delay in approval of the Twelfth Five Year Plan outlay which resulted
in less utilisation of the budgeted funds and had bearing on the desired outcomes of RNCTP as
well other programmes/schemes during the Twelfth Plan period. The Committee would expect the
Department not to let such a situation recur in future. (Para 5.13)
Action Taken
1.14 The observation is noted.
Recommendation/Observation
1.15  The Committee hopes that the funds allocated to the Department are utilized optimally and
recommends that strict monitoring and supervision should be kept on Grants-in aid to the State
Health Societies/NGOs to ensure that the amount allocated is utilized judiciously and scrupulously.
(Para 5.16)
Action Taken
1.16 The necessary action(s) would be taken by the Department.
Recommendation/Observation
1.17 The Committee observes that the problem of unspent balances with States has been
continuing for years together. Instead of analysing the real reasons behind unspent balances and
taking corrective action accordingly, the Department seems to be adopting routine and passive
attitude and letting things drift, which is a matter of serious concern. Removing the impediments
in way of financial performance is an imminent necessity in the interest of achieving the targets
under NLEP. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should analyse the
reasons behind the continuing trend of unspent balances and tackle the problem accordingly, and
not continue disbursing grants in a routine manner even when these are not being utilised.
(Para 5.20)
Action Taken
1.18  The recommendations have been taken note for action.
Recommendation/Observation
1.19 The quantum of funds allocated to National Programme for Control of Blindness NPCB in
BE 2013-14 is Rs.230.00 crore. The funds have been proposed to be utilized in a decentralized
manner through State/District Health Societies functioning in States as per the approved Programme
Implementation Plans for the following major existing programme activities:
1. Performance of cataract operations with IOL implantation;
2. Assistance to NGOs for management of other eye diseases (other than Cataract) like
Diabetic Retinopathy, Glaucoma Management, Laser Techniques, Corneal Transplantation,
Vitreoretinal Surgery, Treatment of Childhood Blindness etc.;

56
3. Screening of school children for detection of refractive errors and providing free
spectacles to those suffering from refractive errors;
4. Collection of donated eyes (after death) for transplantation in persons with corneal
blindness;
5. Enhancing capacities for eye care services in public sector by providing assistance to
hospitals at various levels;
6. Setting up of Vision Centres with basic screening equipments;
7. Developing Eye Banks and Eye Donation Centres to facilitate collection and processing
of donated eyes;
8. Providing non-recurring assistance to V oluntary Organizations for setting up/expanding
eye care services;
9. Assistance for development of dedicated Eye Units in district hospitals;
10. Training of eye care personnel and IEC. (Para 5.27)
Action Taken
1.20 Matter of Record.
Recommendation/Observation
1.21 The Committee is of the view that in a resource constrained country like India greater
attention needs to be paid on health outcomes than health outlays. The Committee would,
therefore, like the Department to brace itself for targeted action for satisfactory physical
performance of the above programme during 2013-14.  The Committee would like to be apprised
of the achievements made in respect of the above activities vis-a-vis  targets set therefor. The
Committee also is given to understand that in some cases of cataract operation, people have lost
vision and/or developed complications. Therefore, organisations implementing the programme
should be asked to follow and adhere the norms and procedures. Government may prepare
guidelines in this regard. (Para 5.28)
Action Taken
1.22 In compliance of the observations of the Committee, NPCB has initiated preparation of
Programme Implementation Plan for each State/UT in consultation with the concerned State Health
Authorities to achieve satisfactory physical performance of the programme during 2013-14. The
Committee would be apprised of the achievements made in respect of the implemented activities
vis-a-vis targets set therefor for the year 2013-14 after implementation of the activities during the
year. However, with the strengthening of existing eye care infrastructure and development of
human resources during the Eleventh Plan period, the programme has shown considerable
improvement with regard to major performance indicators as under:
● Number of cataract surgery has increased from 54,04,406 during 2007-08 to
63,49,205 during 2011-12.
● Number of cataract surgery performed with IOL Implantation has also increased from
94% in 2007-08 to around 98% during 2011-12.
● The programme has been implemented as a comprehensive eye care programme by
providing assistance for other eye diseases (in addition to cataract) also, like diabetic

57
retinopathy, glaucoma, corneal transplantation, vitreo-retinal surgery, treatment of
childhood blindness etc.
● Distribution of number of free spectacles to school children with refractive errors has
increased from 5,12,020 during 2007-08 to 6,58,061 during 2011-12.
● Collection of donated eyes for corneal implantation has also improved from 38,646
during 2007-08 to 49,410 during 2011-12.
1.23 NPCB has already formulated “Guidelines for pre-operative, operative and post-operative
precautions for eye surgery” including cataract surgery for strict compliance in eye-care units/
facilities in States/UTs. Programme implementing authorities in States are regularly reminded to
follow the approved guidelines during review meetings at various levels to avoid eye mishaps. All
State Programme Officers (NPCB), responsible for implementing the programme in States, have
been re-emphasized to strictly follow and adhere to the existing norms and procedures for eye
surgery to avoid eye mishaps and also to improve quality of eye surgery under NPCB. Quality,
more than quantity, in cataract surgery is dictum of the day.
Recommendation/Observation
1.24. In reply to a query, the Department has informed that at least 400 Multi- Purpose District
Ophthalmic Units covering nearly all the districts are proposed to be set up during the Twelfth Plan
subject to approval and availability of funds. The Committee would like to be informed whether
necessary approval could be obtained to the above proposal and if so, whether any roadmap for
setting up of the Ophthalmic Units has been chalked out. (Para 5.29)
Action Taken
1.25 The proposal for setting up of 400 Multi-Purpose District Mobile Ophthalmic Units at the
District Hospitals in States has been approved by the Empowered Programme Committee in the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for implementation during the Twelfth Five Year Plan. These
units will be set up as per the Programme Implementation Plans in a phased manner keeping in
view the districts that have remote and difficult far-flung areas to improve eye-care coverage. The
Mobile Unit will consist of a mobile van/vehicle with essential ophthalmic equipments/drugs and
materials to carry the following major activities under the programme:
(i) Screening Eye Camp
(ii) School Eye Screening
(iii) Transporting Patients for treatment
(iv) On the spot refraction and provision of glasses
(v) Diagnosis of diseases like diabetic retinopathy, glaucoma etc.
(vi) Display of IEC messages on its outer panels
Monitoring of NPCB activities by District Programme Manager.
Recommendation/Observation
1.26 The Department has informed that nearly 71 million persons are estimated to be suffering
from Iodine Deficiency Disorders in the country. The Primary thrust of this programme would be
iodization of the entire edible salt in a phased manner. The allocation made under NIDDCP for
2012-13 in BE was Rs.50.00 crore and in RE Rs.24.80 crore. Under NIDDCP, estimation of iodine

58
content of salt and urinary iodine excretion for the bio-availability of iodine is being done. As per
reports received so far from States/UTs, 81.41% salt samples are adequately iodized. The qualitative
analysis of salt at household/community level by Salt Testing Kit reported 62% salt samples are
adequately iodized. The reported production/ supply of Iodized salt up to the month of December
2012 is 37.44 lakh MT. Some states/UTs have initiated district IDD survey to assess the magnitude
of IDD. States/UTs have been conducting health and publicity activities. Global IDD Day on
21st October, 2012 was observed. So far under the programme Rs.12.96 crore have been utilized.
(Para 5.30)
Action Taken
1.27 Matter of Record.
Recommendation/Observation
1.28 This is yet another case of great variation between Budgetary Estimates, Revised Estimates
and actual expenditure incurred by the Department which reflects poorly on its budgetary planning.
The Committee urges upon the Department to assess requirement of funds more realistically so that
the budgeted funds do not get blocked and surrendered later . (Para 5.31)
Action Taken
1.29 The Budget Estimates of NIDDCP includes greater amount for supply of Salt Testing Kits
and Payment of incentive to ASHA for conducting salt testing at household/community level for
creating awareness about IDD, monitor the presence of iodine in iodated salt and promote
consumption of adequately iodated salt in IDD endemic districts. In the year 2012-13 procurement
of Salt Testing Kits was decentralized and the demand from States/UTs in this regard was not as
per budget estimations, as a result fund requirement was reduced at RE stage. The expenditure
incurred under the programme was Rs. 21.26 lakhs as against RE Rs. 24.80 lakhs.
Recommendation/Observation
1.30 The Committee was informed that funds would be provided to the Salt Commissioner’s
Office for quality control of iodized salt at production level during the Twelfth Plan. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the role of the Salt Commissioner in ensuring quality
control of iodized salt at production level and the role to be played by the Department in ensuring
quality control of iodized salt at production level. (Para 5.33)
Action Taken
1.31 To ensure quality control of iodized salt at production level the Salt Commissioners
Organisation through their nine quality control laboratories conducts analysis of potassium iodate
and iodated salt by using spot kit in the field and iodometric titration in the laboratory, advising
manufacturers about quality and packing standards, Also conducts through mobile laboratories
analysis of iodated salt at the time of production/storing and loading into Railway wagon/rakes and
issuing reports to the manufacturers for taking any corrective action. The Ministry of H&FW
entrusted the salt iodization including production and distribution of iodated salt to State/UTs under
NIDDCP to Salt Commissioners Organisation in order to prevent and control Iodine Deficiency
Disorders i.e. abortions, stillbirth, mental and physical retardation, deaf-mutism, squint, goiter and
neuromotor defects. The Ministry of H&FW monitors quality of iodated salt at distribution and
consumer level through State Health Directorate.

59
National Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (NIDSP)
Recommendation/Observation
1.32 Integrated Disease Surveillance Project (IDSP), a World Bank assisted project, aims to
strengthen disease surveillance for infectious diseases to detect and respond to outbreaks quickly.
The Department has informed that under the project, Surveillance units have been established in all
states/districts (SSU/DSU). Training of State/District Surveillance Teams and Rapid Response
Teams (RRT) has been completed in all States. A country wide Information Communication
Technology (ICT) network connecting all District H.Qrs, State H.Qrs, major medical colleges and
central surveillance unit at NCDC has been established with support from National Informatics
Centre (NIC) and Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO). Presently 90% districts report
weekly surveillance data on epidemic prone diseases through www.idsp.nic.in portal. These data are
analysed by SSU/DSU to detect and respond to outbreaks. On an average 30-35 outbreaks are
detected, reported and responded to by states every week. A 24x7 call centre (1075) has been
established to receive disease alerts which are referred to concerned SSU/DSU through e-mail/
telephone for response. A referral lab network has been established in 9 States by utilising the
existing diagnostic services for epidemic prone diseases during outbreaks. Under the ISDP 12 labs
have been strengthened for influenza surveillance. A total of 1675 outbreaks were reported and
responded to by States in 2011 (Jan.-Dec., 2011). All the activities presently being undertaken
under IDSP are proposed to be continued under NIDSP during the 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17)
under NRHM with an outlay of Rs.851 crores with domestic budget support. Under IDSP, a plan
allocation of Rs.63 crore was made in BE of 2012-13 which was reduced to Rs.40 crore in RE.
The expenditure as on 31.03.13 was Rs.32.60 crores. The reason for less expenditure is due to:
● 76% of funds are budgeted for State releases to implement the programme in different
States, but due to unavailability of UCs for various programmes under NRHM and non-
contribution of State Share, funds could not be released under IDSP, leading to less
utilization.
● Vacant contractual positions are the key reason for under-utilization of funds by States.
Rs.42-57 crore would be needed every year if all contractual positions under IDSP in
the States/districts are filled up. (Para 5.34)
Action Taken
1.33 Matter of Record.
Recommendation/Observation
1.34 The Committee is utterly disappointed on the reasons adduced by the Department for under-
utilisation of funds viz. ‘unavailability of Utilisation Certificates from States’, “vacant contractual
positions in the States’. There are serious shortcomings in the role played by the Department in
acting as a facilitator in implementing NIDSP in coordination with the State Governments. The
Committee expects that Department would introspect and the shortcomings noticed would be sorted
out in the right earnest to fulfil and the intended objective of NIDSP. The Committee also
recommends that States may be impressed upon the need to fill up vacant the contractual positions
at the earliest. (Para 5.35)
Action Taken
1.35 V acant contractual positions are the key reasons for under-utilization of funds by states.
Funds could not be released to some of the states in 2012-13 as they did not give the state
contribution as per NRHM norms.

60
1.36 It is felt that recruitment could not be completed in many States/UTs due to less
remuneration given under IDSP. For example, only Rs 25,000-40,000 was given to medical
graduates who were recruited as Epidemiologists and Microbiologists.
1.37 Now this issue of less remuneration has been addressed and it has been decided with the
approval of HFM on 04.01.2013 that the remunerations in Twelfth Plan for contractual positions
under IDSP will be fixed keeping in view the following broad norms:
1. State Health Societies to propose the remunerations as per NRHM norms/principles in
state PIPs and get it approved by Govt.
2. Remunerations under IDSP to be on par with similar positions in NRHM including
other disease control programmes.
3. Yearly increment applicable as per NRHM norms.
1.38 Further, the need to fill up the contractual positions has already been and is continuously
being impressed upon all the States/UTs through review meetings, senior officers meetings and
reinforced through PIP (Project Implementation Plan) and ROP (Record of Proceeding). All these
efforts will help in improving the recruitment of human resources and utilization of funds by
States/UTs under IDSP.
Recommendation/Observation
1.39 The Committee notes that a substantial allocation of Rs.640.39  crore has been made for
NIDSP for the Twelfth  Plan. Given the fact that there has been persistent under-utilisation of the
allocated funds under IDSP during the last many years, the Committee urges upon the Department
to put in place a rigorous mechanism for improving utilisation level of allocated provision for the
purpose so that the desired results are achieved. (Para 5.38)
Action Taken
1.40 As mentioned in Para 5.35, flexibility has been given to States/UTs to fix the remuneration
of contractual positions which will help in better recruitment and utilization of funds.
1.41 S tates/UTs have also been encouraged to appoint a dedicated State Surveillance Officer
(SSO) for implementation of IDSP.
1.42 More emphasis is being given on monitoring and evaluation of programme. In addition to
briefing of State/District programme officers during meetings and field visits, the states have been
asked to monitor IDSP at highest level and to undertake in-depth review at least once in a year
and to share the findings with CSU.
Recommendation/Observation
1.43 The Committee notes that a decentralized laboratory based IT-enabled disease surveillance
system is targeted to be strengthened/maintained during the Twelfth  Plan. Since there is already a
delay of one year in finalizing the Twelfth
 Plan, the Committee wonders as to how the envisaged
objective would be achieved in the remaining four years. The Committee desires that early action
may be taken in this regard. A comprehensive road map may be prepared for implementation of
NIDSP programme during Twelfth  Plan period. (Para 5.39)
Action Taken
1.44 To attain the project objectives in IDSP, the critical actions required are regular weekly

61
reporting of surveillance data from districts and early detection, confirmation and control of
outbreaks. Presently, about 90% districts report weekly surveillance data on epidemic prone
diseases. Data collection and analysis at all levels will be further improved.
1.45 By March, 2012, 65 Medical College labs in 9 states were linked with adjoining districts to
support diagnosis of epidemic prone diseases during outbreaks. In 2012-13, MoU has been signed
with 21 identified Medical College labs in 7 States to be part of referral lab network. By 2017,
about 190 Medical college labs/referral labs will be linked to districts.
1.46 S tates are increasingly reporting, investigating and controlling outbreaks. A total of 553
outbreaks of epidemic prone diseases were reported and responded through IDSP in 2008, 799
outbreaks in 2009, 990 outbreaks in 2010 and 1675 outbreaks in 2011. In 2012, 1584 outbreaks
have been reported.
Recommendation/Observation
1.47 The Committee while welcoming the conversion of IDSP from a Central Sector Scheme to
Centrally Sponsored Scheme, i.e. NIDSP, observes that the Department is required to play a major
role in facilitating IT-based data reporting through portal. (Para 5.41)
Action Taken
1.48 Information and Communication Technology Network (ICT) plays an integral role in
implementation of IDSP across the country. State Surveillance Units (SSUs) and District
Surveillance Units (DSUs) have been linked to each other through ICT network established with
the help of National Informatics Centre (NIC) and Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO). The
states are being encouraged to report all data through portal, which will make the analysis and use
of data easier.
VI. REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROJECT (RCHP)
Recommendation/Observation
1.49 For the FY 2013-14, a total of Rs.60 crores has been allocated at BE stage for RCH
procurement. The same will be utilized for procurement of sanitary napkins under the Menstrual
Hygiene scheme. The Committee would like to know the manner in which the sanitary napkins
under the Menstrual Hygiene Scheme would be procured and distributed. Whether the allocated
funds would be adequate to meet the requirement of the vast country like India. In case the
allocated funds is not adequate, the Department should seek addition of fund at RE  stage.
(Para 6.4)
Action Taken
1.50 The Sanitary Napkins are procured centrally from HLL and supplied at the Block level. For the
year 2013-14, the allocated amount of Rs.60 crores should be adequate as per the present estimates.
VII. ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
1.51 The Committee notes that an amount of Rs.168.17 crore, which was an Externally Aided
component, had to be surrendered at RE 2012-13 stage due to non-procurement of cold chain
items. The Committee strongly deprecates such kind of inefficiencies and would like to know

62
whether any commitment charges had to be paid on the surrendered amount of external aid. The
Committee feels that the reasons like delay in signing agreements between the Government of India
and the various stakeholders is not a reasonable justification for reducing the funds at RE stage
and especially given the importance of cold chains in the Immunization programme. The Committee
feels that the surrendering of budgeted funds could have been easily avoided had the Department
undertaken due diligence well in advance and ensured time bound signing and execution of the
agreements. The Committee strongly recommends the Department not to repeat this lapse in future
and take all precautions to complete all formalities well in advance for the success of this ambitious
life saving programme. (Para 7.2)
Action Taken
1.52 The observation made above is the factual position. It is stated that after taking several
clarification from the Ministry, the Kfw conveyed its final approval for procurement of 1850
insulated Vaccine Vans out of funds earmarked for Cold Chain infrastructure vide its letter dated
16.02.2012. The agreement with Kfw in this regard was signed finally on 16
th November, 2012.
Due to non-procurement of cold chain items (vaccine vans), the funds were reallocated in the next
financial year i.e. 2013-14 for procurement of the same item. As far as payment of commitment
charges on the surrendered amount of external aid is concerned, based on the information received
from CAA&A, Ministry of Finance, Rs.77,88,998/- has been paid as commitment charge on total
loan amount. It is to be noted that commitment charge is applicable on total undisbursed loan
amount. The above charges were paid on total undisbursed loan amount and not on the amount
of Rs.168.17 crore surrendered at RE stage in 2012-13. The observations of the Committee have
been noted for compliance.
Recommendation/Observation
1.53 The Committee feels that the Department has not been able to keep pace with the reduced
funds allocated at even the RE Stage as can be seen from the fact that out of Rs.591.76 crores
allocated at RE stage, the utilization figures, as on 31.03.2013, is Rs.454.83 crore. The Committee
feels that keeping the funds idly parked year after year, is deplorable as the same could have been
gainfully utilized for some other fund-starved schemes/ projects. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should strive to adhere to the fund utilization targets well in time
in order to ensure that the allocated funds in the future are not pruned down due to fiscal
inefficiencies thereby affecting the ambitious life saving programme like immunization. (Para 7.4)
Action Taken
1.54 The financial Achievement under the programme during 2012-13 (upto 31
st March 2013) is
as under:
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. No. Activities BE RE Utilization
1. Vaccine for Routine Immn. 280.00 280.00 280.21
2. Pentavalent vaccine 164.19 164.19 94.21
3. Needles and Syringes 120.00 80.00 74.58
4. Cold Chain Equipment 232.66 64.50 26.47
5. Grant-in-aid 3.15 3.07 3.07
TOTAL: 800.00 591.76 478.54

63
1.55 However, observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
Recommendation/Observation
1.56 The Committee takes strong exception to the large unspent balances/savings especially due
to delay in introduction of Pentavalent vaccine which would result in jeopardizing the health and
well being of the children and recommends that the Department should adopt a more proactive
approach to ensure prevention of delays in introduction of Pentavalent vaccine. (Para 7.6)
Action Taken
1.57 The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. The matter of
introduction of Pentavalent vaccine in more states is being placed before National Technical
Advisory Group on Immunization (NTAGI), the apex body on Immunization in the country for its
recommendation.
Recommendation/Observation
1.58 The Committee notes that though the Department seems to be patting itself on its back for
achievement during the year 2012-13, these are well short of the set targets. The Committee
would, therefore, like the Department to analyse the contributory factor for under-achievement of
the targets and initiate remedial measures accordingly. (Para 7.7)
Action Taken
1.59 The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
VIII. PULSE POLIO IMMUNIZATION
Recommendation/Observation
1.60 The Committee is appreciative of the fact that the Department has done a yeoman service
in achieving a near elimination of the polio virus. However, the Committee impresses upon the
Department not to lower its guard and maintain a high level of vigilance through surveillance across
the country for detection of polio cases. (Para 8.4)
Action Taken
1.61 The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
Recommendation/Observation
1.62 The Committee impresses upon the Department to ensure that effective surveillance
measures are taken by it to prevent any importation or circulation of wild polio virus from the
neighbouring countries. (Para 8.6)
Action Taken
1.63 The observation made above is the factual position. As per the recommendation of the India
Expert Advisory Group (IEAG) on Polio, the environmental surveillance is being carried out in five
places i.e. Mumbai, Delhi, Patna, Kolkata and Punjab. In addition regular surveillance reviews are
being carried out to ensure effective surveillance for polio.

64
IX. MISSION FLEXIBLE POOL
Recommendation/Observation
1.64 The Committee notes that occurrence of huge savings/unspent balances under Mission
Flexible Pool has been a recurrent feature year after year. The Committee is not aware of the
underlying causes of the savings/ unspent balances. The Committee would therefore, like the
Department to get the Mission evaluated by an independent agency and take remedial measures to
overcome the lapses. The Committee would also like to know whether the fund under the Mission
Flexible Pool flow through the treasury route or society route. (Para 9.3)
Action Taken
1.65 The total expenditure under the Mission Flexible Pool was Rs 4553.03 crore against the RE
of Rs.4220 crore (including NE) i.e. 107%. Even in the previous years, the utilization under
Mission Flexi Pool was as follows:–
(Rs. in crore )
Year B E RE Actual Release Savings
2010-11 4180.74 4153.60 4153.60 Nil
2011-12 4919.20 4496.39 4496.39 Nil
2012-13 5854.00 4220.00 4553.03 Nil
1.66 From the above, it is evident that there have been no savings, under the Mission Flexi Pool.
There have been regular evaluations of NRHM. Last year, evaluation has been done by the Planning
Commission also.
1.67 The funds under Mission Flexi Pool flow through the society route.
Recommendation/Observation
1.68 The quantum of funds allocated in Budgeted Estimate (BE) for 2013-14 is Rs.4711.12 crore
(excluding NE States) and Rs.635.89 crore is for NE States. This is proposed to be provided to
States as per the following prevalent criteria.
● The funds are allocated to the States on equity-based approach under NRHM. The
overall allocation is made on the basis of population of the states. An additional
weightage has been assigned to the NRHM priority States to ensure enhanced
allocation of resources to states with weak socio-economic and health indicators.
● The Five Empowered Action Group (EAG) States viz. Bihar, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh have been assigned Weightage of 1.3, and Weightage of
1.5 have been assigned to Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Special Categories States viz.
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir and Uttarakhand. North Eastern States have
been assigned the Weightage of 3.2 and Other Non-EAG/NE States have been assigned
Weightage of 1 for Mission Flexible Pool and RCH Flexible Pool.
● As per approved PIP, quantum of funds allocated to the States under the Mission
Flexible Pool in BE of 2013-14 is Rs. 5071.64 crores. (Para 9.4)

65
Action Taken
1.69 Matter of Record.
Recommendation/Observation
1.70 The Committee would like the Department to set realistic targets for the above activities and
hold periodic review meetings to ensure that concrete results are achieved and there is little scope
for the budgeted funds remaining unutilized. (Para 9.5)
Action Taken
1.71 The Department agrees with the suggestion and has been endeavouring in this direction
including through periodic review meeting and Video Conference with the state Secretaries and the
Mission Directors and programme heads.
XII. IMPLEMENTATION OF NRHM (PHASE-I)
Recommendation/Observation
1.72 The Committee would like to be apprised of the Guidelines framed for NGOs involvement
in the various programmes under NRHM and whether there have been any instances of blacklisting
of NGOs during implementation of NRHM (Phase-I). The Committee also recommends that while
pursuing welfare measures through the NGOs, the Department should also emphasize on recruiting
more ANMs/GNMs, so as to ensure more focused implementation of various Schemes in the rural
areas during the second Phase of NRHM. (Para 12.5)
Action Taken
1.73 NGOs are involved in various programmes under NRHM such as Reproductive and Child
Health-II Programme via Mother NGO Scheme; Revised National Tuberculosis Control Program
(RNTCP), National Leprosy Eradication Program (NLEP) and National Blindness Control
Programme etc. Each of these programme divisions have their specific guidelines for the
involvement of NGOs.
1.74 MNGO scheme was initiated in the Ninth Five Year Plan (1997-2002) under the
Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) Programme and Grants-in-aid were released to the Mother
NGOs. The selection of the organizations in the MNGO scheme was formalized through detailed
guidelines by the GOI in 2003, which can be seen at http://www.nrhm.gov.in/images/pdf/guidelines/
nrhm-guidelines/ngo_guidelines.pdf. As regards blacklisting of NGOs during implementation of
NRHM is concerned, as per available records no Mother NGO was blacklisted during the period
when the MNGO Scheme was in operation. Recommendation of committee to recruit more ANMs/
GNMs has been noted.

66
66
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
II. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS
Recommendations/Observations
2.1 Approved outlay for NRHM for the Eleventh plan was Rs.90558.00 crore. The Committee
however, learnt that substantial plan allocation could not be released during the Eleventh Plan
period. Out of the total approved outlay of Rs.90558.00 crore for NRHM, total allocation made
during the Eleventh Plan period amounted to Rs.70,030.00 crore with a balance of Rs.20528.00
crore remaining and not being allocated during the Plan period. Even out of this, an expenditure
of Rs.66127.40 crore could be made during the Plan period. The following table gives an idea of
the allocation vis-a-vis their utilization:–
 ( Rs. in crores )
Year Allocation (BE) Expenditure
2007-08 10890.00 10380.40
2008-09 1 1930.00 11239.33
2009-10 13930.00 13305.76
2010-11 15440.00 14696.42
2011-12 17840.00 16505.49
T
OTAL: 70030.00 66127.40
2.2 A plain reading of the allocation made vis-a-vis  the utilization figures underlines the fact
that the Department of Health and Family Welfare was not able to utilize even the allocated
funds. The Committee feels that had the Government released the full approved outlay made
during the Eleventh Plan, the track record of the Department would have made a poor reading
on the efficiency of the delivery mechanism in physical as well as financial terms. The
Committee is, therefore, of the view that the Department should ensure that the expenditure
incurred should be commensurate with the amount allocated so as not to invite reduction of
allocation at RE stage. Huge and persistent mismatch between the Budget Estimates, Revised
Estimates and Actual Expenditure is indicative of unrealistic projection of fund requirements
without application of proper financial yardsticks and reflects poorly on the process of
formulation of Budget Estimates. The Committee, therefore, implores upon the Department to
undertake a thorough analysis of the persistent underutilization of the funds vis-a-vis the
allocated funds and delineate the steps taken so far and to be taken in future to plug the gaps,
so as to minimize the variations between BE, RE and AE and also for ensuring achieving the
targets visualised. (Para 2.1)

67
Action Taken
2.3 During the Eleventh plan, out of the approved outlay of Rs.90,558 crore under NRHM, the
Budget allocation was only Rs.70,030.00 crore and this was further reduced to Rs.68,063.81 crore
at the stage of Revised Estimate (RE). Against the revised allocation of Rs.68,063.81 crore during
the Eleventh Plan, the actual expenditure incurred was Rs.66,048.45 crore i.e. 97.04%. Although,
there is a shortfall of about 3% in actual expenditure against the budgetary allocation, the level of
expenditure of over 97% can’t be said to be unsatisfactory.
2.4 The following table gives the details of Revised Allocations, Actual Expenditure Incurred and
Variance which is 3% over a period of eleventh five year plan:–
(Rs. in crore )
Year Budget Estimate Revised Estimate Actual Expdt. V ariance %
1 2 3 4 5=3-4 6=5/3
2007-08 10890.00 10668.61 10380.25 288.36 3%
2008-09 1 1930.00 11930.00 11200.52 729.48 7%
2009-10 13930.00 13377.75 13261.90 1 15.85 1%
2010-11 15440.00 14960.45 14696.42 264.03 2%
2011-12 17840.00 17127.00 16509.36 617.64 4%
T
OTAL: 70030.00 68063.81 66048.45 2015.36 3%
2.5 The table also clearly shows that the expenditure rose in direct proportion to increase in
funds available at RE stage and were commensurate with budgetary allocation. Therefore, to infer
that the Department would have had a greater shortfall if approved outlay was provided to the
Department, is totally incorrect. Infact, approvals to the States and UTs are provided under the
NRHM based on the budgetary provision and therefore, if the budgetary provision is low,
accordingly the approvals to the States are for a lower amount and utilization is also against
reduced approved amount only. In fact in the year 2012-13, NRHM has incurred an expenditure
of Rs.16,762 crore against the RE of Rs.17,000 crore, i.e. about 99% of the Revised Estimate
which can certainly be considered as creditable. In 2012-13, despite the spending of 52% against
a norm of about 45% by the end of the 2
nd quarter, a cut of almost 27% at the RE stage for
NRHM, the budgetary provision was subjected to was not justified.
2.6 Therefore, it is not correct to conclude that the Department of Health and Family Welfare
could not utilize the allocated funds or made unrealistic projection of funds required for NRHM.
2.7 Incurring an expenditure of 97% during the Eleventh Five Year Plan and 99% during
2012-13 is quite creditable particularly in view of the regional disparities and different absorption
capacities of different states.
2.8 However, to further strengthen financial discipline and absorptive capacity, the Ministry has
taken the following steps:
● Monitoring the expenditure through quarterly Financial Management Report from
States/UTs.
● Implemented the CAG Audit from 2011-12 onwards, Implemented statutory audit and
concurrent audit to capture the accurate expenditure from State/UTs.

68
● Issuance of Model accounting hand books for sub district level finance/accounts
personnel for community Health Centres, Village Health sanitation and nutrition
committees sub Centre, Rogi Kalyan Samitis and Block Accountants.
● Disseminated a hand book on operational guidelines on financial Management.
● Supported Financial Management Group under NRHM to strengthen programme
management at the state, district and block level.
● The implementation of Central Plan Scheme Monitoring system (CPSMS) in NRHM.
The CPSMS developed by the office of the CGA of Ministry of Finance for monitoring
and management of funds on ‘just in time’ basis.
● The implementation of NRHM in States is reviewed through Joint Review Mission
(JRMs), Common Review Missions (CRMs) and periodical reviews by the ministry.
2.9 Senior Officers of the rank of Additional Secretaries and Joint Secretaries have been visiting
the States/UTs to improve the utilization and settle pending UC in the State/UTs.
Recommendation/Observation
2.10 The Committee notes that an overarching National Health Mission (NHM) which would
include National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) and National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) as
its sub-components is proposed to be launched during the Twelfth Plan to strengthen
healthcare in rural and urban areas as well. The Committee cannot allow NHM to suffer due
to less approved outlay of Rs.193405.71  crores in the Twelfth Plan as compared to the
projected outlay of Rs.219702.45  crores. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should explore all mechanisms for augmenting resources for health so that the
objective of NHM of providing universal health coverage does not remain a distant dream. The
Committee desires to be apprised of the measures taken/ contemplated to be taken for
augmenting resources for health . (Para 2.3)
Action Taken
2.11 At RE stage scheme-wise assessment is made to ascertain areas/ programmes where there
is under utilization of funds for reallocation to programmes where feasibility of utilization exists.
Accordingly, resources for NHM could be considered for augmentation at RE 2013-14 stage.
Besides, Planning Commission would be requested for enhancing outlay under NHM during
the remaining years of Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Recommendation/Observation
2.12 On the reasons for reduction in Plan allocation of Rs.261.00 crore made in BE 2012-13
under NTBCP to Rs.220.00 crore in RE 2012-13, the Department informed that the reduction was
effected due to availability of huge unspent balances with the States as on 31
st March, 2012. Out
of the total allocated budget of Rs.290.00 crore (2012-13) which was reduced to Rs.240.00 crore
at RE stage, the expenditure under NPCB is Rs.209.26 crore during 2012-13 (as on 31.03.2013).
Further on the basis of the reports furnished by States/UTs, the following is physical and financial
performance of NPCB in 2012-13:

69
Component Tar get during Achievement
2012-13 (Nos.) during 2012-13 (as on
11.03.2013) (Nos.)
Cataract Operations (Catops) 68,00,000 38,83,963
School Eye Screening Programme 4,00,000 2,73,441
(No. of Spectacles distributed)
No. of donated eyes collected 62,000 34,491
Budgetary Estimates (BE)-2012-13 Revised Expenditure
Estimates incurred (as
(RE)-2012-13 on 31.03.2013)
290.00 crore 240.00 crore 209.26 crore
 (Para 5.25)
Action Taken
2.13 Matter of Record.
Recommendation/Observation
2.14  From the data given above there seems to be a wide gap in the physical as well as the
financial performance. Huge mismatch between the targets achieved vis-a-vis  the targets set
suggests that the programme did not achieve the intended objective. Such kind of deviations are
also indicative of the fact that the monitoring mechanism was slack and also that the targets set
were not backed by any action plan to achieve them. The Committee would expect the Department
not to feel complacent by merely fixing the targets but formulation of sound action plans in
coordination with State Governments to accomplish the same. The Committee also desires that the
achievements of the set targets be assessed objectively and the reasons for the shortfall analysed
in detail for formulating remedial measures for proper implementation thereof. The Committee also
desires that a review of the implementation of the scheme may be done at the earliest. (para 5.26)
Action Taken
2.15 The physical performance for the year 2012-13, as per the reports received from States,
has been updated and the revised updated information with reference to targets fixed for the Result
Frame Work document for NPCB, is given below. Although, there is an apparent gap between
targets and achievements of major performance indicators, this is mainly due to time period taken
for collection/entry of data at district level after completion of work/surgery, further consolidation
of information from all the districts at state level before submission to the central cell.
Component Tar get Achievement during
during 2012-13 (based on
2012-13 reports received from
(Nos.) S tates/UTs as on
16.05.2013) (Nos.)
Cataract Operations (Catops) 68,00,000 62,00,513
School Eye Screening Programme 4,00,000 6,79,870
(No. of Spectacles distributed)
No. of donated eyes collected 62,000 47,143

70
2.16 As regards the financial gap, the same is due to continuing the programme during
2012-13 as per the financial norms prevailing for the Eleventh Five Year Plan, pending approval of
the competent authority for the Twelfth Five year Plan. The financial performance of NPCB during
2012-13, after reconciliation of the expenditure, is as under:
Budgetary Estimates Revised Estimates Expenditure incurred
(BE )-2012-13 (RE)-2012-13 (as on 31.03.2013)
290.00 crore 240.00 crore 212.46 crore

71
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 Approved outlay for National Health Mission (NHM) for the Twelfth Plan is Rs.193405.71
crores as against the projected outlay of Rs.219702.45 crores. Further against a projected demand
for Rs.32,520.13 crore for NHM, the Planning Commission has approved an outlay of Rs.20999.00
crore for 2013-14. The Committee is aware that public spending on health was targeted to be
increased to 2.5% of GDP at the launch of NRHM in 2005. However, as per figures quoted by
the Economic Survey 2012-13, public expenditure on health is just 1.29% of GDP. Private
expenditure on health is 2.9% of GDP. The Committee observes that even if the level of
government expenditure on health is increased to 2.5% of GDP, there would still be a very
substantial health care expenditure which is out-of-pocket payments made by the households in
time of health distress. The cost of health care services in the private sector is so exorbitant that
it is just unaffordable for the poor and the under-privileged. It is in this context that the reduction
in approved outlay of Rs.193405.71 crore for NHM for the Twelfth Plan against the projected
demand of Rs.219702.45 crore is cause for extreme concern to the Committee. Keeping in view
the fact that illness of a family member is the most common reason leading to a financial crisis
among poor households, the Committee lends its full support for greater health outlays. The
Committee, simultaneously, recommends that the Department should strengthen its monitoring
mechanism so as to ensure that the available resources are utilized more efficiently and
responsibility be fixed to ensure timely disbursement and utilization of funds at all levels.
(Para 2.2)
Action Taken
3.2 The Ministry is in agreement with the views of the Committee. There is need to enhance
the outlay for the Health sector to reduce the out of pocket expenditure burden, particularly for
the poor and unprivileged sections of the society. The Ministry is also undertaking necessary
measures to monitor and improve the efficiency of available resources and also monitor timely
disbursement of funds at all levels through CPSMS, etc.
Further Recommendation
3.3 The Committee feels that mere agreement with its views would not suffice. The
Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken so far/contemplated to be taken
in the future to reduce the out-of-pocket payments made by households in time of health
distress. The specific role which the National Health Mission would play in reducing the
exorbitant out-of-pocket expenses, may also be indicated.
Recommendation/Observation
3.4 The Committee is not able to comprehend as to how Department with the approved outlay
71

72
of Rs.20999.00 crores for NHM which is just a shade above the Rs.20542.00 crores which the
Department was allocated in 2012-13 for NRHM, would be able to meet the objective of universal
health coverage. The Committee feels that the Department of Health and Family Welfare has not
been able to plausibly convince the Ministry of Finance/ Planning Commission to release the funds
sought by it. The Committee is not aware of the reasons adduced by the Planning Commission for
marginal increase in allocation of funds in BE 2013-14 over BE 2012-13 and would, therefore, like
to be apprised of the same. Further, from the table given above, the Committee gathers that no
funds have been allocated to “Assistance to States for Capacity Building(Burns)’ and Central Drug
Research Institute (CDRI), Lucknow’ and a mere Rs.1.00 Crore have been allocated for
“Strengthening of District Hospitals for providing advanced secondary care’; “Providing Free
Generic Medicines in all Public Health Institutions in the country’ and “National Urban Health
Mission-Flexible Pool’. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for such nil/low
allocations in respect of such important Institutes/ Schemes which have a vital bearing on the
progress towards Universal Health Coverage that the Department is aiming to achieve in the near
future . (Para 2.6)
Action Taken
3.5 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had proposed Rs.32,520.13 crore as an outlay
for the Financial year 2013-14, whereas the planning commission approved an outlay of
Rs.20,999 crore only. The Ministry made a strong case for higher allocation. The approved 12
th
Plan mentions 322% increase in the twelfth plan outlay to Rs.2,68,551 crore for the Department
of Health and Family Welfare. However, with an annual provision of Rs.20999 crore only, it is not
possible to meet the goal of UHC. The Department will take appropriate action for seeking
enhanced allocation at RE stage.
3.6 For the schemes/activities such as “Central Drug Research Institute (CDRI), Lucknow”,
“No funds have been released to CDRI, Lucknow, as research activities being undertaken by CDRI,
Lucknow have been transferred to Department of Health Research (ICMR) and these are to be
monitored and funded with their own budget”. The National Programme for Prevention and
Management of Burn Injuries has been taken up under the NCD pool under NHM.
3.7 As regards “Providing Free Generic Medicines in all Public Health Institutions in the
country”, ‘Strengthening of District Hospitals for providing advanced secondary care and “National
Urban Health Mission-Flexible Pool”, these schemes were included in the Department’s budget as
these were considered important and are mentioned in the Twelfth Plan document as well. It is also
true that these Schemes have a vital bearing on the progress towards Universal Health Coverage
that the Department is aiming to achieve.
3.8 However, due to inadequate budgetary allocation at BE stage of 2013-14, which is
effectively lower than the BE of 2012-13 if we exclude the new component of NCD pool in the
NHM, only a token provision could be made but with the hope that if additional resources become
available to the Department at the RE stage or if savings are possible in other approved schemes/
programmes, the budgetary provision for these schemes would be enhanced during the course of
the year.
Further Recommendation
3.9 The Committee is concerned to note that adequate budgetary allocation for schemes
which have a vital bearing on Universal Health coverage, could not be allocated despite the
Ministry’s own admission that these programme were considered important and are
mentioned in the Twelfth Plan Document. The Committee is not aware of the reasons
adduced by Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission for not allocating the required funds

73
and would therefore like to be apprised of the reasons. The Committee also notes that by
now the RE must have been made. The Committee, therefore, desires to be updated
whether the enhanced allocations have been made under this head, and if not, what
alternate arrangements have been made by the Ministry to ensure that the activities
proposed under this head do not suffer due to paucity of funds.
Recommendation/Observation
3.10 The Committee feels that the Department should set a time frame within which the Action
Taken on the findings of the review of NRHM is completed, so as to ensure that the newly
introduced NHM schemes, which includes NRHM as its sub-component, should not suffer due to
the vital gaps in physical infrastructure and Human Resources which have been the bane of proper
implementation of NRHM in the first phase. Government should concentrate on filling up the gaps
particularly the gaps in terms of “Specialist’ and “Nurse’ vacancies in many States particularly in
remote, difficult and tribal areas as noticed in the review of NRHM phase-I. Unless these gaps are
filled up, implementation of the ambitious scheme under NRHM will not yield desired results.
(Para 2.10)
Action Taken
3.11 It is true that ensuring availability of infrastructure and human resources, particularly in
rural areas, is critical to achieving desired health outcomes and is thus one of the key concerns
of NRHM. The Department is systematically trying to address these concerns.
3.12 On the one hand, efforts are being made to increase the number of new institutions and
enhancing the capacity of existing institutions to produce more doctors, nurses and paramedical
staff. Thus, norms have been rationalised in medical education, such as relaxation in land
requirements, bed strength, and increase in ceiling for maximum intake for undergraduates,
enhancement of teacher-student ratio in PG etc. which has resulted in substantial increase in
number of undergraduate and post graduate seats.
3.13 There is also a proposal in the Twelfth Plan to support establishment of new medical
colleges in deficient states and strengthening of Government Medical colleges to increase the MBBS
seats. Government has also approved setting up of ANM/GNM Schools in different States besides
setting up of Institutes of Paramedical Sciences at national and regional levels.
3.14 On the other hand, financial support is provided to States under National Rural Health
Mission (NRHM) for engagement of doctors, specialist and paramedics on contractual basis.
Monetary incentives such as hard areas allowances and special packages are provided to staff in
difficult and most difficult areas. Non-Monetary incentives such as preferential admission in post
graduate courses for staff serving in difficult areas and improving accommodation arrangement in
rural areas have also been introduced. Further, support is also provided under NRHM for multi-
skilling of doctors to overcome the shortage of specialists.
3.15 However, higher resource allocation for NHM is critical to addressing the vital gaps in
physical infrastructure and Human Resources.
Further Recommendation
3.16 The Committee lends its full support to the Ministry’s demand for higher resource
allocation for NHM and recommends that the Planning Commission may be apprised of the
Committee’s view in the matter. The Committee also recommends that the Department of
Health and Family Welfare needs to put its case more effectively before the Planning

74
Commission/Finance Ministry so as to ensure that more funds are released for NHM. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the Planning Commission’s response in the matter.
III. NRHM-RCH FLEXIBLE POOL
Recommendation/Observation
3.17 The Committee gathers from the information furnished by the Department that for the
Twelfth Plan, an amount of Rs.11714.09 crores has been allocated for “Strengthening of District
Hospitals for providing advanced Secondary care” and Rs. 16000.00 crores has been allocated for
“Providing Free Generic Medicine in all Public Health Institutions in the Country’. However the
Department has been allocated an amount of only Rs. 1.00 crore each for the above programmes
for the year 2013-14. The Committee fails to comprehend the huge mismatch in the funds outlay
for Twelfth Plan vis-a-vis the meagre allocation of funds for the year 2013-14 and feels that the
Department has a Herculean task cut out for it both in seeking the remaining funds earmarked for
it during the Twelfth Plan as well as utilization thereof in respect of both the above Schemes given
the fact that the second year of the Twelfth Plan has started and there has been no progress made
so far by the Department in convincing the Planning Commission to allocate more funds
commensurating with the Twelfth Plan Outlay as both the schemes are very vital on which the
success of the Department’s vision of Universal Health Coverage hinges. The Committee, therefore,
exhorts the Department of Health and Family Welfare to convince the Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission to release adequate funds commensurating with the Twelfth Plan allocation
to enable it to chalk out a roadmap for implementation of the schemes. (Para 3.2)
Action Taken
3.18 The Department agrees with the Committee’s view. All possible efforts are continuing to be
made by the Department to convince the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission to provide
adequate funds commensurate with the 12th Plan allocation.
Further Recommendation
3.19 The Committee would like the Ministry to indicate the steps being taken towards
allocation of adequate funds under the heads under reference and the outcome thereof.
Recommendation/Observation
3.20 The Committee notes that out of the various activities being covered under the NVBDCP,
the physical progress made under the programme appears to be satisfactory. However, the
Committee has not been apprised of the targets fixed with reference to which the above progress
has been made. The Committee, therefore, desires to be informed of the targets set vis-a-vis the
achievements made towards containing the above diseases, so that a fair assessment of the
progress could be made. As regards the financial performance of NVBDCP, the Committee notes
that as against an allocation of Rs. 455.00 crore, the expenditure as on 31st March, 2013, is only
Rs. 303.59 crore, which indicates that Rs. 151.41 crore has been surrendered. The Committee
observes that in a resource-constrained country like India, efficient utilisation of the available
resources is of prime importance and surrender of the budgeted funds is indicative of inefficiencies
at several levels resulting in sub optimal use of scarce resources. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that in order to ensure that the funds allocated are utilized optimally and productively,
there is a compelling need on the part of the Department to ensure that a time bound blue-print
is prepared and publicized well to all the stakeholders involved in implementation of the programme in
order to ensure that the recurring instances of underutilization of funds could be checked. (Para 5.4)

75
Action Taken
3.21 Regarding NVBDCP, the physical target set for 2012-13 were as under:
Malaria
● Annual Blood Examination Rate (ABER) i.e. percentage of persons screened annually
for Malaria : to be minimum 10%
● Annual Parasite Incidence (API) i.e. Malaria cases per 1000 population annually : to be
less than 1.3
Dengue and Chikungunya
● To reduce morbidity due to Dengue and Chikungunya
● To reduce/sustain Dengue case fatality rate (CFR) to below 1%
● Improving surveillance by Increasing number of functional Sentinel Surveillance
Hospital (SSH).
Japanese Encephalitis
● Vaccination of children 1-15 years in JE endemic districts
● Strengthening surveillance to improve case management and reduce mortality due to JE.
Lymphatic Filariasis
● To cover all LF endemic districts under MDA with improved coverage.
● Identifying districts reporting less than 1% microfilaria rate and validating by WHO
recommended test for MDA stoppage.
Kala-azar
● Reduction of Kala Azar Cases less to less than 1 per 10000 at block levels
● Reduction of number of blocks with more than 1 Kala-azar case per 10000 population
States are regularly emphasized.
Further Recommendation
3.22 The Committee is constrained to note that the reply of the Ministry is evasive
inasmuch as it fails to indicate the targets set vis-à-vis achievements made, which was crux
of its recommendation. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the
targets set as well as the achievements made under NVBDCP may be indicated. The targets
set should be achieved, both physical and financial.
Recommendation/Observation
3.23 The Committee welcomes the enhanced allocation for RNTCP for the Twelfth Plan.
However, given the track-record of sub-optimal utilisation of budgeted funds, the Committee would
like the Department to identify the shortcomings and avoid large variation in the Budget Estimates,
Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure. The Committee takes note of the submission that non-

76
submission of UCs by State Government also contributed to less utilisation of allocated funds. The
Committee observes that with the information technology resources currently available, developing
an effective system of coordination with the State Government for providing information about UCs
should not be a difficult task. The Committee, therefore, exhorts the Department to work in this
direction. The Committee also recommends to the Department to take periodic and regular follow-
up action with the State Governments on issues concerning liquidation of pending UCs.
(Para 5.14)
Action Taken
3.24 The issues raised are noted and necessary action(s) would be taken by the Department.
Further Recommendation
3.25 The Ministry should also have indicated the roadmap to put in place an effective
system of coordination with the States for timely liquidation of UCs.The Committee would
therefore, like to be apprised of the follow-up action taken by the Department with the
State Departments to ensure timely liquidation of pending UCs.
Recommendation/Observation
3.26 The Department has further informed that against the projected outlay of Rs.787 crores for
the Twelfth Plan under the National Leprosy Eradication Programme, the approved outlay has been
only Rs.500 crores. The Committee would like to be apprised of the impact of reduced allocation
under the Programme. The Committee would also like to be informed of State-wise break-up of
newly detected cases of leprosy during the year 2012-13 . (Para 5.21)
Action Taken
3.27 The reduced allocation was based on the sanctioned activities during Eleventh Plan. Now
the approved budget of Rs. 500.00 Cr. for NLEP for the Twelfth Plan has been received and the
revised estimate for 2013-14 is likely to be much higher. Due to delay in disbursing grants in a
routine manner performances were affected in districts in the States like Bihar and U.P. State-wise
list of newly detected Leprosy cases during 2011-12 and 2012-13 is Annexure-I. Increase in new
cases during the year 2012-13 is however due to the NLEP’s strategy to carry out house to house
survey to detect hidden leprosy cases and to treat them early. The effort will help in reducing
transmission potential in the community.
Further Recommendation
3.28 The Committee hopes that the Department’s new strategy to carry out house to
house survey to detect hidden leprosy cases and to treat them early would help in
eliminating spread of the disease. The Committee would like the Department to make an
assessment of the impact of the new strategy and intimate the Committee of the same.
IX. MISSION FLEXIBLE POOL
Recommendation/Observation
3.29 Upgradation of PHCs and CHCs which are to be upgraded to First Referral Units (FRUs)
is a major component under Mission Flexible Pool. The Department has informed that the number
of First Referral Units (FRUs) has increased significantly from 940  in 2005 to 2562 in 2012-13.

77
The Committee would like to be informed of State-wise targets set for upgradation of PHCs and
CHCs to FRUs and the achievements made in respect thereof during 2012-13.  The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the targets set for 2013-14,  State-wise. (Para 9.6)
Action Taken
3.30 Under NRHM upgradation of CHCs to First Referral Units (FRUs) has been emphasized
since its beginning. CHCs are being upgraded to FRUs for providing referral services to the mother
and child and taking care of obstetric emergencies and complications, for provision of safe abortion
services and for prevention, testing/counselling in respect of HIV AIDS. With NRHM support, the
number of FRUs has increased significantly from 940 (2005-06) to 2584 (2012-13) in the country.
Details of state-wise FRUs are at Annexure-II . It may be noticed that some other institutions (of
the level of CHC) are also upgraded to FRUs under NRHM. Target for upgradation of CHCs to
FRUs is 35% of total CHCs.
3.31 However, there is no such provision to upgrade PHCs to FRUs under NRHM. PHCs are
upgraded to make it 24*7 facilities with provisions of all primary health care service. High risk
pregnancies, delivery requiring caesarean section and trauma cases etc. which need major operation
and blood transfusion are referred to FRUs, stationed at CHC or higher level of institutions. Hence
there are no targets set for upgradation of PHCs to FRUs.
Further Recommendation
3.32 The Committee recommends that 100% upgradation should be completed of the
earliest. There should not be any delay in this.
Recommendation/Observation
3.33 The Committee welcomes the proposal for skill development of ASHAs and desires to be
kept apprised of the final outcome of the initiatives taken by the Department for their skill
development and career progression. (Para 9.11)
Action Taken
3.34 Noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
3.35 The Committee observes that it has not been informed of the final outcome of the
initiatives taken by the Department for their skill development and career progression. The
Committee would like to be apprised accordingly.
Recommendation/Observation
3.36 The Committee is aware of the fact that ASHAs have proven to be a vital link between the
doctor and the ANM. However there have been reports that remuneration to ASHA is very meagre
and requires to be suitably enhanced. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to
expedite its decision on revising incentives for ASHAs and to make it commensurate with her job
responsibilities. (Para 9.13)
Action Taken
3.37 Noted for compliance.

78
Further Recommendation
3.38 The Committee recommends the Department to fast-track its decision on revising
incentives for ASHA’s and make it commensurate with her job responsibilities.
X. RCH FLEXIBLE POOL
Recommendation/Observation
3.39 The Commi ttee feels that the adage that ‘I have miles to go before I sleep’ aptly describes
the situation of the targets set vis-a-vis the achievements so far in case of IMR, MMR and TFR.
The Committee notes that countries in almost similar situations such as Bangladesh, Brazil, China,
Sri Lanka have performed much better than India. What is of more concern to the Committee that
at the present pace of decline, it would be difficult to achieve the targets in respect of IMR, MMR
and TFR even by 2015.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department sets
monitorable targets for expansion of activities envisaged under RCH Flexi-Pool on a wide-scale and
make concerted efforts to reduce MMR, IMR and TFR. (Para 10.4)
Action Taken
3.40 The key maternal health indicators are part of Result Framework Document (RFD) and
besides the Department, the achievement against the target is also being monitored by the Prime
Minister Office (PMO).
3.41 Activities, as proposed by the States in their Project Implementation Plan (PIP) as per their
local situation and needs, have been approved by NRHM for achieving the target for reduction of
MMR.
3.42 Program Divisions and also NRHM conduct regular reviews of the achievements made by
the States.
Recommendation/Observation
3.43 The Committee also recommends that the strategies adopted to achieve the goals of
reduction in MMR, IMR and TFR need to be evaluated afresh so that corrective measures are
taken. (Para 10.5)
Action Taken
3.44 Some of the new initiatives taken by the MoHFW are:
● Permitting use of tablet misoprostol by ASHAs for prevention of PPH in case of home
deliveries.
● Permitting injection oxytocin for prevention of PPH, Injection Mag Sulph for
prevention of eclampsia by ANMs and Staff Nurses.
● Free entitlements under JSSK.
● Maternal Death Review.
3.45 Besides this, States are also implementing differential strategies to reduce the MMR on the
basis of Maternal Death Review.

79
Further Recommendation
3.46 The Committee desires that efforts should be continued to reduce MMR, IMR and
TFR. Monitoring mechanism should be strengthened.
Recommendation/Observation
3.47 The Committee, while appreciating the special initiatives being taken to reduce under-five
mortality, feels that these initiatives would be more effective if these are clubbed together under
one umbrella to dispense with multiplicity of authorities and to mitigate the ultimate beneficiary
from the maze of initiatives presently being undertaken. The Committee, therefore, recommends to
bring all these initiatives under one umbrella to ensure optimum benefits to the ultimate beneficiary.
The Committee would also like to impress upon the Department to specifically map the girl child
who expires before attaining the age of five, as the real reason for less than five mortality rate
is due to the rampant female infanticide prevalent in the country . (Para 10.7)
Action Taken
3.48 To achieve a status of good health in mother and baby comprehensively, through the whole
range of continuum of care to be provided from the neonates to the infants and continued to the
adolescents and all the women of reproductive age group- this ministry has developed the
Reproductive, Maternal, New-born, Child and Adolescent Health (RMNCH+A) Strategy for
implementation in all the states and UTs.
3.49 Pneumonia and Diarrhoeal diseases are the major preventable causes of death in under-
fives, while prematurity and low birth weight, neonatal infections, birth asphyxia and birth trauma
accounts for more than three- fourths of neonatal deaths.
3.50 Comprehensive strategies have been adopted under “ RMNCH+A” to address these issues
through implementation of –
● JSSK- which has now been expanded to cover the complications during ANC, PNC
and also sick infants.
● Maternal and Child Health Wings.
● Child Health Interventions- Essential New Born Care, Resuscitation at all DPs, SNCU
and Scaling up, Allied activities like breast- feeding, Kangaroo Mother care, Cord Care,
Nutrition Rehabilitation Centres, New regimen of IFA for children (Iron Plus Initiative),
Vitamin A supplementation, Ensuring Availability of ORS and dispensable Zn tablets at
all levels- ASHA kits/SC/PHC/CHC/DH for care in diarrhoeal diseases and ensuring
availability of antibiotics for treating Acute Respiratory illnesses (ARI).
3.51 Health department has also set monitorable targets for different process and outcome
indicators as ROP targets for all States and U.T.s
3.52 S tatus of implementation and action taken under PC and PNDT Act to prevent female
foeticide/ infanticide is in various annexures given below.
3.53 As per Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs) submitted by States/UTs, 47666 bodies
(Annexure-III ) have been registered under PC& PNDT Act. So far a total of 1175 machines
(Annexure-IV ) have been sealed and seized for violations of the law. A total of 1525 court cases
(Annexure-V) have been filed under the Act and 114 convictions have been secured under the PC
& PNDT Act and following conviction the medical licenses of 33 doctors have been suspended
(Annexure-VI ).

80
● As a result of intensification of the drive against illegal sex determination, 279 cases
have been filed in 2011-12 as compared to 157 in 2010-11.
● As per the decisions taken in the 19 th meeting of the Central Supervisory Board, held
on 20 th July 2012, three committees have been constituted for review of the existing
provisions of the PC & PNDT Act, rationalization of Form-F and technological
solutions for tracking ultrasound machines. The recommendations of expert committee
to be reviewed and approved by the Central Supervisory Board in forthcoming meeting
in July 2013.
● Inspections by the National Inspection and Monitoring Committee (NIMC) have been
scaled up. Inspections have been carried out in 12 States including Gujarat, Uttar
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi, Bihar, Orissa, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand A total of 83 clinics were inspected in 26
districts and 35 machines sealed between Aug., 2011 - Dec., 2012. 19 cases have
already been filed in court.
● An advisory has been issued to States/UTs to check malpractices in registration of
clinics under the Act and to ensure scrutiny-based renewal of registration of facilities.
● Clarification has been issued to all states regarding the qualification of Registered
Medical Practitioners qualified to get employed in Genetic Clinic.
● Communication has also been addressed to States Appropriate Authorities to examine
Block/Panchayat/village/ward wise census data on child sex ratio and proactively focus
on those areas with low child sex ratio and monitor relevant ultrasound clinics and
track pregnancies particularly in those areas.
● The Ministry has written to the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance to design
appropriate mechanisms to regulate import of sophisticated ultrasound equipment
● The Central Government is rendering financial support of Rs.37 crores in FY 2012-13
to strengthen implementation structures under NRHM in States, including setting up
dedicated PNDT cells, capacity building, monitoring and advocacy campaign etc.
● Grant-in-Aid has been released to non-governmental organisations in key focus states
for awareness generation and community mobilisation on the issue of discrimination
against the girl child and declining child sex ratio.
● A two day national level capacity building program on strengthening effective
implementation of the PC and PNDT Act was organized for State Appropriate
Authorities and Nodal officers for PNDT from 35 States/UTs.
● State level capacity building program on enforcement of the Act have also been
organized for district PNDT officers in the states of Rajasthan, Gujarat, West Bengal,
Assam, Kerala, Maharashtra and Bihar.
3.54 Capacity building programmes for judicial officers and public prosecutors have been
conducted in judicial academies of Chandigarh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat and
Rajasthan.
Further Recommendation
3.55 The Committee notes from the reply furnished that three Committees have been
constituted to review the existing provisions of the Pre-conception (PC) and Pre-Natal
Diagnostic Techniques (PNDT) Act. The Committee would like to be apprised of the salient

81
recommendation made in this Report of the Committees and Action taken by the
Government on their findings.
XI. MILLENIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS (MDGS)
Recommendation/Observation
3.56 The Committee feels that the success rate of achievements with regard to Millennium
Development Goals has been a mixed bag of success. While the department is more or less on
track with respect to MDG-4 and MDG-5, the success rate in respect of MDG-6 seems a distant
dream especially with regard to the viral diseases like Dengue, Chikungunya which is a constant
cause of worry year after year, not to mention new diseases like H1N1 which have now started
spreading across the country. The Department should, therefore, put in place a ‘Dedicated Sentinel
Force’ whose main protocol would be ensuring prevention of entry of diseases from outside the
borders(land, sea, air) of the country. Additionally, the Committee feels that the Department should
explore the possibility of tapping the additional resources for mopping up additional funds for its
various programmes particularly for the welfare of our poverty ridden masses. (Para 11.5)
Action Taken
3.57 W ith regard to placing ‘Dedicated Sentinel Force’ in respect of vector borne diseases i.e.
Malaria, Dengue and Chikungunya, it is submitted that Malaria is endemic in all the areas of the
country except areas located above 5000 ft. from the sea level. There is routine surveillance system
to monitor the diseases status in the country. Dengue is also endemic in major part of the country
and Chikungunya has re-emerged and is being reported since 2006. To monitor the situation in the
country 347 sentinel sites have been established in the country.
3.58 A well organized programme called National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme is
being implemented throughout the country for control of vector borne diseases including Malaria,
Dengue and Chikungunya with adequate resource provisions under NRHM. At the state level, there
is a state programme officer for vector borne diseases and at district level, the district malaria
officer now renamed as district VBD officer does exist. District level officers are supported with
technical staff to perform the activities. The programme is integrated under primary health care
system at PHC level.
3.59 The achievements with respect of Millennium Development Goal are as under:
Malaria:
● Millennium Development Goals (MDG) for Malaria  is to halt and begin to reverse the
incidence of malaria and other major diseases by 2015.
● Prevalence and death rates associated with Malaria.
● Proportion population in Malaria risk areas using effective Malaria prevention and
treatment measures (Percentage of population covered under Indoor Residual Spray
(IRS)).
● The incidence of malaria in the country started halting and sustaining reversal of cases
for last one decade. The malaria cases were brought down from 2,031,790 cases in
2000 to 1,816,569 cases in 2005 and further brought down to 1,066,972 cases in
2012. Country is heading towards achieving target of 50% reduction in incidence of
malaria cases against the baseline.

82
· The malaria death rate in the country was 0.09 deaths per lakh population in 2000
which has come down to 0.04 deaths per lakh population in 2012 as per
Annexure-VII.
· The annual incidence has been constantly declining, which reveals that the malaria
incidence has already been halted and being reversed, as indicated at table given above.
Dengue:
3.60 Dengue is an outbreak prone mosquito transmitted viral disease and is one of the neglected
tropical diseases. There is neither any drug nor any vaccine available as on date against Dengue
infection. In India, the risk of dengue has shown an increase since 2000 due to demographic and
societal changes leading to unplanned and uncontrolled urbanization and concurrent population
growth which has put severe constraints on civic amenities, particularly water supply and solid
waste disposal, thereby increasing the breeding potential of the vector species. Dengue has the
potential of causing large scale outbreaks. Though the incidence of Dengue cases has been
increased, however, the case fatality rate (CFR) i.e. death per 100 cases has been declined since
2000 as indicated below:
Dengue Cases, Deaths and CFR in the Country
Year Cases Deaths CFR%
2000 650 7 1.1
2001 3306 53 1.6
2002 1926 33 1.7
2003 12754 215 1.7
2004 4153 45 1.1
2005 1 1985 157 1.3
2006 12317 157 1.3
2007 5534 69 1.2
2008 12561 80 0.6
2009 15535 96 0.6
2010 28292 110 0.4
2011 18860 169 0.9
2012* 50222 242 0.5
*Provisional
Chikungunya:
3.61 A mosquito borne viral disease re-emerged in the country during 2006 after a gap of
30 years.  There is neither any drug nor any vaccine available as on date against Chikungunya
infection. The cases of Chikungunya are gradually declining over the years since its re-emergence.
No death due to Chikungunya reported by any of the state since 2006.

83
Chikungunya Cases and Deaths in the Country
Year Cases Deaths
2000 0 0
2001 0 0
2002 0 0
2003 0 0
2004 0 0
2005 0 0
2006 1390322 0
2007 59535 0
2008 95091 0
2009 73288 0
2010 48176 0
2011 20402 0
2012 (Prov.) 15977 0
Further Recommendation
3.62 The Committee while noting the efforts being taken by the Department to combat
malaria, feels that the Dengue and Chikungunya are emerging as new threats in the
country. The Committee feels that in addition to the efforts being made to control Dengue
and Chikungunya, efforts should be made by the Ministry to explore the possibility of
developing drug/vaccine for fighting these two mosquito borne diseases. Adequate funds
should be earmarked for development of ‘research’ on ‘Mosquito borne’ diseases.
XII. IMPLEMENTATION OF NRHM (PHASE-I)
3.63 The Department has delineated the following issues during the implementation of NRHM
(Phase-I):
Problem Areas :
State Government:-
● Low capacities to manage large programmes especially in Empowered Action Group
(EAG) States. The contribution of block level and district level planning structure and
PRI in the planning process was inadequate.
● Inadequate capacities across many States to carry out infrastructure planning and
implementation e.g. lack of dedicated/exclusive civil construction wing especially under
NRHM and lack of systems with regards to external evaluation and monitoring of
construction works taken up across States.
● Non-availability and uneven distribution of skilled health care provider including critical
manpower like specialists, nurses etc. especially in EAG States is a challenge. High

84
attrition rates of HR, due to lack of clear cut HR Policies and inadequate career
progression opportunities. Deployment of health HR has not been fully rationalized as
there is inadequate deployment in underserved, remote and tribal areas.
● Convergence issues with various implementation agencies like ICDS, education
department, water and sanitation and rural development. Lack of coordination among
frontline providers (ANM, AWW, ASHA) for delivering services towards common goal
of health.
● There is no clear cut policy and systems to provide free generic medicines in public
health facilities across States. Also, States lack adequate Institutional mechanism for
procurement, and supply chain management of drugs. Many States are lacking
rationalized Essential Drugs List (EDL) and published drug formulary.
● Delay in the registration and cash disbursement to beneficiaries under JSY .
● There may be inadequate coordination between the State Health Society and the State
Health Department. Also, insufficient tenure of Mission directors causes leadership
deficit.
Private
● NRHM continues to improve outreach mainly through strengthening of public sector
health facilities and the involvement of private sector is presently limited to a few areas
such as Blindness Control, RNTCP, family planning institutional deliveries and patient
transport. However, the presence of private sector in rural areas, particularly in remote
locations, is negligible.
Action Taken
● States have involved PRIs in the implementation of health and family welfare
programme through progressive transfer of funds clear articulation of functions and by
training equipping and empowering them suitably to manage and supervise the
functioning of health facilities.
● Technical support agencies like NHSRC and SHSRC have been created at National and
State levels to provide handholding support to the States to aid Decentralized planning.
● States are now required to report the progress of construction works as part of
mandatory disclosures on their respective NRHM websites.
● As per conditionalities laid down in ROP 2012-13 States are required to carry out
rational deployment of HR with the highest priority accorded to high focus districts
and delivery points/priority facilities and on compliance would lead to reduction of up
to 7 V2% of total funds.
● There are policies in many States for monetary compensation (direct and indirect
financial incentives) to Doctors/Paramedics for serving in hand to reach and difficult
areas.
● As per conditionalities laid down in ROP 2012-13 States are incentivized for policy and
systems for providing free generic medicines to all in public health facilities (incentive
upto 5% of MFP). States have been provided support for procurement and logistics
management of drugs.

85
● To address the issue of interdepartmental coordination common review meeting are
being held between representatives from various social sector departments. Also
VHNDS and fixed immunization days are being conducted in Anganwadi centres.
● States are being supported to set up a integrated call centre which would create a
network of ambulances running under State budget, PPP and others to provide
comprehensive referral and emergency transport services.
● States are being supported to create dedicated infrastructure development teams and set
up robust procurement and logistics systems.
● Best practices are being shared across States.
● To provide more human resources for health, medical seats for undergraduate and post
graduate doctors are being increased through creating more medical colleges and
increasing seats in existing medical colleges specifically focusing in underserved areas.
Similarly, more GNM/ANM schools are proposed to be opened during Twelfth five
year plan. (Para 12.1)
Action Taken
3.64 Matter of Record.
Recommendation/Observation
3.65 From perusal of the above, the Committee finds that the major problem in implementation
of the NRHM (Phase-I) stems from lack of adequate infrastructure/manpower in the States/UTs,
which has a direct impact on the implementation of the Mission on the whole. The Committee,
while welcoming the initiatives being taken by the Department to increase involvement of the
States, feels that the Department should first and foremost focus on ensuring opening of more
medical colleges, district hospitals, GNM/ANM schools without further delay along with ensuring
that such colleges/schools are opened on equitable distribution throughout the country so as to
ensure that the Department’s Goal to ensure Universal Health Coverage is implemented in both letter
and spirit. (Para 12.2)
Action Taken
3.66 An amount of Rs. 616.51 crore has been released to states so far for opening of 200 ANM/
GNM schools. The State Governments have been asked to implement programmes for opening of
schools without delay.
Further Recommendation
3.67 The Committee strongly observes that the Department should not get complacent by
releasing funds to the States and instead follow-up and constantly monitor the utilization of
funds. State Governments may be impressed upon the need to send proposals.
XIII. NEW SCHEMES DURING TWELFTH PLAN
Recommendation/Observation
3.68 The Committee, while being appreciative of the New Schemes being launched during the
Twelfth Plan, would like the Department to focus aggressively on provision of free generic drugs
as the high Out of Pocket Expenditure still remains a major cause of concern for the vast majority

86
of people in the country. The Committee also impress that the Department should also encourage
production of more generic drugs, as manufacture of Generic Drugs by the Department and free
provision of the same by the Government would reduce the high Out of Pocket Expenses that a
vast majority of the people still bear with. (Para 13.3)
Action Taken
3.69 As per Twelfth Plan Document approved by National Development Council (NDC),
“Availability of essential medicines in public sector health facilities free of cost is critical to achieve
affordable health care for the bulk of the population. This is the area which provides the speediest
scope for improved service delivery in return for allocation of sufficient resources. A set of
measures including revision and expansion of the Essential Drugs List, ensuring the rational use of
drugs, strengthening the drug regulatory system, and supporting the setting up of national and state
drug supply logistics corporations is being recommended as core components. State would be
encouraged to plan and partially fund universal access to essential drugs and diagnostic services
in all government health care facilities. Drug supply would be linked to centralized procurement at
state level to ensure inform drug quality and cost minimization by removing intermediaries.” The
total outlay during the Twelfth Five Year plan period is Rs. 16000 crores. The basic implementation
framework of the scheme is being prepared and has not been finalized so far.
Further Recommendation
3.70 The Committee recommend that the Department should move faster for
implementation of the said Scheme as the second year of the Twelfth Plan is already in
progress and still the basic implementation framework of the scheme is being prepared and
has not been finalized so far.

87
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
V. FLEXIBLE POOL FOR COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
Recommendation/Observation
4.1 In reply to a query, the Department has informed that the report of the survey to assess
the leprosy burden is awaited from the National Institute of JALMA and OMD Agra, an ICMR
Institute, which have asked to submit the report. (Para 5.22)
Action Taken
4.2 Matter of Record.
Recommendation/Observation
4.3 The Committee would like to be informed since when the survey is being conducted,
whether any time-frame had been set up for conclusion of the survey and whether any delay has
taken place in submission of the report. The Committee also desires to be informed of the findings
of the Report when submitted and action taken thereon. (Para 5.23)
Action Taken
4.4 The National Sample Survey (NSS) was conducted by the National JALMA Institute for
Leprosy & Other Mycobacterial diseases, Agra during the year 2010-11 and was completed in June
2011. The report could not be submitted as scheduled in 2011 due to necessity to validate the data
submitted by States/UTs. The process of validation after entering data, of individual persons
surveyed, is still continuing. Findings of the report will be submitted to the committee immediately
on receipt form JALMA institute.
87

88
88
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
(PART-A — HEALTH SECTOR)
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
While making its recommendation in para 2.4 of its 67th Report, the Committee had
expected the Department to outline a roadmap for fiscal discipline and prudence for the
purpose of more efficient utilization of the available resources and also raising the
government expenditure on health as a percentage of GDP and apprise it of the same.
Instead of furnishing a detailed action taken reply, the Department has merely chosen to
state “noted for compliance”. The Committee is, therefore, surprised at the Department’s
silence on addressing the key concerns pointed out by it. The Committee, therefore, would
like the Department to apprise it in specific terms of the steps taken/ contemplated to be
taken to ensure fiscal discipline and to achieve efficiency gain in utilisation of the available
resources. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the reaction of Planning
Commission for enchancing allocation of funds for NUHM. (Para 3.5)
The Committee observes that while making its recommendation in para 2.8 of its
67
th Report it had expected the Department to take steps to prevent and control savings on
the Capital Account and apprise the Committee accordingly.The Committee is constrained
to note that the Department has made a generic reply and not shed any light on the
measures taken or contemplated to be taken to control savings on the Capital Account. The
Committee, therefore, desires that the Department should use greater care while
formulating its replies in future and instead of making replies of generic nature should
invariably indicate the measures taken/contemplated to be taken in pursuance to the
recommendations/observations of the Committee. (Para 3.8)
The Committee notes with concern that even the phase one is under the planning stage. The
Committee is constrained to note though the proposal for redevelopment of hospital has been
cleared by EFC and Cabinet Committee on Economic Affair no headway has been made in the
direction till date. The Committee would like to be apprised regularly about the status of the project
as also what concrete action has been contemplated to be taken to adhere to the timelines proposed
for the project. (Para 3.11)
The Committee recommends that work related to setting up of IVF unit must be completed
and made operational in a dedicated time-frame so as to benefit those people who cannot avail the
expensive facilities in private hospitals. The Committee would also like to be apprised of cost
escalation due to delay in setting up of the Unit. (Para 3.15)
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL
The Committee observes that the measures taken thus far have had only limited
impact on ensuring optimal utilisation of the funds allocated under this head. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the status of the NECB and Dharamshala projects
and whether the targeted timeline for the projects could be achieved. (Para 3.18)
The Committee notes that everything is in a planning stage till date. The Committee
proposes that execution of projects in whatever phases decided should take off as early as

89
possible. There must be a time limit for the same. Proper framework defining each stage
and adherence to time frame is much needed for executing plans and target achievement.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the Status of projects. The Department has
merely repeated the proposals which were apprised at the time of consideration of Demands
for Grants to the Committee. No further proposers has been made in the projects
envisaged. (Para 3.22)
VI. CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY (CIP), RANCHI
The Committee notes with concern that under utilisation of allocated funds has been
mainly due to delay in various projects. Further due to undue delay there has been cost
escalation also. Measures should be taken to check any further cost escalation due to delay
in execution of projects envisaged. (Para 3.27)
VIII. LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE
The Committee is constraint to note the continuous vacancies in all the grades and
the effects on the services provided and standard of education imparted. The Committee
regrets to note that the steps taken by the Ministry have not overcome shortage of
manpower at LHMC. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to take all out
measures in filling all the vacancies in the period targeted and informed to the Committee.
(Para 3.30)
IX. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCE (AIIMS)
The Committee takes note that out of 23 projects only 10 have been completed, 3
have been abandoned. The Committee also notes that many projects are being delayed due
to non-clearance from statutory bodies. The Committee feels that this would result in cost
escalation and delay in providing services to the patients. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Ministry to take steps to ensure that pending issues on project
approvals, sanctions etc are sorted out urgently. (Para 3.34)
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made towards starting
Burns Unit at Jai Prakash Narayan Apex Trauma Center (JPNATC.) (Para 3.37)
XI. THE POST-GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH
The Committee would like the Department to take necessary step to overcome the
manpower shortage. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress in this
regard. (Para 3.40)
XII. NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND
MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG
The Committee in its various Reports on Demands for Grants has been impressing
upon the Department to ensure that all pre-project activities/approvals are completed/
obtained on time so that the projects are not plagued with delays for want of approval and
time and cost overruns are minimized. The Committee is however, constrained to note that
due to delay in approval, the proposed projects of NEIGRIHMS have led to upward revision
of costs of the projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
widen its ambit of monitoring and ensure implementation of the projects at the earliest.
(Para 3.43)

90
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard.
(Para 3.46)
XIII. PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY)
The Committee notes that the there is need for acceleration of rate of work in all
the projects and to devise strategies for successful running of these institution. Bottlenecks
at various stages of work should be removed with proper co-ordination among all the
concerned agencies. There must be effective monitoring of the status of the projects and the
monitoring agencies may be made accountable for day to day update on the projects.
(Para 3.49)
The Committee observes that the above projects are formulated and funded by the
Department. Therefore, the onus of completing them within the specified time-frame and
ensuring better financial performance lies with the Department. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Department to widen its monitoring ambit and ensure that the projects
under PMMSY are not plagued with time and cost overruns. (Para 3.52)
XIV. DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES
The Department should fix a high standard for achievement and strictly adhere to
the time-frame and achieve targets. (Para 3.55)
The Committee notes that more needs to be done in this area than what is being
done at present to maintain a minimum standard in the private nursing institutions. A new
evaluation policy should be framed to balance the demand and quality. (Para 3.58)
XV. NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME
The Committee is dismayed to note that gross under-utilisation of allocated funds
has become a persistent trend under this head and that the Department has sought to shift
the onus on the State Governments for non-submission of utilisation certificates. The
Committee would like the Department to closely monitor the pace of implementation of the
schemes of NMHP at the State level for the sake of better financial performance under this
head. (Para 3.63)
The reply of the Department that the underutilisation of funds has primarily been
for the reason of fulfilling of unavoidable mandatory requirement of financial propriety, is
untenable and reflects poorly on the functioning of the Department. The Department should
focus more on devising ways of ensuring optimum utilisation of allocated funds than relying
on alibis for financial underperformance. (Para 3.66)
XVII. SERA AND V ACCINE MANUFACTURING UNITS
The reply of the Ministry is deafeningly silent about main recommendation of the
Committee, i.e., to formulate new strategies to attain optimum utilisation of funds and
revival of CRI, Kasauli and BCGVL, Guindy. The Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendation and desires that strategies be formulated to ensure optimum utilisation of
funds under this above head. The Committee desires to be apprised of the details of the
progress made towards making the sera and vaccine manufacturing units GMP compliant
and operational. (Para 3.70)

91
XVIII. ASSISTANCE FOR CAPACITY BUILDING .
The Committee notes that the issue is of utmost importance and must be taken up
on priority basis and work in this regard must be started as early as possible.  (Para 3.73)
XX. THE NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR HEALTH CARE OF THE ELDERLY (NPHCE)
The Committee notes that the issues giving rise to under-utilization have not been
addressed and thus the Ministry should pursue the matter diligently. The Committee feels
that there is lack of proper planning for fund utilisation and targets are not properly
defined. The Department needs to work efficiently in this regard and take up with the
states. (Para 3.76)
XXI DISTRICT HOSPITALS
The Committee is constrained to observe that this is yet another example of causal
reply of the Ministry. No mention has been made regarding measures taken or contemplated
to be taken for holding frequent meetings with the States and impress upon them to submit
UCs on time. The Committee would therefore like the Ministry to take tangible action in
this regard and apprise the Committee accordingly. (Para 3.79)

92
(PART-B — NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION)
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee feels that mere agreement with its views would not suffice. The
Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken so far/contemplated to be taken
in the future to reduce the out-of-pocket payments made by households in time of health
distress. The specific role which the National Health Mission would play in reducing the
exorbitant out-of-pocket expenses, may also be indicated. (Para 3.3)
The Committee is concerned to note that adequate budgetary allocation for schemes
which have a vital bearing on Universal Health coverage, could not be allocated despite the
Ministry’s own admission that these programme were considered important and are
mentioned in the Twelfth Plan Document. The Committee is not aware of the reasons
adduced by Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission for not allocating the required funds
and would therefore like to be apprised of the reasons. The Committee also notes that by
now the RE must have been made. The Committee, therefore, desires to be updated
whether the enhanced allocations have been made under this head, and if not, what
alternate arrangements have been made by the Ministry to ensure that the activities
proposed under this head do not suffer due to paucity of funds. (Para 3.9)
The Committee lends its full support to the Ministry’s demand for higher resource
allocation for NHM and recommends that the Planning Commission may be apprised of the
Committee’s view in the matter. The Committee also recommends that the Department of
Health and Family Welfare needs to put its case more effectively before the Planning
Commission/Finance Ministry so as to ensure that more funds are released for NHM. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the Planning Commission’s response in the matter.
(Para 3.16)
III. NRHM-RCH FLEXIBLE POOL
The Committee would like the Ministry to indicate the steps being taken towards
allocation of adequate funds under the heads under reference and the outcome thereof.
(Para 3.19)
The Committee is constrained to note that the reply of the Ministry is evasive
inasmuch as it fails to indicate the targets set vis-à-vis achievements made, which was crux
of its recommendation. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the
targets set as well as the achievements made under NVBDCP may be indicated. The targets
set should be achieved, both physical and financial. (Para 3.22)
The Ministry should also have indicated the roadmap to put in place an effective
system of coordination with the States for timely liquidation of UCs.The Committee would
therefore, like to be apprised of the follow-up action taken by the Department with the
State Departments to ensure timely liquidation of pending UCs. (Para 3.25)
The Committee hopes that the Department’s new strategy to carry out house to
house survey to detect hidden leprosy cases and to treat them early would help in
eliminating spread of the disease. The Committee would like the Department to make an
92

93
assessment of the impact of the new strategy and intimate the Committee of the same.
(Para 3.28)
IX. MISSION FLEXIBLE POOL
The Committee recommends that 100% upgradation should be completed of the
earliest. There should not be any delay in this. (Para 3.32)
The Committee observes that it has not been informed of the final outcome of the
initiatives taken by the Department for their skill development and career progression. The
Committee would like to be apprised accordingly. (Para 3.35)
The Committee recommends the Department to fast-track its decision on revising
incentives for ASHA’s and make it commensurate with her job responsibilities.  (Para 3.38)
X. RCH FLEXIBLE POOL
The Committee desires that efforts should be continued to reduce MMR, IMR and
TFR. Monitoring mechanism should be strengthened. (Para 3.46)
The Committee notes from the reply furnished that three Committees have been
constituted to review the existing provisions of the Pre-conception (PC) and Pre-Natal
Diagnostic Techniques (PNDT) Act. The Committee would like to be apprised of the salient
recommendation made in this Report of the Committees and Action taken by the
Government on their findings. (Para 3.55)
XI. MILLENIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS (MDGS)
The Committee while noting the efforts being taken by the Department to combat
malaria, feels that the Dengue and Chikungunya are emerging as new threats in the
country. The Committee feels that in addition to the efforts being made to control Dengue
and Chikungunya, efforts should be made by the Ministry to explore the possibility of
developing drug/vaccine for fighting these two mosquito borne diseases. Adequate funds
should be earmarked for development of ‘research’ on ‘Mosquito borne’ diseases.
(Para 3.62)
XII. IMPLEMENTATION OF NRHM (PHASE-I)
The Committee strongly observes that the Department should not get complacent by
releasing funds to the States and instead follow-up and constantly monitor the utilization of
funds. State Governments may be impressed upon the need to send proposals. (Para 3.67)
XIII. NEW SCHEMES DURING TWELFTH PLAN
The Committee recommend that the Department should move faster for
implementation of the said Scheme as the second year of the 12
th Plan is already in progress
and still the basic implementation framework of the scheme is being prepared and has not
been finalized so far. (Para 3.70)

MINUTES

96

97
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 16 th December, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Harin Pathak — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
 2. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
3. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
4. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
5. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
8. Shrimati Priya Dutt
9. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
10. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
11. Shri Mahabal Mishra
12. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
II. Opening Remarks
2. Shri Harin Pathak, at the outset, welcomed Members of the Committee and informed them
that due to certain urgent work, the Chairman could not attend the meeting. The Committee,
elected Shri Pathak to preside over the meeting. He apprised Members about the agenda of the
meeting i.e. to consider and adopt draft (i) 78
th Report of the Committee on Action Taken by
the Government on Recommendations/Observations contained in the 67 th Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare; and
(ii) *    *       * .
97
*** Relate to other matters.

98
*** Relate to other matters.
III. Adoption of the Draft Reports
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the * * *  draft Report * * *  mentioned
above. The Chairman invited Members to share their specific suggestions, if any, for incorporation
in the said Draft Report * * * . The Members of the Committee highlighted certain suggestions for
incorporation in the said Report * * * . The Committee decided to further consider and adopt the
said Report * * *  with the said modifications in its meeting to be held on 17
th December, 2013.
4. The Committee adjourned at 3.30 P.M.

99
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 17 th December, 2013 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
 2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
4. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
5. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
8. Shrimati Priya Dutt
9. Moht. Asrarul Haque
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
11. Shri Harin Pathak
12. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
II. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and informed them
about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to further consider and adopt draft (i) 78
th Report of the
Committee on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations/Observations contained in the
67
th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Health and
Family Welfare; and (ii) *      *      * .
99
*** Relate to other matters.

100
III. Adoption of the Draft Reports
3. The Committee then further considered and discussed the two draft Report * * * mentioned
above. The Chairman invited Members to share their specific suggestions, if any, for incorporation
in the said Draft Report* * *. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the aforesaid
Report* * *
4. The Committee, therefore, decided that the said Report * * *may be presented to the Rajya
Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the 18
th December, 2013. The
Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Shri Mohd. Ali Khan and Shri Jagat Prasad
Nadda to present the Report * * *in Rajya Sabha, and Shri Harin Pathak, and in his absence,
Dr. Anup Kumar Saha to lay the Report* * *on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee adjourned at 10.40 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

101
ANNEXURES

102

103
PART-A—HEALTH SECTOR
ANNEXURE-A to Para No. 2.7
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Major Heads 2010-1 1 201 1-12 2012-13
No.
BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Exp. upto
08-03-2013
1. Hospitals and 281.79 341.90 296.29 394.22 378.34 357.13 530.04 520.07 388.23
Dispensaries
2. Medical Education 1982.51 1967.55 1749.94 3135.92 2257.18 2067.71 3150.46 2548.94 1948.10
Training and
Research
3. Public Health 3205.12 2727.36 2545.64 2075.26 1697.05 1633.70 2780.19 1803.62 979.56

104
ANNEXURE-B to Para No. 2.7
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Scheme 2010-11 201 1-12 2012-13
No.
BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE
1. CGHS 68.65 80.81 57.21 84.00 86.23 71.94 92.01 94.46 66.16
2. CIP, Ranchi 27.25 26.60 13.94 40.90 38.97 22.58 45.74 43.80 17.15
3. Cancer Research 180.00 55.00 31.97 200.00 1 12.00 98.78 72.00 50.00 12.59
(include
2012-13 Tobacco)
4. LHMC and S. K. 79.00 72.00 50.90 80.00 68.00 50.79 92.00 63.15 69.16
Hospital
5. PMSSY 750.00 747.00 653.84 1616.57 918.91 877.10 1544.21 1010.00 973.50
6. Total – Medical 1982.51 1967.55 1749.94 3135.92 2257.18 2067.71 3150.46 2548.94 1948.10
Education, Training (Upto
and Research 8.3.2013)

105
105
ANNEXURE-C to Para No. 2.14
Sl.
No.
1
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Report
No.
2
CA 1 of
2008
CA 1 of
2008
CA 14 of
2008-09
CA 14 of
2008-09
CA 16 of
2008-09
23 of
2009-10
23 of
2009-10
3 of
2010-11
(PA)
9 of
2010-11
Para
No.
3
8.1
21.2(App.III
S.No. 9-13)
12.2(App.IV
S.No. 5-10)
5.2
10.1
1.1.1
(App.III
Sl.No.3)
3.2
Chapter-II
7.1
Subject of Para
4
Unfruitful expenditure on
construction on substandard
Laboratories (CRI)
Departmentally Managed
Government Undertaking
Position of Proforma
Accounts
Departmentally Managed
Government Undertaking
Position of Proforma
Accounts
Failure to recover CGHS
charges from BSNL and
Postal Department
Work Management of
ICMR
Grants and Loans released to
central autonomous bodies
Non recovery of cess
(AIIMS)
Reimbursement of Medical
Claim to Pensioners under
CGHS
Non-implementation of
computerized Management
Information System for
Food Control Organisation
Position
5
Final Note yet to be
submitted to Monitoring
cell.
Note called on 28.12.2001
by Audit. Final ATN yet to
be submitted.
Awaited
ATN sent to audit on
06.09.2012.
Revised Note called on
05.04.2001
PDA(SD)/11(67)/LDP/
Insp.I/08-09/Part II
Revised A TN to be
submitted.
Revised A TN sent on
27.06.2012. Audit retuned
ATN with comments on
26.07.2012. Final ATN yet
to be submitted.
Audit returns the ATN on
17.7.2012. Revised ATN to
be sent.

106
1
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
2
20 of
2010-11
38 of
2010-11
16 of
2011-12
16 of
2011-12
14 of
2012-13
3
Chapter-I
3.1
8.1
8.2
Chapter-III
4
Medical Council of India.
63% medical colleges are in
06 States indicates skewed
distribution of medical
colleges across the country.
Permission for 04 Medical
Colleges were granted
without ensuring fulfillment
of prescribed medial
standards. 59 medical
Colleges were found
admitting 326 students in
excess of their intake
capacity in 126 post
graduate courses.
Avoidable payment of
interest-AIIMS
Unfruitful Expenditure -
Safdarjung Hospital and
VMCC
Avoidable payment - CGHS
Dental Council of India
5
Revised ATN to be sent.
Revised ATN to be sent.
Revised ATN to be sent.
First ATN yet to be sent.
First ATN yet to be
submitted. Report was laid
down on the table of the
House on 30.08.2012.

107
ANNEXURE-D to Para No. 17.1
(Rs. in crores )
Institute BE RE Utilisation upto
24.3.2013
Plan Non- T otal Plan Non- T otal Plan Non- T otal
Plan Plan Plan
CRI, Kasauli 35.63 35.00 70.63 15.48 32.75 48.23 1.06 27.37 28.43
BCG, Guindy 30.00 13.00 43.00 7.67 8.58 16.25 0.98 5.91 6.89
PII, Coonor 38.00 – 38.00 38.00 – 38.00 23.75 – 23.75
107

108
108
ANNEXURE-I to Para No. 2.14
Sl.
No.
1
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Report
No.
2
CA 1 of
2008
CA 1 of
2008
CA 14 of
2008-09
CA 14 of
2008-09
CA 16 of
2008-09
23 of
2009-10
23 of
2009-10
3 of
2010-11
(PA)
Para
No.
3
8.1
21.2
(App.III
S.No. 9-13)
12.2
(App.IV
S.No. 5-10)
5.2
10.1
1.1.1
(App.III
Sl.No.3)
3.2
Chapter-II
Subject of Para
4
Unfruitful expenditure
on construction on
substandard Labo-
ratories (CRI)
Departmentally Man-
aged Government
Undertaking Position
of Proforma Accounts
Departmentally Man-
aged Government
Undertaking Position
of Proforma Accounts
Failure to recover
CGHS charges from
BSNL and Postal
Department
Work Management
of ICMR
Grants and Loans
released to central
Autonomous Bodies
Non-Recovery of
cess (AIIMS)
Reimbursement of
Medical Claim to
Pensioners under
CGHS
Remarks
6
Pending
Pending
Awaited
V etting comments
of Pr. Dir. Of
Audit, Kolkata and
Hyderabad awaited.
Revised ATN called
for by DGACE is
to be submitted.
Revised ATN is to
be submitted to
DGACE.
Pending.
Final ATN sent to
Monitoring Cell
Pending.
Position
5
Final Note yet to be
submitted to
Monitoring cell.
Note called on
28.12.2001 by
Audit. Final Note
yet to be sent.
Vetting comments of
DGACE awaited.
ATN sent to Audit
on 06.09.2012.
Revised Note called
on 05.04.2001
PDA(SD)/11(67)/
LDP/Insp.I/08-09/
Part II
Revised ATN to be
submitted.
Final ATN has been
sent to Monitoring
Cell
Revised ATN sent
on 27.06.2012.
Audit returned ATN
with comments on
26.07.2012. Final ATN
yet to be submitted.

109
1
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
2
9 of
2010-11
20 of
2010-11
38 of
2010-11
16 of
2011-12
16 of
2011-12
14 of
2012-13
3
7.1
Chapter-I
3.1
8.1
8.2
Chapter-III
4
Non-implementation
of computerised
Management Infor-
mation System for
Food Control
Organisation.
Medical Council of
India. 63% medical
colleges are in 06
States indicates
skewed distribution
of medical colleges
across the country.
Permission for 04
Medical Colleges
were granted without
ensuring fulfillment of
prescribed medial
standards. 59 medical
Colleges were found
admitting 326
students in excess of
their intake capacity
in 126 post graduate
courses.
Avoidable payment
of interest-AIIMS
Unfruitful Expen-
diture - Safdarjung
Hospital and VMCC
Avoidable payment
CGHS
Dental Council of
India
6
Pending
Pending.
Final ATN sent to
Monitoring Cell
Pending
Revised ATN sent
to DGACE.
Vetting comments
awaited
ATN sent to
DGACE. V etting
comments awaited
5
Audit returned ATN
on 17.07.2012.
Revised ATN to be
sent.
Revised ATN to be
sent.
Revised ATN to be
sent.
First ATN yet to be
sent.
First ATN yet to be
sent. Report was
laid down on the
table of the House
on 30.08.2012.

110
110
ANNEXURE-II to Para No. 4.7
Sl. Post Name Sanctioned V acant Remarks
No. Strength
1. Technical Asstt. Technician 38 4 Recruitment is under process
2. Asstt. Supt. Store 2 2 Vacant due to Cadre review
3. MSW 5 1 Under process (Newly Created)
4. Health Inspector 4 1 Recruitment is under process
5. Photographer 3 2 Newly created. R/Rs not available
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Laundry
Operator
Lab. Attendant
Dresser
Head Cook
Line man
Supervisor
O.T. Attendant
Tailor
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
15
37
12
3
1
22
4
3
9
4
1
Nil
1
4
Nil
1
Permission to fill up the post has
been received from DGHS to filling
of the posts. Under process.
Posts are to be filled by the method
of promotion. Under process.
Filling up of the posts under
process.
N.A.
As per DOT guidelines proposal for
redesignation of post as MTS and
permission to fill up the post
already been sent to DGHS.
Post are to be filled by the method
of promotion. Under process.
N.A.
As per DOT guidelines proposal for
redesignation of post as MTS and
permission to fill up the post
already been sent to DGHS.

111
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Packer
Cook
Daftary
N. Attendant
Animal
Attendant
Safai
Karamchari
Peon
S. Guard
St. Bearer
Mate
Masalchi
Bearer
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
2
29
18
499
2
352
27
58
64
10
9
17
Nil
Nil
1
16
Nil
95
12
18
28
7
5
6
N.A.
N.A.
Posts are to be filled by the method
of promotion. Under process.
As per DOT guidelines proposal for
redesignation of post as MTS and
permission to fill up the post
already been sent to DGHS.
N.A.
As per Government decision these
posts will be filled through
outsourcing basis.
As per DOT guidelines proposal for
redesignation of post as MTS and
permission to fill up the post
already been sent to DGHS.
As per Government decision these
posts will be filled through
outsourcing basis.
As per DOT guidelines proposal for
redesignation of post as MTS and
permission to fill up the post
already been sent to DGHS.
As per DOT guidelines proposal for
redesignation of post as MTS and
permission to fill up the post
already been sent to DGHS.
As per DOT guidelines proposal for
redesignation of post as MTS and
permission to fill up the post
already been sent to DGHS.
As per DOT guidelines proposal for
redesignation of post as MTS and
permission to fill up the post
already been sent to DGHS.

112
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
Khidmatgar
Blood Bank
Attendant
Laundry
Helper
Cleaner
Barber
Canteen Staff
Bearer
S. Wala
Coffee
Maker
Wash Boy
Dish Cleaner
V .M.M.C.
Staff
Lab
Attendant
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
5200 –
20200
+1800
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
Group C
21
4
9
1
2
6
1
1
1
1
15
9
1
9
1
Nil
2
1
1
Nil
Nil
Nil
As per DOT guidelines proposal for
redesignation of post as MTS and
permission to fill up the post
already been sent to DGHS.
Vacant post on 31.3.2013
Permission from DGHS to fill up
the post on regular basis has been
received. Under process.
As per DOT guidelines proposal for
redesignation of post as MTS and
permission to fill up the post
already been sent to DGHS.
N.A.
As per DOT guidelines proposal for
redesignation of post as MTS and
permission to fill up the post
already been sent to DGHS.
As per Government decision these
posts will be filled through
outsourcing basis.
As per DOT guidelines proposal for
redesignation of post as MTS and
permission to fill up the post
already been sent to DGHS.
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.

113
ANNEXURE-III to Para No. 9.6
Status Note of Eleventh Five Year Plan Projects of AIIMS, New Delhi
Sl.
No.
1
1.
2.
3.
Name of Project
2
Covering of Nallah
PH.-II
Expansion of OPD
Block
Expansion of New
Emergency Ward
Estt.
Cost
3
24.50
90.00
150.00
Total
4
20.00
0.00
0.00
Current status and revised
time line
5
Approved by SFC of the
Ministry on 6th July, 2010.
Work underway.
Location changed and area
increased. Revised EFC
submitted for Rs.532.00 crore.
Approved in SFC held on 18th
September, 2012. Also
approved by GB held on 16th
October, 2012.
Project is under Planning
stage. Location of said project
as per Master Plan is in
Masjid Moth.
Reason for delay
6
The H.T. line running above the nallah is to be shifted by the
BSES. Delay was also on account of rainy reason during
which the peak flow of water disrupted the execution of
work. Shifting of Trunk sewer line also caused considerable
delay which is to be done by MCD. Earlier the proposal of
reconstruction of boundary wall along the Gautam Nagar
was not the part of contract. Later on, it was planned that
it has to be taken up along with main work. Hence the delay
occurred.
Originally the proposal was to construct the OPD adjoining
the existing OPD block at Main campus by demolishing the
existing newly developed children OPD and Medicine OPD in
Workshop building. Later on it has been planned in the
vacant land at Masjid Moth as per Revised Master Plan
submitted to NDMC. Plans submitted to NDMC on
10.07.2012
Expansion of New Emergency ward has been planned for
G .F. + 9 stories on the existing Emergency ward of single
story by demolishing it which was developed in the area
earlier used as Kitchen. Later on it has been planned in the
vacant land at Masjid Moth as per Revised Master Plan
submitted to NDMC. The project take off has been deferred
on account of other projects higher on priority.

114
12 3 4 5 6
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Renovation of OPD
and developing OPD
in Old laundry block
Connecting Ansari
Nagar Campus E&W
and with Trauma
Centre with
Motorable subway
Air conditioning in
Main Hospital (SH:
O.T’s Additional Plant)
Additional lift in
Hospital
Air conditioning in
Main Hospital (SH:
Replacing AHU’s).
Expansion of Existing
Cafeteria in Eastern
Campus
13.00
50.50
3.00
4.25
3.95
3.00
Cost increased due to
increased scope of work.
Approx. cost Rs.17.00
crores. Work completed in
November, 2011.
Cost increased due to
increased scope of work.
Approx. cost Rs.50.50
crores. Already approved by
SFC.
Techically not feasible.
Work Completed.
Work Completed.
Not yet started. Drawing
submitted to NDMC for
approval.
16.83
31.15
0.00
5.75
1.55
0.00
Completed.
Permission for tree cutting was to be obtained to take off
the project which is to be obtained by AIIMS which took
reasonable time and further as per plan the route of the
tunnel to access Trauma Centre was through Safdarjung
Hospital land, which they refused to give to us as some
block is coming up at that particular piece of land. Hence the
issue was taken up at Ministry level. Amicable solution has
been planned to have a surface access along the setback area
to exit on Factory Road between Safdarjung and Trauma
Centre. Final letter awaited.
Abandoned.
Completed.
Completed.
Earlier the plan was to renovate the existing Cafeteria, later
on it was proposed to be built by demolishing the existing
cafeteria with basement, GF. + 2 Stories. Accordingly drawing
was submitted to NDMC which shall be approved once the
Master Plan of AIIMS gets approved. The matter has

115
been taken up by the Cabinet Secretariat and is being monitored
regularly with NDMC. Plans has been submitted to NDMC
on 19.12.2012 and have been referred to DUAC/DFS by
NDMC in April, 2013.
Completed.
Yet not planned in view of other priority projects.
Master Plan Submitted to MCD. Yet to be approved.
It has been decided to take up the work of street light along
with upcoming project as and when it materializes.
Deferred by Governing Body in view of inability to
accommodate patients during the construction period.
Underground parking planned
for 3 levels for Rs.60.00
crores for 450 cars. Work
completed in November, 2012.
Under Planning
Master Plan yet to be
approved. Drawings submitted
to MCD.
Abandoned.
Boundary wall work
completed. Street light work
deferred.
Approved by SFC on 28th
May, 2012. The building is
to be demolished and replaced
with a new block with an
estimated cost of Rs.65.00
crores. Consultancy paid to
HSCC. Project has been
deferred by GB for the time
being.
41.82
0.00
0.00
0.11
4.80
0.59
50.50
29.00
9.00
11.00
6.00
65.00
Construction of
Underground parking
at AIIMS-435 cars.
New Multi storeyed
animal house in East
Campus
Construction of
Community Centre at
A.V . Nagar, AIIMS.
Construction of
facilitation block
Construction of
boundary wall and
providing street light
at 300 acres Campus
at Jhajjar.
Paid Ward
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

116
12 3 4 5 6
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
Minor works:-
Renovation, Addition
alteration works in
hospital, hostels and
residential areas in all
campus of AIIMS.
Master Plan and Site
development of Ansari
Nagar Campus.
Jhajjar outreach OPD
Consultancy of Jhajjar
Development of
campus at Badsha
(Irrigation Department
of Haryana)
RPC Lift
Covering of Nallah
Ph-I
T
OTAL:
126.42
20.00
9.50
0.67
13.50
1.12
6.66
127.37
0.40
9.50
0.42
5.00
1.12
6.66
273.07
As per schedule.
Site development work yet to
be started.
Work Completed.
Paid to HSCC.
Paid to Haryana Government.
Completed
Completed
Being done as per schedule.
Master Plan of AIIMS submitted to NDMC which is yet to
be approved. This is being monitored at Cabinet Secretary
and Ministry level. Redevelopment plan was submitted to
NDMC on 24.01.2012. The same is likely to be referred to
DUAC/DFS by NDMC.
Completed.
In progress as firms have been shortlisted and Tender bid
documents are being issued by HSCC. A Committee under
Chairmanship of Secretary (H) is working to finalize the
blocks/facilities to be built in said land, one the same are
finalised the bids shall be issued.
Completed.
Completed.
Completed.

117
117
ANNEXURE-IV to Para No. 12.5
Tentative Action Plan for Recruitment of Vacant Faculty Posts for the Y ear 2013
Sl. Action Plans Date
No.
1. Advertisement of vacant faculty posts 28 th May, 2013
2. Last date of receipt of applications 28 th June, 2013
3. Preliminary Screening Committee 15 th July, 2013
4. Meeting of the Screening Committee to screen the Last week of July, 2013
eligible candidates
5. Issue of Calling letters 1 st week of August, 2013
6. Meeting of the Standing Selection Committee in 2 Last week of August and
(two) Phases 2 nd week of September, 2013
7. Result declared and offer of appointment issued to Last week of September, 2013
selected candidates
8. New Faculty to join the respective posts October, 2013
9. Remaining vacant posts to be advertised 1
st week of November, 2013

118
118
ANNEXURE-V to Para No. 12.5
Tentative Action Plan for direct Recruitment of Vacant Group A Posts for the
Year 2013
Sl. Action Plans Tentative Dates
No.
1. Advertisement issued for vacant Group A posts 30 h May, 2013
2. Last date of receipt of applications 15 th July, 2013
3. Meeting of Screening Committee to screen the Mid August, 2013
applications
4. Issue of Calling letters to candidates Last week of August, 2013
5. Meeting of Selection Committee for interviews 2
nd week of September, 2013
6. Declaration of Result and issued of offer of First week of October, 2013
appointment to selected candidates
7. Selected candidates expected to join Fourth week of October, 2013
8. Remaining vacant posts to be advertised 1
st week of November, 2013

119
119
ANNEXURE-VI to Para No. 12.5
Tentative Action Plan for direct Recruitment of Vacant Group B Posts for the
Year 2013
Sl. Action Plans Date
No.
1. Advertisement issued for vacant Group B posts Last week June, 2013
2. Last date of receipt of applications 15
th August, 2013
3. Meeting of Screening Committee to screen the Mid September, 2013
applications
4. Issue of Calling letters to candidates Last week of September, 2013
5. Meeting of Selection Committee for interviews 2
nd –3 rd week of October, 2013
6. Declaration of Result and issued of offer of Second week of November, 2013
appointment to selected candidates
7. Selected candidates expected to join Fourth week of November, 2013
8. Remaining vacant posts to be advertised 1
st week of December, 2013

120
120
ANNEXURE-VII to Para No. 12.5
Tentative Plan of direct Recruitment for Group-C Posts for the Year 2013-14
Ist Phase: Recruitment:
Advertisement to be released – Last week of June, 2013
Last date of Receipt of Applications – 31
st July, 2013
Screening of Applications – August, 2013
Written/Interview – September and October, 2013
IInd Phase: Recruitment:
Advertisement to be released – Second week of July, 2013
Last date of Receipt of Applications – 31
st August, 2013
Screening of Applications – September, 2013
Written/Interview – December, 2013
IIIrd Phase: Recruitment:
Advertisement to be released – December, 2013
Last date of Receipt of Applications – 31
st January, 2014
Screening of Applications – March, 2014
Written/Interview – April and May, 2014

121
121
ANNEXURE-VIII to Para No. 15.3
Targets set and achieved during the year 2012-13
Sl.
No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10
Activity
Continuation of support
to Centres of Excellence
Continuation of support
to existing DMHPs
Support to SMHA
Continuation of support
to PG Departments in
Mental Health
Specialties
Upgradation of Central
Government Institutes
into Neuro Sciences
Health Care Facilities
Establishment of new
Centres of Excellence
Establishment of PG
Departments in Mental
Health Specialties
Support to NGO/CBOs
Support to DMHPs on
new pattern
Support to MHRC and
state boards Moni-
toring, Implementation,
technical support
Target
10
50
1
27
2
2
25
60
132
Achievement
3
12
1
9
0
0
0
0
0
Reasons for shortfall
Non-Submission of Utilization
Certificates in respect of funds already
released under National Mental Health
Programme and the instructions of
Ministry of Finance linking release to
submission of Utilization Certificates
of all programmes in a State/UT
Non-approval of National Mental
Health Programme Twelfth Five Year
Plan proposals

122
ANNEXURE-IX to Para No. 15.8
Latest status of seats created in the Institutes supported under Manpower Development Schemes
Scheme–A Scheme–B Seats already created No. of Seats
through Supporting created till date
Seats to be Seats already Seats to be Seats to be 27 PG training
created created created through created through departments
through 11 through 11 Supporting 120 Supporting 27
Centres of Centres of PG training PG training
Excellence Excellence departments departments
A B C D E B+E
Psychiatrist 44 16 60 14 7 23
Clinical 176 44 240 56 41 85
psychologist
PSW 176 58 240 42 41 99
Psychiatric nurses 220 70 600 140 35 105
188 124 312

123
123
PART-B–National Health Mission
ANNEXURE-I to Para No. 5.21
National Leprosy Eradication Programme
Statement showing year-wise New Cases Detected during 2011-12 and 2012-13
Sl. States/UTs 201 1-12 2012-13
No.
New Cases New Cases
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 7820 8295
2. Arunachal Pradesh 28 48
3. Assam 1000 1147
4. Bihar 17801 22001
5. Chhattisgarh 6999 8115
6. Goa 64 55
7. Gujarat 7496 9019
8. Haryana 524 648
9. Himachal Pradesh 195 166
10. Jharkhand 3615 3691
11. Jammu and Kashmir 175 191
12. Karnataka 3718 3436
13. Kerala 861 832
14. Madhya Pradesh 5858 5961
15. Maharashtra 17892 18715
16. Manipur 24 24
17. Meghalaya 41 26
18. Mizoram 13 18
19. Nagaland 90 157
20. Odisha 8312 8226
21. Punjab 695 987

124
12 3 4
22. Rajasthan 974 1084
23. Sikkim 20 19
24. Tamil Nadu 4082 3550
25. Tripura 36 23
26. Uttar Pradesh 14627 24222
27. Uttarakhand 499 495
28. West Bengal 12169 11683
29. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 27 14
30. Chandigarh 54 74
31. Dadar and Nagar Haveli 237 368
32. Daman and Diu 3 1
33. Delhi 1295 1252
34. Lakshadweep 2 0
35. Puducherry 49 57
T
OTAL: 127295 134600

125
125
ANNEXURE-II to Para No. 9.6
Total number of centres operational as FRUs*
Sl. States/UTs DH SDH CHC and other level Total
No. health facilites
12 3 4 5 6
1. Bihar 36 19 11 66
2. Chhattisgarh 26 3 46 75
3. Himachal Pradesh 9 7 0 16
4. Jammu and Kashmir 23 0 76 99
5. Jharkhand 21 7 18 46
6. Madhya Pradesh 48 18 17 83
7. Odisha 32 19 22 73
8. Rajasthan 32 14 49 95
9. Uttar Pradesh 90 0 71 161
10. Uttarakhand 12 10 5 27
11. Arunachal Pradesh 12 0 1 13
12. Assam 21 11 29 61
13. Manipur 2 0 0 2
14. Meghalaya 6 1 0 7
15. Mizoram 4 0 0 4
16. Nagaland 11 0 5 16
17. Sikkim 3 0 0 3
18. Tripura 3 5 0 8
19. Andhra Pradesh 17 91 292 400
20. Goa 2 0 0 2
21. Gujarat 24 27 94 145
22. Haryana 20 10 8 38
23. Karnataka 20 111 35 166
24. Kerala 15 50 0 65

126
12 3 4 5 6
25. Maharashtra 23 66 68 157
26. Punjab 21 35 114 170
27. Tamil Nadu 30 127 293 450
28. West Bengal 13 65 16 94
29. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 1 0 0 1
30. Chandigarh 1 0 2 3
31. Dadar and Nagar Haveli 1 0 0 1
32. Daman and Diu 2 0 2 4
33. Delhi 9 19 0 28
34. Lakshadweep 1 0 0 1
35. Puducherry 4 0 0 4
T
OTAL: 595 715 1274 2584
*Status as on 31.03.2013

127
127
ANNEXURE-III to Para No. 10.7
Number of bodies registered under PC and PNDT Act 1994 (up to March, 2013)
Sl. States/UTs No. of bodies registered
No.
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh 4693
2. Arunachal Pradesh 23
3. Assam 595
4. Bihar 1342
5. Chhattisgarh 605
6. Goa 143
7. Gujarat 3976
8. Haryana 1467
9. Himachal Pradesh 238
10. Jammu and Kashmir* 250
11. Jharkhand 717
12. Karnataka 2878
13. Kerala 1628
14. Madhya Pradesh 1587
15. Maharashtra 8855
16. Manipur 64
17. Meghalaya 36
18. Mizoram 41
19. Nagaland 34
20. Odisha 664
21. Punjab 1347
22. Rajasthan 1864
23. Sikkim 24
24. Tamil Nadu 4978

128
12 3
25. Tripura 65
26. Uttarakhand 521
27. Uttar Pradesh 4996
28. West Bengal 2040
29. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 9
30. Chandigarh 70
31. Dadar and Nagar Haveli 15
32. Daman and Diu 12
33. Delhi 1794
34. Lakshadweep 18
35. Puducherry 77
T
OTAL: 47666

129
129
ANNEXURE-IV to Para No. 10.7
Number of machines seized/sealed under PC and PNDT Act 1994 (up to March, 2013)
Sl. States/UTs No. of Machines Seized/Sealed
No.
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh 8
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0
3. Assam 1
4. Bihar 1
5. Chhattisgarh 0
6. Goa 1
7. Gujarat 3
8. Haryana 0
9. Himachal Pradesh 0
10. Jammu and Kashmir 63
11. Jharkhand 0
12. Karnataka 0
13. Kerala 0
14. Madhya Pradesh 0
15. Maharashtra 662
16. Manipur 1
17. Meghalaya 0
18. Mizoram 0
19. Nagaland 0
20. Odisha 2
21. Punjab 0
22. Rajasthan 321
23. Sikkim 0
24. Tamil Nadu 72

130
12 3
25. Tripura 0
26. Uttarakhand 1
27. Uttar Pradesh 33
28. West Bengal 4
29. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 0
30. Chandigarh 2
31. Dadar and Nagar Haveli 0
32. Daman and Diu 0
33. Delhi 0
34. Lakshadweep 0
35. Puducherry 0
T
OTAL: 1175

131
131
ANNEXURE-V to Para No. 10.7
Number of ongoing court cases under PC and PNDT Act 1994 (up to March, 2013)
Sl. States/UTs No. of ongoing Court/Police Cases
No.
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh 35
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0
3. Assam 5
4. Bihar 10
5. Chhattisgarh 7
6. Goa 18
7. Gujarat 113
8. Haryana 90
9. Himachal Pradesh 0
10. Jammu and Kashmir 1
11. Jharkhand 18
12. Karnataka 45
13. Kerala 0
14. Madhya Pradesh 24
15. Maharashtra 527
16. Manipur 0
17. Meghalaya 0
18. Mizoram 0
19. Nagaland 0
20. Odisha 34
21. Punjab 123
22. Rajasthan 274
23. Sikkim 0
24. Tamil Nadu 77

132
12 3
25. Tripura 0
26. Uttarakhand 9
27. Uttar Pradesh 42
28. West Bengal 8
29. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 0
30. Chandigarh 3
31. Dadar and Nagar Haveli 0
32. Daman and Diu 0
33. Delhi 62
34. Lakshadweep 0
35. Puducherry 0
T
OTAL: 1525

133
133
ANNEXURE-VI to Para No. 10.7
Number of convictions and suspension/cancellation of medical license under PC and
PNDT Act 1994 (up to March, 2013)
Sl. States/UTs Convictions No. of ongoing Court/Police Cases
No.
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 0 0
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0 0
3. Assam 0 0
4. Bihar 0 0
5. Chhattisgarh 0 0
6. Goa 0 0
7. Gujarat 4 0
8. Haryana 30 4
9. Himachal Pradesh 0 0
10. Jammu and Kashmir 0 0
11. Jharkhand 0 0
12. Karnataka 0 0
13. Kerala 0 0
14. Madhya Pradesh 5 2
15. Maharashtra 48 17
16. Manipur 0 0
17. Meghalaya 0 0
18. Mizoram 0 0
19. Nagaland 0 0
20. Odisha 3 0
21. Punjab 24 1
22. Rajasthan 0 9
23. Sikkim 0 0
24. Tamil Nadu 0 0

134
12 3 4
25. Tripura 0 0
26. Uttarakhand 0 0
27. Uttar Pradesh 0 0
28. West Bengal 0 0
29. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 0 0
30. Chandigarh 0 0
31. Dadar and Nagar Haveli 0 0
32. Daman and Diu 0 0
33. Delhi 0 0
34. Lakshadweep 0 0
35. Puducherry 0 0
T
OTAL:1 1 4 3 3

135
135
ANNEXURE-VII to Para No. 11.5
Malaria Status in the country 2000-2012
Year Total Positive Annual Parasite Deaths due to Deaths due to
Cases of Incidence (per malaria malaria (per
Malaria 1000 populations) 100000
population)
2000 2031790 2.09 932 0.09
2001 2085484 2.12 1005 0.10
2002 1841229 1.82 973 0.09
2003 1869403 1.82 1006 0.10
2004 1915363 1.84 949 0.09
2005 1816569 1.68 963 0.09
2006 1785129 1.66 1707 0.16
2007 1508927 1.39 1311 0.12
2008 1526210 1.36 1055 0.09
2009 1563574 1.36 1144 0.09
2010 1599986 1.37 1018 0.08
2011 1310656 1.10 754 0.06
2012* 1066972 0.88 519 0.04
*Provisional

136
136
LIST OF REPORTS PRESENTED EARLIER
Report Subject
No.
12
1. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Health (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
2. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Family Welfare (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
3. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
4. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2004-2005) of the Department of Health. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
5. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Second Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2004-2005) of the Department of Family Welfare. (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
6. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Third Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2004-2005) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
7. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
8. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Family Welfare (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
9. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
10. Report on the Homeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
11. Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
12. Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2005
13. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Family Welfare. (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)

137
12
14. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
15. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Health. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
16. Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of Health and Family Welfare (Ministry
of Health and family Welfare)
17. Report on Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
18. Report on the Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy Pharmacy Bill, 2005
19. Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
20. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
21. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
observations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
22. Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
23. Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and family Welfare)
24. Report on Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research
Bill, 2007
25. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-second Report of the
Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare, (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
26. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Twenty-third Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
27. Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

138
12
28. Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
29 Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health Research (Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare)
30 Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007
31. Report on the Paramedical And Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007
32. Report on the Clinical Establishments (Registration And Regulation) Bill, 2007
33. Report on the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
34. Report on the functioning of the three Vaccine Producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
35. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
36. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty eighth report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
37. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty ninth report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
38. Report on Major issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, Namely the
Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor,
and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
39. Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
40. Report on Demand for Grants 2010-11 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
41. Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of Department of Health Research.
42. Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of Department of AIDS Control (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
43. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Thirty-Eighth Report
on major issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of india (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.

139
12
44. Report on the Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009
45. Report on issues Relating to Availability of Generic, Generic-branded and Branded
Medicines, Their Formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy and Effectiveness
46. Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010
47. Report on the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research,
Puducherry (Amendment) Bill 2010
48. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Forty-First Report on Demands for Grants 2010-2011 (Demand
No. 48) of the Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
49. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Forty-Second Report on Demands for Grants 2010-2011 of the
Department of AIDS Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
50. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Fortieth Report on Demands For Grants 2010-2011 (Demand No. 47)
of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
51. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Thirty-Ninth Report on Demands For Grants 2010-2011 (Demand
No. 46) of the Department of Health And Family Welfare.
52. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health And Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its 43rd Report on
Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in it’s 38th Report on
major issues concerning the three Vaccine Producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
53. Report on the National Institute of Mental Health And Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore
Bill, 2010
54. Report on Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
55. Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No.47) of the Department of AYUSH
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
56. Demands For Grants 2012-13 (Demand No.48) of the Department of Health Research
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
57. Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of AIDS Control
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
58. Report on Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the forty fifth Report on issues relating to availability of Generic, Generic-

140
12
Branded and Branded Medicines, their formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy and
Effectiveness
59. Report on the Functioning of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
(CDSCO)
60. Report on the National Commission For Human Resources For Health Bill, 2011
61. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 47)
of the Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
62. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand
No. 49) of the Department of AIDS Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
63. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 48)
of the Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
64. Report on Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fourth report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46)
of the Department of Health and Family Welfare; (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
65. Report on the Proposal to Introduce the Bachelor of Science (Community Health)
Course
66. Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty Ninth Report on the functioning of Central Drugs Standards
Control Organisation (CDSCO)
67. Report on Demands For Grants 2013-14 (Demand No.47) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
68. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of
AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
69. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No.49) of the Department of Health
Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
70. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50) of the Department of AIDS
Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
71. Report on the Functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)
72. Report on Alleged irregularities in the Conduct of Studies Using Human Papilloma Virus
(HPV) Vaccine by Path in India
73. Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
74. Report on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013

141
12
75. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Sixty-Eighth Report on Demands For Grants 2013-14 (Demand
No. 48) of the Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
76. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Seventieth Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50)
of the Department of AIDS Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
77. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Sixty-Nineth Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 49)
of the Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.