 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024/Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO.  
157 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
QUALITY OF MEDICAL EDUCATION IN INDIA 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th February, 2024) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail:  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024/Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
QUALITY OF MEDICAL EDUCATION 
 
 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 9th February, 2024) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 9th February, 2024) 

CONTENTS 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE i 
2.  PREFACE ii-iii 
3.  ACRONYMS iv 
4.  Chapter-I       
Introduction  
 
Chapter-II     
 
                      Infrastructure for Medical Education 
 
Chapter-III   
 
                       Faculty Issues in Medical Education 
 
Chapter - IV   
 
                     Quality Control of Medical Education 
 
 
1-12 
 
 
13-25 
 
26-32 
 
33-41 
5.  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A 
GLANCE 
42-57 
6.  ANNEXURES 58 
7. * MINUTES  
*To be appended at a later stage. 
 
 
 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel 
6. Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
8. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
9. Dr. Santanu Sen 
10. Shri A. D. Singh  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri MaddilaGurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Shri K. Navas Kani 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Rao Munde 
22. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S.  
27. Dr. Jadon Chandra Sen  
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3. Dr. Saket Kumar                      Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Noyaline Vinitha F.C.  Joint Director 
5. Shri Saurav Trivedi   Secretariat Assistant 

ii 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Fami ly Welfare, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred  Fifty 
Seventh Report on the subject ― Quality of Medical Education in India ‖ which was 
adopted by the Committee in its meeting held on the 7th February, 2024. 
2. The assessment of the quality of medical education in India becomes 
paramount considering the escalating healthcare needs of th is vast country with a 
diverse population  and geography . As the demand for competent healthcare 
professionals continues to rise, ensuring that medical education meets the best  
standards becomes crucial to addressing the multifaceted challenges in the 
healthcare sector. The primary objective of the Committee behind identifying the 
subject – ―Quality of Medical Education in India‖ was  to find areas of 
improvement to ensure that medical graduates are well -equipped to navigate the 
evolving landscape of h ealthcare delivery. By scrutinizing the curriculum, clinical 
training,institutional infrastructure, and faculty expertise, the Committee can 
contribute to the production of skilled and specialized medical professionals who 
can effectively meet the diverse healthcare demands of India. Additionally, 
assessing the quality of medical education aligns with the intention to produce  
healthcare professionals with a deep understanding of public health challenges, 
cultural sensitivities, and innovative solutions, thereby enhancing the overall 
quality of healthcare delivery in the country. 
3. The Committee held deliberations with the representatives of the Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare& NMC during its meeting held on the 6th July, 2023 for 
a holistic examination of the subject . The Committee also heard representatives 
from AIIMS, New Delhi, Vardhman Mahavir Medical College, Safdarjung 
Hospital, New Delhi, Delhi Medical Council, New Delhi, Maulana Azad Medical 
College,  New Delhi, Sharda University, Greater Noida in its meeting held on 31 st 
July, 2023 and representatives from Dr. RML Hospital & Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
Institute of Medical Science (ABVIMS), New Delhi, Lady Hardinge Medical 
College and Associated Hospitals , New Delhi and Swami Vivekanand Subharti 
University, Meerut, Uttar Pradesh  in its meeting held on 21 st August, 2023. The 

iii 
 
Committee further heard the Chai rman of N MC; Presidents of UGMEB & 
PGMEB; Member, EMRB along with others on 5 th February 2024 on various 
issues related to medical education. 
4. Besides, the Committee undertook study visits to Mumbai and Goa from the 
10th July to 11 th July 2023 to assess the ground realities related to the quality of 
medical education imparted in the medical colleges.  
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report and reproduced at the end of the Report at 
‗Observations/Recommendations-at a Glance‘. 
6. On behalf of the Committee , I extend special thanks to the  NMC,Secretary 
of the Department of Health and Family Welfare ,Director, AIIMS, New Delhi , 
and all representatives  of other medical institutions who gave their views and 
enriched the Committee with their deep insight and valuable suggestions  on the 
subject during interactions. I further extend special appreciation to the officers of 
the Committee Se cretariat for their valuable efforts in assimilating all relevant 
information and enabling the Committee to produce this Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
7th February, 2024 
Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
   
   
   
BHUBANESWAR KALITA 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
ACRONYMS 
AETCOM 
AEBAS 
AIIMS 
BCLS 
Attitude, Ethics and Communication 
Aadhar Enabled Biometric Attendance System 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
Basic Cardiac Life Support 
CBME 
CCTV 
DHR 
Competency-based Medical Education 
Closed Circuit Television 
Department of Health Research 
DRPSC 
ECLS 
EMRB 
FMGL 
FC 
FDP 
GDP 
HWCs 
ICMR 
KGMU 
LHMC 
Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
Extracorporeal Life Support 
Ethics and Medical Registration Board 
Foreign Medical Graduate Licentiate 
Foundational Courses 
Faculty Development Programs 
Gross Domestic Product 
Health and Wellness Centres 
Indian Council of Medical Research 
King George Medical University 
Lady Hardinge Medical College 
LMP 
LoP 
MARB 
MEU 
MBBS 
MCI 
MCQ 
MoU 
NBE 
NEET 
NExT 
NMC 
NIRF 
PGMEB 
QCI 
UGMEB 
UT 
WFME 
Licentiate of Medical Practice  
Letter of Permission 
Medical Assessment and Rating Board 
Medical Education Units 
Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor or Surgery 
Medical Council of India  
Multiple Choice Questions 
Memorandum of Understanding 
National Board of Examinations 
National Eligibility cum Entrance Test 
National Exit Test 
National Medical Commission 
National Institutional Ranking Framework 
Post-Graduate Medical Education Board 
Quality Council of India 
Under-Graduate Medical Education Board 
Union Territory 
World Federation for Medical Education  
 
 

1 
 
Chapter-I 
Introduction 
Significance of Assessing the Quality of Medical Education 
1.1 Quality  assuranceof the  3As of healthcare - affordability, accessibility, and 
availability is a major prerogative for a nycountry more so, i n a country as diverse 
and populous as India, where healthcare challenges are multi faceted, maintaining 
high-quality standards becomes imperative. Quality healthcare not only prevents 
medical errors and complications but also enhances patient satisfaction and trust in 
the healthcare sy stem. It fosters timely diagnosis, appropriate treatments, and the 
utilization of evidence -based practices, all of which contribute to better health 
outcomes. Moreover, it reduces the econom ic burden on patients by minimizing 
the need for repeat treatments and hospitalizations.  
 
1.2 Medical Education in India is comprehensive, comprising education in 
various streams of Indian systems of medicine and modern allopathic medical 
education. Being a vast field with many mainstream and allied branches, the focus 
of the Committee in this study is to assess the quality, availability, and accessibility 
of medical education in undergraduate and postgraduate programs in allopathic 
system of medicine across  the country. The allopathic system represents a 
significant portion of medical education in the country and pl ays a pivotal role in 
shaping the healthcare landscape. The Committee aims to comprehensively address 
critical issues and improvements needed in this segment of medical education. 
 
Evolution of Modern Medical Education in India 
1.3 Significant transformations and legislative changes have marked the 
evolution of modern medical education in India . It reflects the country's quest to 
provide high-quality healthcare to its population and align with global standards.  
The British introduced Western -style medicine to the Indian subcontinent, leading 
to the establishment of institutions such as the Calcutta Medical College (1835) 
and the Madras Medical College (1835). To regulate medical practice, the 

2 
 
Licentiate of Medical Practice (LMP) was introduced , followed by the Medical 
Registration Act in 1858. 
1.4 Indian Medical Council Act: In 1916, the Indian Medical Council Act was 
enacted, which subsequently led to the establishment of the Medical Council of 
India (MCI) in 1933. The MCI was entrusted with overs eeing and regulating 
medical education standards, defining curricula, and ensuring the quality of 
medical practice nationwide. This marked a si gnificant step toward standardizing 
and formalizing medical education in India. 
1.5 Committee on Health Care and Infrastructure: The first effort to study 
the healthcare infrastructure in India was the formation of a Health Survey and 
Development Committee in 1943 under the chairmanship of Sir Joseph William 
Bhore. The Committee, in its report submitted in 1946, char tered a course for 
public health investment and infrastructure in India. It inter alia  dealt with the 
establishment of Primary Health Centers and major central institutes for 
postgraduate medical education and research. The Committee also paved the way 
to abolish Licentiate in Medical Practice and to replace it with a single 
qualification of an MBBS degree. The Committee, however, overlooked the 
indigenous practitioners of medicine who formed the mainstay of health care in 
those times. 
1.6 Post-Independence Expansion (1947 Onwards): This period saw the 
establishment of  numerous medical colleges and universities throughout India, 
aimed at producing a larger pool of healthcare professionals. All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, New Delhi ,was set up in 1956 through the AIIMS Act, 1956 . 
During this period , the MCI continued to play a crucial role in regulating and 
accrediting these medical institutions while setting educational and ethica l 
standards for medical profession. 
1.7 National Medical Commission Act, 2019: One of the most significant 
legislative reforms recently  was the introduction of the National Medical 
Commission (NMC) Act in 2019. This Act replaced the MCI, ushering in a new 
era in medical education and practice regulation. The major objectives of the NMC 
Act are to provide for a medical education system that improves access to quality 
and affordable medical education, ensure availability of adequate and high-quality 

3 
 
medical professionals in all parts of the country; to promote equitable and 
universal healthcare that encourages community health perspective and makes 
services of medical professionals accessible to all the citizens; that promotes 
national health goals . The Act also  encourages medical professionals to adopt 
latest medical research in t heir work and to contribute to research; and has an 
objective periodic and transparent assessment of medical institutions . The said Act 
facilitates maintenance of a medical register for India and enforces high ethical 
standards in all aspects of medical services; that is flexible to adapt to changing 
needs and has an effective grievance redressal mechanism. 
Current Medical Education System in India 
1.8 India's medical education system presents a peculiar paradox on the global 
front. On the one hand, it prides itself on producing a significant number of 
physicians, making a substantial contribution to the global healthcare workforce. 
On the  other hand, many Indian students pursue their medicaleducation abroad, 
even though India is home to prestigious institutions. This paradox deepens when 
considering that India hosts some of the world's finest medical colleges yet  
concerns persist about the  quality of medical education and healthcare delivery 
within the country. 
1.9 India has one of the largest medical education systems in the world. 
According to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare ,there were702 medical 
colleges in the country at the time of this study in 2023-24. However, the quality of 
medical education in India varies widely, and the system faces several challenges, 
the most prominent among them being the uneven distribution of medical colleges. 
Medical colleges in India are concentrated in urban areas which creates a vacuum 
in the rural areas . The creation  of medical colleges in rural areas can solve the 
problem of the dearth of rural access to medical education.  Another significant 
challenge is the non -availability of su fficient funds for m edical research in India 
and there is an urgent need to create a research ecosystem in medical colleges. This 
necessitates continuous upgradation of the curriculum with the latest advances in 
medical science. 
1.10 Medical education regulation in India is overseen by various authorities and 
bodies to ensure the quality of medical education, the competency of healthcare 

4 
 
professionals, and the delivery of healthcare services. Here's an overview of the 
key aspects of medical education regulation in India: 
 
Figure-1.1: Medical Education Regulation in India 
Quality of Medical Education: Global Perspectives  
1.11 Traditionally, European countries and the USA have excelled in the field of 
medical education (in the context of Western medicine) which dates back as far as 
the nineteenth century. A comparative map displaying the number of medical 
doctors per 10,000 of the population of the country, accessed fro m the website of 
the World Health Organisation reveals that the develop ed countries show better 
doctor-to-population ratio.  To gain an insight into the structure of the medical 
education system in countries with high doctor -population ratios, the Committe e 
had a panoramic view of some of the Countries for a comparative study.  
National Medical Commission 
•Principal Regulatory Authority of Medical Education in India
Dental Council of India
•Regulates dental education and practice in India.
Pharmacy Council of India
•Responsible for regulating pharmacy education in India
Allied Health Professionals Council of India 
•Responsible for regulating allied health professions education in India
Indian Nursing Council
•Responsible for regulating Nursing education in India
National Board of Examinations in Medical Sciences (NBEMS)
•NBEMS conducts entrance examinations for postgraduate medical courses also conducts fellowship and 
diploma examinations in various medical specialties

5 
 
 
Source: World Health Organization  
Figure 1.2: Medical Doctors per 10,000 
U.S.A. 
1.12 Medical Education in the U.S.A. comprises 3 phases: Medical School 
(undergraduate medical education), residency (Graduate Medical Education -
GME), and continuous education and improvement (continuing medical 
education). Medical school is usually a four -year course; on completion of 4 years 
the doctors then choose their desired area of speciality  to take up residency in that 
field termed as ‗Graduate Medical Education‘. The American Association of 
Medical Colleges governs the conduct of an entrance examination called as 
Medical College Admission Test (MCAT). According to the website of AAMC, 
the MCAT is a standardized, multiple -choice, computer-based test that has been a 
part of the medical school admissions process for more than 90 years and is taken 
up by more than 85,000 students every year. The MCAT scores are shared with 
medical colleges all over the country to which the students apply separately.  
AAMC states that the MCAT exam has undergone several changes and of late two 
new sections covering critical thinking as well as behavioural and social sciences 
have also been added. Medical educatio n programs leading to an MD are 
accredited by the Liaison Committee on Medical Education (LCME) and jointly 


6 
 
sponsored by the AAMC certified by the U.S. Department of Education. The USA 
with a population of 333,287,557 has 173 medical colleges to impart med ical 
education. However, it is worthmentioning here that the U.S.A. has a high influx of 
International Medical Graduates due to lucrative income and the state-of-the-art 
medical facilities in the country.  Despite this fact, AAMC has predicted that by 
the year 2034, U.S.A. may face a shortage of 124,000 physicians in primary care. 
A speciality-wise number of physicians currently practicing in U .S.A. is depicted 
in the Figure 1.1 below: 
 
 
Source: Website of Association of American Medical Colleges 
Figure 1.3:Speciality-wise number of physicians practicing in USA. 
1.13 Another notable feature, according to the website of AAMC , is the resident 
database and tracking system introduced in March 2000 known as GME Track. 
This dataset has reduced duplicative reporting by replacing the AAMC's and 
AMA's previously separate GME surveys. The GME track provides a real -time 
database on medi cal graduates under residency and provides medical students, 
residents, and the academic medicine community with information about specific 


7 
 
programs through online search tools (e.g., FREIDA ™, the AMA Residency & 
Fellowship Database ®; and AAMC‘s Residency Explorer). GME Track data is 
widely used by policy analysts to make informed decisions and conduct research 
studies and outcomes evaluations. 
United Kingdom 
1.14 Medical Education inthe United Kingdom (UK) is a 4-year to 5-year course. 
The General Medical Council (GMC) established under the Medical Council Act 
of 1983 comprising 11 members (appointed following an independent appointment 
process) isprimarily responsible for deciding which doctors are qualified to work in 
the UK,  overseeing UK medical education and training,  setting the standards 
doctors need to follow throughout their careers andtake action, where necessary, to 
prevent a doctor from putting the safety of patients, or the public's confidence  in 
doctors, at risk. As a governing authority , they also play a key role in quality 
assurance, registration, licensing, and setting up the professional standards of 
medical practitioners in the country. Admission to medical colleges is based on the 
results of two types of standardised tests: the British Medical Admission Test 
(BMAT) and the UK Clinical Aptitude Test (UCAT); tests need to be taken 
depending on the university preferred by the students.  There are 38 medical 
schools (excluding 9 medical colle ges that are currently under review by the 
General Medical Council) for the UK population of around 67 million. According 
to the General Medical Council Report titled ‗The State of Medical Education and 
Practice in the UK: Workforce Report 2023 ‘ since  2019, the number of doctors 
joining the workforce each year has been more than double the number who leave, 
and that this growth is strongly driven by international medical graduates (IMGs) 
joining the UK medical profession. According to an article in the journal of the 
Royal College of Surgeons, the UK has 2.8 doctors per 1,000 people which it states 
as being comparatively lower than the average of 3.4 per 1,000 persons. 
                                                 
Source: Website of General Medical Council of UK 

8 
 
China 
1.15 According to an article in the Lancet Journal , China has multiple, distinct 
medical education pathways that can last from 3 to 8 years. China had merely 22 
medical colleges in 1 949 and by 2020 more than 200 medical colleges were in 
existence. Also, China enrolls  approximately 8,00,000 lakh students every year. 
This has helped Chin a achieve a ratio of 2.2 doctors per thousand population 
(Source: World Bank 2019). According to an article in the Journal of  the 
Association of American Medical Colleges, China has complex levels of programs 
designed to train doctors which include a 3-year junior college medical program, 5-
year medical bachelor‘s degree program, ―5 + 3‖ medical master‘s degree program, 
and 8-year medical doctoral degree program. The article also states that at present 
postgraduate education in China includes standa rdized residency, general 
practitioner training, and specialist training.  
1.16 The Committee has observed that countries across the world have 
adopted the Flexner Model changing it suitably whenever required. The 
Committee, on scrutiny of various governing authorities for medical 
education across the countries mentioned above, has observed that the 
National Medical Commission of India meets international professional 
standards in medical education. The Committee has further observed that 
barring a few countries at the global level,the shortage of doctors at present or 
for the future seems to be an all -pervading problem. The developed countries 
are able tomeet this shortfall by serving as attractive destinations for medical 
graduates from developing countries and by easing the process for the 
practice of medicine by the International Medical Graduates. In the context of 
the standardised tests for medical education, the Committee has taken note of 
the fact that behavioural and social sciences are also becoming part of the 
testing process of various countries to assess the ethics, i ntegrity, etc. of the 
medical aspirants.  
1.17 The Committee recommends National Medical Commission undertake 
a comparative study of best practices of its parallel organisation in various 
                                                 
China’s Bewildering Medical Education Pathways, Dan Shan, The Lancet, Volume 401, Issue 10381, P999-1000, 
March 25 2023. 

9 
 
countries. The Committee feels that this measure can help NMC to ush er in 
best practices followed around the world and help in making NMC an 
institution par excellence.  
1.18 As regards the maintenance of a national database of resident doctors, 
the Committee recommends that NMC maintain a real-time national database 
akin to the GME Track of the USA. This national database can allow access to 
multiple stakeholders viz, Ministry, States, Medical Colleges, and other 
concerned parties. This database can alsoserve as a tool to decimate the 
limitation of resources in the newly opened institutions and operate as a 
platform for experience and knowledge sharing among the resident doctors.  
Against this background, the Committee would also like to highlight the issue 
of dual registration of doctors with the re spective State Medical Council 
where they practice  and any other place where they may relocate 
subsequently. This gives rise to multiple registrations of doctors with various 
State Medical Councils, making tracking difficult.   The Committee would like 
to recommend the generation of a ‗unique registration number‘ for the 
doctors at the NMC level. This move can also leverage the national database  
and usher in uniformity in the registration of practicing doctors. 
1.19 The modern allopathic medical education is primarily governed by the 
National Medical Commission. NMC was constituted by an act of Parliament 
known as the National Medical Commission Act,2019 , which came into force on 
25.9.2020. It constitutes four autonomous boards (Figure:1.2) which work under 
the overall supervision of NMC.   
 
National Medical 
Commission 
(NMC)
Under-Graduate 
Medical Education 
Board (UGMEB)
Post-Graduate 
Medical Education 
Board (PGMEB)
Medical Assessment 
and Rating Board 
(MARB)
Ethics and Medical 
Registration Board 
(EMRB)

10 
 
Figure 1.4: Structure of NMC 
1.20 The Commission consists of 33 appointees , including one Chairperson. The 
primary objectives of the NMC encompass several critical facets of the medical 
education system. These goals are designed to create a system that enhances access 
to quality and affordable medical education while ensuring the presence of 
sufficient high-quality medical professionals throughout the nation .In addition, the 
NMC aims t o promote healthcare characterized by e quity and universality, 
emphasizing a community health perspective that makes medical services 
accessible to all citiz ens, regardless of their backgrounds or geographical 
locations.Aligned with national health objectives, the NMC encourages medical 
professionals to integrate the latest medical research into their practice and actively 
contribute to ongoing research efforts, ensuring that healthcare practices remain 
up-to-date and effective.To uphold these standards, the NMC emphasizes the need 
for periodic and transparent assessments of medical institutions and facilitates the 
maintenance of a comprehensive medical register for India. Furthermore, it 
enforces rigorous ethical standards across  all aspects of medical services.  The aim 
is to design a flexible medical education system  adaptable to changing needs, 
incorporating an effective grievance redressal mechanism.  
1.21 The Committee notes that the National Medical Commission (NMC) has 
an excellent opportunity to improve the quality of medical education in India. 
However, it must address various issues related to modernising medical 
education and introduce reforms to bring remarkable improvements in the 
overall healthcare system in the countr y. The NMC can take several essential 
and immediate steps to strengthen medical education in India, including 
setting and enforcing high standards for medical education, promoting 
research in medical education, supporting faculty development, and making 
medical education more accessible. The Committee believes that by taking 
these steps, the NMC can help to produce a new generation of highly qualified 
and competent medical graduates. 
 

11 
 
 
Figure-1.5: Benefits of Ensuring Quality in Medical Education 
1.22 The Committee notes that the importance of quality in medical 
education must be considered when considering its direct impact on the 
quality of healthcare services. High-quality medical education is the 
foundation upon which competent and compassionate hea lthcare 
professionals are built. It equips them with the necessary knowledge, skills, 
and ethical principles essential for providing safe and effective care to 
patients. The Committeerecommends the Ministry develop a robust medical 
education system and emphasise evidence-based practices, critical thinking, 
and continuous learning, ensuring that healthcare practitioners stay up to 
date with medical advancements. In this way, quality medicaleducation would 
Improve 
Patient 
Outcomes
•Reduce medical errors
•Increase patient 
satisfaction
•Reduce healthcare costs
Enhance 
Public Trust
•Increase confidence in the 
medical profession
•Improve public health
•Reduce healthcare 
disparities
Boost 
Professional 
Development
•Improve knowledge and skills of 
healthcare professionals
•Increase job satisfaction and 
motivation
•Enhance career opportunities
Strong 
Educational 
Institutions
•Improve reputation and 
credibility
•Increase research funding
•Attract and retain top faculty 
and students

12 
 
not only secure the present generation‘s healthcar e needs but also be an 
investment in the future of healthcare. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
Chapter-II 
Infrastructure for Medical Education 
Medical Colleges and Seats in India 
2.1 The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare , in his deposition 
before the Committee, apprised that there are 702 medical colleges in the country 
in 2023-24, up by 81% from 387 in 2013-14.  Similarly, the number of seats for an 
undergraduate course (MBBS) increased  by almost 110% from 51348 in 2013 -14 
to 1 ,08,990 in 2023 -24, wher eas the number of post graduate seats increased by 
almost 118% from 31185 to 68073 from 2013-14 to 2023-24. 
2.2 As per the latest data by the National Testing Agency, 20,87,462 candidates 
registered for the exam this year , out o f which 20,38,596 candidates appeared in 
the examination and 11,45,976 candid ates finally managed to clear the NEET UG 
examination.  
 
Figure 2.1:Number of Aspirants vs Available MBBS Seats 
107658
2038596
1145976
0
500000
1000000
1500000
2000000
2500000
Number of Aspirants vs Available MBBS Seats
Number of MBBS Seats in 2023-24
Number of candidates appeared in NEET UG 2023
Number of candidates qualified in NEET UG 2023

14 
 
2.3 As per theNational Board of Examinations (NBE) a total of 2,08,898 
candidates appeared for the NEET PG 2023. A ccording to the data furnished by 
the Ministry of Health and Family Wel fare, there are 68073 postgraduate seats in 
the country.  
 
Figure 2.2Number of Aspirants vs Available PG Seats 
2.4 The Committeenotes that the current situation regarding medical seats 
both in UG and PG in our country is a critical issue that warrants immediate 
attention. With an annual influx of approximately 2 million aspiring medical 
students at UG and only 1/20times available s eats, the demand far exceeds the 
availability of seats, similarly, the number of available seats at PG level is far 
less than the demand. The Committeeacknowledges the urgency of addressing 
this challenge while maintaining the quality of medical education at its highest 
standard. To address this issue effectively, several measures can be taken. 
First and foremost, there is a need to significantly increas e medical seats in 
both undergraduate and postgraduate courses. The government's existing 
scheme, which focuses on the establishment of new medical colleges attached 
to district or referral hospitals, can be instrumental in achieving this goal. By 
68073
208898
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
Number of Aspirants vs Available PG Seats
Number of PG seats in India Number of Candidates appeared in NEET PG 2023

15 
 
expanding this initiative, the Government can create more opportunities for 
aspiring medical students. 
2.5 The Committeefurther recommends that it is essential to make optimal 
use of the existing infrastructure. Ensuring that all available resources and 
facilities are utilized efficiently can help accommodate a larger number of 
students without compromising the quality of education. Additionally, 
streamlining the admission process by implementing a standardized national 
entrance examination can improve fairness and  transparency in seat 
allocation.  
2.6 Encouraging private investment in medical education is another avenue 
to explore. Providing incentives and regulatory support to private institutions 
willing to establish medical colleges can not only increase seat av ailability but 
also introduce healthy competition and innovation in medical education. The 
Committeealso recommends the Ministry leverage technology for distance 
learning and organise virtual classrooms that can be a supplementary solution 
to address the s hortage of seats, allowing a more significant number of 
students to access medical education without overburdening physical 
infrastructure. 
Imbalance in Distribution of Medical Colleges 
2.7 The States with larger populations should have more medical colleges as it 
aligns with the principle of ensuring that healthcare and medical education 
resources are proportionate to the  population's needs . States with higher 
populations often face increased healthcare demands, and having more medical 
colleges can h elp address these needs, providing access to medical care and 
educational opportunities for a more significant number of residents. Other factors, 
such as the distribution of healthcare facilities, the prevalence of diseases, and the 
socio-economic conditi ons of the population, must also be considered to ensure 
equitable healthcare access and medical education opportunities for all citizens. 
(Refer Tables A & B at Annexure) 

16 
 
Figure 2.3: State-wise total Medical Seats 
 
Figure 2.4: State-wise number of registered doctors practicing in India. 
 
2.8 Below is the data representation of the five most populous States and the 
number of medical colleges functioning in these States. 
  
 

17 
 
 
Figure 2.5   Imbalance in the distribution of medical colleges: Population vs 
MBBS Seats in some States 
2.9 According to the NMC Notification dated 16 August 2023 on " Guidelines 
for Undergraduate Courses under the Establishment of New Medical Institutions, 
Starting of New Medical Courses, Increase of Seats for Existing Courses & 
Assessment and Rating Regulations, 2023 ", medical colleges shall follow the ratio 
of 100 MBBS seats for every 10-lakh population in that State or Union Territory 
(UT). 
2.10 The Guideline reads- "After AY 2023-24, the Letter of Permission (LOP) for 
starting new medical colleges shall be issued only for an annual intake capacity of 
50/100/150 seats". 
2.11 The Committee has taken note of  the detailed Minimum Standards 
Regulations (UG -MSR) notified on 16 th August 2023. While examining the  
subject, the Committee came across several c oncerns over some of the 
guidelines for opening of a new Medical College and  also regarding  
permission to increase the number of undergraduate seats. The permission for 
Uttar Pradesh
Tamil Nadu
Bihar Maharashtra
Rajasthan
0
50000000
10000000
15000000
20000000
25000000
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Population of the State*
Number of medical Colleges as per NMC
Population vs MBBS Seats in some States
* as per population projectoin for
Indian States 2011-2036 Report by
MoH&FW (2021 year)

18 
 
an increase in MBBS seats will be granted for 50, 100 and 150 seats f rom the 
academic year 2024-25. The Committee notes that based on the guidelines for 
200 and 250 seats at various places have provisions for infrastructure and 
faculty positions. The Committee further notes that many medical colle ges 
have 200 and 250 seats. The Committee was apprised that the ideal batch size 
for a faculty to impart teaching is 150. The Committee, however, believes that 
as per the guidelines, given the infrastructure and faculty position required in 
place, a colleg e, whether old or new, may be considered for granting 
permission to increase, in phases, the undergraduate seats up to a maximum 
of 250. 
2.12 The WHO norms recommend a doctor -population ratio of 1:1000, and 
as per the NMC, the country has  already achieved a ratio of 1:856. However, 
the concern area associated with opening a new medical college is the number 
of prescribed department-wise and total patient Bed capacity, read along with 
the requirement of their 80 per cent average occupancy in the attached 
hospital. The Committee would recommendthe Government that such one-
size-fits-all criterion prescribed in the UG -MSR may be revisited to take into 
account the geographic imbalances, if any, and formulate region -specific 
guidelines/ norms. 
2.13 The Committee also recommends the Government to chalk out a 
comprehensive India-specific approach that considers the nation's healthcare 
needs in the next 20 -25 years, identifies the categories of doctors, viz. 
pediatricians, ophthalmologists, neurosurgeon s, critical care specialists, 
infectious disease specialists that the country would need  rather than just 
randomly increasing general surgery, pharma, and anatomy seats. The 
Committee believes that  such a concerted effort to produce need -based 
specialists/ doctors commensurate with disease -burden specialists will secure 
India's healthcare needs in the future. The Committee recommends that in the 
case of the current scenario modalities for a fair distribution of doctors‘ 
workforce across the country especial ly in underprivileged areas can be 
worked out by the NMC by offering incentives, monetary or otherwise. 
2.14 The Committee notes that a travel time of 30 minutes between the 
college campus and the attached hospital has been prescribed in the 

19 
 
guidelines. The Committee while taking cognisance of the rationale behind 
this travel time criteria fails to understand the logic behind keeping separate 
distance criteria of 30 kilometres (Tier-I cities) and 50 kilometres ( for other 
cities) between RHTC/UHTC/CHC and the medical college. The Committee 
recommends the National Medical Commission review t his criterion  and 
consider incorporating suitable travel time instead of distance.  
Evaluation of the existing curriculum and its relevance to healthcare needs, 
the need for transformation 
2.15 The earlier medical education system focused on specific subjects and a 
fixed timetable. The new undergraduate (UG) curriculum, however, has a different 
goal: it emphasizes all three aspects of learning - cognitive (knowledge), affective 
(attitudes), and psychomotor (skills), rather than concentrating solely on 
knowledge as the previous curriculum did. In the past, evaluations mainly focused 
on end-of-term assessments and pr ovided little room for feedback. Teaching and 
assessment prioritized knowledge over skills and attitudes. As a result, graduates 
lacked certain  essential clinical and soft skills like effective communication, 
building doctor -patient relationships, professi onalism, and ethics despite having 
solid theoretical knowledge. To solve these issues, the Undergraduate Medical 
Education Board (UGMEB) of the NMC published the final Competency -Based 
Medical Education (CBME) Regulations, 2023, on 01 August 2023. CBME 
defines competency as the observable ability of a healthcare professional that 
integrates knowledge, skills, values, and abilities, ensuring that graduates meet the 
demands of patient care in society. 
2.16 The Committee notes that the NMC guideline s on Compet ency-Based 
Medical Education (CBME) Regulations, 2023,  are comprehensive and 
comparable to best global practices and thus a welcome step in upgrading the 
curriculum of medical education in India.  The Committee, however, believes 
there are some areas where the guidelines could be improved to make them 
more feasible and effective in the Indian context. The current policies need to 
be more transparent in implementing CBME in practice. Implementing 
CBME can be challenging for medical colleges, especially those with limited 
resources. Specific guidance to develop the CBME curricula, assessments, and 
teaching methods would prove to be useful in reaping early benefits . 

20 
 
Furthermore, the Committee feels that the transition to CBME will require 
significant changes to medical education programs; therefore, medical 
colleges will need support, including augmentingfaculty training and access to 
resources from the NMC and other stakeholders in making this transition. 
The Committee also notes that medical colleges in India vary widely regarding 
resources, faculty expertise, and student demographics. The CBME guidelines 
should consider this diversity and be flexible enough to be implemented in 
different settings.To maintain the true spirit of CBME , the Committee feels 
that there should be a  regular periodic review and monitoring of t he medical 
curriculum. 
 
2.17 The new UG curriculum aims to help students transition from acquiring 
knowledge to acquiring practical skills. Achieving this shift depends on aligning 
and integrating various disciplines. Key elements of the revised curriculum include 
foundational courses (FC), early exposure to clinical practice (ECE), training in 
attitudes, ethics, and communication (AETCOM), elective opportunities, and 
alignment and integration of different areas of study. Additionally, the curriculum 
promotes electives, self -directed learning, problem -based learning, structured 
feedback, and maintaining a logbook.  
 
2.18 The Committee acknowledges the critical elements introduced in the 
new curriculum to help students acquire practical skills. The Committee 
strongly recommends the rigorous and comprehensive implementation of the 
AETCOM module within the MBBS curriculum. This module is paramount 
as it is pivotal in cultivating the right attitu de, ethics, and communication 
skills among medical students. Patient care is not solely about clinical 
knowledge and technical skills; it hinges on empathy, compassion, and 
effective communication. By instilling these qualities in future healthcare 
professionals, we can significantly enhance the overall quality of patient care. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends the Government ensure that the 
AETCOM module is enforced consistently and effectively to empower medical 
students with the essential attributes ne eded to provide holistic and patient -
centered healthcare. In addition to the implementation of AETCOM, the 
Committee recommends the incorporation of these criteria in NEET so that 
the aptitude of aspiring medical students can be assessed. Such aptitudetestsat 

21 
 
the entrance level go beyond mere knowledgeassessment of aspirants, often 
obtained through rote learning and mastering MCQ -based exams, and  
evaluate the genuine interest and passion of the candidate for the field of 
medicine. It will enable the system to identify candidates who have a sincere 
calling for the profession and distinguish them from those who may be under 
external pressure or legacy expectations. By doing so, we can ensure that 
medical work continues to attract individuals who are genuinely committed to 
delivering high-quality healthcare.  
 
2.19 In a general context, the Committee  has observed that the re is a 
frequent change in the regulations notified by the National Medical 
Commission. The Committee would recommend that before notification of 
any regulation,a robust and thorough study involving the opinions/ viewpoints 
of various stakeholdersshould be undertaken. 
 
2.20 The Committee was apprised of the  fact that some private medical 
colleges seemingly fail medical graduates deliberately during mid -semester 
exams which results in repetition of the semester, and charging additional fees 
for repeating the semester or exam . This practice causes tress on the medical 
students, financial and otherwise. The Commit tee therefore recommends that 
UGMEB may  develop appropriate feasible modalities for monitoring 
assessment, revaluation, etc. without charging any additional fee. 
 
Research Support and facilities 
 
2.21 One of the objectives of NMC is to encourage medical professionals to 
adopt the latest medical research in their work and to contribute to research. 
Medical colleges serve as vital hubs for medical research worldwide. In India, 
there are o ver 700 such institutions that produce more than 1,00,000 medical 
graduates annually. Among these graduates, more than 70,000 pursue various 
postgraduate degrees, diplomas, or fellowships. Furthermore, several corporate 
hospitals also offer postgraduate me dical programs. However, despite this 
substantial pool of medical professionals, the medical research output still needs to 
improve. Moreover, most of the research work at the college level is limited to a 
few top colleges in the country.  

22 
 
2.22 Medical education involves "Trinity Mission", the first component is patient 
care; the second is teaching and learning, and the third aspect is research. Quality 
research has major implications for enhancing the quality of patient care.Therefore, 
research plays a  crucial role in medical education, and it must be given due 
attention as part of the Trinity Mission". 
 
2.23 The Committee observes that i n recent years ,ICMR and DHR have started 
giving small funds for dissertations. They have  also set up a network of 
laboratories inside many medical colleges. However, overall budgetary allocation 
in India is still substantially low.  As informed by the Department of Health 
Research (DHR), the statement indicating allocation at the BE stage during the last 
three years and a ctual expenditure w.r.t percentage of GDP of India (previous five 
years) is as follows: - 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year BE 
Allocation 
BE 
allocation as 
percentage 
of Total 
Health 
Budget 
Actual 
Expenditure 
 
Actual health 
research 
expenditure 
as percentage 
of GDP 
Health research 
expenditure as 
percentage of GDP 
for US, UK and 
China  
2021-22 2663.00 3.60 % 2690.60 0.02 % As per the World 
Bank data, current 
health expenditure 
2017 (from internet) 
health research 
expenditure in US 
and UK as a 
percentage of GDP 
is 0.65 % and 0.44 
% respectively. 
2022-23 3200.65 3.71 % 2332.62  
(upto 
31.01.2023 
0.02 % 
2023-24 2980.00 3.34 % -  0.02 % 
Source: Department of Health Research (DHR) 
 
2.24 The Committee notes that research is an integral part of medical 
education and thushas to be sufficiently supported by both the Government 
and medical colleges.  The Committee further notes that the actual health 
research expenditure as a percentage of GDP has constant lyremained at 0.02 
since 2021 -22. The Committee feels that medical research an d innovation 

23 
 
needsfurther impetus and there is an urgent need to substantially increase the 
Government expenditure on  health research infrastructure  or provide 
incentives/ ecosystem for collaboration with leading private research firms.  
2.25 The Committee recommends the NMC encourage the medical colleges 
to develop a tradition of research in the college so that upcoming MBBS 
students and later MD / MS students gain sufficient exposure in the research 
ambience of the institute. Furthermore, col leges should incentivize quality 
research both at the student and faculty level.  
2.26 To have result -oriented and gainful research, the Committee also 
recommends the Government form guidelines to decide on ‗priority research 
fields‘ based  on disease burde n and focus areas of the country. For this, 
colleges can form a collegium of senior faculties and decide on the research 
priority; funds for such research should be partly provided by the institute 
and partly by Government agencies like ICMR. 
Affordability of Medical Education 
2.27 The average MBBS course fees across Government colleges in I ndia (both 
centrally funded, and State Government funded)  can reachRs. 50,000 per annum. 
However, such subsidized medical education can only be availed by a select few 
who perform exceedingly well in the NEET UG exam. As per the information 
furnished by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, there are only 56,193 
Government seats in MBBS and as per NTA, more than  11 lakh candidates 
qualified for the NEET UG exam in 2023. Therefore, more than 10 lakh MBBS 
aspirants are left either to opt for MBBS seats in private medical colleges where 
the course fees can range up to 1.5 crores or to pursue their dream in countries  like 
China, Ukraine, and Russia, where the cost is lower in comparison to private 
colleges in India. 
Name of College Annual Tuition Fees in 2023 for 
MBBS 
AIIMS, New Delhi (Central Institution) Rs.1,350 

24 
 
KGMU, Lucknow (State Institution) Rs. 24,000 
Dr. DY Patil Vidyapeeth, Pune (Private 
Institution) Rs. 26,50,000 
 
2.28 According to a LANCET study in 2018, the  cost of medical education of 
doctors in India doubled from USD 35,000 in 2008 to USD 70,000 (around 60 
lakhs in INR). In contrast, the expenditure per student in 2018 was USD 41,000 
in China.  
2.29 The Committee was apprised that there is significant variation among 
the States/UTs in the  amount of  fee charged ; the cost of medical education 
ranges between a whooping 60 lakh and one crore rupees, or more. In order 
to alleviate the financial stress on t he students, t he Committee recommends 
that the M inistry, in collaboration with S tates, consider need -based 
scholarships to deserving students. Other suggestive options that can be 
explored are – running the medical coll ege and hospital on a PPP model, 
giving tax benefits to the company/group , etc.  The Committee, however, 
further recommends prescribing minimum marks in the NEET -UG exam for 
each category of students seeking admission. 
2.30 The Committee further recommends the Ministryformulate a 
comprehensive framework to address bureaucratic hurdles and effectively 
implement the partnership of private medical colleges with the district 
hospitals. The Committee believes that  this initiative will not only provide 
sufficient clinical material to the MBBS students but also decrease the setting 
up and functioning cost of private colleges, thereby rationalizing the costs of 
medical education. Additionally, as another measure to reduce the cost of 
medical education in p rivate colleges, the Committee recommends the 
Government subsidize the necessary equipment/ machines for  the setting up 
of ―Skill Labs‖ in private colleges as they are  sophisticated and costly and 
areoften imported. In addition, the Government should creat e need -based 
scholarship programs to assist economically disadvantaged students in 

25 
 
covering their tuition fees. These scholarships could be funded through 
government and private sector contributions, creating an accessible path to 
medical education for all. 
  

26 
 
Chapter-III 
Faculty Issues in Medical Education 
Faculty Shortage and the Issue of Ghost Faculty 
3.1 Faculty is central to quality in medical education. Experienced, 
knowledgeable, and qualified teachers play a crucial role in providing quality 
medical education. The importance of such faculty cannot be overstated, as they 
contribute significantly to the development of competent and ethical healthcare 
professionals. However, due to Government‘s recent efforts to increase the number 
of Medical Colleges and the number of Undergraduate and Post Graduate seats 
have resulted in an alarming shortage of faculty m embers in Indian medical 
colleges.  Director Professor, Vardhman Mahavir Medical College & Safdarjung 
Hospital, New Delhi apprised the Committeethat there is a severe shortage of 
faculty positions in various Medical Colleges spread all over India.  
3.2 According to the reply of the Union Health Minister in Rajya Sabha in 
August 2023, about 5,527 faculty positions in all AIIMS have been sanctioned, of 
which, 2,161 are vacant currently. AIIMS, New Delhi which is a premier institute 
also faces severe faculty crunch with almost 347 faculty positions lying vacant and 
this accounts for almost 28% of the total sanctioned strength. 
3.3 A recent assessment of 246 medical colleges in 2022 -23 by the 
Undergraduate Medical Education Board (UGMEB) under the National Medic al 
Commission (NMC) revealed that no medical college had adequate faculty 
members or senior residents, and all failed to meet the 50% attendance 
requirement. The assessment brought to light that most of the colleges had either 
ghost faculty or senior residents or had yet to employ the required faculty at all. 
While none of the institutes met the minimum 50% attendance requirement, zero 
attendance of faculty was common in most of the medical colleges. 
3.4 According to NITI Aayog's "Barriers to Recruitment, Onboarding , and 
Retention of Faculty in Government Medical Colleges of India" report, the primary 
reasons for the severe shortage of faculty in medical colleges are as follows: - 

27 
 
 
a) There are significant delays in the recruitment process, often extending from the 
approval stage to the actual job advertisements, lasting as long as 2 to 4 years. 
b) Well-compensated positions in the private sector are attracting professionals in 
the fields of surgery and super-specialties. 
c) The preference for jo b postings in major urban centers or near one's hometown 
is a prevailing trend. 
d) The alteration in NMC guidelines in 2019 has led to a restriction on recruiting 
faculty members with postgraduate qualifications in basic sciences, permitting only 
MBBS graduates to fill positions. This change has resulted in a need for more 
flexibility in staffing pre- and para -clinical specialties, limiting them to medical 
graduates only. 
3.5  The Committee feels that establishing ad ditional medical colleges is 
undoubtedly a positive stride in addressing the chronic shortage of 
healthcare professionals. However, in this effort , it is crucial to ensure the 
production of genuinely qualified doctors  which is incumbent upon the  
presence of well -qualified and experienced faculty members.  Teachers in 
medical colleges are the cornerstone of a robust medical education system, 
shaping not only the knowledge and skills but also the ethical foundations of 
future medical practitioners. The Committee believes that whether it is the 
expansion of medical colleges or the implementation of progressive 
initiatives like NMC's Competency -Based Medical Education (CBME) 
module, the efficacy of these reforms hinges on the availability of a 
dedicated, skilled teaching force . The shortage of qualified teachers is a 
common thread in both scenarios and addressing this issue is paramount.  In 
this regard, the Committee has taken note of the findings of NMC for 246 
medical colleges.  The Committee views that  NMC's efforts, like AEBAS -
based attendance CCTVs in colleges, have yet to deliver much as issues like 
ghost faculty and zero faculty attendance have only escalated as per the 
NMC's assessment. Therefore, the Committee is of the consensus that the 
faculty shortage issue in India is twofold: first, there is a genuine shortage of 
qualified faculty members, and second, even the available faculty often lacks 

28 
 
the inclination to teach at the college level. To address the issue of ghost 
faculty and ensure that the  available faculty comes to the college to teach, 
the Committee recommends the Government to strictly enforce the 
regulations already in place  to curb the problem of ghost faculty and zero 
attendance. NMC should conduct regular inspections of medical colleges 
and take action against colleges that are found to be violating the 
regulations.  
3.6 Additionally, streamlining the recruitment process is imperative. The 
significant delays in the recruitment process must be reduced through the 
simplification of  bureaucratic procedures and the incorporation of 
technology for quicker application processing and interview scheduling. An 
efficient recruitment processis necessary to expedite faculty appointments 
and fill vacant positions without unnecessary delays. NMC  should make it 
easier for students and parents to report ghost faculty and zero attendance. 
Furthermore, the Committee feels that the Government should  undertake 
some essential steps for retaining faculty  viz. improved working conditions 
for faculty membe rs, transparent career progression paths , etc.C lear 
criteria and milestones for promotions by recognising and rewarding 
excellence in teaching, research, and clinical work need to be chalked out . 
Regular performance evaluations are crucial in identifying and addressing 
concerns promptly.  
Faculty Qualifications and Competence  
3.7 In 2022, the National Medical Commission (NMC) implemented fresh 
guidelines about the eligibility criteria for faculty members in medical institutions. 
These regulations, known as  the "Teacher's Eligibility Qualifications in Medical 
Institutions Regulations, 2022," have been put in place with the overarching goal 
of elevating the standards of medical education and healthcare across the nation. 
The new regulations require all medica l teachers to have a postgraduate degree or 
equivalent qualification in the subject they are teaching. Furthermore, these 
regulations require all medical teachers to complete basic training in medical 
education technology and biomedical research. The new r ules have more rigorous 
criteria for promotions of medical teachers.  

29 
 
3.8 The Committee notes that the NMC's "Teacher's Eligibility 
Qualifications in Medical Institutions Regulations, 2022", are a significant 
step forward in improving the quality of medical education in India. By 
requiring higher qualifications for teachers, man dating training in medical 
education technology and biomedical research, and having more rigorous 
promotion criteria, the new regulations will help to ensure that medical 
teachers in India are highly skilled and qualified. The Committee, however, 
opines th at along with the rigorous promotion criteria, NMC should focus 
more on Teacher -Learning Programmes than on manpower and 
infrastructure. The Commission should also formulate norms to incentivize 
and encourage faculty to take up training for skills improvem ent and devise 
policies creating an ambience to kindle interest in research in the faculties. 
Furthermore, the Committee recommends the NMC design and strictly 
implement exhaustive training programs for faculties to enhance their 
understanding of the principles, functioning, and practices of CBME.  
3.9 To reform the quality of medical education and effectively implement the 
CBME module, NMC, as per its Notification dated 16 August 2023, limited the 
appointment of non -medical teachers in the Department of An atomy, Physiology, 
and Biochemistry to the extent of 15% of the total number of posts and zero 
percent in microbiology and pharmacology subject to non -availability of medical 
teachers. However, the Medical Council of India (which was replaced by the NMC 
in 2019), as per its 1998 regulation, allowed up to 30% appointment of non -
medical faculty in these courses.  Medical MSc degree is included in the first 
schedule of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956. Medical MSc courses were 
opened for non-doctors in the 1960s to counter faculty shortage.  
3.10 The Committee recognizes the regulator's aspiration to introduce 
competency-based learning for MBBS students and foster clinical exposure 
from the early stages of their education. This direction is indeed in line with 
international trends in medical education. However, the sudden  cessation of 
non-MBBS candidates teaching non & non -para-clinical subjects, such as 
anatomy, pharmacology, and microbiology, presents a complex situation. 
While upholding high educational standards is paramount, there is a need for 
a balanced and gradual approach that accommodates the interests and 
expertise of non -MBBS candidates.The Committee recommends a th oughtful 

30 
 
and phased strategy to address this issue. It is advisable to introduce a 
transitional period that allows non -MBBS faculty members to continue 
teaching these subjects until enough MBBS-qualified educators become 
available. This gradual shift will ensure that students continue to receive a 
comprehensive education as the transition toward competency-based learning 
takes place. Furthermore, it is crucial to emphasize faculty development for 
non-MBBS educators, offering them opportunities to enhance th eir teaching 
skills and align their curriculum with evolving standards in medical 
education. This will help them remain effective contributors to medical 
education. Non -MBBS educators often bring unique perspectives and 
expertise to the field. Rather than limiting their involvement, their expertise 
can be integrated into the education system through collaborative efforts, 
interdisciplinary research, and innovative teaching methodologies. 
Faculty Development Programs 
3.11 Medical education constantly evolves  with the emergence of new 
technologies and teaching methods. The quality of medical education plays a 
crucial role in maintaining overall societal health. One practical approach to 
ensuring high -quality education is the implementation of Faculty Development 
Programs (FDPs). The erstwhile Medical Council of India made it mandatory for 
all medical colleges to establish Medical Education Units (MEUs) or departments 
to enable faculty members to avail modern education technology for teaching. To 
boost this acti vity, MCI used Faculty Development Programmes through selected 
Regional Centres since July 2009. However, the new regulator, the National 
Medical Commission, is revising the guidelines on the "Faculty Development 
Programme". In the meantime, the NMC contin ues to offer them through its 
regional centers. 
3.12 WHO's "Transforming and Scaling up Health Professionals' Education and 
Training" guidelines 2023 State that the "selection and recruitment of qualified 
educators and trainers is a crucial part of the sca ling up and transformation of the 
education of health professionals. Recruited staff should have adequate clinical and 
scientific competencies. Still, they rarely have the pedagogical preparation 
(communication, adult learning principles, use of new inform ation technology, 
etc.) required to function in the transformed environment. Faculty development is, 

31 
 
therefore, important to ensure that teachers and trainers are well prepared to 
assume their responsibilities as educators". 
3.13 Director, Lady Hardinge Me dical College, New Delhi, in his deposition to 
the Committee, stated, "Though NMC had implemented CBME in 2019, our 
faculty is tuned to the previous system, they still have some inhibitions. Therefore, 
faculty development programmes shall be enforced with a certain number of 
programmes that one should attend in a year so that they can adapt to the newer 
system".  
3.14 The Committee notes that faculty development is vital for ensuring that 
faculty members have the skills and knowledge they need to teach and train 
students effectively. The Committee understands that in our country, 
elementary, primary, and secondary school teachers must undergo training in 
formal schools or colleges of education to be eligible for appointments and 
promotion. Still, there is no such requirement for selecting teachers in medical 
colleges in India. Therefore, the Committee recommends the NMC to release 
the guidelines on the ―Faculty Development Programme" without any delay. 
The policies should be formulated to support the achievement of the goal to 
enhance the quality and relevance of education for future healthcare 
professionals. These guidel ines should encompass critical areas such as 
clinical instruction, small group facilitation, large group presentations, 
feedback and assessment, personal and organizational growth, leadership, and 
scholarly activities. The strategies and formats for faculty development should 
exhibit flexibility, ensuring they are tailored to the specific healthcare 
requirements of our nation, institution, and learners. Faculty development 
programs (FDPs) can encompass a range of activities, including continuing 
education, on-the-job training, traditional classroom settings, in -person, 
online, or via tele/videoconferences, self -paced learning, mentorship, 
involvement in communities of practice, or a combination of these 
approaches. 
3.15 Furthermore, the Committee notes that conducting faculty training 
through regional bodies and nodal centers has limited availability and 
capacity. Therefore, the Committee recommends establishing a National 
Institute for Training of Medical Teachers. A dedicated institute would 

32 
 
provide year-round access to training for medical college faculty, effectively 
expanding the capacity for teacher development and establishing 
standardized quality benchmarks. This may also lead to the 
institutionalization of training procedures and best practices.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
Chapter-IV 
Quality Control of Medical Education 
Rating and Accreditation of Medical Colleges 
4.1 With India having the largest number of medical colleges in the world and a 
record number of medical graduates passing out from these colleges every year, 
quality assurance of medical education becomes a vital aspect. The NMC, since its 
inception, has play ed a crucial role in quality assurance by setting standards for 
medical education and practice, accrediting medical colleges, conducting 
inspections of medical colleges, and taking corrective action against medical 
colleges that do not meet the standards. 
4.2 In 2023, the National Medical Commission has been granted World 
Federation for Medical Education (WFME) Recognition Status for tenure of 10 
years. The recognition will further enhance the quality and standards of medical 
education in India by aligning them with global best practices and benchmarks . 
Therecognition and reputation of Indian medical schools and professionals  will 
gain further impetus. F acilitation of  academic collaborations and exchanges, 
continuous improvement and innovation in medical edu cation, and fostering a 
culture of quality assurance among medical educators and institutions  are added 
advantages of WFME Recognition Status. 
4.3 Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in his oral evidence, 
apprised the Committee that "the Qual ity Council of India and the NMC's Medical 
Assessment and Rating Board have signed an MoU for assessment of rating the 
medical colleges wherein QCI will provide third party assessment of both private 
and government medical colleges". According to the MoU, from the next academic 
session, all medical colleges in the country, both private and public, will 
mandatorily be rated and ranked. At present, the Union Ministry of Education  
mandates the participation of Government medical colleges in the National 
Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF), whereas private medical colleges have 
the option to partake voluntarily. Most private colleges in India are yet to be 
ranked, and only institutions possessingrobust academic records choose to 
volunteer for NIRF. It poses a challenge for students seeking admission to MBBS 

34 
 
or PG-medicine programs. It hinders their ability to make well -informed decisions 
regarding the medical institutions they intend to enroll in. 
4.4 The Committee commends NMC on receiv ing World Federation for 
Medical Education (WFME) Recognition. The Committee notes that though 
this recognition would enable Indian medical graduates to pursue PG training 
and practice in countries such as Australia, USA, Canada, and New Zealand, 
it may al so lead to the country's top talent leaving India for better 
opportunities abroad. Therefore, the Committee recommends the 
Government not only take appropriate steps to limit the exodus of medical 
professionals but at the same time take proactive measures to make India an 
attractive destination for international students and healthcare professionals.  
4.5 Furthermore, the Committee  recommends the NMC  develop global 
standards criteria along with QCI (Quality Council of India)  to rate medical 
colleges, both p rivate and government,  based on the parameters that are 
specific to medical education.  
Foreign Medical Graduates  
4.6 In 2021, NMC brought the Foreign Medical Graduate Licentiate Regulations 
2021 (FMGL Regulations, 2021) that govern the licensing of foreign medical 
graduates (FMGs) to practice medicine in India. The regulations were introduced 
in November 2021 and came into effect on December 1, 2021. The FMGL 
Regulations 2021 ensure that FMGs have the same skills and knowledge as Indian 
medical gradu ates before they are allowed to practice medicine in India. The 
regulations are also designed to protect the public from unqualified medical 
practitioners. According to the rules, only a foreign medical graduate shall practice 
medicine in India if granted permanent registration from the respective State 
Medical Council(s).  
Below are some of the significant regulations of the Foreign Medical Graduate 
Licentiate Regulations, 2021: - 
1. FMGs must have a foreign medical degree from a country that the NMC 
recognizes.  

35 
 
2. FMGs must have completed a one -year internship in the same foreign 
medical institution where they obtained their degree. 
3. FMGs must complete a one -year internship in India before obtaining 
permanent registration. The training must be completed at an ac credited 
medical institution in India. 
4. FMGs who have obtained their medical degree from a country the NMC 
does not recognize must pass the Foreign Medical Graduate Exam (FMGE) 
to get provisional registration in India. 
5. FMGs who have obtained permanent regis tration under the FMGL 
Regulations, 2021 must practice in rural areas for one year. 
6. FMGs must clear the National Exit Test (NE xT) to obtain permanent 
registration in India. The NE xT is a single national examination to be 
conducted for both Indian and foreign medical graduates. 
4.7 The C ommittee believes that the FMG Regulations 2021 are a pivotal 
framework to maintain and uphold the quality of medical professionals in 
India. However, these regulations must adopt a facilitative role rather than 
imposing unwarranted obstacles in the registration and internship process for 
foreign medical graduates. The NMC should address the inconsistencies in 
granting permanent registration to foreign medical graduates across various 
States. The Committee recommends the N MC strike a balance between 
quality assurance and inclusivity, ensuring that bureaucratic or procedural 
impediments do not unduly burden foreign medical graduates who meet the 
necessary standards. By acting as facilitators, regulatory authorities can 
streamline the registration and internship procedures, enhancing the 
integration of foreign medical graduates into the Indian healthcare system. 
4.8 Alternatively, the Committee has  also taken note of the fact that with 
the expansion of the number of medical co lleges in India , the reliance on 
Foreign Medical Graduates to maintain the doctor to population ratio may 
dwindle in the near future. Moreover, the Committee has also come across the 
fact that given the high standards of medical education in India, several  
FMGs are unable to clear the examination process despite several attempts. 

36 
 
Given the future scenario, the Committee recommends that the Government 
take a serious view on this issue and come up with some advisories to dissuade 
students from pursing medical education abroad.  
Graduate Outcome Assessment & NMC EXIT Test 
4.9 Presently, in India, medical colleges conduct final -year MBBS 
examinations. At the same time, the responsibility for NEET PG and FMGE falls 
under the purview of the National Board of Examinations (NBE), overseen by the 
Director-General of Health Services w ithin the Ministry. The NMC Act (Section 
57) provides for  National Exit Test (NExT) to enhance the competence of 
graduating MBBS students who obtain licenses to practice annually. This initiative 
addresses the current emphasis on clearing the NEET -PG, which is predominantly 
theoretical and necessitates rote memorization.  
4.10 In June 2023, the National Medical Commission developed the NMC Exit 
Test Regulations 2023 (NEXT Regulations, 2023). The test was to replace the final 
MBBS examination, act as a licen tiate exam for grant of registration to practice 
medicine, and provide a basis for entry to postgraduate courses instead of NEET -
PG. The NExT would be a medical licensing exam that is designed to assess the 
competency of medical graduates.  However, in July  2023, NMC has videnotice 
statedthat "the National Exit Test (NExT) examination is deferred on the advice of 
the Ministry till further directions".  
4.11 The Committee acknowledges that the NMC intends to introduce a 
standardized assessment of medical graduates through the National Exit Test 
(NExT). The Committee notes that standardized assessment of medical 
graduates would ensure that all medical graduates have a uniform level of 
knowledge and skills, regardless of where they stu died. This improves the 
quality of medical education and training in India and makes the process of 
licensure and postgraduate admissions more transparent and fair er. The Act 
provides for three years for unrolling of NExT, the Committee has taken note 
that NExT is yet to be implemented.   
4.12 Given the pivotal role the NExT exam is poised to play in medical 
education, the Committee recommends the Government exhaustively examine 
the implications of implementation. The Committee advocates for meticulous 

37 
 
due diligence in addressing the concerns of all relevant stakeholders. 
Furthermore, the Committee recommends that the Government allocate 
ample time for thorough preparation and provide an early release of the exam 
schedule, along with other relevant detai ls regarding the examination. This 
will enable the first batch of candidates to prepare adequately and smoothly 
transition to the new examination format. Additionally, considering the 
diverse background of medical colleges from which the first batch of NEx T 
aspirants would come, the Committee suggests that the evaluation criteria 
should be moderate. It is imperative to ensure that no group of graduates 
faces an undue advantage or disadvantage in the examination. Striking a fair 
and equitablebalance in the e valuation process will be pivotal in ensuring the 
success and fairness of the NExT exam. 
4.13 Moreover, the Committee believes in addition to  standardised final 
assessment of graduates, there is an urgent need to universalize or standardise 
undergraduate a nd postgraduate education. Reputed institutes like AIIMS 
impart different quality of medical education while newly opened medical 
institutes need such quality. Keeping this in view, the Committee recommends 
the Government to divide India into zones, and in each zone reputed institutes 
like AIIMS can function as mentor institutes for all the other medical colleges 
in that zone. Mentor institutes shall play a significant role in monitoring the 
standard of education and the classes in the newly set medical col leges or 
private medical colleges. 
 
Other Key Areas 
4.14 Improving the quality of medical education in India is crucial for producing 
well-trained healthcare professionals who can provide high-quality patient care. To 
achieve this goal, the Committee feels that a holistic approach to enhance the 
quality of medical education  has to be taken for India to achieve its targets 
concerning the 3A‘s of healthcare - affordability, accessibility, and availability. In 
this regard, the Committee would like to mention other key aspectsthat need to be  
addressed to enhance medical education in India, as listed hereunder: 
1. Curriculum Revision:  

38 
 
 Update the medical curriculum to align with international standards 
toinclude the latest advancements in medical science. 
 Emphasize the importance of practical skills and clinical exposure. 
2. Faculty Development: 
 Invest in training and development for medical faculty to ensure they 
are up to date with current medical practices and teaching methods.  
 Encourage medical faculty to engage in research and publications. 
 
3. Assessment and Evaluation:  
 Implement regular and rigorous assessment mechanisms, including 
practical exams and clinical evaluations, to ensure students have the 
necessary skills and knowledge. 
4. Infrastructure and Resources:  
 Provide state -of-the-art infrastructure and resources, including well -
equipped laboratories, libraries, and technology, to support teaching 
and research activities. 
5. Clinical Exposure:  
 Ensure medical students have ample opportunities for hands -on 
clinical experience through partnerships with public and private 
hospitals. This can include clerkships, internships, and rotations in 
various specialties. 
6. Ethics and Communication Skills:  
 Integrate courses on medical ethics, communication skills, and 
cultural competence to ensure that future healthcare professionals not 
only possess clinical knowledge but also the ability to interact with 
patients effectively and ethically. 
7. Interdisciplinary Learning: 

39 
 
 Promote interdisciplinary education to foster collaboration between 
healthcare professionals, including doctors, nurses, and allied health 
professionals. 
8. Research and Innovation:  
 Encourage medical students to engage in research and innovation 
from an early stage. This can help generate new knowledge and foster 
critical thinking. 
9. Regulatory Reform:  
 Streamline and strengthen regulatory bodies to ensure strict adherence 
to quality standards in medical education. 
 
10. Use of Technology:  
 Leverage technology for teaching and learning. Virtual reality, online 
resources, and telemedicine can enhance educational experience. 
 Design diagnostic protocols to be followed by doctors when treating 
patients virtually. 
11. Continuous Assessment and Feedback:  
 Establish mec hanisms for constant feedback from students, faculty, 
and healthcare facilities to identify improvement areas and make 
necessary adjustments. 
12. Public-Private Partnerships:  
 Collaborate with private institutions to expand access to quality 
medical education.  Public-private partnerships can help in sharing 
resources and expertise. 
13. Financial Support:  
 Offer scholarships and financial incentives to attract the best and 
brightest students to pursue a medical career. This can help address 
the shortage of qualified medical professionals. 
14. Accreditation:  

40 
 
 Encourage medical colleges to seek accreditation from reputable 
bodies to ensure they meet quality standards. 
15. Community Engagement: 
 Involve medical students in community health programs and outreach 
to instill a sense of social responsibility and practical experience in 
addressing healthcare challenges at the grassroots level. 
16. Global Collaboration:  
 Foster international collaborations and partnerships with renowned 
medical institutions to bring global best prac tices to Indian medical 
education. 
17. Designing of Local Language Learning Modules  for effective 
communication between the doctor and patient 
 Given the fact that most students pursu e their medical education in 
States in which they are not domiciled , the Committee feels that 
UGMEB can design local language learning modul es for medical 
graduates evincing interest in learning the local language. Such a 
move would  go a long  way in paving the way for establishing 
effective communication between the doctor and the patient. 
18. Review of retirement age of doctors 
 The Committee, while examining the subject  has felt doctors gain 
more experience with the advancement in age, hence it feels that there 
is a need to reconsider/ review the age of retirement of doctors.  
19. Issue of Pharmaceutical Companies sponsoringmedical professionals: 
 In view of the accrual of benefits to the medical fraternity at large, 
pharmaceutical companies can be allowed to sponsor medical 
conferences with adequate social/ transparent auditing of such 
contributions.  
 
4.15 Continuing Medical Education (CME): The Committee feels that there 
is a need to introduce regulatory provisions for CME covering the Teachers, 

41 
 
practicing Doctors and students pursuing higher medical education. The 
Committee is of the view that CME enables healthcare professionals to 
maintain, enhance, and updat e their knowledge, skills, and competencies 
throughout their careers. It is a very crucial aspect of professional 
development in the medical field which ensures that doctors are aware of the 
latest advancements in medicine, technology, and healthcare pract ices. This 
ultimately results in achieving better patient outcomes. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that UGMEB and PGMEB explore the possibility of 
including components such as attending workshops, conferences, seminars, 
publishing papers in medical j ournals, etc. for medical students, and as an 
incentive measure such students/faculty/medical professionals can earn extra 
credits for partaking in them. The Committee hopes that the CME being a 
dynamic and evolving process would enable medical practitione rs to provide 
high-quality care while staying current in the ever -evolving healthcare 
landscape.  
4.16 The Committee is of the view that improving the quality of medical 
education is a long -term endeavor that requires the commitment of governments, 
educational institutions, healthcare providers, and regulatory bodies. India is on the 
right track to enhance the quality of its medical education system; and by 
addressing the critical aspects highlighted in this Report, the country can achieve 
the desired outcome of producing highly skilled healthcare professionals.  
 
  

42 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
Quality of Medical Education: Global Perspectives  
The Committee has observed that countries across the world have 
adopted the Flexner Model changing it suitably whenever required. The 
Committee, on scrutiny of various governing authorities for medical 
education across the countries mentioned above, has observed that the 
National Medical Commission of India meets international professional 
standards in m edical education. The Committee has further observed that 
barring a few countries at the global level , the shortage of doctors at present 
or for the future seems to be an all -pervading problem. The developed 
countries are able to meet this shortfall by serving as attractive destinations 
for medical graduates from developing countries and by easing the process for 
the practice of medicine by the International Medical Graduates. In the 
context of the standardised tests for medical education, the Committee has  
taken note of the fact that behavioural and social sciences are also becoming 
part of the testing process of various countries to assess the ethics, integrity, 
etc. of the medical aspirants.  
(Para 1.16) 
The Committee recommends National Medical Commissio n undertake 
a comparative study of best practices of its parallel organisation in various 
countries. The Committee feels that this measure can help NMC to usher in 
best practices followed around the world and help in making NMC an 
institution par excellence.  
(Para 1.17) 
As regards the maintenance of a national database of resident doctors, 
the Committee recommends that NMC maintain a real-time national database 
akin to the GME Track of the USA. This national database can allow access to 
multiple stakeholders viz, Ministry, States, Medical Colleges, and other 
concerned parties. This database can alsoserve as a tool to decimate the 

43 
 
limitation of resources in the newly opened institutions and opera te as a 
platform for experience and knowledge sharing among the resident doctors.  
Against this background, the Committee would also like to highlight the issue 
of dual registration of doctors with the respective State Medical Council 
where they practice a nd any other place where they may relocate 
subsequently. This gives rise to multiple registrations of doctors with various 
State Medical Councils, making tracking difficult.   The Committee would like 
to recommend the generation of a ‗unique registration n umber‘ for the 
doctors at the NMC level. This move can also leverage the national database 
and usher in uniformity in the registration of practicing doctors. 
(Para 1.18) 
The Committee notes that the National Medical Commission (NMC) has 
an excellent opportunity to improve the quality of medical education in India. 
However, it must address various issues related to modernising medical 
education and introduce reforms to bring remarkable improvements in the 
overall healthcare system in the country.  The NMC can take several essential 
and immediate steps to strengthen medical education in India, including 
setting and enforcing high standards for medical education, promoting 
research in medical education, supporting faculty development, and making 
medical educatio n more accessible. The Committee believes that by taking 
these steps, the NMC can help to produce a new generation of highly qualified 
and competent medical graduates. 
(Para 1.21) 
 The Committee notes that the importance of quality in medical 
education must be considered when considering its direct impact on the 
quality of healthcare services. High -quality medical education is the 
foundation upon which competent and compassionate hea lthcare 
professionals are built. It equips them with the necessary knowledge, skills, 
and ethical principles essential for providing safe and effective care to 
patients. The Committeerecommends the Ministry develop a robust medical 
education system and emp hasise evidence -based practices, critical thinking, 

44 
 
and continuous learning, ensuring that healthcare practitioners stay up to 
date with medical advancements. In this way, quality medicaleducation would 
not only secure the present generation‘s healthcare n eeds but also be an 
investment in the future of healthcare. 
(Para 1.22) 
Medical Colleges and Seats in India 
 The Committee notes that the current situation regarding medical seats 
both in UG and PG in our country is a critical issue that warrants immediate  
attention. With an annual influx of approximately 2 million aspiring medical 
students at UG and only 1/20times available seats, the demand far exceeds the 
supply, similarly, the number of available seats at PG level is far less than the 
demand. The Commit tee acknowledges the urgency of addressing this 
challenge while maintaining the quality of medical education at its highest 
standard. To address this issue effectively, several measures can be taken. 
First and foremost, there is a need to significantly inc rease medical seats in 
both undergraduate and postgraduate courses. The government's existing 
scheme, which focuses on the establishment of new medical colleges attached 
to district or referral hospitals, can be instrumental in achieving this goal. By 
expanding this initiative, the Government can create more opportunities for 
aspiring medical students. 
(Para 2.4) 
 The Committee further recommends that it is essential to make optimal 
use of the existing infrastructure. Ensuring that all available resources a nd 
facilities are utilized efficiently can help accommodate a larger number of 
students without compromising the quality of education. Additionally, 
streamlining the admission process by implementing a standardized national 
entrance examination can improve  fairness and transparency in seat 
allocation.  
(Para 2.5) 

45 
 
 Encouraging private investment in medical education is another avenue 
to explore. Providing incentives and regulatory support to private institutions 
willing to establish medical colleges can not only increase seat availability but 
also introduce healthy competition and innovation in medical education. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry leverage technology for distance 
learning and organise virtual classrooms that can be a supplementary solution 
to address the shortage of seats, allowing a more significant number of 
students to access medical education without overburdening physical 
infrastructure. 
(Para 2.6) 
Imbalance in Distribution of Medical Colleges 
The Committee has taken note of the detailed Minimum Standards 
Regulations (UG -MSR) notified on 16 th August 2023. While examining the 
subject, the Committee came across several concerns over some of the 
guidelines for opening of a new Medical College and also regarding 
permission to increase the number of undergraduate seats. The permission for 
an increase in MBBS seats will be granted for 50, 100 and 150 seats from the 
academic year 2024-25. The Committee notes that based on the guidelines for 
200 and 250 seats at various places have provisi ons for infrastructure and 
faculty positions. The Committee further notes that many medical colleges 
have 200 and 250 seats. The Committee was apprised that the ideal batch size 
for a faculty to impart teaching is 150. The Committee, however, believes that  
as per the guidelines, given the infrastructure and faculty position required in 
place, a college, whether old or new, may be considered for granting 
permission to increase, in phases, the undergraduate seats up to a maximum 
of 250. 
(Para 2.11) 
 
The WHO n orms recommend a doctor -population ratio of 1:1000, and 
as per the NMC, the country has already achieved a ratio of 1:856. However, 

46 
 
the concern area associated with opening a new medical college is the number 
of prescribed department-wise and total patient Bed capacity, read along with 
the requirement of their 80 per cent average occupancy in the attached 
hospital. The Committee would recommendthe Government that such one -
size-fits-all criterion prescribed in the UG -MSR may be revisited to take into 
account the geographic imbalances, if any, and formulate region -specific 
guidelines/ norms. 
(Para 2.12) 
The Committee also recommends the Government to chalk out a 
comprehensive India-specific approach that considers the nation's healthcare 
needs in the next 20 -25 years, identifies the categories of doctors, viz. 
pediatricians, ophthalmologists, neurosurgeons, critical care specialists, 
infectious disease specialists that the country would need  rather than just 
randomly increasing general surgery, pharma, and anat omy seats. The 
Committee believes that  such a concerted effort to produce need -based 
specialists/ doctors commensurate with disease -burden specialists will secure 
India's healthcare needs in the future. The Committee recommends that in the 
case of the curr ent scenario modalities for a fair distribution of doctors‘ 
workforce across the country especially in underprivileged areas can be 
worked out by the NMC by offering incentives, monetary or otherwise. 
(Para 2.13) 
 The Committee notes that a travel time of 30 minutes between the 
college campus and the attached hospital has been prescribed in the 
guidelines. The Committee while taking cognisance of the rationale behind 
this travel time criteria fails to understand the logic behind keeping separate 
distance criteria of 30 kilometres (Tier -I cities) and 50 kilometres (for other 
cities) between RHTC/UHTC/CHC and the medical college. The Committee 
recommends the National Medical Commission review this criterion and 
consider incorporating suitable travel time instead of distance. 
(Para 2.14) 

47 
 
 
 
Evaluation of the existing curriculum and its relevance to healthcare needs, 
the need for transformation 
 The Committee notes that the NMC guideline s on Competency -Based 
Medical Education (CBME) Regulations, 2023,  are comprehensive and 
comparable to best global practices and thus a welcome step in upgrading the 
curriculum of medical education in India.  The Committee, however, believes 
there are some areas where the guidelines could be improved to make them 
more feasible and effective in the Indian context. The current policies need to 
be more transparent in implementing CBME in practice. Implementing 
CBME can be challenging for medical colleges, especially those with limited 
resources. Specific guidance to develop the CBME curricula, assessments, and 
teaching methods would prove to be useful in reaping early benefits . 
Furthermore, the Committee feels that the transition to CBME will require 
significant changes to medical education programs; therefore, medical 
colleges will need support, including augmentingfaculty training and access to 
resources from the NMC and other stakeholders in making this transition. 
The Committee also notes that medical colleges in India vary widely regarding 
resources, faculty expertise, and student demographics. The CBME guidelines 
should consider this diversity and be flexible enough to be implemented in 
different settings.The CBME guidelines should consider this diversity and be 
flexible enough to be implemented in different settings. To m aintain the true 
spirit of CBME, the Committee feels that there should be a regular periodic 
review and monitoring of the medical curriculum. 
(Para 2.16) 
 The Committee acknowledges the critical elements introduced in the 
new curriculum to help students ac quire practical skills. The Committee 
strongly recommends the rigorous and comprehensive implementation of the 
AETCOM module within the MBBS curriculum. This module is paramount 
as it is pivotal in cultivating the right attitude, ethics, and communication 
skills among medical students. Patient care is not solely about clinical 

48 
 
knowledge and technical skills; it hinges on empathy, compassion, and 
effective communication. By instilling these qualities in future healthcare 
professionals, we can significantly e nhance the overall quality of patient care. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends the Government ensure that the 
AETCOM module is enforced consistently and effectively to empower medical 
students with the essential attributes needed to provide holistic and p atient-
centered healthcare. In addition to the implementation of AETCOM, the 
Committee recommends the incorporation of these criteria in NEET so that 
the aptitude of aspiring medical students can be assessed. Such aptitude tests 
at the entrance level go beyond mere knowledge assessment of aspirants, often 
obtained through rote learning and mastering MCQ -based exams , and  
evaluate the genuine interest and passion of the candidate for the field of 
medicine. It will enable the system to  identify candidates who have a sincere 
calling for the profession and distinguish them from those who may be under 
external pressure or legacy expectations. By doing so, we can ensure that 
medical work continues to attract individuals who are genuinely committed to 
delivering high-quality healthcare.  
(Para 2.18) 
 
 In a general context, the Committee has observed that there is a 
frequent change in the regulations notified by the National Medical 
Commission. The Committee would recommend that before notification of 
any regulation, a robust and thorough study involving the opinions/ 
viewpoints of various stakeholders should be undertaken. 
(Para 2.19) 
The Committee was apprised of the fact that some private medical 
colleges seemingly fail medical graduates deliberately during mid -semester 
exams which results in repetition of the semester, and charging additional fees 
for repeating the semester or exam. This practice causes stress on the medical 
students, financial and otherwise. The Committee therefore recommends that 
UGMEB may develop  appropriate feasible modalities for monitoring 
assessment, revaluation, etc. without charging any additional fee 
(Para 2.20) 

49 
 
 
Research Support and facilities 
 
 The Committee notes that research is an integral part of medical 
education and thus  has to be sufficiently supported by both the Government 
and medical colleges.  The Committee further notes that the actual health 
research expenditure as a percentage of GDP has constant ly remained at 0.02 
since 2021 -22. The Committee feels that medical research an d innovation 
needs further impetus and there is an urgent need to substantially increase the 
Government expenditure on  health research infrastructure or provide 
incentives/ ecosystem for collaboration with leading private research firms.  
(Para 2.24) 
 The Committee recommends the NMC encourage the medical colleges 
to develop a tradition of research in the college so that upcoming MBBS 
students and later MD / MS students gain sufficient exposure in the research 
ambience of the institute. Furthermore, colleges should incentivize quality 
research both at the student and faculty level.  
(Para 2.25) 
 To have result -oriented and gainful research, the Committee also 
recommends the Government form guidelines to decide on ‗priority research 
fields‘ based on disease burden and focus areas of the country. For this, 
colleges can form a collegium of senior faculties and decide on the research 
priority; funds for such research should be partly provided by the institute 
and partly by Government agencies like ICMR. 
(Para 2.26) 
Affordability of Medical Education 
 The Committee was apprised that there is signific ant variation among 
the States/UTs in the amount of fee charged; the cost of medical education 
ranges between a whooping 60 lakh and one crore rupees, or more. In order 
to alleviate the financial stress on the students, the Committee recommends 

50 
 
that the Mi nistry, in collaboration with States, consider need -based 
scholarships to deserving students. Other suggestive options that can be 
explored are – running the medical college and hospital on a PPP model, 
giving tax benefits to the company/group, etc. The Co mmittee, however, 
further recommends prescribing minimum marks in the NEET -UG exam for 
each category of students seeking admission. 
(Para 2.29) 
 The Committee further recommends the Ministryformulate a 
comprehensive framework to address bureaucratic hurdles and effectively 
implement the partnership of private medical colleges with the district 
hospitals. The Committee believes that  this initiative will not only provide 
sufficient clinical material to the MBBS students but also decrease the setting 
up and functioning cost of private colleges, thereby rationalizing the costs of 
medical education. Additionally, as another measure to reduce the cost of 
medical education in p rivate colleges, the Committee recommends the 
Government subsidize the necessary equipment/ machines for  the setting up 
of ―Skill Labs‖ in private colleges as they are sophisticated and costly and are 
often imported. In addition, the Government should crea te need -based 
scholarship programs to assist economically disadvantaged students in 
covering their tuition fees. These scholarships could be funded through 
government and private sector contributions, creating an accessible path to 
medical education for all. 
(Para 2.30) 
Faculty Shortage and the Issue of Ghost Faculty 
  The Committee feels that establishing additional medical colleges is 
undoubtedly a positive stride in addressing the chronic shortage of 
healthcare professionals. However, in this effort , it is crucial to ensure the 
production of genuinely qualified doctors which is incumbent upon the 
presence of well -qualified and experienced faculty members.  Teachers in 
medical colleges are the cornerstone of a robust medical education system, 

51 
 
shaping not on ly the knowledge and skills but also the ethical foundations of 
future medical practitioners. The Committee believes that whether it is the 
expansion of medical colleges or the implementation of progressive 
initiatives like NMC's Competency -Based Medical E ducation (CBME) 
module, the efficacy of these reforms hinges on the availability of a 
dedicated, skilled teaching force . The shortage of qualified teachers is a 
common thread in both scenarios and addressing this issue is paramount.  In 
this regard, the Com mittee has taken note of the findings of NMC  for 246 
medical colleges.  The Committee views that NMC's efforts, like AEBAS -
based attendance CCTVs in colleges, have yet to deliver much as issues like 
ghost faculty and zero faculty attendance have only escala ted as per the 
NMC's assessment. Therefore, the Committee is of the consensus that the 
faculty shortage issue in India is twofold: first, there is a genuine shortage of 
qualified faculty members, and second, even the available faculty often lacks 
the incli nation to teach at the college level. To address the issue of ghost 
faculty and ensure that the available faculty comes to the college to teach, 
the Committee recommends the Government to strictly enforce the 
regulations already in place  to curb the proble m of ghost faculty and zero 
attendance. NMC should conduct regular inspections of medical colleges 
and take action against colleges that are found to be violating the 
regulations.  
(Para 3.5) 
 Additionally, streamlining the recruitment process is imperativ e. The 
significant delays in the recruitment process must be reduced through the 
simplification of bureaucratic procedures and the incorporation of 
technology for quicker application processing and interview scheduling. An 
efficient recruitment process is necessary to expedite faculty appointments 
and fill vacant positions without unnecessary delays. NMC should make it 
easier for students and parents to report ghost faculty and zero attendance. 
Furthermore, the Committee feels that the Government should  undertake 
some essential steps for retaining faculty  viz. improved working conditions 
for faculty members , transparent career progression paths , etc. C lear 
criteria and milestones for promotions by recognising and rewarding 

52 
 
excellence in teaching, research, and clinical work  need to be chalked out . 
Regular performance evaluations are crucial in identifying and addressing 
concerns promptly.  
(Para 3.6) 
Faculty Qualifications and Competence  
 The Committee notes that the NMC's "Teacher's Eligibility 
Qualifications in Medical Institutions Regulations, 2022", are a significant 
step forward in improving the quality of medical education in India. By 
requiring higher qualifications for teachers, mandating training in medical 
education technology and biomedical researc h, and having more rigorous 
promotion criteria, the new regulations will help to ensure that medical 
teachers in India are highly skilled and qualified. The Committee, however, 
opines that along with the rigorous promotion criteria, NMC should focus 
more o n Teacher -Learning Programmes than on manpower and 
infrastructure. The Commission should also formulate norms to incentivize 
and encourage faculty to take up training for skills improvement and devise 
policies creating an ambience to kindle interest in research in the faculties. 
Furthermore, the Committee recommends the NMC design and strictly 
implement exhaustive training programs for faculties to enhance their 
understanding of the principles, functioning, and practices of CBME.  
(Para 3.8) 
 The Committee recognizes the regulator's aspiration to introduce 
competency-based learning for MBBS students and foster clinical exposure 
from the early stages of their education. This direction is indeed in line with 
international trends in medical education. However, the sudden cessation of 
non-MBBS candidates teaching non & non -para-clinical subjects, such as 
anatomy, pharmacology, and microbiology, presents a complex situation. 
While upholding high educational standards is paramount, there is a need for 
a balanced an d gradual approach that accommodates the interests and 
expertise of non -MBBS candidates.The Committee recommends a thoughtful 
and phased strategy to address this issue. It is advisable to introduce a 

53 
 
transitional period that allows non -MBBS faculty members  to continue 
teaching these subjects until enough MBBS -qualified educators become 
available. This gradual shift will ensure that students continue to receive a 
comprehensive education as the transition toward competency-based learning 
takes place. Furtherm ore, it is crucial to emphasize faculty development for 
non-MBBS educators, offering them opportunities to enhance their teaching 
skills and align their curriculum with evolving standards in medical 
education. This will help them remain effective contribut ors to medical 
education. Non -MBBS educators often bring unique perspectives and 
expertise to the field. Rather than limiting their involvement, their expertise 
can be integrated into the education system through collaborative efforts, 
interdisciplinary research, and innovative teaching methodologies. 
(Para 3.10) 
Faculty Development Programs 
 The Committee notes that faculty development is vital for ensuring that 
faculty members have the skills and knowledge they need to teach and train 
students effectively. The Committee understands that in our country, 
elementary, primary, and secondary school teachers must undergo training in 
formal schools or colleges of education to be eligible for appointments and 
promotion. Still, there is no such requirement for selecting teachers in medical 
colleges in India. Therefore, the Committee recommends the NMC to release 
the guidelines on the ―Faculty Development Programme" without any delay. 
The policies should be formulated to support the achievement of the goal to 
enhance the quality and relevance of education for future healthcare 
professionals. These guidel ines should encompass critical areas such as 
clinical instruction, small group facilitation, large group presentations, 
feedback and assessment, personal and organizational growth, leadership, and 
scholarly activities. The strategies and formats for faculty development should 
exhibit flexibility, ensuring they are tailored to the specific healthcare 
requirements of our nation, institution, and learners. Faculty development 
programs (FDPs) can encompass a range of activities, including continuing 
education, on-the-job training, traditional classroom settings, in -person, 
online, or via tele/videoconferences, self -paced learning, mentorship, 

54 
 
involvement in communities of practice, or a combination of these 
approaches. 
(Para 3.14) 
 Furthermore, the Committee notes that conducting faculty training 
through regional bodies and nodal centers has limited availability and 
capacity. Therefore, the Committee recommends establishing a National 
Institute for Training of Medical Teachers. A dedicated institute would 
provide year-round access to training for medical college faculty, effectively 
expanding the capacity for teacher development and establishing 
standardized quality benchmarks. This may also lead to the 
institutionalization of training procedures and best practices.  
(Para 3.15) 
Rating and Accreditation of Medical Colleges 
 The Committee commends NMC on receiving World Federation for 
Medical Education (WFME) Recognition. The Committee notes that though 
this recognition would enable Indian medical graduates to pursue PG training 
and practice in countries such as Australia, USA, Canada, and New Zealand, 
it may also lead to the country's top talent leaving India for better 
opportunities abroad. Therefore, the Committee recommends the 
Government not only take appropr iate steps to limit the exodus  of medical 
professionals but at the same time take proactive measures to make India an 
attractive destination for international students and healthcare professionals.  
(Para 4.4) 
 Furthermore, the Committee  recommends the NMC  develop global 
standards criteria along with QCI (Quality Council of India)  to rate medical 
colleges, both private and government,  based on the parameters that are 
specific to medical education.  
(Para 4.5) 

55 
 
Foreign Medical Graduates  
 The C ommittee believes that the FMG Regulations 2021 are a pivotal 
framework to maintain and uphold the quality of medical professionals in 
India. However, these regulations must adopt a facilitative role rather than 
imposing unwarranted obstacles in the registration and internship process for 
foreign medical graduates. The NMC should address the inconsistencies in 
granting permanent registration to foreign medical graduates across various 
States. The Committee recommends the NMC strike a balance between 
quality assurance and inclusivity, ensuring that bureaucratic or procedural 
impediments do not unduly burden foreign medical graduates who meet the 
necessary standards. By acting as facilitators, regulatory authorities can 
streamline the registration and internsh ip procedures, enhancing the 
integration of foreign medical graduates into the Indian healthcare system. 
(Para 4.7) 
Alternatively, the Committee has also taken note of the fact that with 
the expansion of the number of medical colleges in India, the relianc e on 
Foreign Medical Graduates to maintain the doctor to population ratio may 
dwindle in the near future. Moreover, the Committee has also come across the 
fact that given the high standards of medical education in India, several 
FMGs are unable to clear th e examination process despite several attempts. 
Given the future scenario, the Committee recommends that the Government 
take a serious view on this issue and come up with some advisories to dissuade 
students from pursing medical education abroad. 
(Para 4.8) 
Graduate Outcome Assessment & NMC EXIT Test 
 The Committee acknowledges that the NMC intends to introduce a 
standardized assessment of medical graduates through the National Exit Test 
(NExT). The Committee notes that standardized assessment of medical 
graduates would ensure that all medical graduates have a uniform level of 
knowledge and skills, regardless of where they studied. This improves the 

56 
 
quality of medical education and training in India and makes the process of 
licensure and postgraduate admissions more transparent and fair er. The Act 
provides for three years for unrolling of NExT, the Committee has taken note 
that NExT is yet to be implemented.   
(Para 4.11) 
 Given the pivotal role  the NExT exam is poised to play in medical 
education, the Committee recommends the Government exhaustively examine 
the implications of implementation. The Committee advocates for meticulous 
due diligence in addressing the concerns of all relevant stakehol ders. 
Furthermore, the Committee recommends that the Government allocate 
ample time for thorough preparation and provide an early release of the exam 
schedule, along with other relevant details regarding the examination. This 
will enable the first batch of  candidates to prepare adequately and smoothly 
transition to the new examination format. Additionally, considering the 
diverse background of medical colleges from which the first batch of NExT 
aspirants would come, the Committee suggests that the evaluatio n criteria 
should be moderate. It is imperative to ensure that no group of graduates 
faces an undue advantage or disadvantage in the examination. Striking a fair 
and equitablebalance in the evaluation process will be pivotal in ensuring the 
success and fairness of the NExT exam. 
(Para 4.12) 
 Moreover, the Committee believes in addition to  standardised final 
assessment of graduates, there is an urgent need to universalize or standardise 
undergraduate and postgraduate education. Reputed institutes like AIIMS 
impart different quality of medical education while newly opened medical 
institutes need such quality. Keeping this in view, the Committee recommends 
the Government to divide India into zones, and in each zone reputed institutes 
like AIIMS can function as mentor institutes for all the other medical colleges 
in that zone. Mentor institutes shall play a significant role in monitoring the 
standard of education and the classes in the newly set medical colleges or 
private medical colleges. 

57 
 
(Para 4.13) 
Other Key Areas 
 Continuing Medical Education (CME): The Committee feels that there 
is a need to introduce regulatory provisions for CME covering the Teachers, 
practicing Doctors and students pursuing higher medical education. The 
Committee is of the view that CME e nables healthcare professionals to 
maintain, enhance, and update their knowledge, skills, and competencies 
throughout their careers. It is a very crucial aspect of professional 
development in the medical field which ensures that doctors are aware of the 
latest advancements in medicine, technology, and healthcare practices. This 
ultimately results in achieving better patient outcomes. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that UGMEB and PGMEB explore the possibility of 
including components such as attending w orkshops, conferences, seminars, 
publishing papers in medical journals, etc. for medical students, and as an 
incentive measure such students/faculty/medical professionals can earn extra 
credits for partaking in them. The Committee hopes that the CME being a 
dynamic and evolving process would enable medical practitioners to provide 
high-quality care while staying current in the ever -evolving healthcare 
landscape.  
(Para 4.15) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

58 
 
Annexures 
 
Table-A 
Registered Medical Practitioners in India: State-wise 
 


59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


60 
 
Table B  
State-wise distributionof medical seats(course-wise) 
 
 
