 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
REPORT NO.  
150 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE 137TH REPORT ON THE “VACCINE DEVELOPMENT, 
DISTRIBUTION MANAGEMENT AND MITIGATION OF 
PANDEMIC COVID-19” 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2023)  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail:  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE 137TH REPORT ON THE “VACCINE 
DEVELOPMENT, DISTRIBUTION MANAGEMENT AND 
MITIGATION OF PANDEMIC COVID-19” 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2023)  
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE i 
2.  PREFACE ii 
3.  ACRONYMS iii - iv 
4.  REPORT 
 
Chapter-I       
Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Ministry  
 
Chapter-II     
Recommendations/observations on which the 
Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Ministry’s replies  
 
Chapter-III   
Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by 
the committee  
 
Chapter - IV   
Report At a Glance  
 
 
1 - 42 
 
 
43 - 96 
 
 
97 - 99 
 
 
100 – 101 
 
5 MINUTES 102 - 104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel 
6. Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
8. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
9. Dr. Santanu Sen 
10. Shri A. D. Singh  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Shri K. Navas Kani 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Rao Munde 
22. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S.  
27. Dr. Jadon Chandra Sen  
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3. Dr. Saket Kumar   Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 

ii 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Depar tment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Fiftieth Report of the Committee on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Rec ommendations/ Observations contained in the 137 th 
Report on “ Vaccine Development, Distribution Management and Mitigation of Pandemic 
COVID-19”. 
 
2.  The One Hundred Thirty Seventh  Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid 
on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th December, 2022. The Action Taken Notes of the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Report was received from the 
Departments in April, 2023. 
 
3.    The Committee made a total of 140 recommendations in the 137 th Report, out of 
which 64 recommendations have been accepted by the Ministry and has been categorized 
under Chapter-I. There are 74 recommendations, which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Ministry’s replies that have been categorized under Chapter -II. There 
are 2 recommendations/observations, in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations 
thereon and have been categorized under Chapter-III. 
 
4.  The Committee, in its meeting held on the 11 th December, 2023 considered the 
Draft Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
11th December, 2023 
Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
BHUBANESWAR  KALITA 
CHAIRMAN, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
  
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ABHWCs   Ayushman Bharat Health and Wellness Centres 
AB-PMJAY   Ayushman Bharat/Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
ASU&H   Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy 
AYUSH   Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa Riga and Homeopathy 
CCC     COVID Care Center 
CEPI   Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations 
CFR   Case Fatality Rate 
CGRMS   Central Grievance Redressal Management System 
CHC   Community Health Centers 
CHE    Current Health Expenditure 
CPHC    Comprehensive Health Care 
CSOs   Civil Society Organizations 
CSU    Central Surveillance Unit 
DBT   Department of Bio Technology 
DCH    Dedicated COVID Hospital 
DCHC   Dedicated COVID Health Centre 
DGHS   Director General of Health Services 
DHR   Department of Health Research 
DLE   Direct Lab Empanelment 
DSOs   Disease Surveillance Officer 
DSU    District Surveillance Units 
EUA    Emergency Use Authorization 
GE   Genus Epidemicus 
GERD   Gross domestic expenditure on R&D 
GHE    Government Health Expenditure 
GHSA   Global Health Security Agenda 
GOI    Government of India 
GoM    Group of Ministers 
HBPs    Health Benefit Packages 
HCQ   Hydroxychloroquine 
HEM   Hospital Empanelment Module 
IAPSM   Indian Association of Preventive and Social Medicine 
IAS   Indian Administrative Service 
ICMR   Indian Council of Medical Research 
ICTV   International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses 
IDSP   Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme 
iGOT   Integrated Government Online Training 
IHIP    Integrated Health Information Platform 
IHS   Indian Health Service 
IJMR   Indian Journal of Medical Research 
ILI    Influenza Like Illness 
IPHA   Indian Public Health Association 
IPHS   Indian Public Health Standard 
IST    Indian Standard Time 
JMG   Joint Monitoring Group 
LMWH    Low Molecular Weight Heparin 

iv 
 
MEA   Ministry of External Affairs 
MERS   Middle East Respiratory Syndrome 
MHA    Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoHFW  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MRHRUs  Model Rural Health Research Units 
MRUs   Multi Disciplinary Research Units 
MSMEs   Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
NAFU   National Anti-Fraud Unit 
NARI    National AIDS Research Institute 
NCDC   National Center for Disease Control 
NDMA   National Disaster Management Authority 
NEC   National Executive Committee 
NHA   National Health Authority 
NIV   National Institute of Virology 
PHC   Primary Health Centers 
PHEIC   Public Health Emergency of International Concern 
PM-ASBY  Prime Minister Atma Nirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana 
PMGKY   Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana 
PoE   Points of Entry 
PPE   Personal Protective Equipment 
RRTs   Rapid Response Teams 
SAFUs    State Anti-Fraud Units 
SARI    Severe Acute Respiratory Illness 
SARS   Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome 
SDRF   State Disaster Response Fund 
SHA    State Health Agencies 
SII   Serum Institute of India 
SOP   Standard Operating Procedure 
SOPs   Standard Operating Protocols 
SOR    Objects and Reasons 
SSU    State Surveillance Units 
STI   Science, Technology and Innovation 
STWs   Standard Treatment Workflows 
STGs   Standard Treatment Guidelines 
TDABC   Time Driven Activity Based Costing 
THE   Total Health Expenditure 
TMS    Transaction Management System 
UIS data   UNESCO Institute of Statistics data 
VBM   Vande Bharat Mission 
VHSNC   Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee 
VRDLs   Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories 
VTMs   Viral Transport Media 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
1.1 Tracing Origin of COVID-19 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.1.1   The Committee observes that the origin of the virus still remains obscure and more 
studies need to be conducted to shed light on the origins of the SARS- CoV-2 virus. The 
Committee strongly believes that identification of the true sour ce of the virus is crucial for 
establishment of new zoonotic reservoirs so that future reinfections and diseases in animals as 
well as humans are prevented. Moreover, the information is crucial to reduce any future risks 
due to the emergence and transmissi on of the zoonotic diseases like the recent outbreak of 
Monkeypox.  The Committee is of the opinion that the large scale fatalities and the devastating 
impact of COVID -19 pandemic necessitate the need of being better prepared for possible future 
outbreaks viz the menace and management of Monkeypox. The Committee strongly believes that 
it is incumbent upon global scientists to accelerate its efforts in identifying novel pathogens and 
establish a robust surveillance mechanism for faster detection of the pathogens. In this regard, it 
becomes all the more important to identify the origin of the SARS- CoV-2 virus and investigate its 
origin along all the possible pathway of emergence.  
(Para 1.9 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.1.2  Government of India in 73rd Session of World Health Assembly has already supported the 
proposal to study origins of SARS -CoV-2 virus. Following this, a joint World Health 
Organization (WHO) team of experts that investigated the source of SARS -CoV-2 in January -  
February 2021 concluded that virus probably originated in bats and was introduced in humans 
through an intermediary host species as the most likely pathway and one that will require more 
studies and more specific targeted research. Other hypothesis considered and evaluated by the  
team included possibility of transmission through the trade of frozen cold- chain products. 
Although the investigative team concluded that a laboratory leak is the least likely hypothesis, 
WHO has acknowledged that this still requires further investigation. 
 
1.2 Disease Surveillance System 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.2.1 The Committee takes into account that there is still lack of concrete evidence on whether 
the corona virus reached humans via a laboratory incident. Nevertheless, the Committee 

2 
 
understands that if the origin of corona virus is allowed to remain a mystery, it will have colossal 
consequences over bio- safety and bio- security of the world. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends the Government to reckon its diplomacy to appeal to the comity of nat ions to 
conduct more studies to identify the origin of COVID -19 and penalize the culprits at the 
International platform. The Committee further feels that the increasing number of emerging virus 
highlights the necessity of establishing a robust mechanism for systematic investigation of the 
origin and the route of transmission of the pathogens. The Committee accordingly recommends 
the Ministry to develop a healthcare framework in the country for investigating and managing 
future outbreaks more effectively. In  this regard, the Committee strongly believes that the 
recently constituted Task Force Team led by Dr. VK Paul will track the Monkeypox situation and 
provide guidance to the Government on the expansion of diagnostic facilities in the country and 
combat the menace of Monkeypox.    
(Para 1.10 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.2.2  The recommendation of the Committee has been noted by the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare. It is informed that for strengthening of Disease Surveillance System for 
epidemic prone diseases, to detect and respond to the outbreaks of communicable diseases in the 
country, States/districts have been asked to notify the outbreaks immediately to the 
system. Health officials are required to report the cases of 33 plus communicable diseases 
identified under the programme. This system enables to detect the early warning signals  of 
impending outbreaks ( early rising trends and clustering of cases)  of 33 selected communicable 
diseases, initiation of timely and effective public health actions to reduce mortality and 
morbidity.  
 
1.2.3  Supplemental Information is generated through Media Scanning & Verification Cell 
(MSVC) of Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP)  which is functional at CSU 
(Central Surveillance Unit) at headquarter level and further at state and district level.  It detects 
and shares media alerts with the concerned States/districts for verification and response.  
 
1.2.4  Under IDSP, strengthening of public health labs is also an important component which 
mainly focused on developing lab capacity in India. Public health lab strengthening plan is 
currently based on two strategies:  Strengthening of District public health labs and  Referral lab 
network. 
 
1.2.5  Apart from this, as a long -term goal to better prepare the countr y against public health 
emergencies, PM Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM -ABHIM) has been 
launched by the Government of India at an outlay of Rs. 64,180 crores with the intent to enhance 
the capacity of primary, secondary and tertiary healt h care facilities and institutes for identifying 
and managing any new and emerging diseases. PM -ABHIM aims to create the requisite physical 
infrastructure on a saturation mode in different geographies.  
 

3 
 
1.2.6  Further, it is also informed that the Task Fo rce on Monkeypox Disease continues to 
monitor the multi-country outbreak of Monkeypox disease and provide its guidance on necessary 
public health measures for the same.  ICMR has taken key steps to expand the diagnostic 
facilities for COVID -19 and Monkeypox virus testing. Total testing laboratories are 3388 for 
COVID-19; whereas, for Monkeypox virus testing, total trained laboratories and testing 
laboratories are 32 are 20, respectively.  
 
1.3  Promotion of Collaborative Studies at National and International Level. 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.3.1 The Committee emphasizes that the Government must incentivise multi -disciplinary 
research and efforts towards enhancing the research infrastructure in the country. The 
Committee recommends to promote collaborative studies among National and International 
Institutes and develop a roadmap for creating a vibrant research environment in the country. 
(Para 2.6 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.3.2 
• The Department of Biotechnology supports Vaccine Research & Development activities  
through both National and International efforts. 
• Support has also been provided for basic and applied research for development of new and 
improved vaccines and related technologies; build human and infrastructural capacities in 
vaccine development.  
• Dedicated Mission programmes, as mentioned hereunder , have been implemented for 
vaccine development:  
i. National Biopharma Mission with the World Bank to accelerate biopharmaceutical 
development in the country;  
ii. Ind-CEPI mission (India Centric Epidemic Preparedn ess)for rapid vaccine 
development and supporting Indian vaccine development which is aligned with the 
Global Initiative of the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI),  
iii. Mission COVID Suraksha to accelerate Indian COVID-19 Vaccine Development.    
• International partnerships for fostering vaccine development include: Indo -US Vaccine 
Action Programme; Indo- EU Horizon 2020 partnership; Partnership with Coalition for 
Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI).  
 

4 
 
1.3.3 These programmes have enabled the fostering of strong R&D ecosystem for vaccine 
development in the country. As an outcome of these programmes, a strong vaccine candidate 
pipeline in various stages of pre-clinical and clinical development has been developed. 
 
1.3.4 Further, ICMR also conducts multidisciplinary studies and considering the 
recommendations of the Committee as a point of suggestion, ICMR will emphasize more on 
collaborative studies among National and International Institutes. 
 
1.4 Mission COVID Suraksha 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.4.1  The Committee also appreciates, "Mission COVID Suraksha-  The Indian COVID -19 
Vaccine Development Mission" which was announced as part of the third stimulus package. The 
Committee recommends Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the Department of 
Biotechnology to continue work towards development of vaccines and ensure that the vaccines 
are introduced in the market for free use.  
(Para 2.24 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.4.2  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the Department of Biotechnology  
acknowledge the appreciation made by the Committee regarding "Mission COVID Suraksha -  
The Indian COVID -19 Vaccine Development Mission". Under this Mission, following 04 
vaccine candidates have progressed in their development and received Emergency Use 
Authorization (EUA):  
• ZyCoV-D, world’s first and indigenously developed plasmid DNA Vaccine, by Zydus Life 
Sciences, for use in 12 years and above subjects.  
• Corbevax, nation’s first protein subunit vaccine by Biological E, for use in 5 years and above 
subjects. 
• GEMCOVAC-19, nation’s first mRNA Vaccine by Gennova Biopharmaceuticals. 
• iNCOVACC, first intranasal vaccine against COVID-19, by Bharat Biotech International Ltd. 
 
1.4.3  The recommendations of the Committee that MoHFW and DBT to continue work towards 
development of vaccines and ensure that the vaccines are introduced in the market for free use 
have been noted. 
 
1.5  Vaccine Research Collaboration  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.5.1 The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need to develop vaccines that  are 
effective against all the variants of concerns that have been discovered so far and also the future 

5 
 
newer variants. The Committee recommends the Ministry to take initiatives to develop a 
universal COVID vaccine that is effective against all the variants. The Ministry should encourage 
research collaboration between ICMR and other research Institutes in the country.  
(Para 2.25 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.5.2  ICMR has already transferred all the strains of variants of concern of SARS -CoV-2 
(alpha, beta, gamma, delta and omicron) to Bharat Biotech Ltd. for development of a modified 
vaccine. ICMR NIV has also been regularly undertaking studies to understand the protective 
efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines against emerging variants of SARS-CoV-2. 
 
1.6 Monitoring of Utilization of Funds  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.6.1 As per the information submitted by the Ministry, a large percentage of the fund has 
already been transferred to the States, however, the Committee is apprehensive about the 
utilization of the funds  under the Emergency COVID Response Package (Phase I & II). The 
Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to monitor the utilization of the funds by the 
States and ensure that adequate infrastructure is available in the States. The Centre along with 
the States must ensure that the allocated COVID fund is utilized for implementation of IT, 
training and capacity building of human resources besides vaccine administration. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to follow up with the Stat es to ensure 
that the funds are optimally utilized by the States and seek utilization certificate from the 
States/UTs.  
(Para 2.35 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
1.6.2  To ensure optimal utilization of funds of ECRP -I and II following steps have been take n 
by the Ministry: - 
1. States have been directed to ensure submission of annual utilization certificates (in from 
GFR-12C) as per the GFR, 2017. 
2. Use of Public Financial Management System (PFMS) in ECRP -I and II to track flow of 
funds. 
3. Various monitoring mechanisms for utilization of the funds exist to assess the 
implementation and progress of ECRP-I and II like:  
• Performance Audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India,   

6 
 
• A separate chapter for COVID -19 Emergency Response and Health system 
preparedness project for ECRP -I and II were included as a part of statutory audit for 
the FY   2021-22 as per vide DO letter No. G -2520/1/2015-16-NHM-(F) dated 
06/01/2022.  
• Regular review and monitoring of scheme components. 
 
1.7 Procurement of Vaccine and its Distribution 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.7.1  The Committee notes that procurement and delivery of vaccines for catering to the 
targeted group of people requires huge amount of financial resources. The Committee observes 
that a robust assessment of the logistic re quirements and streamlining of the procurement 
process is crucial in ensuring the supply chain of the vaccines in the country. As the beginning of 
the National COVID Vaccination Program, much confusion prevailed on the Government's 
vaccine procurement policy. The Committee takes into account that some States raised objection 
to the provision of Liberalized Pricing and Accelerated National COVID -19 Vaccination 
Strategy due to the financial constraints in the procurement of the vaccine that disturbed the 
vaccine demand supply continuum. States complained about acute shortage of vaccines in the 
third phase of vaccination, i.e. 18- 44 age Group while vaccination was the only real weapon or 
the last hope to combat COVID -19. The Committee is of the opinion that the  Centre's erstwhile 
policy of not providing free vaccines to age group of 18- 44 years was devoid of any  justification 
and generated hue and cry amongst vaccine willing citizens.   
(Para 3.10 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.7.2  The COVID -19 vaccination in the country is guided by National Expert Group on 
Vaccine Administration for COVID -19 (NEGVAC) on the basis of concurrent scientific 
evidence. The prioritization for vaccination has been done with an aim to protect the pandemic 
response and health system and to have maximum impact on reduction of disease & deaths due to 
COVID-19. This was later followed by age -based prioritization, which is considered equitable 
and which has also been the practice globally. 
 
1.7.3  Procurement of vaccines was done by al l States/UTs as part of ‘Liberalised Pricing and 
Accelerated National COVID -19 Vaccination Strategy’ that was in effect from 1 st May, 2021 to 
20th June, 2021. A total of 4.57 crore doses were procured by the States/UTs during this period 
through a clear la id down procedure. The demand from private hospitals was collated by states 
and communicated to manufacturers. It is also informed that during this period, Government of 
India continued to supply COVID-19 vaccines free of cost to all States/UTs for priorit y groups of 

7 
 
health care workers, front line workers and persons aged 45 years and above as identified by 
NEGVAC. 
 
1.7.4  Free vaccination to all persons aged 18 years and above started from 21st June 2021. 
 
1.8 Pre-purchase Agreement for Procurement of Vaccine. 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.8.1 The Committee takes note that the Indian Government did not make any upfront payments 
or signed any pre-purchase agreement with the vaccine manufacturers during the developmental 
phase of vaccines. The need of such agreement w as felt when the vaccine supply could not match 
the vaccine demand from the States. The Committee notes that as most of the vaccine centres 
used to get full to its capacity at quick pace, booking a slot on Cowin became herculean task at 
the early stage. Th e Committee is  of the view that the Government should have taken steps to 
enhance vaccine capacity in the country and procure additional vaccine doses. The Committee 
believes that a better assessment of the vaccine requirement in the country could have 
accelerated the vaccination drive. However, absence of a micro -level planning greatly impacted 
the supply chain of vaccines.  
(Para 3.11 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
1.8.2  The issue of vaccine supplies not meeting the vaccine demand was felt across many 
countries of the world. It was because of limited supply of COVID -19 vaccine that an approach 
of vaccinating the most vulnerable population groups was adopted by most countries including 
India. 
 
1.8.3 Vaccination at each CVCs was done based on the laid down SOPs in the operational 
guidelines of COVID -19 vaccination programme. Each vaccinator was allotted a session with 
atleast 100 beneficiary load per day. Number of vaccination sites was planned by States/UTs 
based on their requirements and availability of vaccinators and distribution of vaccines. 
 
1.8.4 Advance information of vaccine allocation to be supplied to the States/UTs was provided 
by the Government of India at the beginning of each month. States/UTs to further plan and 
allocate doses to districts an d vaccination centers. Further, the information about the above 
availability at vaccination center were put in the public domain and widely disseminates it among 
the local population, maximizing the visibility and convenience of citizens. 
 
1.9 Negotiation on Better Price 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.9.1 The Committee further notes that the Procurement Policy was modified from time to time 
to overcome the limitation of each Procurement Process. However, the Committee is of the view 

8 
 
that there exists a huge disparity between the States and many economically weaker States were 
incapable of managing such intricate vaccine logistic requirements on their own.  With the 
change in the guidelines of the procurement policy, the Central Government could negotiate with 
the vaccine manufacturers and settle on a fair and better price. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to make elaborate arrangements for ensuring procurement in emergency situations.  
(Para 3.12 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.9.2  Vaccine doses provided free o f cost by Government of India are being allocated to 
States/UTs based on criteria such as population, disease burden and the progress of vaccination. 
Further, the Government of India has negotiated with the concerned vaccine manufacturers for 
settling on a  fair and better price and timely production. All efforts were made to ensure timely 
procurement of vaccines during such emergency situations.  
 
1.10 Assistance for Procurement Planning  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.10.1  The Committee further recommends the Minist ry to seek technical as well as financial 
assistance so that procurement planning strategy can be further strengthened for future such 
emergencies. 
(Para 3.13 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.10.2  The policy decisions and strategic guidance to the vacci nation program are guided by the 
expert bodies like NEGVAC, NTAGI and Empowered Groups and Domain Knowledge Experts 
which have stakeholders from states/UTs and professional bodies and institutions. These groups 
have guided the program on all aspects including procurement in emergency situation. 
 
1.10.3  The financial assistance to Support for COVID -19 Vaccination Programme was received 
from the Ministry of Finance under Demand No. 40 –Transfer to States during FY 2021- 22 and 
under Demand No. 42 –Transfer to States during FY 2022-23. 
 
 
1.11 Modern Technology for Last Mile Delivery of Vaccine 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.11.1  The Committee also notes that in regions with difficult geographical terrain and poor 
connectivity, digitization of vaccine stock inventory and its storage temperature may not be 
possible.  The Committee is concerned especially for States like Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh 

9 
 
and the North Eastern States where road as well as network connectivity is very poor. Ensuring a 
robust vaccine distribution m echanism and monitoring the temperature while ensuring last mile 
delivery of the vaccines may be a challenge in such areas. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends the Ministry to coordinate with the States and encourage use of modern 
technologies, Drones, Helicopters for the robust distribution of the vaccines.  
(Para 3.27 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.11.2    Use of modern technologies like drones, as well as other means i.e. helicopters, boats, 
camel and by foot were used in the Hilly States and NE St ates during the National COVID -19 
Vaccination Programme. However, digitization of vaccine stock inventory through eVIN has 
been rolled out across the country and the States are being supported through PIP for ensuring 
good internet connectivity. 
 
1.12 Indigenous mRNA Vaccine 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.12.1  The Committee observes that the price of Indian vaccines compared to the foreign 
vaccines is less, however, the Committee observes that mRNA vaccines because of their high 
potency have been greatly explored over the conventional vaccine platforms such as subunit, 
killed and live attenuated virus etc. The Committee is given to understand that mRNA vaccines 
provide greater flexibility in comparison to other vaccine platforms. With the virus constantly 
mutating and increasing risk of vaccine escape, mRNA vaccines provide a better alternative and 
more flexibility. The potential for low cost manufacture of the mRNA vaccines is also a major 
advantage. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to explore such versatile 
vaccine platforms in the country and work towards producing cost effective indigenous mRNA 
vaccines.   
(Para 3.32 of 137th Report) 
 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.12.2  
• Noted for compliance.  
• Development of nearly ten COVID -19 vaccine candidates based on about seven different 
platforms has been supported by the Department of Biotechnology. 
• Of these four vaccine candidates received Emergency Use Authorization. These include 
the World’s first DNA vaccine for COVID -19 (ZyCoV-D); and the nations’ first mRNA 
vaccine for COVID-19 (GEMCOVAC-19) stable at 2-80 C. 
 

10 
 
1.13 Research for Booster Doses 
 
Recommendation: 
1.13.1  The Committee notes that Booster or Precautionary doses commenced for all adults at 
Private vaccination Centres from April, 2022. The Committee would l ike to be apprised of the 
evidence based research and the clinical trials conducted in the country that necessitated the 
administering of booster doses in the country. The Committee would like to be informed on the 
reasons for the change in the vaccination policy of the Government and inoculating the citizens 
with the precautionary dose of the same vaccine. The Committee also notes that some reports 
suggest that a booster dose of a vaccine of a different platform could be better than a vaccine of 
the same p latform. The Committee feels that such proposition requires deep research and any 
implementation of such suggestion must be substantiated by in- depth research data, scientific 
interpretations and clinical trials.  
(Para 3.37 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.13.2  A study has been conducted by Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) to examine 
the effect of booster dose of Covaxin which shows increase in the levels of neutralizing 
antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 after the booster dose. The study report can be accessed through 
the given link: https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.01.05.22268777v1. International 
data available on booster doses of AstraZeneca/Covishield suggests 3 -4 times increase in 
neutralizing antibody levels after administration of third dose of AstraZeneca/Covishield.  
 
1.13.3  As per the recommendation of the National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization 
(NTAGI), administration of precaution dose has started from 10th January 2022 as a homologous 
precaution dose to Health Care Workers (HCWs), Front Line Workers (FLWs) and persons aged 
60 years who have received two doses of COVID -19 vaccines. This has been subsequently 
expanded to all beneficiaries 18 years and above. 
 
1.14 People Centric Approach 
  
Recommendations: 
 
1.14.1  The Committee is of the view that a robust implementation of the five principles will 
ensure the success of the National Vaccination Program. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to ensure participation of the key officers from State to the Block level along  with active 
participation of the masses. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to ensure that 
diversion of healthcare forces to manage Covid- related uncertainties must not cause any 
disruption in the delivery of primary health care services. The Comm ittee further recommends 
that that past experiences of universal immunization and elections must be utilized in smooth 

11 
 
implementation of the National Vaccination Program.  At the same time, every effort should be 
made so that there is no compromise on scientific and regulatory rules and norms.  
(Para 4.5 of 137th Report) 
 
Action taken: 
 
1.14.2   The vaccination drive has constantly evolved as per the scientific evidence and ground 
situation of the pandemic, providing the best possible solutions and guidance  for people-centric 
implementation. During the course of time, strategic interventions were instituted to make the 
vaccination program and its process more people centric, convenient and more pragmatic. 
MoHFW has given guidance to the States/UTs on continuing covid vaccination along with 
Primary health services. 
 
1.14.3   The policy decisions and strategic guidance to the vaccination program are guided by the 
expert bodies like NEGVAC, NTAGI and Empowered Groups and Domain Knowledge Experts 
which have stake holders from states/UTs and professional bodies and institutions. The COVID-
19 vaccination utilizes the existing infrastructure of the Universal Immunization Programme 
(UIP), including the cold chain system. Further, all efforts have been made by the Minis try in 
order to ensure that there is no compromise on scientific and regulatory rules and norms. 
 
1.15 IT Framework for Vaccination Programme 
 
Recommendation: 
1.15.1  The Committee appreciates the Ministry's initiatives in developing a digital system, 
"CoWin" to monitor vaccine administration in the country. The Committee notes that a platform 
was crucial for rolling out of the country wide vaccination program and the Co- WIN app formed 
the backbone of the country's vaccination drive. However, some technical  glitches were reported 
in the app and some issues were raised during beneficiary registration on the COWIN App. The 
Committee is of the view that enabling a strong IT framework through Cowin Platform and 
imparting necessary training to all the stakeholder s was crucial for success of the vaccination 
Program.  
(Para 4.24 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.15.2      A unique digital platform - Co-WIN 2.0 supports the vaccination activity, helping the 
beneficiary to register and program officers to tracking of every beneficiary for COVID -19 
vaccination along with real time information on the available stocks of vaccine, their storage 
temperature, actual vaccination process, generation of digital certificates etc. The platform is 
serving as single source of truth for all data related to beneficiaries, vaccination process. 
 

12 
 
1.15.3  Regular training of stakeholders and administrative officers were held on the CoWIN 
portal, across all States and UTs. 
 
 
1.16 Tracking of Vaccine 
 
Recommendation: 
1.16.1  The Committee o bserves that tracking of the vaccine transporting vehicles is crucial for 
ensuring the timely supply of the vaccines. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the 
Karnataka Government and recommends that all the States must also use such vaccine vehicle 
live tracking app for better vaccine management on a real time basis.   
(Para 4.25 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.16.2  The tracking of the vaccine transporting vehicles including monitoring of  temperature 
loggers is planned. 
 
1.17 Focus of Vaccination in Rural Areas 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.17.1  The Committee understands that there exists a huge digital divide between the rural and 
the urban population. With poor accessibility and connectivity, many areas of the country still 
remain disconnected from the digital ecosystem. The Committee notes that rural areas tend to be 
neglected as the level of awareness is very poor. The Committee recommends the Ministry to take 
effective measures to ensure that the rural areas especially the tribal areas are also included in 
the vaccination drive. The Committee notes that in the absence of internet connectivity, entering 
data in the app is a challenge. The Committee accordingly, recommends the Ministry to ensure 
that the data collected in the physical form is uploaded in the Cowin app at the earliest. The 
Committee is of the view that the Ministry must aim towards an inclusive vaccination policy and 
the vaccination drive must include the marginalized and the vulnerable population of the country 
too.   
(Para 4.26 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.17.2  The registration and vaccination of people without access to digital technology can be 
done through walk- in registration and vaccination of either single individual or groups of 
individuals at COVID -19 Vaccination Centre (CVC),  Facilitated cohort on –site registration and 
vaccination, Assisted registration through Common Service Centers (CSCs) or 1075 

13 
 
helpline/State’s Call Center, Special sessions for people who don’t have any of the specified 
identity cards such as migrants, seers, nomads etc. 
 
1.17.3  In areas without internet connectivity, the vaccination sessions can still be organized 
using manual records which are to be entered into the Co- WIN system for generation of 
vaccination certificates, up to 5:00 pm on the day after the date of such session. 
 
1.17.4  As on 1 st February 2023, a total of 220.51 crore vaccine doses have been administered in 
the country in the population above 12 years of age. Out of which, 1st dose is 102.57 crore (97%) 
and 2nd dose is 95.18 crore (90%) and 22.75 crore precaution dose have been administered in the 
country. The National COVID-19 vaccination programme is ongoing across the country. 
 
1.17.5  A total of 71.7% vaccine doses have been administered in COVID Vaccination Center 
(CVCs) tagged as rural CVCs,  28.1% in Urban CVCs  and 0.3% in untagged CVCs. 
 
1.18 Data on Efficacy of Vaccination 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.18.1  The Committee also notes that through CoWin the Ministry has been successful in 
administering 2 billion COVID doses and CoWin holds a huge repository of the vaccination data. 
However, various stakeholders during the discussion highlighted the absence of any data on the 
efficacy of the vaccine. The Committee accordingly notes that even with an outstanding CoWin 
data system, the country has no extensive records of after immunisation effects in its population. 
The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to facilitate linkages between CoWin and other 
data systems and share the data in the public domain. The Committee is of the opinion that 
building inter -operable data systems that ensure real time data exchange can provide a better 
assessment of the efficacy of the vaccines. The Committee further feels that this digital ecosystem 
can be aptly utilised for not only monitoring the vaccine supply chain but also promoting 
concrete research and formulating better policy decisions.   
(Para 4.27 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.18.2  India COVID-19 Vaccine Tracker has been developed by ICMR by utilising COVID -19 
Vaccination data from Co -WIN Port al & testing data from ICMR portal using a common 
identification to link the two data system. It is analysed by ICMR using common identifier to 
measure Vaccine Effectiveness on Mortality (Person-Time Analysis).    
 
1.19 Regional Scientific Co-operation  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.19.1  The Committee takes into account that DBT strengthened the Regional Scientific Co-
operation and looked forward in taking a lead role in ensuring that the indigenous vaccines 

14 
 
undergo rigorous clinical trials in the neighbouring count ries. The Committee, in this regard, 
recommends the Ministry to collaborate with research bodies and apex institutes of the 
neighbouring countries so that regional cooperation is further strengthened and scientific 
fervour is promoted in India and the neighbouring countries. The Committee also recommends 
the Ministry of Health and Family and the Department of Biotechnology to work towards 
upgrading the clinical trials infrastructure in the country.   
(Para 5.4 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.19.2   
• The recommendations of the Committee have been noted by the Ministry of Health and 
Family and the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) . It is informed that the DBT in 
partnership with the National Institutes of Health (NIH), USA, has initiated the Indo -US 
Clinical Research Ethics Fellowship Program under the aegis of Indo–US Vaccine Action 
Programme (VAP). The program has been designed for building capacities in the area of 
clinical research ethics.  
• Further, DBT has supported a network of 54 clinical trial sites, across India, consisting of 
a network of public and private hospitals, clinics and reputed academic institutions for 
facilitating vaccine clinical trials. Each site has access to a cohort of about 50000 –  
100000 healthy volunteers, who can be tracked for prolonged periods of time. The sites 
are equipped with Harmonized systems for GCP compliance; Electronic data capture on a 
central platform; robust Disease Registry for capturing patient data on clinical 
presentation, treatment and outcome. 
 
1.20 Partnership for Accelerating Clinical Trials  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.20.1  The Committee appreciates the PACT (Partnerships for Accelerating Clinical Trials) 
programme and recommends the Department of Biotechnology and the Department of Health 
Research to launch various programs for studying other diseases along with  their drug and 
vaccine development.  The Committee also recommends the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare and the Department of Health Research to collaborate on development of Indian 
COVID-19 vaccines.  
(Para 5.5 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.20.2  The recommendations of the Committee have been noted by the Ministry of Health and 
Family and the Department of Health Research. It is also informed that the ICMR has started 
preparations to conduct clinical trials on other vaccines for diseases such as Dengue, Monkeypox, 
etc.  Additionally, in order to strengthen their search ecosystem in the country, ICMR has 

15 
 
launched the Indian Clinical Trial and Education Network (In- TENT), an initiative to build a 
network of Research Institutes to facilitate clinical research trials across the country. 
 
1.21 Indigenous COVID-19 Vaccine Development  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.21.1  The Committee appreciates, "Mission COVID Suraksha -The Indian COVID -19 Vaccine 
Development Missi on" which is aimed at accelerating indigenous COVID 19 vaccine 
development efforts. The Committee hopes that the Mission is successful in developing more 
indigenous vaccines that are affordable and easily accessible. The success of the Mission can 
break the barrier of shortage in vaccine supply, thus ensuring vaccines for all and promoting 
vaccine equity across the world.   
(Para 5.6 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.21.2  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the Department of Biotechnology 
acknowledge the appreciation recorded by the Committee regarding "Mission COVID Suraksha -  
The Indian COVID -19 Vaccine development Mission ". Under this Mission, following 04 
vaccine candidates were supported and have received Emergency Use Authorization (EUA): 
• ZyCoV-D, World’s first and indigenously developed plasmid DNA Vaccine, by Zydus 
Life Sciences, for use in 12 years and above subjects.  
• Corbevax, Nation’s first protein subunit vaccine by Biological E, for use in 5 years and 
above subjects. 
• GEMCOVAC-19, Nation’s first mRNA Vaccine by Gennova Biopharmaceuticals. 
• iNCOVACC, First intranasal vaccine against COVID-19, by Bharat Biotech International 
Ltd. 
 
1.22 Vaccine Diplomacy  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.22.1  The Committee is of the firm opinion that India should ensure adequate availability of 
vaccines in the country alongwith expanding its collaboration with other countries under 
"Vaccine Maitree". The Committee believes that India's vaccine diplomacy would promote 
vaccine equity i.e. global equitable vaccine distribution among the less developed Asian, African 
and Latin American countries.    
(Para 5.7 of 137th Report) 
 
 

16 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.22.2  To facilitate the external supplies of COVID -19 vaccines to other countries, India 
launched Vaccine Maitri in January 2021. In li ne with our Neighbourhood First  policy, the 
supplies were first undertaken to our neighbouring countries as India’s gift. Subsequently, 
supplies to other countries were undertaken, both as gifts and under commercial contracts. Till 
end September 2022, Indi a has exported 267.37 million doses of vaccines to more than 100 
countries and two UN entities. Out of theses, 82.80 million doses to Asian, 38.95 million doses to 
African and 7.4 million doses to Latin American countries. Indian continues to supply vaccines 
as demanded from the various regions of the world. 
 
1.23 Utilisation of Ayush Infrastructure for Vaccination 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.23.1  The Committee understands the piloted role of Ministry of Ayush in National COVID -19 
vaccination programme as the Ministry provided pool of Heatlhcare workers as vaccinator.  The 
Committee recommends that the Ayush institutional structure must be massively utilised as 
platform for dissemination of IEC activities, thus enhancing public awareness for mitigation of 
COVID-19.      
(Para 5.8 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.23.2  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of AYUSH had worked in close 
tandem for generating widespread awareness regarding COVID -19 vaccination.  All IEC 
including press releases, fact checks, rebuttals, information documents, etc., issued by the 
MoHFW were shared with M/o AYUSH to amplify through their platforms. Similarly, AYUSH 
IEC activities and positive stories were amplified through various social media platforms of 
MoHFW, and diss eminated through Doordarshan (DD), All India Radio (AIR) and amplified 
further through regional media, community radio stations, etc.   
 
 
1.24 End-to-End Vaccine Supply Chain 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.24.1 The Committee recommends the Government to lay special e mphasis on the 
strengthening of the end -to-end vaccine supply chain and logistics systems. The Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare in coordination with the States must ensure strengthening of the 
cold-chain infrastructure and fair distribution of the vaccines to all the States/UTs.       
(Para 5.10 of 137th Report) 
 

17 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.24.2  Government of India has been supplying COVID -19 vaccines free of cost to the 
States/UTs for administration to prioritized beneficiaries as recommended by NEGVAC under 
the National COVID-19 Vaccination Programme. Advance visibility of these vaccine allocations 
i.e. total doses of vaccine that would be available to a State/UT, is provided to States/UTs 15 
days in advance so as to enable States/UTs to plan for acceleration of vaccination coverage. 
 
1.24.3  The allocation of vaccines to States/UTs are being done on the basis of pro- rata target 
population, progress of vaccination in the State/UT and vaccine wastage. The existing cold chain 
infrastructure of the Universal Immuni zation Programme (UIP) has been augmented to meet the 
requirements of the COVID-19 vaccination programme. 
 
1.25 Vaccine Awareness in Rural Areas 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.254.1  Taking into account the Urban- Rural vaccination gap, the Committee is of the view that 
the existing infrastructure of Panchayati Raj can be optimally reckoned for dissemination of IEC 
for creating public awareness regarding the benefits of vaccine. 
 
1.25.2  The Committee, in this regard recommends that the Panchayati Raj Institutional 
arrangement and grass root local bodies must be massively utilized for mass rural 
vaccination. The Ministry must also utilize the State machinery to increase the uptake of the 
precautionary dose in the rural areas.   
(Para 5.13 & 5.14 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.25.3  Panchayati Raj Institutions have proactively been at the forefront of COVID -19 
management and effective implementation of world’s largest & fastest COVID -19 vaccination 
programme in and across rural areas of the country. There are numerous  Panchayats in the rural 
areas, including those of tribal dominated, remotely located, belonging to hill/difficult terrains 
etc., that have achieved 100% COVID-19 vaccine shot coverage, many of them also covering the 
booster precautionary dose requirements . Such villages/ Gram Panchayats have achieved 
vaccination targets at the fastest pace possible adopting locally -customized strategy to vaccinate 
entire eligible population. Following actions have been taken by the M/o Panchayati Raj: 
i. State / UT Department s / Directorates of Panchayati Raj were requested to make extensive 
use of the IEC materials and get it translated in prominent local languages for wider 
dissemination among the general rural masses. These IEC materials customized for 
ensuring mass awarene ss and maximum outreach through network of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions / Rural Local Bodies with an objective to building public confidence regarding 
COVID-19 vaccine and addressing fears over any adverse events and at the same time 
continuing stress on strict public adherence to COVID-19 Appropriate Behaviour. 

18 
 
ii. Sabki Yojna Sabka Vikas  WhatsApp Group was created among headquarter level Officers 
of State / UT Departments / Directorates of Panchayati Raj for circulating among other 
WhatsApp Groups for accessing to the IEC materials and having authentic news regarding 
COVID-19 vaccine benefits and updates on nationwide vaccination drive. 
iii. M/o Panchayati Raj has also regularly been disseminating the IEC materials / updates on 
COVID-19 vaccine benefits, ongoing vac cination programme and COVID -19 Appropriate 
Behaviour among the masses through social media outreach activities. 
iv. The means of bulk SMSes to the Gram Panchayats have also been used to circulate IEC 
materials shared by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare on building public confidence 
regarding COVID -19 vaccine and stressing upon strict public adherence to COVID -19 
Appropriate Behaviour. 
v. The occasion of National Panchayati Raj Day –2021 (i.e. 24th April 2021) was also utilized 
towards awareness creation about C OVID-19 appropriate behaviour and vaccination 
through social media interventions and bulk-SMSes. 
vi. As a result of such intensive campaign, many best performing Panchayats could emerge, 
and their example could also be seen in popular social media platforms li ke Twitter / 
YouTube etc. MoPR has also been disseminating / sharing such success stories on 
vaccination drive in rural areas through social media so that the same can be replicated in 
other parts of the country. 
vii. M/o Panchayati Raj had also organized serie s of virtual meetings with States / Union 
Territories (Panchayati Raj Departments) (in different batches) during 20 th – 31st May 2021 
to discuss and review the steps taken by the States/UTs vis -à-vis awareness / IEC and 
overall preparedness in view of the MoHFW’s SOPs / Guidelines. 
viii. Panchayats to inform / sensitize the masses about various guidelines issued by the 
Government of India or State Government regarding prevention of COVID -19. They were 
also advised to sensitize the villagers about simple tips and step -by-step guide to book 
COVID-19 vaccination slot, and extend help to the poor, widows, elderly, persons with 
disabilities (Divyang) and other disadvantaged persons for this purpose. 
ix. M/o Panchayati Raj has developed a dashboard to monitor the COVID -19 management by 
the Panchayats including the vaccination drive and IEC activities for targeted and 
continuous monitoring wherever necessary. 
 
1.26 Vaccination in J&K 
 
Recommendation: 
1.26.1  The Committee hopes that the UT of J&K would achieve the set target under its 
vaccination drive through coveted IEC mechanism. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
must monitor and guide the UT for effective management of COVID cases in the UT of J&K.   
(Para 5.19 of 137th Report) 

19 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.26.2  As on 12 th October 2022, Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir has achieved 100% 
coverage of 1st and 2nd dose for population 12 years and above.   
 
1.27 Use of IEC and IPC for Vaccination 
 
Recommendation: 
1.27.1  The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Health and  Family Welfare must 
ensure that appropriate accountability and review mechanisms are established in each State 
and adequate training is provided for ensuring smooth roll out of the vaccination drive. The 
Committee further recommends the use of Information Education and Communication (IEC), 
Interpersonal communication (IPC) strategies to generate awareness among the community 
to counter vaccine hesitancy in the States.  
(Para 5.27 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.27.2  Information Education and Communicati on (IEC) and Interpersonal Communication 
(IPC) strategies have been used as an integral tool for widespread awareness generation to 
counter any possible vaccine hesitancy in regions and States, depending primarily on regional 
language. ASHAs, Anganwadi wor kers, vaccinators were the first point of contact for creating 
this ground level awareness and confidence among people.  
 
1.27.3  All IEC including press releases, fact checks, rebuttals, information, documents, etc., 
issued by the MoHFW were amplified thr ough various social media platforms of MoHFW, and 
disseminated through Doordarshan (DD), All India Radio(AIR) and amplified further through 
regional media, community radio stations, etc.  The Ministry also engaged with regional 
influencers, community leade rs, faith and religious leaders to encourage beneficiaries across 
States towards vaccination. Door to door campaigns were taken up for providing authentic 
information as parts of various campaigns, prominent being the Har Ghar Dastak 1.0 and 2.0 and 
the 75 days campaign for Precaution Dose, as part of Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav was celebrated 
across country from 15.07.2022 to 30.09.2022.  
 
1.27.4  Testimonials from the various States featuring beneficiaries taking the vaccine, including 
Haryana, were highlight ed on social media and other channels for encouraging people to come 
forward and take the COVID vaccination. 
 
1.28 Vaccination for Marginalised Groups 
 
Recommendation: 
1.28.1  The Committee, in this regard, commends the role of Government of Haryana for 
conducting special sessions to cover homeless population, prison inmates, specially -abled, 

20 
 
etc. The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that the vulnerable and marginalized 
groups are not excluded from the vaccination drive.   
(Para 5.28 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.28.2  Under the National COVID -19 Vaccination Programme, strategic interventions were 
instituted to make the vaccination program and its process more people centric, convenient and 
more pragmatic. These include the following guidance  and interventions issued to the 
States/UTs:  
• Vaccination of people at workplace for employees above 18 years & their dependents 
• Vaccination of beneficiaries without prescribed identity cards   
• Revision in dosage interval of Covishield based on growing evidence 
• Vaccination recommendations for lactating mothers and pregnant women 
• Near to Home COVID vaccination centres (NHCVCs) for elderly & differently abled 
citizens. 
 
1.29 Har Ghar Dastak 
 
Recommendation: 
1.29.1 The Committee emphasizes on the need of expanding "Har Ghar Dastak" Programme 
across the country. The Committee further desires that other State Governments must follow the  
COVID-19 mitigation strategy  of  the Government of Assam where funds raised under Corporate 
Social Responsibility have been utilized to strengthen the public health infrastructure in the State 
that is being optionally utilized in Vaccination drive in the State.   
(Para 5.41 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.29.2  Har Ghar Dastak 2.0 Campaign was implemented across the country fr om 1st June 2022 
to 31st July 2022, with an objective to : 
 
• Vaccinate all due for 2nd dose and eligible for precaution dose in ≥ 60 years age group 
through door-to-door activity 
• Emphasise on vaccination of beneficiaries in prisons and old-age homes, ashrams etc. 
• School-based campaign (Govt./Pvt,/Informal schools like Madrasas, Day Care 
Schools) & Har Ghar Dastak round (Schools with summer vacations during the 
campaign period & non- school going children)for focused coverage of children aged 
12-18 years population. 
• The campaign has contributed in reaching out to the beneficiary till the last mile 
including the old-aged, differently-abled and evens the vaccine hesitant populations.  
 

21 
 
1.29.3  Through the Har Ghar Dastak campaign, the vaccination coverage in the States has shown 
an increasing trend. 
1.30 Utilization of eVIN 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.30.1  The Committee appreciates the utilization of eVIN in the State of Manipur, however, the 
Committee notes that collection of real time information may be difficult in many geographically 
tough terrain of the State thereby necessitating further improvemen t in Vaccine logistic 
management.  The Committee, further recommends the State to ensure that vaccine centres and 
cold chain points are well integrated in the eVIN.   
 
(Para 5.43 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.30.2  Digitization of vaccine stock invent ory through eVIN has been rolled out across the 
country, allowing real time information on vaccine availability. 
 
1.31   Data Management of Vaccination  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.31.1  The Committee understands that far flung and remote islands of the UT of Andaman & 
Nicobar have poor network connectivity and live data entry may be a herculean task. The 
Committee recommends the UT to ensure that the entries are logged as soon as the network 
connectivity is restored so that national data on the vaccination is compiled without delay.    
 
(Para 5.73 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.31.2  Co -WIN portal has the provision that in areas without internet connectivity, the 
vaccination sessions can still be organized using manual records which are to be entered into the 
Co-WIN system for generation of vaccination certificates, up to 5:00 pm on the day after the date 
of such session.   
 
1.32 Best Practices of Vaccination 
 
Recommendation: 
1.32.1  The Committee takes notes of the best practices adopted while implementing nati onal 
Vaccination Programme in Madhya Pradesh especially for Cold Chain and vaccine 

22 
 
management.  The Committee recommends the adoption of the best practices during execution of 
Vaccination drive by other States too.   
(Para 5.76 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.32.2  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been reviewing the progress of National 
COVID-19 Vaccination program with all States/UTs, wherein best practices of each state is 
shared/appreciated with all other states.   
 
1.33 Robust Institutional Arrangement in Kerala 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.33.1  The Committee applauds the proactive response of the State Government of Kerala in 
COVID case management. The State was very efficient in minimizing the impact of the first wave 
of the pandemic and the State Health machinery was never stretched to its limits. Various State 
interventions were planned at the outset of the pandemic itself which helped the State to manage 
the pandemic efficiently. The robust Institutional arrangement and timely & effective measure s 
further helped in delaying the peak.    
(Para 5.89 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.33.2  Government of India is supporting states in their endeavor to manage COVID -19 since 
the beginning of pandemic. Union Ministry of Health has provided requisite support to 
States/UTs to enhance preparedness and response capacities against COVID -19. During various 
virtual review meetings held with States/UTs, States have been urged to convey the best practices 
adopted by them for their adaptation and implementation in other States as well. 
 
1.33.3  Union Health Ministry has issued a number of guidelines and the same have been made 
available on the website of the Ministry (www.mohfw.gov.in) targeting various groups/activities 
such as (i) Travel (ii) Behavioral Health, ( iii) Citizens, (iv) Hospitals, (v) States / Departments / 
Ministries, (vi) Employees etc. Over 180 guidelines/advisories/SOPs have been issued to 
States/UTs. These guidelines cover a wide array of subjects related to COVID -19 management 
including surveillance & containment, testing, treatment protocols for adults as well as children, 
management of co -morbidities, management of post -COVID sequale, safe resumption of 
activities in workplaces, markets, malls, hotels etc. 
 
1.33.4  Further, financial assistance has been provided to States/UTs for health system 
strengthening to meet any exigency due to resurgence of cases in the country through NHM, 
SDRF, ECRP packages I & II and PM – ABHIM. 
 
 

23 
 
1.34 Kerala Model for Management of Oxygen 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.34.1  Th e Committee appreciates the novel approaches adopted by the State Government of 
Kerala to manage the pandemic. The State Healthcare system did a commendable job to ensure 
that the COVID cases are timely tracked and contained. The Committee takes notes that  the State 
of Kerala had a robust monitoring system and a well planned infrastructure in the form of 
Domiciliary Care Centre, COVID first line treatment Centre, COVID second line treatment 
centre and COVID hospital. The Committee strongly feels that a strong primary health care 
network along with trained grass root healthcare workers was crucial for containing the 
pandemic. The containment strategies and efficient planning adopted by the State helped the 
State in averting the medical emergency due to shortage of medical oxygen and beds in the 
hospitals. The Committee further acknowledges the hub and spoke model adopted by the State for 
efficient management of Oxygen in the State. The Committee notes that timely mapping of 
hospitals through software as done by the State of Kerala should have been adopted by the other 
States for better management of Oxygen across hospitals.   
 
1.34.2  The Committee feels that the pandemic has given us the opportunity to plug the loopholes 
of the Indian Healthcare System and shi fted the focus on the need of ushering change in the 
healthcare sector. The Committee observes that the State Government of Kerala adopted many 
novel approaches in its fight against the pandemic. The Committee strongly recommends the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to study the Kerala Model and other novel approaches 
adopted by other States. The Committee recommends that the Ministry must co- ordinate and play 
pivotal role in exchanging of new ideas and new learning during the pandemic and related 
strategic management and ensure implementation of the successful models viz. the Kerala Model 
in other States and strengthen healthcare delivery system to meet any future medical emergency. 
                                                                (Para 5.90 and 5.91 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.34.3  The State of Kerala through e- jagratha portal, an IT based platform, monitors the 
requirement of medical oxygen, efficient allocation of oxygen for the entire State. All the 
hospitals both from the pri vate and government sector were registered in the portal and different 
types of oxygen inventories available in all these hospitals were mapped in the portal. Whereas, 
pan India States were using Oxycare –Management Information System (OC -MIS) for the real  
time supply, allocation, installation and functionality of ventilators, oxygen concentrators, 
oxygen cylinders, etc. 
 
1.34.4   For appropriate management of suspect/confirmed COVID -19 cases, a three tier 
arrangement of health facilities has been implemented in the country. This includes COVID Care 
Center (CCC) that shall offer care for mild/asymptomatic cases, Dedicated COVID Health Centre 

24 
 
(DCHC) that shall offer care for all cases that have been clinically assigned as moderate and 
Dedicated COVID Hospital  (DCH) that shall offer comprehensive care primarily for those who 
have been clinically assigned as severe. Tertiary care hospitals under ESIC, Defence, Railways, 
paramilitary forces, Steel Ministry etc. are also being leveraged for case management. During  
various virtual meetings, States/UTs have been urged to convey the best practices adopted by 
them for their adaptation and implementation in other States as well. 
 
1.35 Waiver of Intellectual Property Protection for COVID Vaccines And Other COVID -
19 Diagnostics and Therapeutics 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.35.1 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the proposal of temporary waiver of 
Intellectual property protection for COVID vaccines and other COVID -19 diagnostics and 
therapeutics at WTO. The Committee  believes that exclusive control over vaccines via patents 
can pose a hurdle in ensuring vaccine access to countries that lack the vaccine manufacturing 
capacity. The looming fear of future resurgence and more virulent viruses persists and global 
eradication of the COVID is crucial for halting this pandemic. The Committee, therefore, 
believes that transfer of technology and waiver will significantly bridge the large demand supply 
gap as the vaccines will be produced without authorization from the patent hol der. The 
Committee strongly believes that for ensuring vaccine equity, there is a need to expand the 
vaccine manufacturing capacity across the globe and waive the Intellectual Property Protection 
(IPP) for COVID -19 vaccines. This can help countries in scal ing up the production of vaccines 
and make vaccines more affordable and accessible to everyone. The Committee, however, also 
believes that special emphasis will have to be laid on ensuring safety and quality standard for 
mass vaccine manufacturing. The Com mittee further notes that the move to waive Intellectual 
Property Protections (IPP) must not disincentivize the Pharmaceutical companies to invest on 
vaccine research rather the Industry and the countries across the world must unite and work 
together to expand the global vaccine manufacturing  capacity.    
 
1.35.2  The Committee accordingly urges the Government to continue making efforts for waiver 
of IP Protection for COVID vaccines and other COVID -19 diagnostics and therapeutics so that 
the vaccines are p roduced on a large scale and 100% vaccination of the world population is 
achieved.  
(Para 6.27& 6.28 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.35.3  In October 2020, India and South Africa submitted a proposal for a waiver from certain 
provisions of the Trade -Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement for 
the prevention, treatment and containment of COVID -19 to the WTO TRIPS Council. The 
proposal sought a temporary waiver from certain provisions of the TRIPS Agreement relating to 
patents, copyrights, industrial designs and trade secrets to the extent that they pose a barrier to 

25 
 
accessing COVID -19 products and technologies. This proposal was co- sponsored by 65 WTO 
Members and received wide-ranging support from international Organisations, acad emicians and 
world leaders. 
 
1.35.4  As a result of persistent follow up at various levels by India along with co- sponsors of the 
proposal, a decision on this matter was taken during the 12 thMinisterial Conference of the WTO. 
The key features of the outcome of the TRIPS waiver are the following: 
• can only be used by 'eligible Members,' i.e., developing country Members. 
• covers patents for producing and supplying vaccines needed to address the COVID -19 
pandemic. 
• includes some TRIPS -plus elements such as necess ity tests, efforts to  
prevent re-exportation, notification requirements etc. 
• waives the requirement of Article 31(f) of TRIPS and allows the products manufactured 
under the authorization to be exported to eligible Members. 
• requires Members to prevent re -exportation of the products manufactured under the 
authorization. 
• for remuneration, Members are to consider the humanitarian and not -for-profit purpose of 
specific vaccine distribution programs. 
• applicable for five years from the date of the decision. 
• Members have to decide on this Decision's extension to COVID -19 diagnostics and 
therapeutics within six months. 
 
1.35.5  Some of the critical demands of India that this decision be possibly extended to COVID -
19 diagnostics and therapeutics, and applicability of this decision for five years have been 
accepted. India led a global deal on vaccines which may help poor and developing countries to 
get better vaccine access, availability and affordability. 
 
1.35.6  India’s stand was eventually supported by more than 120 Members of the WTO. WTO 
members are currently deliberating the prospect and modalities for extending the TRIPS decision 
to therapeutics and diagnostics at the TRIPS Council. India, along with South Africa, Pakistan, 
Indonesia, Egypt and Tanzania, made a s ubmission before the TRIPS Council on the 
implementation of the TRIPS decision that deals with extending the TRIPS decision to 
therapeutics and diagnostics. 
 
1.36 PSU in Production of Vaccines  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.36.1  The Committee, in this regard, would like to be apprised of the total number of Public 
Sector Vaccines Units that are owned by the Central Government and the State Governments. 
The Committee must also be informed about the financial status and the annual Budget that has 
been allocated to the se Public Sector Manufacturing Units over the past four years. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to monitor the revival of these units and henceforth, furnish 

26 
 
quarterly Reports to the Committee. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare must forward the revival plan along with financial requirement to the Ministry of 
Finance for approval at the earliest. 
    (Para 6.32 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.36.2  The Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology, Govt. of India, 
has, under its purview, a Public Sector Undertaking (PSU), Bharat Immunologicals and 
Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL), Bulanshahr. The company currently manufactures 
and produces a range of pharmaceuticals products such as Oral Pol io Vaccines (OPV Vaccine), 
Zinc Tablets and Sanitizers. 
 
1.36.3  The budget details with respect to the Public Sector Manufacturing Units over the past 
four years are as under: 
 
Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Year BE RE Actual Exp. 
2018-19 74.20 54.20 44.11 
2019-20 65.60 65.60 38.68 
2020-21 61.79 55.79 44.67 
2021-22 67.74 80.88 55.00 
 
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL):  
(Rs. in Crore) 
Year BE RE Actual Exp. 
2018-19 22.33 21.03 14.44 
2019-20 22.33 18.60 17.12 
2020-21 21.03 21.29 18.00 
2021-22 20.57 23.49 20.82 
 
Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli: 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Year BE RE Actual Exp. 
2018-19 63.77 57.92 49.06 
2019-20 63.62 50.57 46.36 
2020-21 52.12 54.83 41.44 
2021-22 82.14 54.27 51.78 
 

27 
 
1.36.4  The recommendations of the Committee to monitor the revival of these units and henceforth, 
furnish quarterly Reports have been noted. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare also 
acknowledges the recommendations of the Committee to forward the revival plan along with financ ial 
requirement to the Ministry of Finance for approval.  
 
1.37  National COVID-19 Control Plan 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.37.1  The Committee observes that vaccination has caused a phenomenal mitigating impact on 
the continuum of the pandemic COVID-19. The Committee notes that the vaccine effectiveness in 
Preventing Mortality is very high and the death among the non - vaccinated has been the highest 
during the second and the third wave. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the 
Government to continue with National COVID -19 control Plan through massive vaccination 
drive so as to mitigate the causation factor of mutating variants of COVID-19. 
(Para 6.37 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.37.2  As on 1st February 2023, a total of 220.51 crore vaccine doses have been administered in 
the country in the population above 12 years of age. Out of which, 1 st  dose is 102.57 crore (97%) 
and 2nd dose is 95.18 crore (90%) and 22.75 crore precaution dose have been administered. The 
National COVID-19 vaccination programme is ongoing across the country. 
 
1.38 Vaccination Campaign  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.38.1  The Committee further points out the unrealistic target set by the Government for 
completion of the vaccination drive in the country by December 2021. Various studies have  been 
conducted across the world on the additional deaths that would have been averted had the 
vaccination coverage targets been achieved by the country. With the waning of vaccine efficacy 
in the population and the risk of emerging mutated variants across  the world, the success of the 
vaccination Program is a keystone of the COVID mitigation policy. The Committee, therefore, 
accordingly recommends the Ministry to focus not only on the vaccine supply side barrier but 
also on the demand side barriers so that  vaccination targets are achieved. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to take necessary measures to increase the uptake of precautionary 
doses so that the mortality rate is lowered given the rise in fresh infections. The Committee 
cautions the Gove rnment against mutating variants of COVID -19 and strongly recommends to 
have the vigil for total elimination of virus through resilient mitigation policy and effective mass 
vaccination Program.  
(Para 6.38 of 137th Report) 
 

28 
 
Action Taken: 
1.38.2   
• Har Ghar Dastak 2.0 Campaign was implemented across the country from 1 st June 2022 to 
31st July 2022, with an objective to: 
• Vaccinate all due for 2 nd dose and eligible for precaution dose in ≥ 60 years age 
group through door-to-door activity 
• Emphasis on vaccination of beneficiaries in prisons and old-age homes, ashrams etc. 
• The campaign contributed in reaching out to the beneficiary till the last mile including 
the old-aged, differently-abled and even the vaccine hesitant populations.  
1.38.3   From 15 th July 2022 to 30 th September 2022, as part of the celebration of 75 years of 
India’s Independence, Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav, Government of India launched  the ‘COVID 
Vaccination Amrit Mahotsava’ initiative under which free precaution doses were administered to 
all eligible beneficiaries (persons aged 18 years & above who have completed 6 months or 26 
weeks after the 2nd dose) at all Government CVCs. 
 
1.39 Offline Mode for feeding Vaccination Data 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.39.1  The Committee further notes that geographically tough terrain with poor connectivity 
may not permit live data entry of vaccination, hence back log entry option or off line mode of 
entry must be permitted so that the extent of actual vaccination coverage can be observed and 
any possible gap for vaccination is abridged.  
 
 (Para 6.39 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.39.2  In areas having tough terrain with poor internet connectivity, the vac cination sessions can 
still be organized using manual records which are to be entered into the Co- WIN system for 
generation of vaccination certificates, up to 5:00 pm on the day after the date of such session.   
 
 
1.40  Need of Strong Public-Private Partnership in the Health Sector 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.40.1  The Committee understands that the Government with its limited resources, faces a far 
big challenge to bring in structural changes in the Public Health System. It is a well established 
fact that there is  an urgent need to augment and develop the health ecosystem in the country to 
keep the health index of the whole population to global standard. The Committee believes that 

29 
 
Public Private Partnership in the Health Sector can facilitate bridging of the gaps in the 
healthcare infrastructure and ensure an efficient delivery of healthcare services upto lower rungs 
of the society. The Committee, taking a clue from the success of the PPP model in various sectors 
such as infrastructure, tourism, education recommends the Government to adopt a similar model 
in the health sector. The Committee finds that the Public Private Partnership in Health Sector is 
still an unexplored area and therefore, can prove momentous in increasing the reach of 
healthcare facilities. The Co mmittee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare to collaborate with the Private Sector on novel Projects related to the Health. 
The Business Houses and Companies must be encouraged to devote a substantial part of their 
CSR funding in the Health Sector to build necessary health infrastructure.  
 (Para 6.40 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.40.2  Noted for compliance. 
 
1.41 Utilisation of Private Sector Capacity  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.41.1  The Committee also recommends the Government to launch new Schemes and initiatives 
that incentivizes the Private Sector to bring in the funding and the expertise in the health sector. 
The Government must leverage the key resources of the Private sector and take full advantage of 
the expertise, finances, technology and human resource that the PPP model offers in combating 
National emergency situation in health sector like the pandemic COVID-19.   
 (Para 6.41 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.41.2   
• Government of India has launched multiple new initiatives in the context of COVID-19 to 
strengthen diagnostics, public health surveillance and access to primary health care in 
rural and urban areas. It includes funds provided to states/UTs under PM –Ayushman 
Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM -ABHIM), Emergency COVID Response 
Packages I and II (ECRP I and II) and 15 th Finance Commission Grants earmarked 
through urban and rural local bodies. 
• Private sector capacities will be leveraged through suitable PPP and contracting 
(outsourcing, insourcing etc.) arrangements. 
• Investments from private sector will be explored through mechanisms such as ‘viability 
gap funding’ from the existing government schemes. Partnerships with Civil Society 
Organizations will also be explored.  
 

30 
 
1.42 Need of Change in Vaccination Policy 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.42.1  The Committee is of the opinion that the effectiveness studies of the vaccines on the newer 
variants of the virus should have been conducted by the research bodies in India along with the 
beginning of the vaccination drive.  Countries like US and UK started conducting various studies 
to determine the proportion of people who were vaccinated but still either got severely ill or died 
due to the COVID.  The Committee further notes the research studies that recommended delay in 
the second dose of the AstraZeneca vaccine beyond the earlier recommended 4 weeks.  This was 
also endorsed by the WHO Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) 
Committee. In May, 2021, the COVID Working Group chaired by Dr N K Arora also 
recommended extension of the gap between the first and second doses of COVISHIELD vaccine 
to 12-16 weeks. The earlier gap between the two doses of COVISHIELD vaccine was 6 -8 weeks. 
The Committee, in this regard, recommends the Government to find out scienti fically, the 
reasonable gap between the two doses of the vaccine on the gap between the 2 nd and 
precautionary booster dose in the interest of public health otherwise common masses apprehend 
that Government is allowing adjustment of time gap between two dos es of vaccine to clear the 
stock of vaccine manufacturers.   
 (Para 6.42 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.42.2  Dose gaps are revised based on the evolving evidences and recommendations of COVID 
working group (of domain knowledge experts), of National Tec hnical Advisory Group on 
Immunization (NTAGI). 
 
1.42.3  Following studies conducted by ICMR and other researchers clearly indicate that6months 
gap between the primary and booster dose is appropriate: 
 
1. Persistence of immunity and impact of third dose of ina ctivated COVID-19 vaccine against 
emerging variants. 
2. Booster dose of the inactivated COVID -19 vaccine BBV152 (Covaxin) enhances the 
neutralizing antibody response against Alpha, Beta, Delta and Omicron variants of concern. 
3. Sub-optimal neutralization of omicron (B.1.1.529) variant by antibodies induced by vaccine 
alone or SARS-CoV-2 Infection plus vaccine (hybrid immunity) post 6-months. 
4. Reduced neutralizing antibody response in naïve Covishield vaccines against Omicron 
emphasizes booster vaccination. 
 
1.43 Research for Optimisation of Vaccine Dosage  
 
Recommendation: 
1.43.1   The Committee feels that with the huge repository of vaccination data in the country, 
India should have been at the forefront of conducting better assessment of the vaccine efficacy in 

31 
 
its population. The Committee believes that any change in the national vaccination policy should 
have been substantiated by real -life evidences and concrete research in the country itself. The 
Committee therefore, recommends the Ministry to conduct more re search on optimising the 
dosage interval and accordingly approach its vaccination policy.   
 
 (Para 6.43 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.43.2  Noted for compliance. 
 
1.44 Preparedness of Vaccination Strategies 
 
Recommendation: 
1.44.1  The Committee further recommends that there is a need to develop a mechanism that in 
case of future outbreaks of the pandemic, the research infrastructure is put into action and the 
vaccine policy is accordingly modified for better results. The Committee again emphasizes that 
the preparedness of vaccination strategies requires much more clinical research so that the rapid 
response care strategies are adopted. 
 (Para 6.44 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.44.2  ICMR is looking into data triangulation mechanisms so that the clinical & sequencing 
data from INSACOG, the COVID- 19 testing database of ICMR & ICMR’s COVID -19 hospital 
based clinical registry covering 40 hospitals. This will enable early prediction of any future 
waves. 
 
1.45 Enhancement in the Honorarium of AWWS/AWHS and ASHAS 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.45.1  The Committee applauds the Anganwadi Workers (AWWs), Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs) 
and Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHAs) who were  extensively involved in COVID -19 
awareness drive in the community. The Committee notes that ASHAs, AWWs and AWHs acted as 
the frontline workers during the pandemic and were responsible for spreading awareness about 
COVID-19 and safety protocols. The ASHAs were also tasked with identifying as well as tracking 
COVID-19 positive cases and carry ing out vaccination drive. ASHAs, AWWs and AWHs have 
played an important role in community surveillance as has also been applauded by WHO, 
however, these frontline workers remain unrewarded. The Committee accordingly recommends 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the Ministry of Women and Child Development to 
ensure timely payment of wages along with other social security benefits. The Committee further 

32 
 
recommends the Government to consider incentives and financial protection for the ASHAs, 
AWWs and AWHs workers under different financial packages.   
 (Para 6.49 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.45.2   
 
• Following additional incentives were provided by the Government of India to ASHAs 
engaged in COVID 19 management:  
 Additional Incentive of Rs.1000 per month per ASHA for undertaking COVID -19 related 
activities from January, 2020 extending up to March, 2022.  
 Provisions were also made for continued full payment for existing routine activities and 
recurring incentive of Rs. 2000 per month to ASHAs to ensure delivery of essential health 
services during the pandemic, along with the additional COVID incentives.  
 Team Based Incentives (TBIs) were extended to the primary healthcare team members 
including ASHAs for engaging in COVID-19 duties till March 2022.  
 In addition, some States also provided additional incentives to ASHAs for their 
engagement in COVID-19 work.  
• Government of India took several steps to ensure physical and mental wellbeing of frontline 
COVID workers, including ASHAs. States were suggeste d to provide ASHAs with Identity 
card for facilitating her movement in teams. 
• ASHAs were covered under ‘Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Package’ (PMGKP)  for 
Insurance of Rs. 50 Lakh (insurance scheme for health workers fighting COVID -19) from 
30th March, 2020 with extension up to April, 2022. 
 
1.46  Administration of Booster Doses 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.46.1  The Committee notes that administration of free booster doses has enhanced the booster 
dose uptake. However, the Committee notes that this free precautionary  dose window is only for 
75 days. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to extend the 75 days window and 
make the precautionary dose free for all so that complete vaccination of all can be ensured.  
 (Para 6.53 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
1.46.2  Government of India continued to supply COVID -19 vaccines free of cost to all 
States/UTs. These vaccines doses (including precaution dose) are being administered to all 
beneficiaries at the COVID vaccination centres. 

33 
 
1.47 Awareness Regarding Precautionary Dosage  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.47.1  The Committee further notes that the ease of access to vaccination site also has a major 
role to play in increase in vaccination rate. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to 
increase the Government COVID Vac cination centres across all the States/UTs. The Committee 
is also concerned at the general prevalence of complacency in the healthcare workers as well as 
the public towards booster doses. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to work 
towards increasing awareness regarding the precautionary dose among the public, particularly 
among the immune-compromised and people with co morbidities.  
 (Para 6.54 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.47.2  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare launched Har Ghar D astak 1.0 (3 rd 
November, 2021 -  30th November, 2021) and Har Ghar Dastak 2.0 campaign (1 st June, 2022 – 
31st July, 2022) for encouraging beneficiaries for taking the COVID -19 vaccine including the 
precaution dose at door step. The campaign contributed in r eaching out to the beneficiary till the 
last mile including the old-aged, differently-abled and even the vaccine hesitant populations. 
 
1.47.3  Further, from 15th July 2022 to 30th   September 2022, as part of the celebration of 75 years 
of India’s Independence, Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav, Government of India launched the ‘COVID 
Vaccination Amrit Mahotsava’ initiative under which free precaution doses were administered to 
all eligible beneficiaries (persons aged 18 years & above who have completed 6 months or 26 
weeks after the 2 nd  dose) at all Government CVCs. A camp -based strategy was implemented 
wherein special vaccination sessions were organized at various places such as public & private 
offices, schools, colleges, routes of religious yatras, industrial establishments etc. 
 
1.48 Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI) 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.48.1  The Committee notes that on 19 th July, 2022, a total of 28 AEFI were reported across the 
country and total AEFI is reported to be 0.006% of the total cases. The C ommittee observes that 
under-reporting and poor quality data collection may be the reason behind reporting of such less 
number of AEFI. However, the Committee takes note of the unusual peak in AEFI on 10 th July, 
2022 where 743 AEFI cases were reported. The  Committee would like to be apprised of the 
reason behind this sudden rise in the cases and the vaccines that caused the adverse reaction.   
 (Para 6.57 of 137th Report) 
 
 

34 
 
Action Taken: 
1.48.2  As per the AEFI guidelines for COVID -19 vaccines, all the adve rse events being entered 
in COWIN are to be verified by the DIO as minor, severe and serious adverse events based on the 
completeness of the information. All cases which are incomplete in nature or have been 
inadvertently entered are then filtered out and the database is updated accordingly. 
 
1.49 Adverse Effects of Vaccination 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.49.1  The Committee notes that mild side effects after administering of the vaccines are usually 
reported as the body requires time to adjust to the vaccination dose. However, the Committee 
feels that the Ministry must ensure that possible adverse effects are communicated to the people 
followed by timely treatment. Attention of the Committee is also brought to the death of a patient 
post COVID -19 vaccination. The C ommittee notes that in the concerned case, the AEFI 
Committee released its assessment Report after almost seven months. The Committee strongly 
recommends the Ministry to ensure that appropriate investigation must be done and AEFI 
Committee must expedite its examination of each adverse cases.   
 (Para 6.58 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.49.2  The MOHFW has frequently sent out letters to the states with specific instructions for 
vaccinators to share information on possible side effects of vaccines and spec ific treatment 
guidelines for doctors. An example is the information regarding Thrombosis and 
Thrombocytopenia Syndrome (TTS) following adenovector vaccines. 
1.49.3  The process of causality assessment comprises of different steps starting from reporting 
and completion of investigations by the District AEFI Committee and sharing of all supporting 
documents such as hospital records, post mortem reports, laboratory test reports, etc. to the state 
and the national AEFI committees. The members of the state and national AEFI committee then 
discuss each case in detail, first fixing the diagnosis and then the causality assessment 
classification using standard globally accepted causality assessment guidelines of WHO. 
 
1.50 Liability of Manufacturers on AEFI 
 
Recommendation: 
1.50.1  The Committee also notes that COVID -19 vaccination is voluntary and presently there is 
no mechanism of compensation to beneficiaries or liability of vaccine manufacturer in case of 
any Adverse Event Following Immunization. The Committee, t herefore, strongly recommends the 
Ministry to create a clear framework of vaccine liability for manufacturer in case of AEFI so that 
adequate compensation can be provided to the aggrieved individuals.  
 (Para 6.59 of 137th Report) 
 

35 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.50.2  COVID vaccination is like vaccination under Universal Immunization programme is free 
and voluntary in Government CVCs. The policy of Government of India is  not to award any 
compensation to victims and kin of those who suffer any Adverse Event Following 
Immunization. However free treatment is available at Govt. hospitals and Health facility in case 
of any serious Adverse Event Following Immunization. 
 
1.51 Surveillance of Post COVID Complications 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.51.1  The Committee also notes the findings of various research studies that have indicated the 
prevalence of long COVID among individuals infected with COVID. Even after the infection has 
passed, individuals have been reported to experience lingering symptoms. The Committee 
observes that there is  a need to monitor and conduct surveillance of post COVID complications. 
The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to frame a 
treatment protocol and make specific guidelines for managing post COVID complications and 
related health problems arising due to the initial infection. The Ministry must also work towards 
sensitizing the Indian Health Public System to deal with such cases of long COVID. The 
Committee further recommends the Ministry to ensure medical support for Long COVID 
sufferers and train the healthcare workers for managing patients with Long COVID.   
 
 (Para 6.60 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.51.2  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare issued a Comprehensive Guidelines for 
Management of Post -COVID Sequelae on 21 st October 2021 after expert consultations to guide 
doctors on post -COVID-19 complications and their management. These guidelines have been 
widely disseminated and also deliberated upon during clinical webinars held under MoHFW’s 
Centers of Excellen ce initiative through aegis of AIIMS, New Delhi in collaboration with State 
level Centers of Excellence as well as various professional organizations. 
 
1.52 Role of Ayush in COVID-19 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.52.1  The Committee in its 136th Report had appreciated the efforts of the Research Councils in 
development of new drugs especially repurposed Ayush 64 in management of COVID -19. The 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that AYUSH must continue emphasis on evidence based 
scientific research and drug devel opment process entailing pre clinical as well as clinical trials. 
The Committee further recommends the Ministry of Ayush to work towards building inter -

36 
 
ministerial linkages and collaborate with other Departments for undertaking clinical studies on 
newer drugs.  
 (Para 6.63 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.52.2   
• To reduce the burden on the hospital -based health care delivery system during the second 
outbreak of COVID -19 in India, the Ministry of Ayush has conducted a community -based 
study through its Resea rch Councils and National institutes for mass distribution of AYUSH -
64 and Kabasura Kudineer to asymptomatic, mild to moderate COVID -19 patients in home 
isolation. 
• The Ministry of Ayush has also funded a novel research study to explore the safety, 
immunogenicity and protection of Ashwagandha administration with COVID -19 vaccine 
(COVISHIELDTM). The objective of this study is to investigate the Immunomodulatory 
effects of Ashwagandha in vaccinated individuals and to assess the effect of Ashwagandha on 
the sustenance of the vaccine response. The outcomes of this study will hold importance as 
sustenance of immune response to the vaccine will have implications for long term prevention 
against COVID-19 including breakthrough infection. This study has been conducte d at seven 
study sites (Delhi, Mumbai, Pune, Nagpur, Jaipur, Belgaum and Hassan). 
• Besides, validation of classical Ayurveda formulations in identified disease conditions, the 
Council has undertaken development of Ayurveda formulations through systematic pr ocess of 
drug development viz. drug standardization, preclinical studies, clinical studies which are at 
different stages of drug development.  
• The Council has also undertaken a multicentric collaborative project on Systems Biology 
approach to delineate mol ecular signatures of Prakriti in healthy humans involving JNU & 
Transdisciplinary University, Bengaluru which is ongoing. 
• The Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) has also collaborated with 
INMAS –DRDO for Preclinical study on Ayurvedic formulations for radiation induced 
dermatitis. 
• Further, the CCRAS has undertaken the mechanistic studies of Ayurveda interventions in 
diseases conditions viz. Osteoarthritis in collaboration with  IIT Guwahati and Alzheimer’s 
disease& parkinsonism in collaboration with  NIPER Guwahati under Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Government of India and drug -drug 
interaction studies in collaboration with ICMR –NIRRH, Mumbai. 
 
1.53 Integration of Ayush in Health Sector  
 
Recommendation: 
1.53.1  The Committee believes that in the wake of global health crisis and the threat of emerging 
viruses, Ayush system can be utilized as an effective means to tackle the challenges associated 
with health sector. The Committee strongly recomm ends the adoption of an inclusive and 

37 
 
integrated health care policy. The Committee accordingly urges the Government to continue 
making efforts in integrating Ayush in the health sector. 
 (Para 6.64 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.53.2  With regard to the  recommendations of the Committee to make continuous efforts in 
integrating Ayurveda into various National programmes, it is informed that the Central Council 
for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences has undertaken following feasibility studies:  
(i)  Integration of AYUSH (Ayurveda) with NPCDCS (National Programme for Prevention and 
Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular diseases & Stroke) in three districts of Gaya, 
Bhilwara and Surendranagar in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare. 
(ii)  Feasibility of introducing Ayurvedic interventions in Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) 
through integrative health care services in 30 selected PHCs of Gadchiroli district of 
Maharashtra in association with Govt. of Maharashtra. 
(iii)  The Council has also conducted an operational study to explore the feasibility of integrating 
Ayurveda with modern system of medicine in a tertiary care hospital (Safdarjung Hospital, 
New Delhi) for the management of Osteoarthritis (Knee). 
(iv)  Also the Council has c arried out the study in a pilot mode in some selected PHCs of Mandi 
and Kangra District of Himachal Pradesh for introducing Ayurveda health care system in the 
conventional system for Antenatal, postnatal and neonatal care with technical support from 
ICMR.  
(v)  Further, Council has collaborated with reputed institutes such as AIIMS, Delhi; NIMHANS, 
Bangalore; ICMR, Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai; KGMU, Lucknow; PGI, Chandigarh, 
BHU, Translational Health Science and Technology Institute (THSTI), Faridabad, ILB S, 
New Delhi, etc. for conducting clinical trials adopting integrated research protocol  
(vi)  Recently, the Council has also undertaken intuitive to collaborate with Directorate General 
Armed Force Medical Services(DGAFMS), Ministry of Defence. 
 
1.54 Contribution of Ayush Manpower  
 
Recommendation: 
1.54.1  The Committee recognizes the services of AYUSH doctors in providing the first line of 
treatment especially in the rural areas. The Committee further recommends the contribution of 
AYUSH manpower in offering their services during the pandemic.  
 (Para 6.65 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
1.54.2  Persons Without Identity (PWI) can be vaccinated under special sessions, the detailed 
SOPs of which are also available on MoHFW website. The SOP include nomads, pri son inmates, 

38 
 
inmates in Mental Health Institutions, citizens in Old Age Homes, road side beggars, people 
residing in rehabilitation centres/camps and any other identified eligible persons, aged 18 years or 
more, and not having any of the prescribed individual Photo ID Cards. 
 
1.55 Inclusion of Marginalized Section in the Vaccination Drive 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.55.1  The Committee notes the economic impact of the pandemic and the mass migration of the 
workforce from the cities to the villages. The Committee no tes that the migrant workers due to 
the nature of their jobs that demand rapid movement may have been excluded from the 
vaccination drive. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare to ensure that the migrant workforce i s administered both the doses of the vaccine along 
with the precautionary doses. The Committee also urges the Ministry to ensure that the poor 
vulnerable section of the society, due to the absence of relevant identification cards or documents 
does not remain neglected. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare to ensure free and universal vaccination for all.    
 (Para 6.66 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.55.2  Persons Without Identity (PWI) can be vaccinated under special sessions, the detailed 
SOPs of which are also available on MoHFW website. The SOP include nomads, prison inmates, 
inmates in Mental Health Institutions, citizens in Old Age Homes, road side beggars, people 
residing in rehabilitation centres/camps and any other identified eligible persons, aged 18 years or 
more, and not having any of the prescribed individual Photo ID Cards. 
 
1.56 Lack of COVID Appropriate Behaviour  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.56.1  The Committee notes that the present trend of COVID -19 reflects the need for adopting a 
new approach to the pandemic for its total eradication. With waning immunity in the population, 
the susceptibility to the infection is bound to increase. The Committee is at distress to observe the 
lack of Covid Appropriate Be haviour (CAB) in the general public. People have stopped wearing 
masks and social gathering have also increased. The Committee further notes that though the 
cases are comparatively less than the earlier Covid waves but the fear of subsequent waves still 
persists if the CAB is not adhered to. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the 
Ministry to promote better communication in driving the benefits of vaccines to the general 
public as vaccine is the only last hope to mitigate the pandemic COVID-19.  
    (Para 7.2 of 137th Report) 
 
 

39 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.56.2  Adherence to Covid Appropriate Behavior (CAB) is one of the key component under 
fivefold strategy of test -track-treat-Covid-19 vaccination and adherence to CAB. This has been 
highlighted right from the starting with encouragement of mask wearing, hand washing, physical 
/social distancing. 
 
1.56.3  MoHFW through regular formal communication as well as video conferencing has urged 
the States/UTs not to lose track of Covid-19 trajectory and ensure adherence to CAB. States have 
also been requested to engage community and stress on IEC activities to ensure adherence to 
CAB. It has also been stressed that participation of community backed by strict enforcement is 
necessary for ensuring adherence to CAB.  Infog raphics, GIFs, Videos, Celebrity/Expert bytes 
were widely amplified and disseminated through various public and private channels to 
encourage people to follow Covid Appropriate Behaviour. 
1.56.4  As on 1st February 2023, a total of 220.51 crore vaccine dos es have been administered in 
the country in the population above 12 years of age. Out of which, 1 stdose is 102.57 crore (97%) 
and 2nddose is 95.18 crore (90%) and 22.75 crore precaution dose have been administered. The 
National Covid-19 vaccination programme is ongoing across the country.    
 
1.57 Expansion of Genomic Surveillance  
 
Recommendation: 
1.57.1  The Committee further believes that any increase in the Covid cases must not be ignored 
and the public must not let the guard down against the pandemic. Over the past two years, the 
Ministry has been following, "Tracing, Tracking, Testing, Treating and Technology (5Ts)" to 
contain the pandemic. However, with the mutating Covid- 19 variants, the Ministry must adopt 
newer strategies against the evolving virus. The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry 
to revise the indicator to track the COVID -19 situation in the country. The Ministry must closely 
monitor clusters where any Covid incidence cases are reported. The Committee also recommends 
the Ministry to expand the genomic surveillance facilities in the country upto far flung areas so 
that the emergence of any new variant is tracked faster. The Ministry should strengthen the 
network of labs under NCDC -IDSP upto the rural areas so that any newer clinical  outcomes are 
translated to better COVID management policies.   
    (Para 7.3 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.57.2  MoHFW has through regular formal communication as well as video conferencing has 
urged the States/UTs not to lose track of COVID -19 trajectory and continue focus on fivefold 
strategy of test- track-treat-COVID-19 vaccination and adherence to COVID Appropriate 
Behaviors.  
 

40 
 
1.57.3  Union Ministry of Health has issued ‘Operational Guidelines for Revised Surveillance 
Strategy in context of COVID -19’ on 9th June 2022 with the long term vision to fully integrate 
COVID-19 surveillance within existing Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) 
surveillance mechanism with focus on early detection, testing, and timely management of 
suspected and confirmed cases as well as to aid detection and containment of outbreaks of new 
SARS-CoV-2 variants and monitoring the trends of existing variants. 
 
1.57.4  As recommended by the Committee to expand the genomic surveillance facilities in the 
country, it is  informed that t he Indian SARS -CoV-2 Genomics Consortium (INSACOG) was 
established by the Ministry on 30 th December 2020. It is a joint initiative taken by the MoHFW 
alongwith various INSACOG Genome Sequencing Labs (IGSLs) in networking with the DBT, 
ICMR, CSIR, AIIMS, DRDO, etc. institutions, and State Level Govt. and Private Labs under 
INSACOG units from across India. Overall, it is a consortium 10 National Laboratories expanded 
further to 47 laboratories and 418 sentinel sites to monitor the genomic vari ations in the SARS -
CoV-2. INSACOG is a multi -laboratory, multi-agency, Pan -India network to monitor genomic 
variations in the SARS -CoV-2 by a sentinel sequencing effort which is facilitated by the NCDC, 
Delhi involving the Central Surveillance Unit (CSU) u nder IDSP. The data from the genome 
sequencing laboratories is being analyzed as per the field data trends to study the linkages (if any) 
between the genomic variants and epidemiological trends. This helps to understand super 
spreader, outbreaks, risk fact ors, breakthrough infections, morbidity / mortality rates and to 
strengthen public health interventions across the country in breaking the chains of transmission. 
 
1.57.5  This unit is actively working with the Integrated Health Information Platform (IHIP)  to 
maintain all the data day by day in IHIP with coordination from all Central and State/UT 
labs/Sentinel sites. Upto 12 th October 2022, total genomic sample sequenced 2,28,934 on IHIP 
portal. Additionally, the consortium is also looking to expand to sewa ge surveillance as a quick 
and early detection tool of assess the spread of variants in a hotspot locality of increased 
positivity. 
 
1.57.6  Further, with the long- term goal to better prepare our country against public health 
emergencies, PM Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM -ABHIM) with an outlay 
of Rs. 64,180 crores have been launched with the intent to enhance the capacity of primary, 
secondary and tertiary health care facilities/systems and institutes for identifying and managing 
any new and emerging diseases. 
 
1.58 Booster Doses for High Risks Population 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.58.1  The Committee also recommends the Ministry to conduct studies on whether there is a 
need to administer Covid vaccine yearly. The Committee further recommends the  Ministry to 
undertake in depth R&D project to explore the possibility of manufacturing one -time single dose 
vaccine for all variants of corona virus. Moreover, the Committee emphasizes that R&D 

41 
 
activities under PPP model should also be carried out to expl ore drugs development to treat 
Covid Patients with due clinical trials keeping in view the health safety of the patients. The 
Ministry must adopt a scientific view backed by research evidence to address major issues 
regarding Vaccine distribution. The Committee believes that the Ministry must be very pragmatic 
and strategic in administrating the precautionary dose of vaccines. However, the Ministry must 
continue accelerating its efforts towards administrating booster doses specifically to the high-
risk population groups. The Committee believes that booster dose is essential to provide 
additional protection particularly to those with co- morbidities. The Committee also believes that 
research outcomes with respect to efficacy of booster doses must be shared wit h the scientific 
community as well as the general public.  
   (Para 7.4 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.58.2  Note for compliance.  
 
 
1.59 Hybrid Immunity 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.59.1  Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to a study that suggests Hybrid immunity 
has been associated with higher levels of neutralising antibodies and greater protection against 
infection than vaccines. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to adopt a dynamic 
response strategy keeping in view the results of such studies.  
    (Para 7.5 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.59.2  The National COVID -19 vaccination program is guided by National Expert Group on 
Vaccine Administration for COVID -19 (NEGVAC) and National Technical advisory group on 
immunization (NTAGI) on the basis of concurrent scientific evidence. However, the 
recommendations of the Committee to adopt a dynamic response strategy has been noted.  
 
1.60 Equitable Centre-State Relations 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.60.1  The Committee also believes that there is a ne ed to expand democracy to promote 
people’s health and include equitable centre -state relations and ensure more transparency in 
decision making and data management. The Committee further recommends that the Government 
must ensure robust planning at all leve ls along with taking special measures to address gender 
and social inequities.    
 (Para 7.17 of 137th Report) 
 

42 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.60.2  Noted for compliance.  
 
1.61 Disruption in Essential health Care Services  
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.61.1  The Committee in its Report has extensively examined the subject, "Vaccine Development, 
Distribution Management and Mitigation of Pandemic COVID -19" and identified various issues 
and challenges that are yet to be resolved. The Committee emphasizes the Ministry to ensure that 
the set targets of complete vaccination are achieved and any existing disparity in vaccine 
distribution is addressed at the earliest. The Committee hopes that the Ministry sees Covid- 19 as 
an opportunity to revamp the public healthcare infrastructure in the country and usher in new 
reforms. The Committee strongly advocates the imperative essentiality of increasing Government 
health expenditure and investments in research and development. The Ministry must also work 
towards forging better public private part nerships for ensuring last mile delivery of healthcare 
services.  
 (Para 7.18 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.61.2  Noted  for compliance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
CHAPTER- II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY’S REPLIES 
 
2.1 Resurgence of Covid-19 
 
Recommendation: 
2.1.1  The Committee observes that India is one of the countries with the heaviest burden of 
COVID-19 cases in the world. The enormity of the population of the country posed a major 
challenge in the face of this unprecedented pandemic. With the fragile health infrastructure and 
the huge shortage of the healthcare workers, the country witnessed itself reel under tremendous 
pressure. The Committee notes that the Government could not accurately anticipate the gravity of 
the possible resurgence of pandemic and its subsequent waves. The Committee believes that even 
when the trajectory of COVID -19 cases in the country registered a decline in the aftermath of 
first wave, the Government should have continued its efforts to monitor the resurgence of 
COVID-19 situation and its possible outrage in the country. The Committee notes that the 
Ministry has been cautioning States to maintain the vigil and chalk out situation and strategy & 
plan for any exigencies that may arise due to resurgence of COVID -19 in their respective States, 
however, the Committee is unhappy to note that many States were unable to cope up with the 
arising uncertainties and medical emergencies in the wake of the pandemic resurgence of 
COVID-19 during the second wave that caused more than 5 lakh registered deaths.   
(Para 1.18 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.1.2 Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has continued to closely monitor COVID -19 
situation in the country right up to the district level. Given the unpredictability associated with 
the virus, Union Ministry of Health has advised all States to continue focus on fivefold strategy 
of test-track-treat-COVID-19 vaccination and adherence to COVID Appropriate Behaviors.  
2.1.3 The Indian SA RS-CoV-2 Consortium on Genomics (INSACOG) is monitoring the 
genomic variations in the SARS -CoV-2. Union Ministry of Health has issued ‘Operational 
Guidelines for Revised Surveillance Strategy in context of COVID-19’ on 9th June 2022 with the 
long term vision to fully integrate COVID -19 surveillance within existing Integrated Disease 
Surveillance Programme (IDSP) surveillance mechanism with focus on early detection, testing, 
and timely management of suspected and confirmed cases as well as to aid detection and 
containment of outbreaks of new SARS -CoV-2 variants and monitoring the trends of existing 
variants. 
2.1.4  Further, Government of India is also supporting States in their endeavor to manage 
COVID-19 since the beginning of pandemic. Union Ministry of Hea lth has provided financial 
support to the States/UTs for health system strengthening to meet any exigency due to resurgence 

44 
 
of cases in the country through National Health Mission, State Disaster Response Funds (SDRF), 
Emergency COVID-19 Response and Prepa redness packages I & II and PM - Ayushman Bharat 
Health Infrastructure Mission. 
 
2.2  Expansion of Genome Sequencing  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.2.1    The Committee takes into consideration the anticipation and conclusion of virologists and 
microbiologists that virus will continue to evolve and possibly mutate into a more virulent and 
transmissible variant and so has been evident by the subsequent COVID waves across the world. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly advises the Government that there is an urgent need to 
expand the genome sequencing machinery in the country to keep a track of mutating variants.  
(Para 1.31 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.2.2  The Indian SARS-CoV-2 Consortium on Genomics (INSACOG) started with 10 National 
Laboratories. Considering the  continued evolution of virus, the consortium has expanded to 57 
laboratories across the country in Hub and Spoke model, wherein the 10 National Laboratories 
act as mentor organizations for the other laboratories which have been added to the network, as 
part of infrastructure and genome sequencing capacity building efforts of the Consortium. The 
State/UT-wise genome sequencing laboratories and the hubs, may be seen at Annexure-I.  
 
2.2.3  Further, ICMR has supported the laboratories across the country to pr ocure Next 
Generation Sequencing (NGS)machines. Training and capacity building of ICMR and non-ICMR 
Institutes has been undertaken. Till date, there are 52 NGS facilities available at ICMR Institutes 
and Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) across the country. 
 
2.3 Augmenting Genome Sequencing Facilities  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.3.1      The Committee notes that Indian SARS- CoV-2 Consortium on Genomics (INSACOG) 
is a consortium of 38 laboratories which monitors the genomic variations in the SARS- CoV-2. 
INSACOG, in its Bulletin dated June 20, 2022 has submitted that the total number of samples 
sequenced is 256,599.  The Committee feels that considering the high number of total COVID 
cases in the country, the number of samples sequenced is very low. The Committee, therefore, is 
of the firm view that genome sequencing is part of an effective virus containment strategy and 
facilitates better surveillance thereby entailing necessity for better policy formulation on COVID-
19 management. Keeping into account the fact that India lags behind in genome sequencing and 

45 
 
has sequenced very less number of samples when compared to other countries. The Committee 
strongly believes that there is a need to augment the genome sequencing facilities in the country. 
The Com mittee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to intensify its efforts with regard to 
genome sequencing of the SARS- CoV-2 genome and ensure that the mutating variants are 
monitored efficiently and regularly. This is essential to understand the characteristi cs and 
complexity of the virus along with its ramifications and the conclusion so arrived must be 
scientifically utilized for vaccines development based on empirical facts and data with due 
clinical trials.   
(Para 1.32 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.3.2   
• The Indian SARS -CoV-2 Consortium on Genomics (INSACOG) started with 10 National 
Laboratories. Considering the continued evolution of virus, the consortium has expanded to 
57 laboratories across the country.  
• The consortium, since its inception, has focussed on sequencing of : 
a. International travellers: country scenario, duration of stay, infection/ vaccination status, 
travel details, etc.  
b. Community samples: States/districts with unusual scenarios, cluster outbreaks: 
representative samples  
c. Sentinel surve illance (as per WHO strategy): identified sites – labs, hospitals, high 
transmission/low transmission areas, and  
d. Re-infection: repeat infection, Infection post vaccination (single dose, full coverage), etc.  
• The sampling strategy is dynamic with the flexibility of immediate scale -up as and when 
required. The labs are equipped with different sequencing platforms with varied sequencing 
capacities which enable scaling up sequencing or sequencing smaller batches with a quick 
turnaround time. Further, the consortium is working towards isolating the virus of different 
lineages. 
• As on October 3, 2022 India has sequenced 291,913 samples as part of INSACOG’s 
sequencing efforts and those carried out by IGSLs vide MoU with different state 
governments.  
• Several initiatives have been undertaken by ICMR to support the laboratories for Next 
Generation Sequencing (NGS) facility.   
2.4.  Analysis of Genome Sequencing Data 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.4.1 The Committee, in its 123 rd Report, had analyzed the role of NCDC -IDSP and emphasized 
on the need to revitalize the enshrined role and responsibility of NCDC for effective control of 

46 
 
the disease along with strengthening of the Central Surveillance Unit (CSU), State Surveillance 
Units (SSU) and District Surveillance Units (DSU). The Committee notes that NCDC -IDSP 
undertakes crucial tasks related to surveillance and conducts epidemiological investigation. The 
Committee strongly recommends that the sequenced data must be shared with the NCDC at the 
earliest. The Ministry must make efforts  to strengthen the Integrated Disease Surveillance 
Programme (IDSP) at the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) so that the data provided 
by the sequencing laboratories are timely investigated and correlated with the field data trends. 
(Para 1.33 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.4.2 The Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) has taken steps to strengthen 
disease surveillance in the country. At present, 31 States have completely shifted to Integrated 
Health Information Platform (IHIP) for d isease reporting which is a near real time disease data 
entry system and has provision of monitoring by higher authorities through customized 
dashboards. Remaining States will be shifted shortly on this IHIP platform.  IHIP is further 
envisioned to be strengthened under the PM-ABHIM scheme by providing infrastructure support 
at State and District Level and with provision of incentives. The Metropolitan surveillance units 
are now being envisaged in 20 metropolitan cities. Against which, 9 metropolitan units are under 
the process of signing MoU with NCDC to start these surveillance units. This activity will 
strengthen urban surveillance and these are supported under the PM- ABHIM scheme. 
 
2.5  Need for Molecular Diagnostic Tests 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.5.1  The Co mmittee appreciates Government’s efforts that the COVID -19 testing 
infrastructure in the country has come a long way since the detection of the first COVID case in 
January, 2020. Initially the COVID testing facility was available only at NIV Pune and gradually 
the testing facilities were expanded to other laboratories across the country. The Committee 
considers that the usage of highly specific molecular diagnostic tests is crucial for identifying the 
active cases and managing the risk of contamination. The  Committee, in this regard, commends 
ICMR's push for a variety of other tests such as TrueNAT and CBNAAT systems which were used 
for comprehensive screening and confirmation of COVID- 19 cases.  
 (Para 1.37 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.5.2  Noted for compliance. 
 
 
 

47 
 
2.6  Testing Facility for Early Detection of COVID  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.6.1  The Committee takes into account that earlier diagnosis of the virus followed by timely 
isolation of the infected persons is extremely important in the pandemic management. The 
Committee, however, strongly believes that providing large scale testing facilities with faster 
results that correspond to the increased transmission rate of the virus should have been a crucial 
part of COVID management policy.  The Committee   observes that owing to the initial delayed 
action in the aftermath of outbreak of Pandemic by the Healthcare system to adapt to the rapidly 
increasing cases, there were considerable procrastination in getting the results of COVID Test 
and thereafter unbound spree of transmission went unchecked and uncontrolled. Incidents of 
results getting delayed by more than a week were also reported thereby leaving infected persons 
in lurch. The Committee observes that the people had to reluctantly approach private fac ilities 
for RT-PCR Tests which charged heavily. The Committee is concerned to note that there existed 
a visible divide in the testing infrastructure in the rural and the urban areas, thereby forcing 
COVID infected persons to run from pillar to posts.   
 
(Para 1.38 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.6.2  Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has continued to closely monitor COVID -19 
situation in the country right up to the district level. Given the unpredictability associated with 
the virus, Union Ministry of Health has advised all States to continue focus on fivefold strategy 
of test-track-treat-COVID-19 vaccination and adherence to COVID Appropriate Behaviors. 
 
2.6.3  The COVID -19 testing rates and testing confirmation rates are routinely monitored up to 
the district level. States reporting a declining quantum of testing are urged through formal 
communication and during review meetings to ramp up their testing infrastructure and rate of 
testing. States were also provided with financial assistance under ECRP Ph ase II to enhance 
testing capacity in underserved areas. 
 
 
2.7 Testing of COVID Cases 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.7.1   The Committee regrets the non-responsive attitude of the Government towards enhancing 
the health infrastructure in the aftermath of the receding first COVID-19 wave. With trends of 
Pandemic COVID -19 witnessing a steady decrease, the Government laid its guard down and 

48 
 
failed to maintain the momentum of COVID case management attained during the first wave. The 
Committee expresses its disappointment over the lackadaisical approach of the Government 
machinery to testing of COVID cases with the fall in its trends and further ease in restrictions 
across the country. Both of these could be attributed to the tsunami of COVID cases which was 
followed by enormous fatalities during the second wave and the Government agencies remained 
perplexed and witness to the deteriorating situation that went out of control. 
 
(Para 1.39 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.7.2  Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has continued  to closely monitor COVID -19 
situation in the country right up to the district level. Given the unpredictability associated with 
the virus, Union Ministry of Health has advised all States to continue focus on fivefold strategy 
of test-track-treat-COVID-19 vaccination and adherence to COVID Appropriate Behaviors. 
 
2.7.3  The COVID -19 testing rates and testing confirmation rates are routinely monitored up to 
the district level. States reporting a declining quantum of testing are urged through formal 
communication and during review meetings to ramp up their testing infrastructure and rate of 
testing. States were also provided with financial assistance under ECRP Phase II to enhance 
testing capacity in underserved areas. 
 
 
2.8 Mismanagement of Oxygen Supply During the Second Wave 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.8.1   The Committee finds that with the increase in the number of COVID positive cases in the 
country, there was a severe pressure on the health infrastructure from the smallest to the large 
private hospitals. There w ere several instances of families of patients pleading for oxygen and 
waiting in queues for oxygen cylinders. Media relayed stories of hospitals running out of oxygen 
and making desperate appeals when hospitals were reportedly left with only few hours of oxygen 
supply. In April, 2021, the Delhi High court slammed the Delhi Government for alleged 
mismanagement in distribution of medical oxygen.  The High Court in May, 2021 also asked the 
Central Government to divert the unutilized tankers of oxygen to Delhi from States where the 
COVID-19 situation was improving. 
 
(Para 1.47 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.8.2  A dynamic and transparent framework for allocation of medical oxygen in consultation 
with States/UTs and all the stakeholders such as relevant Ministries, manufacturers/suppliers of 

49 
 
liquid oxygen etc. was prepared. The active case load of the State/UT was the primary 
determinant of oxygen allocation, other factors such as doubling rate, available medical 
infrastructure, etc. were also given due consideration. Further, the allocation was kept dynamic as 
per the changing pandemic load. 
 
2.8.3  Government of India also supported the States in their endeavor to enhance preparedness 
and response capacities against COVID -19 and medical oxygen supply to manage  COVID-19. 
Following initiatives have been taken by Government of India for provisioning of medical 
oxygen: 
i. States have been supported with supply of oxygen cylinders and oxygen concentrators. One 
lakh oxygen concentrators are being procured and distribute d to States under PM CARES 
Fund.  
ii. States are also being supported in terms of installation of Oxygen concentrator plants/ PSA 
(Pressure Swing Adsorption plants) plants. As many as 1563 PSA plants are being 
established by the Government of India which includes 1225 PSA plants installed under 
PMCARES Fund in every district of the country. Remaining 338 Plants (i.e. 110 Plants by 
M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas, 21 Plants by M/o power, 56 Plants by M/o Coal, 95 Plants 
by M/o Railways and 57 Plants by foreign grant s) are from other sources. All the PSA 
plants sanctioned under PM-CARES have been commissioned. 
iii. States have also been requested to set up similar oxygen generation plants in the remaining 
public health facilities. 
iv. Oxygen Demand Aggregation system (ODAS) which is an online digital solution has now 
been developed to ascertain the demand for medical oxygen from all medical facilities 
based on bed availability and occupancy and aggregating them at the State level. Now more 
than 9,000 active facilities are updating real time oxygen demand on the portal. 
v. An Oxygen Digital Tracking System (ODTS) to track the daily allocations of oxygen, their 
dispatch and deliveries, including movement of oxygen tankers has also been developed 
and put in place. 
vi. All the States have been advised rational use of oxygen and to prohibit the wasteful usage 
by strict monitoring.  
2.8.4  States have also been advised to undertake oxygen consumption audit in hospitals 
including private hospitals and to undertake facility -wise/hospital-wise o xygen inventory 
mapping and advance planning for timely replenishment so that there is no stock out. 
 
2.9  Availability of Oxygen  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.9.1 The Committee reiterates its observations/recommendations made while examining the 
COVID situation in 2020. The Committee in its 123 rd Report had warned the Government of the 

50 
 
possible shortage of the Oxygen Cylinders and supply of Oxygen in the hospitals. The Committee 
is disappointed to note that the Ministry in its submission in 2020 had assured that the country is 
self sufficient in Oxygen and Oxygen Cylinders; however, their hollow claim was brutally 
exposed during the second wave. The Committee recalls its recommendation made in the 123 rd 
Report where the Committee had strongly recommended the Governm ent for encouraging 
adequate production of oxygen and ensuring its supply in the hospitals. Notwithstanding, the 
Government failed to manage the even distribution of oxygen in the States and amidst the 
skyrocketing demand, the Government could not maintain a steady flow of oxygen leading to an 
unprecedented medical crisis. The Committee notes that poor logistic management and failure of 
the Government in ensuring a quick response from the healthcare system speaks volume of the 
utter chaos in the Government machinery especially during the second wave.  A poor monitoring 
of the oxygen generation capacity and availability of Medical Oxygen, Oxygenated and 
Ventilator beds in the hospitals further aggravated the situation.  
 
 (Para 1.48 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.9.2   
 
• The daily liquid medical oxygen (LMO) production, which was about 5700 MTs per day in 
August 2020 increased to a high of 9690 MTs on 13 May2021. This was done by 
enhancement of LMO production in steel plants as well as in other LMO plants. 
• A system for real-time monitoring of oxygen production in steel plants and distribution of 
oxygen to States/UTs was also put in place. Restrictions were  imposed on industrial use of 
oxygen. 
• Availability of tankers and ISO containers  was augmented through conversion of existing 
Nitrogen & Argon tankers and import and manufacture in the country. 
• Logistical support to transport LMO tankers was provided with the support from the Air 
Force and Railways. 
• A total of 4,02,517 cylinders were disturbed to all States/UTs since year 2020. 
• 1,13,186 Oxygen Concentrators were allocated in all States/UTs under PMCARES and 
ECRP-I. 
• OxyCare Portal  has been operationalized for barcoding and tracking of these Oxygen 
concentrators being provided to States/UTs. 
 
2.10     COVID Death  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.10.1  The Committee observes that in the Statement laid in the house in the 256 th Session of the 
Rajya Sabha, the Minister of Health and Family Welfare submitted that as on 4 th April, 2022, 
States/UTs reported a total of 5,21,358 deaths due to COVID -19 in the country. The Ministry 

51 
 
submitted that the Government of India maintains data of total cases and deaths due to COVID -
19 reported and updated by States/UTs on a regular basis. The Committee wonders that in 
response to the Union Government's request to States/UTs to furnish the details of COVID deaths 
owing to the lack of oxygen, 20 States/UTs responded and none of these State/UTs have reported 
confirmed death due to oxygen shortage.   
(Para 1.49 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.10.2  COVID -19 death in the country from public health perspective is recorded and reported 
by the States as per Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR's) ‘Guidance for appropriate 
recording of COVID -19 related deaths in India’, issued on 10th May 2020. Thi s guidance is 
based on World Health Organization’s (WHO’s) International Classification of Disease -10 (ICD) 
guidelines. Detailed guidelines for reporting of deaths have been issued to all States/UTs. 
Accordingly, all States/UTs are reporting cases and deaths to the Ministry on a regular basis. 
 
2.10.3  MoHFW vide letter dated 9th October 2020 has also conveyed to the States/UTs, WHO 
and ICMR guidelines on correct recording of COVID -19 related deaths in accordance with 
globally accepted ICD -10 classification and also urged states to undertake periodic death audits 
with the aim to improve quality of healthcare services by suitable corrective measures. 
States/UTs were also provided with a proforma for undertaking death audits in this regard. 
 
2.10.4  The COVID -19 management toolkit for District Collectors shared by Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare on 2nd April 2021 with States, also highlighted the need for deaths audits and 
follow up action as one of the key monitoring parameters. 
 
2.10.5  170 Central teams deployed to 33 states/UTs have also reiterated need for correct 
recording of deaths and undertake periodic death audits. 
 
2.11  Oxygen Stricken Death  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.11.1  The Committee is disturbed at the unfortunate denial of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare regarding COVID Deaths due to Oxygen shortage in the country. The Committee takes 
into account the media reports that there were many deaths due to Oxygen shortage in the 
hospitals; however, the sheer negligence of the fact shows the abs ence of empathy in the 
Government parlance. The Committee notes that there were no definite guidelines for identifying 
the deaths due to inadequate supply of oxygen. Oxygen shortage is not noted as a cause of death 
in the medical records and most of the de aths were attributed to co- morbidities. The Committee 
is disappointed at this utter ignorance by the Government and strongly recommends the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare to examine the number of deaths due to oxygen shortage especially 

52 
 
during the second wave of COVID. The Ministry, in coordination with the States, must audit the 
deaths due to oxygen shortage and enable robust documentation of the COVID deaths that will in 
fact generate the responsive and responsible sense of government and cautious formulation of 
policy and combat situational health care emergency. The Committee further expects more 
transparency and more accountability from the Government agencies. The Ministry must 
meticulously examine the oxygen stricken COVID deaths and ensure that proper compensation is 
accorded to the families of the victims.  
 (Para 1.50 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.11.2  COVID -19 death in the country from public health perspective is recorded and reported 
by the States as per Indian Council of Medical Res earch (ICMR's) ‘Guidance for appropriate 
recording of COVID -19 related deaths in India’, issued on 10th May 2020. This guidance is 
based on World Health Organization’s (WHO’s) International Classification of Disease -10 (ICD) 
guidelines. Detailed guidelines  for reporting of deaths have been issued to all States/UTs. 
Accordingly, all States/UTs are reporting cases and deaths to the Ministry on a regular basis. 
 
2.11.3  MoHFW vide letter dated 9th October 2020 has also conveyed to the States/UTs, WHO 
and ICMR guidelines on correct recording of COVID -19 related deaths in accordance with 
globally accepted ICD -10 classification and also urged states to undertake periodic death audits 
with the aim to improve quality of healthcare services by suitable corrective mea sures. 
States/UTs were also provided with a proforma for undertaking death audits in this regard. 
2.11.4  The COVID -19 management toolkit for District Collectors shared by Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare on 2nd April 2021 with States,also highlighted t he need for deaths audits and 
follow up action as one of the key monitoring parameters. 
 
2.11.5  170 Central teams deployed to 33 states/UTs have also reiterated need for correct 
recording of deaths and undertake periodic death audits. 
 
2.11.6  Apart from this, the Government of India is also supporting the States in their endeavor to 
enhance preparedness and response capacities against COVID -19. Various initiatives have been 
undertaken by the Government to provide technical guidance and further strengthen health 
infrastructure, availability of essential logistics including drugs and medical oxygen supply to 
manage COVID-19. 
 
2.11.7  Government of India in pursuance of the Hon’ble Supreme Court Judgement dated 30 th 
June 2021, through National Disaster Manage ment Authority’s (NDMA) issued ‘Guidelines to 
provide for ex -gratia assistance to kin of the deceased by COVID -19’. In the said guidelines, 
NDMA has recommended an ex -gratia amount of Rs. 50,000/ - per deceased person subject to 
cause of death certified as COVID-19.  

53 
 
2.12 Optimum Utilisation of PSA Plants  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.12.1 During its deliberations with the Ministry, the Committee noted that the PSA plants were 
being established in each district hospitals. The Committee observes that setting up Pressure 
Swing Adsorption (PSA) and ensuring its proper operation and maintenance incurs high costs. 
The Committee is concerned that the plants may be left unused when the Oxygen demand is low. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to ensure that t he PSA set up is utilized 
optimally and any wastage of the resources is avoided. The Government must accordingly devise 
a system to make Oxygen readily available to the hospitals and strengthen the infrastructure for 
transporting oxygen to the Government and private Hospitals within the desirable span of time.  
  
(Para 1.51 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.12.2   
• A total of 4135 PSA plants  are being established in the country from different sources. 
Government of India supported States/UTs by setting up and operationalizing 1225 PSA 
Plants under PM-CARES. PSA plants under PMCARES for effective monitoring and usage 
pattern analysis has been equipped with IOT devices by DRDO with NIC. To ensure smooth 
functioning and ensuring up keep of these PSA plants, 3 Mock -drills have already been 
conducted and evaluated with State/UT administration. 
• Oxygen Demand Aggregation system (ODAS)  is developed to ascertain the demand for 
medical oxygen from all health facilities based on bed availability and occupancy, and 
aggregating them at the State level. Now more than 9,000 active facilities are updating real 
time oxygen demand on the portal.  
• Moreover, for efficient utilization of PSA plants output, 138 booster pumps will be allocated to 
PM-CARES Funds already installed PSA plants under Global Fund for refilling the oxygen 
cylinders. These pumps can fill approx. 40 D -type cylinders per day if operationalized 24*7. 
This modality post implementation will act as “Hub -and-Spoke” i.e. booster pump installed at 
a particular health facility can refill the oxygen cylinders of other public health facilities 
located nearby. This model will reduce the dependency on outer private resources for essential 
service delivery at public health system. 
 
2.13  Manpower for PSA Plants  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.13.1  The Committee is of the view that technical expertise is required for operation of PSA 
plants. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to ensure that the required technical 

54 
 
staff is available at the district hospitals and no unwarranted incident take place once the PSAs 
are installed in the hospitals. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to ensure that 
efficient Oxygen Management Protocols (OMP) are followed in all the hospitals and oxygen is 
scientifically administered and managed for optimum medical utilization in public and private 
hospitals.  
(Para 1.52 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.13.2 
• Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship, Indian Navy and IIT, Kanpur have 
developed training program for operation and mai ntenance of PSA plants and have 
identified and trained across the country. 
 10 Hrs for day to day operations – 6900 candidates trained 
 180 Hrs for maintenance & troubleshooting – 5084 candidates trained 
• Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on 22nd December  2021 launched ‘National 
Oxygen Stewardship Program’ with an aim to empower all healthcare workers engaged 
in Oxygen management and administration with the essential knowledge and skills to 
ensure rational utilization and avoid any wastage of medical Oxyge n, especially in 
resource constraint settings. As on date, more than 20,000 oxygen stewards  have been 
successfully trained virtually covering all 738 districts. 
Further, the Ministry is also in the process of development of National Oxygen Guidelines and 
SOPs for optimal utilization of medical oxygen equipment and devices. The guidelines would 
cover all the key aspects on the use of medical oxygen devices. 
 
2.14  Testing Facilities for COVID-19 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.14.1 The Committee understands that the sec ond wave of COVID -19 put the Indian healthcare 
system and the diagnostic infrastructure under insurmountable pressure, thereby, emphasized on 
the need for strengthening mitigation strategies. The Committee appreciates that the Government 
has upgraded testing infrastructure in the country; however, the number of testing facilities still 
remains low in proportion to its population.  
(Para 1.54 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.14.2   Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has continued to closely monitor COVID -19 
situation in the country right up to the district level. Given the unpredictability associated with 
the virus, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has advised all States to continue focus on 

55 
 
fivefold strategy of test-track-treat-COVID-19 vaccination and adherence to COVID Appropriate 
Behaviors. The COVID-19 testing rates and testing confirmation rates are routinely monitored up 
to the district level. States reporting a declining quantum of testing are urged through formal 
communication and during review meetings to ramp up their testing infrastructure and rate of 
testing. States were also provided with financial assistance under ECRP Phase II to enhance 
testing capacity in underserved areas. 
 
2.14.3  Further, ICMR is continuously working to increase t he testing facilities across the 
countries in order to cater large population during such pandemic. 
 
2.15 Identification of Virulent Strain of Virus 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.15.1  The Second wave was undoubtedly marred by high cases, increased deaths, shortage of 
oxygen and beds in hospitals, reduced supplies of medicines and other important drugs, 
disruption of essential health care services, hoarding and black marketing of cylinders and 
medicines etc. The Committee is of the considered view that had the Government been successful 
in identification of the more virulent strain of virus in the population at an early stage and 
suitably implemented its containment strategy, the repercussions would have been less grave and 
many lives could have been saved.  
 
(Para 1.55 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.15.2  Government of India had already taken necessary measures for containment, treatment 
and prevention as per the evolving situation of the pandemic. However, the unprecedented nature 
of the event has led to stressed situation which was managed effectively with the available 
resources. 
 
2.16 Uncontrolled Massive Gatherings  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.16.1  The Committee also takes note of the constant rise in COVID cases during the Kumbh 
Mela, Tablighi Jamaat in New Delhi and election campaigns in the West Bengal. The Committee 
notes that large gatherings with no social distancing are synonymous with hotspots of COVID. 
The Committee notes that managing a large crowd along with following COVID protocols poses 
a challenge to the  administration. Such massive gatherings on several social, political and 
religious occasions were also a major causing factor for the second COVID wave. With COVID 
fatigue hitting in among the citizens, the Government also raised celebratory flag and pres umed 

56 
 
that the whole situation was under control. However, a devastating second COVID wave exposed 
all the false claims of the Government and resulted into large scale causalities. 
(Para 1.56 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.16.2  Advisory on Mass Gatherings  was circulated to the all States/UTs as early as on 
05.03.2020. States/UTs were also requested that in case any such mass gatherings are organized, 
States may take necessary action to guide the Organizers on precautions to be taken so as to avoid 
COVID-19 transmission. Physical distancing remains the key COVID -19 Appropriate Behavior 
and various IEC materials on the same were prepared and widely disseminated. Various SOP s 
were also issued by Union Ministry regarding precautions to be followed in context of religious 
places, markets, festivities, offices etc. which (among others) stressed on need for adequate 
physical distancing measures.  
 
2.16.3  With regard to elections , the Election Commission of India has issued "Broad Guidelines 
for Conduct of General Election/Bye election during COVID -19', which stressed on adherence to 
physical distancing measures during election processes. However, as ‘Health’ and ‘Law 
Enforcement’ are State subjects, the implementation of physical distancing and prohibition of 
mass gatherings are to be ensured by the concerned State Government. 
 
2.17 Need for COVID Appropriate Behavior  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.17.1  The Committee notes that the rate of  spread of Omicron is higher than its previous delta 
variants. Omicron has led to a rise in the number of COVID cases in India particularly among 
the young population. However, the rate of hospitalization and the severity of infection remained 
low compared to second wave that was fuelled by the Delta variant.  The Committee is of the 
opinion that since many cases were mild and asymptomatic, there are more chances of cases 
remaining undetected and not making it to the official registry. The Committee underst ands that 
the death rates have been lower in the third wave; however, the Government must continue 
taking effective measures for enforcing COVID -Appropriate Behavior (CAB). The Committee 
further feels that a strict testing regime in the airports for intern ational flights should have been 
followed and patients testing positive should have been immediately isolated.  With the 
uncertainty brewing around newer and more virulent strains of the virus, it is imperative to 
generate public awareness to wear a mask and follow all the COVID protocols.  
(Para 1.63 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.17.2  Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has continued to closely monitor COVID -19 
situation in the country right up to the district level. Given the unpredictability associa ted with 

57 
 
the virus, Union Ministry of Health has advised all States to continue focus on fivefold strategy 
of test-track-treat-COVID-19 vaccination and adherence to COVID Appropriate Behaviors.  
 
2.17.3  The Ministry has already issued ‘Operational Guideli nes for Revised Surveillance 
Strategy in context of COVID -19’ on 9th June 2022 with the long term vision to fully integrate 
COVID-19 surveillance within existing Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) 
surveillance mechanism with focus on early detection, testing, and timely management of 
suspected and confirmed cases as well as to aid detection and containment of outbreaks of new 
SARS-CoV-2 variants and monitoring the trends of existing variants. 
 
2.17.4  In view of increasing COVID -19 vaccination coverage across the globe and the changing 
nature of the pandemic, the current guidelines for International arrivals were last updated on 2 nd 
September 2022. These guidelines are implemented for international passengers and are being 
carried out at airports, ports, seaports and land border entry points. As per the current guidelines, 
international travellers from all countries are required to submit self -declaration form and submit 
details of a negative COVID -19 RT -PCR report (for test conducted within 72 hrs prior to 
undertaking the journey) or provide details of completed COVID -19 vaccination (only for 
countries which have agreement with India on mutual recognition of vaccination certificates of 
Nationally recognised or WHO recognised vaccines) on the onl ine Air Suvidha portal 
(www.newdelhiairport.in) before the scheduled travel. Only a small sub- section (2% of the total 
passengers in the flight) are required to undergo random post arrival testing at the airport on 
arrival in India. 
 
2.18 Policy for Early Detection of Next COVID Outbreak 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.18.1  The Committee notes that although the COVID -19 cases have been on a slow rise, fear of 
transmission of a more virulent strain of Sars -Cov-2, still persists. The Committee notes that the 
recent surg e in cases reveals that COVID is here to stay and will become endemic. The 
Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to take note of any fresh surge in the COVID cases 
and conduct sequencing of adequate number of samples so that new Variants of Interest ( VoI) 
and Variants of Concern (VoC) can be identified at the earliest.  The Ministry must also ensure 
that adequate number of samples are tested so that COVID cases are well reported and 
documented. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to be prepared for any eventualities 
of more virulent strain of Sars -Cov-2 virus and carry out mock drills to identify any gap in the 
COVID containment policy of the Government. The Ministry must also explore options to study 
sewage samples for early prediction of any possible outbreak of COVID waves in future and 
thereby formulate dynamic strategy to mitigate the resurgence.  
(Para 1.66 of 137th Report) 
 

58 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.18.2  
• The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has issued ‘Operational Guidelines for 
Revised Surveillance Strategy in context of COVID -19’ on 9th June 2022 with the long 
term vision to fully integrate COVID -19 surveillance within existing Integrated Disease 
Surveillance Programme (IDSP) surveillance mechanism with focus on early detection, 
testing, and timely management of suspected and confirmed cases as well as to aid 
detection and containment of outbreaks of new SARS -CoV-2 variants and monitoring the 
trends of existing variants. 
• INSACOG is working along with NCDC towards developing a common data shari ng 
portal for sewage surveillance just like the IHIP which is being used for sharing sentinel 
surveillance results. 
• The sentinel surveillance is dependent upon RT -PCR testing of individuals and hence 
asymptomatic positive individuals might not be captured in the sequencing surveillance 
which uses the swab samples collected during RT -PCR test for genome sequencing. 
Therefore, there is a need for a novel strategy that could provide early warning about 
potential surge of infection and increase in variants of c oncern in specific geographic 
locations.  
• After infection by SARS -CoV-2 virus in humans, shedding of virus particles in faecs of 
both symptomatic and asymptomatic patients has been reported. Estimation of viral load 
in wastewater and sewer systems, based o n this faecal shedding of the virus has been 
shown to be an early and sensitive monitoring tool for genomic surveillance. Pilot studies 
on use of this method of wastewater surveillance have been proposed to be initiated by 
INSACOG.  
• Presently, establishmen t of experimental and computational methods as well as 
identification and training of laboratories for collection and processing of samples are 
underway. 
 
2.19 Coordination with Status for Preventing Future Pandemic 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.19.1  The Union Gove rnment must coordinate with the States and assess the requirement of 
medicines, kits, oxygen etc so that shortage in supplies is averted in case of future outbreak. The 
Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry must closely monitor the trajectory of COVID 
in the country so that the system is better prepared to manage future resurgence of the virus, if 
any. 
 (Para 1.67 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.19.2  The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. However, financial assistance has 
been provi ded to States/UTs for health system strengthening to meet any exigency due to 

59 
 
resurgence of cases in the country through NHM, SDRF, ECRP packages I & II and PM – 
ABHIM. 
 
 
2.20  Provision of Emergency use Authorization  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.20.1 The Committe e observes that the provisions for emergency use authorization is absent in 
New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 and under Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. It is 
regretful to note that the vaccines have been given EUA without any specific provision in t he 
Indian drug rules and regulations. The laws in other countries are very clearly defined which 
made the granting of approvals of vaccine and drugs during the pandemic very transparent. 
However in India, the information regarding the protocol followed and  the clinical trial data of 
the vaccines remained shadowed for a long time.  
(Para 2.17 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.20.2   There are provisions under the Second Schedule of the New Drugs and Clinical 
Trials Rules, 2019 which were exercised by CDSCO for granting approval to COVID -19 
vaccines. These provisions provide for relaxation, abbreviations, omission or deferment of data 
for a new drug which is reproduced as below:  
 
“(2) Special situations for a new drug where relaxation, abbreviations, omission or deferment of 
data may be considered. –  
 
(i) Depending on categories and nature of new drugs to be imported or manufactured for sale or 
clinical trial to be undertaken (viz. New Chemical Entity, biological products, similar 
biologics, approved new drug or  new dosage form or new indication or new route of 
administration or new strength of already approved drugs, etc.,) requirements of chemical 
and pharmaceutical information, animal pharmacology and toxicology data, clinical data 
may differ. The requirements may also differ depending on the specific phase of clinical trial 
proposed to be conducted as well as clinical parameters related to the specific study drug.  
(ii) For drugs intended to be used in life threatening or serious disease conditions or rare 
diseases and for drugs intended to be used in the diseases of special relevance to Indian 
scenario or unmet medical need in India, disaster or special defence use e.g. haemostatic and 
quick wound healing, enhancing oxygen carrying capacity, radiation safety, drugs  for 
combating chemical, nuclear, biological infliction etc., following mechanism may be 
followed to expedite the development of new drug and approval process.  
 
Accelerated Approval Process:  Accelerated approval process may be allowed to a new 

60 
 
drug for a disease or condition, taking into account its severity, rarity, or prevalence and the 
availability or lack of alternative treatments, provided that there is a prima facie  case of the 
product being of meaningful therapeutic benefit over the existing treatment. 
a) In such case, the approval of the new drug may be based on data generated in clinical trial 
where surrogate endpoint shall be considered rather than using standard outcome 
measures such as survival or disease progression, which are reasonably likely to  predict 
clinical benefit, or a clinical endpoint. These should be measurable earlier than 
irreversible morbidity or mortality (IMM) and reasonably likely to predict clinical benefit.  
b) After granting accelerated approval for such drug, the post marketing t rials shall be 
required to validate the anticipated clinical benefit. 
c) Accelerated approval may also be granted to a new drug if it is intended for the treatment 
of a serious or life -threatening condition or disease of special relevance to the country, 
and addresses unmet medical needs. This provision is intended to facilitate and expedite 
review of drugs so that an approved product can reach the therapeutic armamentarium 
expeditiously.  
d) If the remarkable efficacy is observed with a defined dose in the Phase  II clinical trial of 
investigational new drug for the unmet medical needs of serious and life threatening 
diseases in the country, it may be considered for grant of marketing approval by the 
Central Licensing Authority based on Phase II clinical trial dat a. In such cases, additional 
post licensure studies may be required to be conducted after approval to generate the data 
on larger population to further verify and describe the clinical benefits, as per the protocol 
approved by the Central Licensing Authority.  
e) The type of information needed to demonstrate the potential of a drug to address an unmet 
medical need will depend on the stage of drug development. Early in development, such 
potential should be sufficiently demonstrated based on nonclinical models, a mechanistic 
rationale and pharmacologic data. Later in development, prior to new drug approval such 
potential should be demonstrated through clinical data to address an unmet medical need.  
2.20.3  Explanation -  For the purpose of this clause, an unmet m edical need is a situation where 
treatment or diagnosis of disease or condition is not addressed adequately by available therapy. 
An unmet medical need includes an immediate need for a defined population (i.e., to treat a 
serious condition with no or limit ed treatment) or a longer term need for society (e.g., to address 
the development of resistance to antibacterial drugs).” Considering the emergency situation due 
to COVID -19 pandemic and to expedite faster access to patients/beneficiaries, based on the 
existing provisions under the New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 without compromising 
Quality, Safety, Immunogenicity and Efficacy of COVID -19 vaccines, CDSCO, after detailed 
consultation and deliberation with the Subject Expert Committee (SEC) and aft er examining the 
safety, immunogenicity and or efficacy etc. of various COVID -19 vaccines and their effects, 
granted permissions to various COVID -19 vaccines for restricted use in emergency situation 
under the Accelerated Approval Process. 
 

61 
 
 2.21 Transparent Emergency Use Authorization Approval Process 
 
Recommendation: 
  
 2.21.1  The Committee is of the firm opinion that the procedure followed behind granting 
emergency or restricted approvals to drugs and vaccines must be clearly defined in the laws. 
Ambiguity on the vaccines trials as well as the procedure followed for EUA reflects greatly on 
the need of making amendments to the Indian Laws. The Committee accordingly recommends the 
Ministry to make specific provisions for EUA in the Indian drug laws. The Committee also notes 
the lack of clarity in the procedure followed for granting the approval for administering the 
booster doses. The Committee would like to be apprised on the protocol followed and the laws 
under which the approval was granted. The Committe e feels that meticulous scientific findings 
must form the basis for any major changes in the course of the vaccination policy. The 
Committee further recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to carry out rigorous 
assessments of laboratory and cl inical trial data before granting any future Emergency Use 
Authorization for vaccines.  The Ministry must also share the data on quality, safety, production 
of protective antibodies and efficacy of the vaccines in the public domain.  
(Para 2.18 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.21.2   The details of provisions for relaxation, abbreviations, omission or deferment of data 
(including animal studies & clinical trial) for a New Drug under the Accelerated Approval 
Process have been mentioned in Sr. No. 23 point 2.17 above.  
 
2.21.3  It is mentioned that various COVID -19 vaccines have been approved by CDSCO based 
on the clinical trials conducted in the country and/or overseas countries and after due evaluation 
of safety, immunogenicity and/or efficacy data and in consultation with the Subject Expert 
Committee (SEC) comprising of experts from various fields including Microbiology, 
Pulmonology, Immunology, Paediatrics, Internal medicine, etc. and following the provisions of 
New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 under the 
Accelerated Approval Process. Further, the interim clinical trial results containing safety, 
immunogenicity and/or efficacy results of approved COVID-19 vaccines is available in Summary 
of Product Characteristics ( SmPC) and factsheet which are publically available on CDSCO 
website i.e. www.cdsco.gov.in.  
 
2.21.4  As such, there was no procedure lack by CDSCO while granting permission to COVID -
19 vaccines (COVAXIN and COVISHILED) for restricted use in emergency situation. 
 
 
 
 

62 
 
 
2.22 Strengthening of Research Ecosystem for End-to-End Vaccine Development Process 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.22.1   The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department of Health Research and the 
Department of  Biotechnology that have been at the forefront of the vaccine research and 
development in the country. The Committee time and again has emphasized on the need for 
strengthening the research ecosystem in the country. The Committee further believes that both 
the Departments must also work towards strengthening the clinical trials ecosystem in the 
country along with data transparency. The Committee understands that vaccine development 
faces a slew of challenges ranging from procuring the raw material to conduc ting human trials. 
However, the present situation necessitate development of effective interventions so that the 
future outbreaks as the like of COVID -19 are mitigated.  The Committee strongly recommends 
the Ministry to strengthen the end- to-end vaccine development programme and extend support to 
vaccine candidates which are at different stages of development.  
(Para  2.23 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.22.2 
• The Department of Biotechnology has enabled strengthening the ecosystem to facilitate pre-
clinical and clinical development of vaccine candidates, through setting up of 
Biorepositories for archiving biospecimens for subsequent biomedical research; facilities 
for animal models and immunoassays (which also offered services to the industry); and 
GCP compliant clinical trial sites.  
• The Translational Health Science and Technology Institute ( THSTI) lab has been identified 
as one of the 7 global laboratories for centralized assessment of COVID-19 vaccines.  
• Also, through PM -CARES Funds support, the laboratories at DBT Autonomous Institutes 
(AIs) have been upgraded as vaccine testing facilities or Central Drugs Laboratories 
(CDLs). 
• A network of 54 GCP compliant clinical trial sites has been supported at different 
geographical locations PAN -India. Patient regi stry database and harmonized SOPs and 
protocols have been developed across the sites. The sites are being prepared for initiation of 
clinical trials in network mode. 
• Further, through the dedicated programme for accelerating COVID -19 vaccine 
development, fi ve vaccine candidates for COVID -19 have been supported whereby, four 
vaccines were accorded approval for Emergency Use by the Drugs Controller General of 
India (DCGI). 

63 
 
• Besides these, a broadly protective coronavirus vaccine candidate, supported by the global 
coalition of CEPI is being developed by Translational Health Science and Technology 
Institute (THSTI), Faridabad and Panacea Biotec. 
• The manufacturers were encouraged to share the safety, immunogenicity and efficacy data 
with the regulators as and when it was generated instead of waiting for the completion of 
the clinical trial, so as to enable continuous assessment/rolling review for reducing the 
processing time. 
• Further, in order to strengthen the research ecosystem in the country, ICMR has launched 
the Indian Clinical Trial and Education Network (In-TENT), an initiative to build a network 
of Research Institutes to facilitate clinical research trials across the country. 
 
2.23  Support for Strengthening Research Ecosystem  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.23.1   The Committee appreciates that the scientific community around the world sprung into 
action and developed COVID -19 vaccines in record time. It is a well established fact that the 
Indian pharmaceutical companies have a worldwide presence and have the ability to produce 
vaccines on a large scale. Taking into account that the company that produces the largest 
number of vaccines in the world is an Indian company, the Committee observes that India has 
huge potential in supplying the global demand of vaccines, howeve r, the Committee discovers 
that there is a gigantic scope for more innovation and research in the sector. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Government should look forward for strengthening the 
research ecosystem so that vaccines on new er and more scientific platforms are developed. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends the Government to increase the budget of Health Research 
and ICMR so that newer innovations see the light of the day. India should not just focus on being 
a mass produce r of vaccines but also aim at creating a niche space for the Indian Research 
fraternity in the vaccine and drugs development sector. 
  (Para 2.30 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.23.2  ICMR realizes the need for R&D and innovation in the field of vaccine s. ICMR has 
therefore identified vaccine related R&D as one of the top priority areas of research. 
 
2.24  Utilization of Funds for COVID Vaccination  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.24.1  The Committee is of the view that the funds allocated for COVID -19 management should 
have been judiciously distributed among the States so that the financial burden of the poorer 

64 
 
States is aptly managed. The Committee recommends the Government to ensure that adequate 
funds are reserved for purchasing and administering of vaccine doses . The Ministry may submit 
the expenditure profile of the Rs. 35,000 crore funds allocated for vaccination other emergency 
response and Health System preparedness packages and allocation from PM COVID Care 
Funds. The Committee again emphasizes that the Mini stry must ensure equitable distribution of 
funds among the States.  
(Para 2.34  of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.24.2   During FY 2021- 22, funds to the tune of Rs.35,437.68 crore has been utilized towards 
Support for COVID -19 Vaccination under “Transfer to States” in Demand for Grants No.- 40, 
controlled by the Ministry of Finance. The said amount has been utilized for the procurement of 
COVID-19 vaccines for supplying free of cost to all States/UTs. 
 
2.24.3  The funds allocated under PM Care Funds amounti ng to Rs.1392.825 crore was utilized 
for procuring 5.6 crore doses of covishield vaccine and 0.7 crore doses of covaxin vaccine. 
 
2.25  Guidelines for Financial Prudence 
 
 Recommendation: 
 
2.25.1   The Committee expresses its deep concern over the practice of releasing grants on the 
last day of the financial year. The Committee has time and again recommended the Government 
to adopt financial prudence and avoid last minute disbursement of funds. However, such poor 
financial management speaks volume of the lack of communication between the Union 
Government and the UT. The Committee recommends the Ministry to frame guidelines of 
financial prudence in consultations with the States and ensure that the guidelines are judiciously 
followed. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare must act as a facilitator and guide the 
States to ensure optimum utilization of the funds.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to adopt prudent fiscal analysis and devise a feasible roadmap so that such instances of 
poor financial mismanagement are not repeated.  
(Para 2.37 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.25.2 Department of Expenditure (DOE) vide its O.M.F.No.1(13)/ PFMS/ FCD/ 2020 dated 
23.03.2021  has issued guidelines regarding release of fund under Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
(CSS) and monitoring utilization of the funds released. As per the guidelines, Ministry will 
release not more than 25% the amount earmarked for a state for a CSS in a single 
tranche/installment. 

65 
 
 
2.25.3  Further, next tranche/installment of fund of  Central Share (not more than 25% at a time) 
can only be released upon the transfer of the earlier Central Share of funds to SNA account of 
State Health Society and after transfer of matching State share to the Single Nodal Account by 
the State Government and utilization of at least 75% of funds released earlier. 
 
2.25.4  The Ministry is ensuring strict compliance of all DOE guidelines issued on the subject. 
 
2.26  Cold Chain Equipment 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.26.1  The Committee notes that a robust cold chain i nfrastructure forms the crux of the 
National Vaccination Programme. Under the Universal Immunisation Programme, the 
Government has been providing vaccination for other diseases to the citizens. However, 
considering the large scale of COVID vaccination program, there was an urgent need to provide 
adequate cold chain equipments to the States so that the vaccines were smoothly distributed and 
rolled out upto the last corner of the country. The Committee is of the view that the vaccines need 
to be stored in ref rigerated conditions and the temperature has to be monitored on a real time 
basis. Insulated vaccines vans are required for transportation of the vaccines across the country 
within stipulated timeframe. The Ministry, therefore, must assess the ground requi rements of the 
cold chain supply and ensure that adequate number of insulated vans and cold chain equipments 
are available. The Committee points out that since adequate cold chain infrastructure is absent 
in many rural parts of the country, therefore, the Ministry must make concerted efforts to address 
future challenges arising from newer variants and newer diseases, keeping a vigil on assured 
adequate vaccine cold- chain supply. The Committee emphasizes that the Ministry must 
accordingly work towards establ ishing an efficient network of cold chain logistics for ensuring 
efficient last mile-delivery of the vaccines in required environment.  
(Para 3.18 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.26.2  The COVID -19 vaccination utilizes the existing infrastructure of the  Universal 
Immunization Programme (UIP), including the cold chain system which was assessed and 
accordingly augmented to keep it ready for storage of the requisite quantity of vaccines. 
 
2.26.3  13,607 Ice line refrigerators (ILR), 11,925 Deep Freezer (DF), 107 Walk in cooler (WIC), 
54 Walk in freezer (WIF) and 473 Solar direct drive (SDD) were supplied additionally to the 
States/UTs for COVID 19 preparedness. 
 
 

66 
 
2.27  Trained Personnel for Handling Vaccines 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.27.1  The Committee also notes  the five levels of vaccine stores and recommends the Ministry 
to ensure that vaccine store at each level fulfill the requisite criteria for adequate storage of 
vaccines. The Ministry along with the States must ensure that the personnel are well trained to  
manage the vaccines at these cold chain points. Any damage to the vaccines at any level must be 
taken very seriously and all efforts must be made to ensure that the vaccines are transported at 
desired temperature.  
(Para 3.19 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.27.2  The COVID -19 vaccination utilizes the existing infrastructure of the Universal 
Immunization Programme (UIP), including the cold chain system. Strengthening of cold chain 
points, training of cold chain handlers and temperature controlled transport of vaccine is ensured 
in Universal Immunization Programme and COVID -19 vaccination programme and upgraded on 
regular basis. 
 
2.28 Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network (eVIN) 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.28.1 The Committee notes that the use of modern cold chain equipments for storing and 
transportation of vaccines at the recommended temperature is the keystone for maintaining the 
quality and efficacy of the vaccines, however, the Committee finds that there is huge scope for 
improvement in the cold chain equipm ents in the country. The Committee points out that there is 
a need to upgrade the cold chain equipments in many States and adopt modern refrigerant 
technology so that the vaccines can be better monitored. The Committee also notes that use of 
eVIN has facil itated real time monitoring of the vaccines in the States. The Committee strongly 
recommends the Ministry to make eVIN functional in all the States and UTs and build technical 
capacities so that the cold chain handlers as well as the Programme Managers hav e a complete 
overview of the vaccine supply and consumption pattern. 
(Para 3.25 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.28.2  The COVID -19 vaccination utilizes the existing infrastructure of the Universal 
Immunization Programme (UIP), including the cold chain s ystem which was assessed and 
accordingly augmented to keep it ready for storage of the requisite quantity of vaccines. 

67 
 
 
2.28.3  13,607 Ice line refrigerator (ILR), 11,925 Deep Freezer (DF), 107 Walk in cooler (WIC), 
54 Walk in freezer(WIF) and 473 Solar di rect drive (SDD) were supplied additionally for 
COVID 19 preparedness. 
 
2.28.4  As recommended by the Committee, e-VIN system has been rolled out across the country. 
Necessary capacity building of programme managers on eVIN system is carried out routinely 
through NHM PIP activities. 
 
2.29 Cold Chain Infrastructure 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.29.1  The Committee takes into account the fact that the lack of ultra cold chain vaccine 
infrastructure in the country has limited the choice of vaccines. The m -RNA vaccines f rom 
Moderna, Pfizer etc that need a temperature of - 70 to -80 C for storage could not be explored as 
vaccine options in India when these were some of the first vaccines that were given EUA in the 
western countries. The Committee believes that a poor cold c hain infrastructure not only limits 
the choice of the vaccines but also increases the risk of vaccines wastage.  
(Para 3.26 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.29.2 The vaccines approved under the National COVID -19 Vaccination Programme does not 
require ult ra-cold chain infrastructure.  Existing cold chain infrastructure of the Universal 
Immunization Programme has been augmented to meet the requirement of the COVID -19 
vaccination programme. 
 
 
2.30 Pricing of Vaccine in Private Hospitals 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.30.1 The Committee notes that the bargaining powers of the vaccine manufacturers are high 
due to the high demand of the vaccines, however, the Ministry through bulk negotiations have 
settled at a fair price for free administration of the vaccines in the Gov ernment facilities. The 
Committee further notes that the vaccine manufacturers fix the price of vaccine for procurement 
by Private Hospitals and these private hospitals subsequently charge high price for 
administering the vaccines. The Committee strongly r ecommends the Ministry and the States to 
strictly monitor the exorbitant rates being charged by the private hospitals. 
(Para 3.33 of 137th Report) 
 

68 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.30.2  The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare strongly agrees with the recommendations of 
the Committee. Under the National COVID -19 Vaccination programme, the price of vaccine 
doses for private hospitals was declared by each vaccine manufacturer, and any subsequent 
changes were notified in advance. The private hospitals may charge up to a maxim um of Rs.150 
per dose as service charges in addition to the vaccine cost. State Governments were instructed to 
monitor the price being so charged by the Private Hospitals/COVID Vaccination Centres and 
hold regular meetings with the private hospitals. 
 
2.31 Pricing of Vaccines 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.31.1  The Committee further notes that  with the increase in the number of vaccine candidates 
in the market, the private hospitals as well as the Government will be at a better position to 
negotiate the price. The Ministry must accordingly ensure that the vaccines prices are negotiated 
on favourable terms and the demand supply gap is adequately abridged.  
(Para 3.34 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.31.2  The price of vaccine for procurement by Government of India i s negotiated by National 
Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for     COVID -19 (NEGVAC) and its subgroups 
involving detailed deliberations with the vaccine manufacturers. The procurement price of such 
vaccines in India compares very favorably with other countries. 
 
2.32 Intermixing of Doses of Vaccines 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.32.1  Attention of the Committee is also drawn to the study of CMC Vellore on the inter -mixing 
of doses of Covishield and Covaxin which claims to provide better immunity. Media Reports have 
suggested that the CMC Vellore study reveals that heterologous immunisation provides better 
results than homologous vaccination. However, no official information or updates have been 
provided by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in the public d omain. The Committee 
would like to be apprised on the findings of the aforementioned research study. The Committee 
further recommends the Ministry to encourage such studies on the potency and efficacy of the 
vaccines and ensure that bureaucratic hurdle and inordinate delays do not stall the findings of 
the research.  
(Para 3.38 of 137th Report) 
 

69 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.32.2  As per the minutes of the 17th NTAGI meeting held on 28th June 2022, the scientific 
evidence from CMC Vellore study suggested that Covishield booster dose given 6 months after 
COVAXIN primary series gives 6 -10 times higher antibody level as compared to when Covaxin 
is administered as the booster dose after a gap of six months after the primary schedule. 
Furthermore, surrogate neutralization to multiple variants showed ≥90% increase in NAb for all 
variants other than omicron, when Covishield was administered as booster after Covaxin primary 
series. Against Omicron variant significant jump of 60% NAb response was observed. This type 
of NAb was not observed when Covaxin was administered as booster. 
 
2.32.3  Further, during the 42ndStanding Technical Sub- Committee (STSC) of NTAGI, 
following recommendations were made on booster dose: 
 
• Evidence from the CMC Vellore study suggests that when Covishield vaccine is given as 
booster, it gives a better immune response. However, the CWG may also review the data 
of protein sub-unit vaccines booster studies before a decision on mix -match booster could 
be taken. 
• There is no evidence on comparative value of precau tion/booster dose at six months vs. 
nine months. Considering global evidence on six -month booster and no known safety 
concern booster dose may be administered at six months following last dose of primary 
series. 
 
2.33 Vaccine Effectiveness Studies 
 
Recommendation: 
2.33.1   The Committee reiterates that research studies that provide data on the efficacy of 
vaccines must be encouraged. The results of such study can help the Government in developing a 
better containment strategy and effective vaccine administr ation policy. The Ministry must 
expedite the decisions on such studies and its vaccine policy must be guided by scientific evidence 
and amended accordingly.  The Committee further recommends the Ministry to commission 
epidemiological and vaccine effectiveness studies so that strong evidence on the vaccines efficacy 
is generated and guaranteed so as to alley the apprehension and hesitancy against the booster 
dose. 
(Para 3.39 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.33.2  ICMR is conducting taskforce projects for determining the vaccine effectiveness and also 
to assess the facilitators & barriers for uptake of COVID-19 precaution dose. 
 

70 
 
2.34 Vaccine for Booster Doses  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.34.1  Attention of the Committee has also been brought to the concerns of few States that have 
sought the Union Government's permission to use the available vaccines for booster doses for the 
18-59 age group. The Committee recommends the Ministry to address the concerns of the States 
and allow them to use the available doses for boos ter doses if full vaccine coverage in the adult 
population has been achieved. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to ensure that 
any excess stock of vaccines is not wasted so that country achieves 100% vaccination of its 
citizens.  
(Para 3.40 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.34.2  Under National COVID -19 vaccination programme, precaution dose was made available 
from 10 th January 2022 for the population at risk to include Health Care Workers/Front Line 
Workers and those above 60 years of age. Gov ernment of India closely monitors COVID -19 
vaccine stocks in States/UTs so as to ensure their optimal utilization and minimal wastage. 
COVID-19 vaccine stock which has not been utilized in private hospitals and nearing expiry are 
usually taken up for redis tribution by respective State Government, for their timely utilization. 
States/UTs have also been advised to review program coverage & vaccine wastage on a daily 
basis and redistribute the vaccine stock if required for their optimal utilization.  
 
2.35 Assistance to States 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.35.1  The Committee takes note that undertaking COVID vaccination drive at such a large 
scale requires huge capacity and financial resources which many States may lack. The 
Committee, therefore, is of the firm view that the Government should generously equip the State 
Government with technical import and financial assistance.  In all circumstances, The Centre 
had to take a lead role in devising policies to substantially mitigate the impact of the pandemic. 
The Committee understands that mass vaccination for a country as vast and as diverse as India 
poses a big challenge. The Central Government adopted a targeted vaccination strategy by 
according the highest priority to the group at the highest risk. The Committee, in its 123rd Report, 
had pointed out that smart vaccination might be used as an immediate strategy so that the whole 
population should be vaccinated. The Committee agrees that for a country as heterogeneous as 
India a smart vaccination strategy was the need of the hour. However, the Committee observes 
that the response of the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on the vaccine front was 
delayed at the initial stage. In India, mass vaccination started in June, 2021 when vaccination 

71 
 
was made free for persons aged 18 and above. The Committee notes that repercussions of the 
delay in the vaccination program were evident in the high fatality during the second wave.  
(Para 4.11 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.35.2  The COVID -19 vaccination in the country is guide d by National Expert Group on 
Vaccine Administration for COVID -19 (NEGVAC) on the basis of concurrent scientific 
evidence. The prioritization for vaccination has been done with an aim to protect the pandemic 
response and health system and to have maximum impact on reduction of disease & deaths due to 
COVID-19. This was later followed by age -based prioritization, which is considered equitable 
and which has also been the practice globally. 
 
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has provided requisite fina ncial support to the 
States/UTs to enhance preparedness and response capacities against COVID -19. Funding support 
has been provided to States/UTs for health system strengthening to meet any exigency due to 
resurgence of cases in the country through Nationa l Health Mission, Emergency COVID -19 
Response and Preparedness packages. Further, with the long -term goal to better prepare the 
country against public health emergencies, PM Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission 
(PM-ABHIM) has been launched at an o utlay of Rs. 64,180 crores with the intent to enhance the 
capacity of primary, secondary and tertiary health care facilities and institutes for identifying and 
managing any new and emerging diseases. 
 
2.35.3  As on 1 st February 2023, a total of 220.51 cror e vaccine doses have been administered in 
the country in the population above 12 years of age. Out of which, 1st dose is 102.57 crore (97%) 
and 2nd dose is 95.18 crore (90%) and 22.75 crore precaution dose have been administered in the 
country. The National COVID-19 vaccination programme is ongoing across the country. 
 
2.36 Delay in Vaccination  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.36.1  The Committee notes that in countries like the USA, mass vaccination started in 
December, 2020 whereas in India, the first phase of the va ccination drive started in January, 
2021 with the healthcare workers getting the shots. The beginning of the vaccination drive had 
been slow owing to the exclusion of the other groups. Vaccination was made free at all 
Government Centers for people above 18 years from 21st June, 2021.  
(Para 4.18 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.36.2  Prior to the launch of COVID -19 vaccination programme, the country has invested in 
upgrading the manufacturers capacities of the manufacturer, build digital systems for deliv ery of 
vaccines, prepared operation and communication strategy and training of manpower for 

72 
 
delivering services. The COVID -19 vaccination is guided by National Expert Group on Vaccine 
Administration for COVID -19 (NEGVAC) on the basis of concurrent scientif ic evidence. The 
prioritization for vaccination has been done with an aim to protect the pandemic response and 
health system and to have maximum impact on reduction of disease & deaths due to COVID -19. 
This was later followed by age -based prioritization, which is considered equitable and which has 
also been the practice globally. 
 
2.37 Pace of Vaccination 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.37.1   As per the vaccination trend, the Committee observes that the vaccination rate has not 
been steady and the vaccination reached its peak in September 2021.  The Committee 
understands that although the one size fits all approach does not bear fruit and the situation in 
India cannot be compared to other countries considering the large scale of the vaccination drive, 
however, the Comm ittee strongly believes that India has immense potential and is home to the 
best of the brains in the world. The country must emulate the best of the practices from the 
western world and be the harbinger of innovation not only in its public policies but al so in its 
approach to ameliorate the health sector. The Committee emphasizes that, had the vaccination 
drive been carried out in full swing as was done in the western countries; the country would have 
been at a better position to face the subsequent COVID waves. However, the exclusion of a large 
population from the program during the initial period aggravated the health inequities. The 
Committee strongly believes that the vaccination has to be made free and universal. The 
Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to ensure adequate supply of vaccines so that 
the target of universal free COVID vaccination is achieved.  
(Para 4.19 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.37.2  Prior to the launch of COVID -19 vaccination programme, the country has invested in 
upgrading the manufacturers capacities of the manufacturer, build digital systems for delivery of 
vaccines, prepared operation and communication strategy and training of manpower for 
delivering services. The COVID -19 vaccination is guided by National Expert G roup on Vaccine 
Administration for COVID -19 (NEGVAC) on the basis of concurrent scientific evidence. The 
prioritization for vaccination has been done with an aim to protect the pandemic response and 
health system and to have maximum impact on reduction of disease & deaths due to COVID -19. 
This was later followed by age -based prioritization, which is considered equitable and which has 
also been the practice globally. 
 
 
 

73 
 
2.38 Use of RWA, NGO, Temples, Gurudwaras, Mosques for Vaccination 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.38.1  The Committee appreciates the involvement of residential welfare association, 
Market Committees, NGOs, Management committees of various Temples, Gurudwaras & 
Mosques in the National COVID -19 vaccination programme to ensure the success of the 
vaccination drive in the UT of Chandigarh. The Committee recommends the other State 
Governments to follow suite and also conduct special vaccination campaign for elderly, 
differently-abled persons, bed-ridden beneficiaries and people without any identification 
Card.  
(Para 5.35 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.38.2  During the course of time, strategic interventions were instituted to make the vaccination 
program and its process more people centric, convenient and more pragmatic. These include the 
following guidance and interventions issued to the States/UTs:  
 
• Vaccination of people at workplace for employees above 18 years & their dependents 
• Vaccination of beneficiaries without prescribed identity cards   
• Revision in dosage interval of Covishield based on growing evidence 
• Vaccination recommendations for lactating mothers and pregnant women 
• Near to Home COVID vaccination centres (NHCVCs) for elderly & differently -abled 
citizens 
2.38.3  Vaccination at the place of residence for persons who are bed- ridden or have extremely 
restricted mobility or disability and/or special needs that may hamper their accessibility even to 
NHCVCs. 
 
2.39  Last Mile Delivery of Vaccines  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.39.1  The Committee takes note of the CVC linked outreach session, Alternate Vaccine Delivery 
mechanism being followed in the State of Arunachal Pradesh for transporting vaccine. The 
Committee strongly recommends the State Government to ensure the last mile delivery of 
vaccines especially in the remotest area of the State. The Committee ap preciates the use of First 
Expiry First Out (FEFO) concept in the State where vaccine vials with early expiry are used first. 
However, the Committee recommends the State Government to ensure that the temperature of the 
vaccines are maintained accurately and avoid any wastage of vaccine. The Committee further 

74 
 
recommends the Ministry to ensure that FEFO is followed in all the States so that vaccine vials 
are not wasted due to expiry of the vaccines.   
(Para 5.49 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.39.2  All va ccines under Universal Immunization Programme and National COVID -19 
vaccination program is supplied in the remotest area ensuring robust cold chain practices. 
Government of India closely monitors COVID -19 vaccine stocks in States/UTs so as to ensure 
their optimal utilization and minimal wastage. States/UTs have also been advised to review 
program coverage & vaccine wastage on a daily basis and redistribute the vaccine stock if 
required for their optimal utilization.   
 
2.40 Real Time availability of Vaccines 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.40.1  The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the State Government of Meghalaya for 
ensuring the vaccination Status of the shopkeepers and their staff that are being displayed in all 
the shops. The Committee further recommends th e State to ensure that the information regarding 
vaccine availability and other logistics are reflected on a real time basis for better vaccine 
distribution and management in the State.   
 (Para 5.62 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.40.2  Digitization of  vaccine stock inventory through eVIN has been rolled out across the 
country, allowing real time information on vaccine availability. Advanced information of vaccine 
availability for the month is provided to States/UTs for effective planning of vaccination drive.  
 
2.41 Logistics of Vaccine Distribution 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.41.1  The Committee notes the submission of the State Government of West Bengal where 
instances of shortage in supply of syringes have been reported. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends the Ministry of H&FW to work in tandem with the State Government and ensure 
that such instances are avoided for making the vaccination drive a success in the State. The 
Committee strongly recommends the State Government to manage the logistics of the vac cine 
distribution system and in case of shortage in supply of any related equipment timely 
communication to the Union Government should be ensured.  
(Para 5.66 of 137th Report) 
 

75 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.41.2  Adequate COVID -19 vaccine doses and related logistics w ere made available to all 
States/UTs to vaccinate all eligible beneficiaries with 1 st dose, 2 nd dose and precaution dose. 
Advanced information of vaccine availability for the month is provided to States/UTs for 
effective planning of vaccination drive. 
 
2.42 Vaccination in Dadra and Nagar 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.42.1  The Committee applauds the role of UT Government of Dadra and Nagar Haveli for 
vaccinating all eligible beneficiaries for 1 st dose. However, the Committee recommends the 
Central Government to addre ss the concerns of the UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman 
& Diu by rectifying the total population of UT.   
(Para 5.80 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.42.2  Total population for the National COVID -19 vaccination programme has been based on 
estimates provided by Registrar General of India. 
 
2.43  Jan Swasthay Abhiyan 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.43.1  The Committee finds that Jan Swasthaya Abhiyan (JSA) has suggested useful course of 
action for strategic management of Pandemic COVID-19 that inter-alia include report of Serious 
Adverse Events (SAE) following COVID vaccine, assurance of affordable Medicine, 
Strengthening of public health sector & health manpower and promotion of PPP Model in health 
reforms. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may examine the suggestions at length for 
better health management in the country. 
(Para 5.96 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.43.2  Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI) are monitored through a well -structured 
& robust AEFI surveillance system. Causality Assess ment of all serious and severe AEFIs are 
done by the designated AEFI committee to determine if AEFI is related to vaccine or vaccination 
process or otherwise. The National Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI) Committee 
monitors vaccine safety and recommends action to improve AEFI surveillance. 

76 
 
2.44 High Out of Pocket Expenditure 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.44.1  The Committee is disappointed to note that the Government Health Expenditure as a 
percentage of Current Health Expenditure is only 27% and the Out of Pocket Expenditure as 
percentage of the Current Health Expenditure is 62.7%. The Committee while examining the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry has repeatedly recommended for increase in Public 
investments in the health sector.  
(Para 6.4 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.44.2   
1. The Global Health Expenditure Database (GHED) is based on National Health Accounts 
Estimates of countries. As per the latest estimates of GHED 2018, the Government Health 
Expenditure (GHE) as a percentage of current health expe nditure (CHE) is 30.08% and out-of-
pocket expenditure (OOPE) as a percentage of CHE is 55.32%. Further as per National Health 
Accounts 2018- 19, Government Health Expenditure (GHE) and Out of Pocket Expenditure 
(OOPE) as percentage of Current Health Expendi ture (CHE) are 34.5% and 53.2% 
respectively. 
 
2. The National Health Policy (NHP 2017) target of Government spending on healthcare at 2.5% 
of GDP encompasses the overall government expenditure which along with the Union 
government includes State and Local governments. Since the contribution by States to overall 
GHE is 65.7% (NHA 2018- 19), a significant increase in spending on healthcare by the States 
will have a major impact on the GHE. The NHP 2017 recommended that the States should 
allocate more than 8% of their budget to healthcare.    
 
3. Department of Health & Family Welfare has been making consistent efforts to increase public 
health spending. As per NHA 2018- 19 the Government Health Expenditure (GHE) as a share 
of GDP has increased from 1.15% to 1.28% from 2013- 14 to 2018-19.  The budget allocation 
for Department of Health & Family Welfare has increased by 75.3% from Rs. 47,353 crores in 
2017-18 (BE) to Rs. 83,000 crores in 2022- 23 (BE). Moreover, the fifteenth Finance 
Commission has also recommended health grant aggregating to Rs. 70,051 crores to local 
government for addressing the gaps in Primary health infrastructure in rural and urban area. 
 
4. The Government has launched four mission mode projects, namely PM -Ayushman Bharat 
Health Infrastructure Mission (P M-ABHIM), Ayushman Bharat Health & Wellness Centres 
(ABHWCs), Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY) and Ayushman Bharat Digital 
Mission (ABDM). PM-ABHIM, with an outlay of Rs. 64,180 crores to develop the capacities 

77 
 
of primary, secondary, and tertiary healthcare systems, strengthen existing national institutions 
and create new institutions to cater to detection and cure of new and emerging diseases. Under 
ABHWCs, Comprehensive Primary healthcare by strengthening Sub Health Centres (SHCs) 
and Primary Heal th Centres (PHCs) are facilitated.  PMJAY provides health coverage of 
Rs.5.00 lakh per family per year to around 10.74 crore poor and vulnerable families for 
secondary and tertiary care. ABDM is aimed at developing the backbone necessary to support 
the integrated digital health infrastructure of the country. 
 
2.45 Increase in Health Budget 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.45.1  The Committee in its 134th Report on the Demand for Grants of the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare had noted that BE of 2022- 23 was just a 0.2% increase over RE 2021- 22. 
The Committee had noted that despite the pandemic necessitating high investments in health 
sector, the Government had failed to increase the Health Budget.  As per National Health 
Accounts Data 2017- 18, the Government Healt h Expenditure as percentage of GDP is 1.35%. 
The Committee further recalls that under National Health Policy, the GHE was targeted to 
increase to 2.5% of GDP by 2025.  
(Para 6.5 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.45.2   
1. Department of Health & Family Welfar e has been making consistent efforts to increase 
public health spending. The budget allocation for Department of Health & Family Welfare 
has increased by 125% from Rs. 35,948 crores in 2014- 15 (BE) to Rs. 83,000 crores in 2022-
23 (BE). Moreover, the fiftee nth Finance Commission has also recommended health grant 
aggregating to Rs. 70,051 crores to local government for addressing the gaps in Primary 
health infrastructure in rural and urban area. In comparison to BE of 2021- 22, there has been 
increase of 16% i n the BE of 2022- 23.During 2021- 22, the India COVID -19 Emergency 
Response and Health System Preparedness Package (ECRP) Phase- II was also approved by 
the cabinet on 08th July 2021 amounting to Rs. 23,123 Crores with a central share of Rs. 
15,000 Crore and a state share of Rs. 8,123 Crore. The provision of fund for ECRP -II was 
made at the RE stage. 
 
2. The National Health Policy (NHP 2017) target of Government spending on healthcare at 
2.5% of GDP encompasses the overall government expenditure which along with the Union 
government includes State and Local governments. Since the contribution by States to overall 
GHE is 65.7% (NHA 2018-19), a significant increase in spending on healthcare by the States 
will have a major impact on the GHE. The NHP 2017 recommended that the States should 

78 
 
allocate more than 8% of their budget to healthcare.    As per NHA 2018 -19 the Government 
Health Expenditure (GHE) as a share of GDP has increased from 1.15% to 1.28% from 2013-
14 to 2018-19.   
 
3. Moreover, The India COVID -19 Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness 
Package (ECRP) -I for Rs. 15,000 Crores (USD 2 billion) was approved by Cabinet to 
prevent, detect and respond to the threat posed by COVID -19. In pursuant to the guidance on 
the management of the COVID-19 patients, dedicated facilities have been set up by the States 
for the management of the COVID -19 patients.  Subsequently, the India COVID -19 
Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness Package (ECRP) Phase- II was also 
approved by the cabinet on 08th July 2021 a mounting to Rs.23,123 Crores with a central 
share of Rs.15,000 Crore and a state share of Rs.8,123 Crore. To provide support to Central 
hospitals agencies and to States/UTs Governments to augment their existing response to the 
second wave and the evolving pandemic, including at district and sub -district levels in 
peripheral facilities. 
 
2.46 Increased Investment in Public Health  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.46.1  The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Government must increase its 
investment in public health systems and public health research. Indian States like Kerala that 
have a robust healthcare infrastructure were at a far better position to anticipate the 
uncertainties of the pandemic. The quick response strategy of the State reflected the advantages 
of a strong public healthcare infrastructure. The Committee in its 126 th Report on Demands for 
Grants 2021- 22 had explicitly recommended the Government for increasing its health 
expenditure to 2.5 % of GDP in the next two years and to 5% by 2025. The Committee 
accordingly reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry must set higher targets and ensure 
that the Government Health Expenditure is increased to 5% of GDP. The Committee further 
recommends the Ministry to nudge the States with Health Budget less than 8% of the State's GDP 
to increase the State Government's investment in the health sector.   
(Para 6.6 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.46.2   
1. The Government of India has launched four mission mode projects, namely PM -Ayushman 
Bharat Health Infras tructure Mission (PM -ABHIM), Ayushman Bharat Health & Wellness 
Centres (ABHWCs), Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY) and Ayushman Bharat 
Digital Mission (ABDM). PM -ABHIM, with an outlay of Rs. 64,180 crores to develop the 

79 
 
capacities of primary, secondary, and tertiary healthcare systems, strengthen existing national 
institutions and create new institutions to cater to detection and cure of new and emerging 
diseases. Under ABHWCs, Comprehensive Primary healthcare by strengthening Sub Health 
Centres (SHCs) and Primary Health Centres (PHCs) are facilitated.  PMJAY provides health 
coverage of Rs.5.00 lakh per family per year to around 10.74 crore poor and vulnerable 
families for secondary and tertiary care. ABDM is aimed at developing the backbone 
necessary to support the integrated digital health infrastructure of the country. 
 
2. The National Health Policy (NHP) formulated in 2017 envisages to provide universal access 
to good quality healthcare services through increasing access, increasing affordability by 
lowering the cost of healthcare delivery and equity. The policy envisages as its goal the 
attainment of the highest possible level of health and well- being for all at all ages, through a 
preventive and promotive healthcare orientation in all developmental policies, and universal 
access to good quality healthcare services without anyone having to face financial hardship as 
a consequence. The Policy is centered on the key principles of Equity; Affordability; 
Universality; Patient Centeredness & Quality of care; accountability; Inclusive partnerships; 
Pluralism and decentralization. The National Health Policy (NHP 2017) target of Government 
spending on healthcare at 2.5% of GDP encompasses the overall government expenditure 
which along with the Union government includes State and Local governments. Since the 
contribution by States to overall GHE is 65.7% (NHA 2018 -19), a significant increase in 
spending on healthcare by the States will have a major impact on the GHE. The NHP 2017 
recommended that the States shoul d allocate more than 8% of their budget to healthcare.   
 Department of Health & Family Welfare has been making consistent efforts to increase 
public health spending.  
 
3. The Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) envisages creation of tertiary 
healthcare capacity in medical education, research and clinical care, in the underserved areas 
of the country. It aims at correcting regional imbalances in the availability of 
affordable/reliable tertiary healthcare services and also augmenting facilities for q uality 
medical education in the country. PMSSY has two components: projects involving setting up 
of new AIIMS like institutes and upgradation of existing Government Medical Colleges 
(GMCs). Since the launch of the scheme, setting up of 22 new AIIMS and 75 government 
medical college up-gradation projects has been approved under this scheme. 
 
2.47 Gender Gap in Vaccination   
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.47.1  The Committee regrets that women remain the most affected group in any calamity. 
Women have long been denied basic rights and gender inequities are very high, especially in 
economically weaker and poorly accessible regions. The Committee notes that as per the 

80 
 
Government official data a total of 1.99 billion doses have been administered in the country till 
mid July , 2022. Out of the total doses, 988 million doses have been given to Males and 950 
million doses to women leading to a difference of over 38 million doses. 
 
2.47.2  The Committee notes the success of vaccination drive is correlated to registration on 
Cowin and easy access to the health care centre for vaccination. However, with women having 
no access to internet or any digital tool and her high dependence on the male member of the 
family for any information further widens the gender gap in vaccination. The Committee further 
notes that rumours, such as the impact of vaccination on menstruation etc further leads to lower 
willingness to be vaccinated. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to conduct more 
awareness campaigns especially in region with poor rate of vaccination among women. The 
Ministry must make all out efforts to bridge this gender gap in vaccination. 
(Para 6.11& 6.12 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.47.3  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare was aware of the hesitancy among women 
towards COVID-19 vaccination. With collaboration with M/o Women and Child Development 
and State Govts. the issues of vaccine hesitancy amongst women were addressed with targeted 
and focused IEC campaigns as part of the larger campaign. 
 
2.47.4  The misinformation was countered urgently and immediately through traditional and 
social media, due to its potency of taking the message in a viral form. Various videos were made 
and posted on the Ministry’s YouTube channel. Expert Speakers, COVID Charcha / Vaccine 
Varta, COVID Gurukool and other such series were introduced to generate awareness among 
women for COVID vaccination. ‘Myths vs Facts’ Press Releases were also issued to counter 
speculations and provide correct information on vaccination. These were amplified through social 
media, TV, Radio and through the states in regional languages. Gender related issues were also 
addressed in the daily/weekly press conferences of the Union Health Ministry.  
 
2.47.5  As on 1st February, 2023, a total of 2.20 billion doses have been administered in the 
country out of which 1.06 billion doses are administered to females.  
 
2.47.6  Har Ghar Dastak 2.0 Campaign was implemented across the country from 1 st June 2022 
to 31st July 2022, with an objective to: 
 
• Vaccinate all due for 2 nd dose and eligible for precaution dose in ≥ 60 years age group 
through door-to-door activity 
• Emphasise on vaccination of beneficiaries in prisons and old-age homes, ashrams etc. 
• School-based campaign (Govt./Pvt,/Informal schools like Madrasas, Day Care Schools) & 
Har Ghar Dastak round(Schools with summer vacations during the campaign period & 
non-school going children)for focused coverage of children aged 12-18 years population. 
• The campaigns have contributed in reaching out to the beneficiary till the last mile 
including the old-aged, differently-abled and even the vaccine hesitant populations.  

81 
 
 
2.47.7  Through the Har Ghar Dastak campaign, the vaccination coverage in the States have 
shown an increasing trend. 
 
2.47.8  During the course of time, strategic interventions were instituted to make the vaccination 
program and its process more people centric, convenient and more pragmatic. These include the 
following guidance and interventions issued to the States/UTs:  
 
• Vaccination of people at workplace for employees above 18 years & their dependents 
• Vaccination of beneficiaries without prescribed identity cards   
• Revision in dosage interval of Covishield based on growing evidence 
• Vaccination recommendations for lactating mothers and pregnant women 
• Near to Home COVID vaccination centres (NHCVCs) for elderly & differently abled citizens 
2.47.9  Vaccination at the place of residence for persons who are bed- ridden or have extremely 
restricted mobility or disability and/or special needs that may hamper their accessibility even to 
NHCVCs.   
 
2.48 Rural-Urban Vaccine Disparity 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.48.1  The Committee observes that the vaccination rate was very poor in the rural areas in the 
beginning of the vaccination drive. Internet connection and a mobile phone was the  foremost 
requirement for registering oneself in the Cowin App and walk-in COVID vaccination had not yet 
started. Rural areas with poor digital literacy did not see an uptake in the vaccination drive. The 
Committee further notes that many villages across I ndia do not have access to pucca roads, 
electricity and drinking water. These regions are rendered inaccessible either due to their rough 
geographical terrain or precarious security situation. With regions devoid of electricity, 
maintaining the temperature  of the vaccines especially in inhospitable terrain is a difficult 
challenge.  
(Para 6.13 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
2.48.2  The registration and vaccination of people without access to digital technology can be 
done through walk- in registration and v accination of either single individual or groups of 
individuals at COVID -19 Vaccination Centre (CVC), Facilitated cohort on –site registration and 
vaccination, Assisted registration through Common Service Centers (CSCs) or 1075 
helpline/State’s Call Center,  Special sessions for people who don’t have any of the specified 
identity cards, [migrants, seers, nomads etc.].In areas without internet connectivity, the 
vaccination sessions can still be organized using manual records which are to be entered into the 

82 
 
Co-WIN system for generation of vaccination certificates, up to 5:00 pm on the day after the date 
of such session. 
 
2.48.3 The COVID -19 vaccination utilizes the existing infrastructure of the Universal 
Immunization Programme (UIP), including the cold chain s ystem. Strengthening of cold chain 
points, training of cold chain handlers and temperature controlled transport of vaccine is ensured 
in Universal immunization programme and COVID-19 vaccination programme. 
 
2.49  New Technology for Vaccine Delivery  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.49.1  The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to open more vaccination centres in 
the rural areas. The Ministry must also explore use of newer refrigeration technology, such as 
"solar direct drive" that resolves the battery powered vaccine refrigerator problems and ensure 
that vaccines are made available in such remote areas. The Committee reiterates its 
recommendation that the Ministry must use modern technology and equipments to expedite the 
delivery of vaccines. The use of drone by the State Government of Maharashtra for delivering 
vaccines is a good example of making vaccines easily available in difficult terrains. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to deploy helicopters, boats, motor bikes and every possible 
means of transport to achieve last mile delivery of vaccines.  
(Para 6.14 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.49.2  Use of modern technologies  like drones, as well as other means i.e. h elicopters, boats, 
camel and by foot were used during the National COVID -19 vaccination pr ogramme. Further, 
Government of India has installed 460 Solar direct drive in the existing cold chain across the 
country for vaccines. 
 
2.50 Vaccine Hesitancy  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.50.1  The Committee agrees that a lot of misconceptions about the vaccines have given rise to 
vaccine hesitancy in the Indian population. With COVID vaccines getting the Emergency use 
authorization amidst the lack of information in the public domain, a certain sense of doubt 
prevailed in the people’s mind. The Committee also notes  that several instances of vials of 
vaccines getting wasted due to people not turning up to the vaccination centres have been 
reported. The vaccines have to be maintained at the recommended temperature and the vials of 
vaccines have to be used and discarded within hours of being opened.   
 

83 
 
2.50.2  Vaccine hesitancy has also been recognised as one of the reason behind low vaccine 
coverage in certain areas leading to regional disparities in Vaccine Distribution Plan. The 
Committee therefore believes that ther e is an urgent need to provide correct information on 
vaccines and address the issue of vaccine hesitancy.   The Committee accordingly recommends 
the Ministry to feature strong community engagement strategies in the vaccination Programme 
along with social media engagement. The Ministry must also explore involving celebrities and 
influential community voices for increasing the outreach of the vaccination programme.  
2.50.3  The Committee strongly urges the Ministry to disseminate information and spread 
public awareness regarding the safety and efficacy of the vaccines. The Committee further 
recommends the Ministry to continue conducting various Communication strategy activities 
especially in rural areas and areas with poor accessibility. The Committee also recommends the 
Ministry to conduct at-home inoculations especially for the aged and people with special need. 
 (Para 6.16, 6.17 & 6.18 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.50.4  Social media and community engagement have been included as pivotal aspects of the  
comprehensive, multi -media and multi- lateral IEC strategy of MoHFW to counter vaccine 
hesitancy and promote vaccination among different age groups.  
 
2.50.5  The National COVID -19 Vaccination Programme started from 16 th January, 2020. Since 
then, throughout the following months, social media has driven the media and communication 
strategy regarding COVID vaccination. Everyday posts on various social media platforms, both 
at the centre and states through regional versions/languages, informed citizens of the  new 
interventions, initiatives, polices regarding expanding the vaccination basket, along with 
approvals for new vaccines, allaying fears and apprehensions, encouraging people through 
photos, videos of people getting vaccination. These were through various ministries, in addition 
to PIB, AIR, DD, states government platforms.  
 
2.50.6  Special social media products were created such as COVID Gurukool, Corona Jagrukta, 
Zara Sochiye where experts, celebrities spoke about myths and countered them. Best Practices of 
States/UTs were highlighted and promoted through TV, radio, opeds, press releases, GIFs, reels, 
collaboration with MyGov etc. The Ministry also collaborated with brands like PayTM and Uber 
to amplify the vaccination campaign. Various celebrities acro ss States were engaged to debunk 
myths and fears and encourage people to come forward for the vaccine.   
 
2.50.7   Strategies were adopted included deploying ‘Prachar Toli’ in advance to villages which 
would ensure mobilization and counselling of the eligi ble population along with awareness 
campaigns, followed by the ‘Vaccination Team’ who would ensure that all eligible citizens are 
vaccinated with the first and second dose.  

84 
 
2.50.8  Further, in order to remove hesitancy, the Ministry launched Har Ghar Dast ak 1.0 (3 rd 
November, 2021 -  30th November, 2021) and Har Ghar Dastak 2.0 campaign (1 st June, 2022 – 
31st July, 2022) for encouraging beneficiaries for taking the COVID -19 vaccine including the 
precaution dose at door step. The campaign contributed in reac hing out to the beneficiary till the 
last mile including the old-aged, differently-abled and even the vaccine hesitant populations. 
 
2.50.9  From 15 th July 2022 to 30 th September 2022, as part of the celebration of 75 years of 
India’s Independence, Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav, Government of India launched the ‘COVID 
Vaccination Amrit Mahotsava’ initiative under which free precaution doses are being 
administered to all eligible beneficiaries at all Government CVCs. A camp -based strategy was 
implemented wherein s pecial vaccination sessions will be organized at various places such as 
public & private offices, schools, colleges, villages, routes of religious yatras, industrial 
establishments, etc.  
 
2.50.10  Various Ministries and State Govt. participated in these c ampaigns to make it a Jan 
Andolan through multi-stakeholder participation and multi-media activities. 
 
2.51 Vaccination of total population 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.51.1  The Committee was given to understand that the Indian Government had targeted 
vaccination for the entire adult population by December, 2021, however, the Government failed 
to achieve its targets set for the total vaccination drive. Attention of the Committee has also been 
brought to instances of vaccine shortage in few States, thereafter, the States were forced to divert 
stock meant for the 18- 44 age group to the 45 plus group for their second dose. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends the Government to refresh its target of 100% vaccination of the 
Indian population along with booster doses and make concerted efforts to achieve the targets.  
 (Para 6.20 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.51.2  As on 1st  February 2023, a total of 220.51 crore vaccine doses have been administered in 
the country in the population above 12 years of age. Out  of which, 1st  dose is 102.57 crore (97%) 
and 2nd  dose is 95.18 crore (90%) and 22.75 crore precaution dose have been administered. The 
National COVID-19 vaccination programme is ongoing across the country. 
 
 
2.52 Vaccine diplomacy  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.52.1   The Committee further notes that there exists a huge economic divide in the world and 
the pandemic has further widened the divide between the rich and the poor countries. With the 

85 
 
development of vaccines, the western countries started stockpiling of the vaccines and were the 
first to provide booster doses to its citizens while the low and middle income countries struggled 
to administer even the first dose of the vaccine. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Government to revisit its vaccine diplom acy and take a lead role at international fora to ensure 
that the third world countries get adequate doses of vaccines. The Committee believes that global 
vaccination is very crucial for minimizing the possibility of any future outbreaks of pandemic due 
to resurgence of mutated virus in any other country. The Committee, in this regard strongly 
advocates equitable global distribution of vaccines. 
(Para 6.21 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.52.2  India facilitated supplies of more than 50.4 million doses to more than 47 countries in the 
global south under COVAX. India donated 525,000 doses of WHO EUL approved. Made in 
India vaccines to Cambodia and Thailand under Quad Vaccine Partnership. 
 
2.53 Vaccine Pricing 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.53.1  The Committee agrees t hat the Government should have employed a better pricing 
mechanism for controlling the price of the vaccines. The prices of the vaccines in the Private 
Hospitals and vaccination centres were very high allowing high profiteering by the vaccine 
manufacturing firms and the Private hospitals.  
2.53.2  The Committee further notes that the vaccine manufacturing firms slashed the prices of 
vaccines for private hospitals to Rs 225 per dose in April, 2022. During the peak of the 
pandemic, the COVID vaccines were being administered at Rs. 900-1400 in the Private hospitals. 
The Committee understands the demand-supply economics and believes that private firms have to 
be allowed to make some profit so that investment can be made in research & development and 
increasing t he production capacity. However, the Committee fails to understand such high 
fluctuations in the prices of the vaccine that leave enormous space for vaccine manufacturing 
firms to earn exorbitant profits on the production of vaccines. 
(Para 6.25 & 6.26 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
2.53.3  Under National COVID-19 Vaccination programme, the price of vaccine doses for private 
hospitals were declared by each vaccine manufacturer, and any subsequent changes would be 
notified in advance. The private hospitals may charge up to a maximum of Rs.150 per dose as 
service charges in addition to the vaccine cost. State Governments may monitor the price being 
so charged. 
 

86 
 
2.54 Revamping Public Sector Vaccine Manufacturing Units 
 
Recommendation: 
2.54.1  The Committee understands that ensuring a consistent supply of vaccine during the 
pandemic COVID-19 posed a major challenge, thereby, arising an urgent need to accelerate the 
COVID-19 vaccination drive. However, the Committee laments that the public sector vaccine 
units we re not reckoned to service in times of crisis and their contribution to the COVID -19 
vaccine production remained negligible in the fight against the pandemic COVID-19.  
 (Para 6.30 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
2.54.2  
• Under Mission COVID Suraksha, effor ts have been made for augmentation of Covaxin 
manufacturing capacities, whereby, support has been provided to Bharat Biotech International 
Limited (BBIL), Malur facility; Indian Immunologicals Limited (IIL), Hyderabad, a Public 
Sector Undertaking (PSU) of Ministry of Animal Husbandry.  
• Support to the PSU, Haffkine Biopharmaceutical Corporation Ltd (HBPCL), Mumbai; is 
under active consideration.  
2.54.3  Support has also been provided to Gujarat COVID Vaccine Consortium (GCVC), 
Ahmedabad, a consortium of Guj arat Biotechnology Research Centre (GBRC) and Hester 
Biosciences, led by the State Govt. Of Gujarat. 
 
2.55 Revival of Vaccine Manufacturing Units  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.55.1  The Committee has been given to understand that in 2008, the vaccine production in CRI, 
PII and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai were halted for non- compliance with 
Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP). The Committee observes that although the licenses were 
restored in 2010; however these vaccine units continued to remain underutilised. The Committee 
strongly believes that revival of these units is imperative to bridge the gap between vaccine 
demand and supply and to make vaccines more affordable and accessible. The Committee further 
notes that the Madras High Court in May 2021 had asked the Central Government as to what 
steps were being taken to revive the existing Vaccine Institutes owned by the Government. The 
Supreme Court in December, 2021 had also sought the response of the Central Government on 
its policy to revamp public s ector vaccine manufacturing units.  The Committee, accordingly, 
strongly recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to revive the existing vaccine 
manufacturing units and issue production licences to the GMP compliant vaccine manufacturing 
units.   
 (Para 6.31 of 137th Report) 
 

87 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.55.2   PII, Coonoor: After the revocation of suspension of manufacturing license, PII produced 
and supplied the following 199.41 lakh doses of DPT in the year 2012- 13, 188.19 lakh doses of 
DPT in the year 2013-14 and 106.70 lakh doses of DPT vaccine during 2014- 15. PII successfully 
established 7 new facilities and modified 2 existing facilities. all manufacturing facilities at PII 
are made fully functional, the entire installed capacity will be available for  supply to UIP. In 
addition, Government of India has also instructed PII to identify suitable land for establishing a 
new manufacturing facility for viral and other vaccines.  
 
2.55.3  CRI, Kasauli: CRI’s manufacturing and supply License No. 21- MP suspensi on was 
revoked on 26.10.2010. In 2016, CRI launched the TT vaccine and has supplied approximately 
30 lakh doses to UIP. Further, CRI has supplied 2,75,03,900 doses of DPY vaccine. CRI is in 
continuous manufacturing and at present approximately 1.2 crore doses are at different stages of 
production and will be supplied in due course of time.  
 
2.55.4  BCGVL,Guindy: After revocation of suspension of license in 2010 for old facility, 
BCGVL undertook production in the same facility and supplied about 100 lakh do ses to 
UIP till 2015.  
 
2.55.5  The GMP facility was granted manufacturing and sale license in Oct 2019. Production 
was initiated in the GMP facility in Dec 2019 and supply to UIP commenced from July 
2020.  
 
2.55.6  For the FY 2020- 2021, BCGVL has supplied 170 lakh doses and for FY2021- 2022, 
BCGVL has supplied 270 lakh doses to Universal Immunization Programme. 
 
 
2.56  Waver of Intellectual Property Rights for Covaxin  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.56.1  The Committee further notes that India has been advocating the waiver of Intellectual 
Property rights of COVID vaccines at  the global level, however, the Committee is perplexed to 
note that the Government has taken no major initiative to waive the Intellectual Property Rights 
for the indigenous vaccine Covaxin which was developed in collaboration with ICMR. The 
Committee strongly recommends to examine the possibility of technology transfer of Covaxin to 
the Public Sector Units and start its production in these Units.  
 (Para 6.33 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
2.56.2  Under Mission COVID Suraksha, augmentation of manufacturing facilities for enhanced 
COVAXIN production, was supported at Indian Immunologicals Limited (IIL), Hyderabad, a 

88 
 
PSU of Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Diarying. Indian Immunologicals Limited 
has achieved a production capacity of 20 lakh doses/month equivalent drug substance in 
September, 2021. Support for facility augmentation at Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals 
Corporation Limited (BIBCOL), Bulandshahr; and Haffkine Biopharmaceut ical Corporation Ltd 
(HBPCL), Mumbai for COVAXIN production is under consideration.   
 
2.57 Implementation of National Vaccine Policy 2011 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.57.1  The Committee notes that the National Disaster Management Guidelines, Management of 
Biological Disasters contained comprehensive guidelines for undertaking biosafety and 
biosecurity measures. It aimed to strengthen the existing regulatory framework so that the 
country adopts a resilient response strategy in the wake of any imminent biological di saster. The 
Committee believes that had the Ministry implemented the guidelines and addressed the gap that 
was highlighted in the Report, the country would have been better prepared to tackle the 
pandemic. The Committee further notes that if the Government  had implemented the National 
Vaccine Policy, 2011 in letter and spirit, the issues of vaccine -security, management, regulatory 
guidelines, vaccine research & development and product development could have been dealt in a 
better manner. The Committee recom mends the Ministry to assess the functional status of 
National Disaster Management Guidelines, 2008 and National Vaccine Policy, 2011 and apprise 
the Committee of the initiatives being taken for implementation of these policies at the ground 
level to achieve the set objectives in these guidelines/policy.   
 (Para 6.35 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.57.2  The COVID -19 response in the country is in alignment with NDMA’s Guidelines on 
Management of Biological Disasters which stresses on building on core ca pacities to prevent, 
prepare against, and response to public health emergencies like disease surveillance, 
augmentation of diagnostic capacities, augmenting health infrastructure and medical logistics, 
IEC etc. 
 
2.57.3  In accordance with the National Vaccine Policy, 06 new vaccines have been introduced in 
the Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) schedule, and due to continuous support on 
research and development of vaccines, most of the vaccine introduced in UIP are indigenously 
developed vaccine.  Similarly, under National COVID-19 vaccination program most of the doses 
administered are indigenously produced.  
 

89 
 
2.57.4  Further, the strengthening of cold chain over the years has been in line with the National 
Vaccine Policy, the gains of which were utilized for effective implementation of National 
COVID-19 vaccination programme. 
 
 
2.58 Need of Change in Vials Size 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.58.1  The Committee has also been apprised by the State Governments that due to the bigger 
size of 20 doses in the Corbevax v accine, it is becoming difficult for the vaccination Centres to 
use them. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the vaccines should be made available in 
smaller packs of 5 doses each to ensure the best usage of vaccine and prevent wastage.  
 (Para 6.45 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.58.2  As of now, no new order of the Corbevax vaccine has been placed by Government of 
India. 
 
2.59 One VRDL in each District  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.59.1  The Committee in its 135 th Report on the Demands for Grants 2022- 23 (Demand No. 47) 
of the Department of Health Research had examined the Schemes of the Department, 
particularly, "Establishment of Viral Diagnostic & Research Laboratories (VRDL) to manage 
epidemics and national calamities". The Committee had emphasized on the need of establishing 
VRDLs across States and strengthen the bio- safety network to tackle any future outbreaks. The 
Committee accordingly reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry must continue its efforts 
towards expansion of testing labs network  in the country. The Ministry must aim towards - "One 
VRDL in each District" by 2026 and ensure that trained manpower is available in these 
laboratories.  
 (Para 7.6 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.59.2  DHR -ICMR is in continuous effort for increasing th e number of Viral Research and 
Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) in Government Medical Colleges across the country. As of 
date, 147 VRDLs have been established. 
 

90 
 
2.60 Network of BSL Labs 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.60.1  The Committee in its 135 th Report had also strongly advocated for the need of BSL -3 and 
BSL-4 labs in the country. The Committee notes that a strong network of modern high tech labs 
with sophisticated diagnostic techniques is crucial to strengthen the bio- safety ecosystem in the 
wake of emerging new virus. Lack of adequate BSL Labs in the country increases the risk of such 
viral outbreaks. The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to establish one BSL -IV 
lab in each of the four zones. The Committee further believes that for regular and effecti ve 
surveillance of any kind of infections or disease in the country, the Ministry must establish BSL-II 
facilities in different regions of the country. The Ministry must also start new  
mobile BSL -III labs in the country and ensure that all the zones of the country have a well 
established network.  
 (Para 7.7 of 137th Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.60.2   
• 17 BSL-3 facilities under different phases are under DHR -ICMR network. In addition to 
this, 7 BSL -3 facilities (including 5 upgradation of VRDLs) are planned under PM -
ABHIM scheme. 
• 2 Mobile BSL -3 have undergone validation and are deployed in Pune and Gorakhpur. 
Maximum Containment facility (BSL -4) is currently available at ICMR -NIV, Pune. In 
addition to this, two more BSL -4 facilities will be established at Dibru garh (North East) 
and Nagpur. 
 
2.61 Upgradation of VRDLs 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.61.1  The Committee further notes that under the PM -ABHIM Scheme, existing 5 VRDLs are 
being upgraded to BSL -III labs.  The Committee would like to be  apprised of the status of t hese 
labs and the Ministry must accelerate its efforts and ensure that the labs are upgraded within the 
set timeline. The need of the hour is to focus and emphasize on the state of the art laboratory 
infrastructure and have a robust research environment in order to understand the various kinds 
of infections/ viruses and also to ensure bio security of the country. 
(Para 7.8 of 137th Report) 
 
 
 
 

91 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.61.2  Kota, Rishikesh and Raipur are among 5 VRDLs which have been approved by Technical 
and Approval Committee for upgradation to BSL-III. 
 
 
2.62 Association of NGO/Civil Societies in Vaccination 
 
Recommendation: 
2.62.1  The Committee appreciates the Government's move for linking Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav 
with vaccine drive, thereby, announcing a 75 day  window starting from 15th July, 2022 wherein 
all the adults will get free booster doses at all Government Covid Vaccination Centres. In this 
regard, the Committee recommends the Government apparatus/NGO/Civil Society to associate 
with vaccination drive on auspicious occasion of Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav and achieve the 
intended targets. The Committee hopes that this Vaccination Amrit Mission leads to mass 
mobilization and mass vaccination among the eligible beneficiaries. 
(Para 7.10 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.62.2  From 15 th  July 2022 to 30 th September 2022, as part of the celebration of 75 years of 
India’s Independence, Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav, Government of India launched the ‘COVID 
Vaccination Amrit Mahotsava’ initiative under which free precautio n doses were administered to 
all eligible beneficiaries (persons aged 18 years & above who have completed 6 months or 26 
weeks after the 2nd dose) at all Government CVCs. During this initiative, a total of 98,82,948 
first dose, 4,25,18,001 second dose and 5,52,81,920 precaution dose were administered. 
 
2.63 Need of Restoring Ecological Balance in the World 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.63.1  The Committee observes that the pandemic through the devastating impact it ravaged 
across the rungs of the society, shed light on the importance of ecological balance in the world.  
The Committee notes that in this age of globalization and rapid urbanization, humans are 
becoming more detached from their environment. Nature is the essence of human life and human-
nature relationship does have an impact on human's health. 
(Para 7.11 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.63.2  The concerns of the Committee have been noted. 
 

92 
 
2.64 Restoration of Ecological Balance  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.64.1  The Committee notes that the increase in anthropogenic activities and 
augmentedhumaninterventionsintheecosystemhashadanadverseimpactontheenvironment.The 
impact of Global warming and Climate Change are visible throughout the world, especially in 
developing countries. Pollution in all form -air, water, noise etc. has become quite common. The 
Committee believes that there is a need to restore the ecological balance and let nature take its 
course. The Committee therefore, strongly emphasizes on the need to adapt a living and lifestyle 
which is in harmony with nature so that humanity is better prepared for dealing with any 
uncertainties in the future. 
(Para 7.12 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.64.2  Noted for compliance.  
 
 
2.65 Humanity is Part of Nature  
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.65.1  The Committee notes that the  former President of India, Shri Ram Nath Kovind, has also 
highlighted the importance of economical balance in the world. The former President of India's 
in his Speech in the farewell function on 23rd  July, 2022 stated the following: 
 
"In the year 2020, i n a matter of few days, our world changed like never before.  After 
nearly hundred years, a pandemic jolted the entire humanity.  It has been an 
unprecedented tragedy in our times, and the whole world is still struggling with it. At this 
stage, one can onl y hope that the world will draw the right lessons from it. The chief 
lesson is that we human beings have forgotten that we are part of nature. The reality is 
that we are neither separate from nature, nor we are above it. The outbreak of the 
pandemic was partly linked with the disruption in ecological balance. The last two years 
have also reminded us that we are after all one human family and our survival depends 
on mutual cooperation. India's efforts in combating COVID have been appreciated 
worldwide. With everyone's efforts, we have achieved the target of 200 crore vaccinations 
in just 18 months.  During the Corona period, we had provided free ration to 80 crore 
people." 
(Para 7.13 of 137th Report) 
 
 
 

93 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.65.2  Noted for compliance.  
 
 
2.66 Reforms in Health Sector 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.66.1  The Committee notes that India's response strategy against the pandemic had many 
shortfalls and the country struggled to minimize the impact of the pandemic Covid- 19. Many 
experts have opined that the Covid s ituation and its subsequent waves could have been handled 
in a better way. However, there is no denying the fact that India despite its large population and 
fragile healthcare infrastructure was successful in adapting to the uncertainties that the 
pandemic ravaged. The Committee appreciates the up scaling of the testing infrastructure in 
record time and notes that India has huge potential to deliver healthcare services to the last mile. 
India must continue its journey towards ushering new reforms in its health sector through its 
exemplary inclusive schemes and initiatives and expansion in the health Budget. Hon'ble 
President Smt. Droupadi Murmu in her Speech on her assumption of office as President of India 
on 25th July, 2022 also commended the capability India showed during the pandemic which is 
quoted as under:  
 
"The kind of capability that India has shown in combating the global crisis of Corona 
pandemic has enhanced India's credibility all over the world. We Indians not only 
faced this global challenge w ith our efforts but also set new standards for the world. 
Just a few days ago, India has set a record of administering 200 crore doses of 
corona vaccine. The patience, courage and cooperation shown by the people of India 
in this entire battle is a symbol o f our growing strength and sensitivity as a society. 
India not only took care of itself in these difficult situations but also helped the world. 
In the atmosphere created by the Corona pandemic, today the world is looking at 
India with a new confidence. The international community has high hopes from India 
for ensuring global economic stability, ease of supply chain and peace." 
 (Para 7.14 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.66.2  To strengthen the Public Health Infrastructure effectively manage and respond towards 
any future pandemics/ outbreaks and to fill critical gaps in health infrastructure, surveillance and 
health research -  spanning both the urban and rural areas , PM -Ayushman Bharat Health 
Infrastructure Mission (PM- ABHIM) was launched on 25 th October, 2021 with an outlay of Rs. 
64,180 Cr over till FY 2025- 26. The scheme is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) with some 
Central Sector (CS) components. 

94 
 
2.66.3  The main interventions under the CSS component of PM -ABHIM scheme to be achieved 
by FY 25-26 are: 
 
• Support for 17,788 rural Health and Wellness Centres in in 10 High Focus States. 
• Establishing 11,024 urban Health and Wellness Centres in all the States. 
• 3382 Block Public Health Units in11 High Focus states. Support for other States/UTs under 
XV Finance Commission Health Sector Grants and NHM. 
• Setting up of Integrated Public Health Labs in all districts. 
• Establishing Critical Care Hospital Blocks in all districts with population more than 5 lakhs. 
 
2.67 Better Vaccination Strategies  
 
Recommendation: 
2.67.1  The Committee notes that the pandemic has brought in open the need of scaling up the 
vaccine manufacturing ecosystem in the country and investing in the research and development 
infrastructure in the country. With the future variants being inevitabl e, the country must prepare 
better vaccination strategies. The Committee further believes that a resilient vaccination strategy 
will require concrete clinical research which is currently being carried out in the country. The 
Ministry must also focus on dev elopment of newer vaccine candidates and develop rapid 
response care strategies for better mitigation of the future uncertainties.  
 (Para 7.15 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.67.2  As and when the application receives for COVID -19 vaccines, CDSCO exami nes the 
proposal as a rapid regulatory response and further has no comments in this regard. 
 
2.68 Learning from COVID-19 
 
Recommendation: 
2.68.1  The Committee further feels that there is a need to learn from Covid experience and 
implement the health syste m reforms in the country. The Committee further reemphasizes that 
India must operationalize an effective, functional, transparent and accountable system for 
reporting severe adverse events.  
(Para 7.16 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.68.2  The learning’ s from COVID 19 vaccination are already being implemented with suitable 
changes made to the formats, the reduction in the number of investigation formats from two to 
one, expansion of membership of AEFI committees at all levels, etc. 
 

95 
 
2.69 Expansion of Public Health Service 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.69.1  The Committee also notes the shortfall of healthcare workforce in India and recommends 
the Ministry to ensure that regular recruitment is carried out to fill all the vacant posts in the 
Medical Colleges and Hospitals. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to continue its 
efforts to expand the capacity of public  health services in rural and urban areas through 
adequate, massive increase in central government expenditure on health. 
(Para 7.19 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.69.2  With the long -term goal to better prepare the country against public health emergencies, 
PM Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM -ABHIM) has been launched at an 
outlay of Rs. 64,180 crores with the intent to enhance the capacity of primary, secondary and 
tertiary health care facilities and institutes for identifying and managing any new and emerging 
diseases. 
 
2.70 Vaccine Development and Distribution 
 
Recommendation: 
 
2.70.1  The Committee in its Report has extensively examined the subject, "Vaccine Development, 
Distribution Management and Mitigation of Pandemic COVID -19" and identified various issues 
and challenges that are yet to be resolved. The Committee emphasizes the Ministry to ensure that 
the set targets of comple te vaccination are achieved and any existing disparity in vaccine 
distribution is addressed at the earliest. The Committee hopes that the Ministry sees Covid- 19 as 
an opportunity to revamp the public healthcare infrastructure in the country and usher in ne w 
reforms. The Committee strongly advocates the imperative essentiality of increasing Government 
health expenditure and investments in research and development. The Ministry must also work 
towards forging better public private partnerships for ensuring las t mile delivery of healthcare 
services.  
(Para 7.20 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.70.2  As on 1st February 2023, a total of 220.51 crore vaccine doses have been administered in 
the country in the population above 12 years of age. Out of which, 1 st dose is 102.57 crore (97%) 
and 2nd dose is 95.18 crore (90%) and 22.75 crore precaution dose have been administered. The 
National Covid-19 vaccination programme is ongoing across the country. 

96 
 
 
2.70.3  Further, with the long- term goal to better prepare the cou ntry against public health 
emergencies, PM Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM -ABHIM) has been 
launched at an outlay of Rs.64,180 crores with the intent to enhance the capacity of primary, 
secondary and tertiary health care facilities and ins titutes for identifying and managing any new 
and emerging diseases. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

97 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
3.1 Development of Variant Neutral Vaccines. 
  
Recommendation: 
 
3.1.1   The Committee observes that the country's first indigenous vaccine - Covaxin works on 
inactivated virus platform. With the constant mutation in the virus, there is an urgent need to 
evolve strategies for development of second -generation vaccines. The Committee, accordingly 
recommends the Ministry to encourage vaccine development on other newer and more efficient 
platforms and also evaluate the efficacy of the existing COVID -19 vaccines. The Ministry must 
make continuous efforts in developing vaccines that are variant neutral and whose efficacy 
remains unchanged against other strains of virus. The Committee reiterates its recommendation 
that all the Ministries concerned must collaborate with other National and International 
Institutes on vaccine research and development front and benefit the nation with latest 
innovation.  
 
 3.1.2  The Committee appreciate efforts of the Ministry with regard to development of Vaccines 
through various agencies and further recommends that more efforts are required in collaboration 
with other International Agencies for development of various neutral vaccines.   
(Para 2.29 of 137th Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
3.1.3 In addition to COVAXIN, as on date, CDSCO has approved following COVID -19 
vaccines for restricted  use in emergency situation of various technology/platforms based on the 
satisfactory CMC data, safety, immunogenicity and/or efficacy in preclinical studies & clinical 
trials and recommendations of Subject Expert Committee:  
 
1. COVISHIELD ChAdOx1 nCoV -19 Corona Virus vaccine Recombinant) of M/s Serum 
Institute of India Pvt. Ltd.  
2. SPUTNIK-V Gam COVID Vac (component I & II) imported by Dr. Reddy’s Lab. Ltd.  
3. Moderna vaccine mRNA-1273 COVID-19 vaccine imported by M/s Cipla Ltd. (Importer)  
4. Janssen Vaccine Ad26. COV2-S [recombinant] COVID -19 vaccine imported by M/s 
Johnson & Johnson Pvt. Ltd. (Importer)  
5. ZyCovD Novel Corona Virus -2019-nCov vaccine (recombinant DNA) of Cadila 
Healthcare Limited 
6. CORBEVAX SARS -CoV-2 vaccine containing Receptor Binding Domain (RBD) of  
SARS-CoV-2 gene of M/s Biological E Ltd.  
7. COVOVAX SARS-CoV-2 rS Protein (COVID-19) recombinant spike protein Nanoparticle 
Vaccine of M/s Serum Institute of India Pvt. Ltd.  

98 
 
8. SPUTNIK Light Recombinant adenoviral vector vaccine containing particles of seroty pe 
26 containing the protein S gene of the SARS -CoV-2 virus imported by Dr. Reddy’s Lab. 
Ltd.  
9. GEMCOVAC Lyophilized mRNA Vaccine for Injection (COVID -19) of M/s Gennova 
Biopharmaceuticals Ltd.  
10. iNCOVACC ChAd36 -SARS-CoV-S COVID -19 (Chimpanzee Adenovirus Vec tored) 
recombinant COVID-19 Vaccine of M/s Bharat Biotech.  
 
3.1.4 A broadly protective coronavirus vaccine candidate, supported by the global coalition of 
CEPI is being explored by Translational Health Science and Technology Institute (THSTI), 
Faridabad and Panacea Biotec. 
 
Further  Recommendations 
 
3.14   The  Committee appreciates role of CDSCO   for permitting    various vaccines 
developed on various  technology/platforms   for restricted use in emergency situation  and 
efforts of THSTI and Panacea Biotec for global coalition for development of  broadly 
protective corona virus vaccine candidate. However Committee feels that there is  an urgent 
need to evolve strategies for development of next generation vaccines. The Committee, 
accordingly recommends the Minist ry to encourage vaccine development on other newer 
and more efficient platforms and also evaluate the efficacy of the existing COVID -19 
vaccines. More efforts are also required in collaboration with other International Agencies 
for development of various n eutral vaccines as constant mutation of virus requires that we 
also follow the mutants and be ready for pandemics in waiting.  
 
3.2  Study of Dharavi Model 
 
Recommendation: 
 
3.2.1  The Committee commends the role of the State Government of Maharashtra wher e the 
Pandemic Covd- 19 has shown heinous expression resulting into large number of deaths, 
however, the SMART (Specific, Measureable, Achievable, Relevant and Time Bound) monitoring 
of the implementation of vaccination programme led to effective management  of the Pandemic.  
The Committee appreciates the vaccine distribution plan of Government of Maharashtra which 
was formulated through meticulous planning and prioritization of areas based on consideration 
of the number of active COVID cases and micro analys is of vaccination data.  The committee 
further applauds the specific strategy for COVID -19 Management in 'Dharavi' - Asia's largest 
slum area in Mumbai.  The Committee recommends the Ministry to undertake case study of 
'Dharavi' Model of COVID Management to arrive at the managerial skill, planning & strategic 
course of action for combating any possible pandemic in the country.   
(Para 5.55 of 137th Report) 
 

99 
 
 
Action Taken: 
 
3.2.2 Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation successfully implemented containment measure s 
to break transmission of COVID infection in slum population of Dharavi in Mumbai City.  
 
 Further Recommendations  
 
3.2.3  The Committee appreciates role of BMMC in containment of  COVID-19 in Dharavi.  
The Committee reiterates its recommend ation that the Ministry must study ‘Dharavi 
Model’ so that its experience may be utilized in future for containment of future pandemic 
of similar nature.   
 

100 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
 
REPORT AT A GLANCE 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the  
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 137 th Report on the ‘Vaccine Development, 
Distribution Management and Mitigation of Pandemic Covid-19’.  
 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
in respect of the 140 recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as 
follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:  1.9, 1.10, 
2.6, 2.24, 2.25, 2.35, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.27, 3.32, 3.7, 4.5, 4.24, 4.25, 4.26, 4.27, 5.4, 
5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.10, 5.13, 5.14, 5.19, 5.27, 5.28, 5.41, 5.43, 5.73, 5.76, 5.89, 5.90, 5.91, 
6.27, 6.28, 6.32, 6.37, 6.38, 6.39, 6.40, 6.41, 6.42, 6.43, 6.44, 6.49, 6.53, 6.54, 6.57, 6.58, 
6.59, 6.60, 6.63, 6.64, 6.65, 6.66, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 7.17, and 7.18.  
 
Total – 64  (Chapter-I) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue  in view of 
the Government's replies: 1.18, 1.31, 1.32, 1.33, 1.37, 1.38, 1.39, 1.47, 1.48, 1.49, 1.50, 
1.51, 1.52, 1.54, 1.55, 1.56, 1.63, 1.66, 1.67, 2.17, 2.18, 2.23, 2.30, 2.34, 2.37, 3.18, 3.19, 
3.25, 3.26, 3.33, 3.34, 3.38, 3.39, 3.40, 4.11, 4.18, 4.19, 5.35, 5.49, 5.62, 5.66, 5.80, 5.96, 
6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 6.11, 6.12, 6.13, 6.14, 6.16, 6.17, 6.18, 6.20, 6.21, 6.25, 6.26, 6.30, 6.31, 6.33, 
6.35, 6.45, 7.6, 7.7, 7.8, 7.10, 7.11, 7.12, 7.13, 7.14, 7.15, 7.16, 7.19 and 7.20 
Total –  74  (Chapter-II) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  
 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 2.29 and 5.55. 
 
Total– 2 (Chapter-III) 
 
 
A pie -chart depicting the status of action taken  by the Ministry on the 137 th Report has 
been given hereunder: 
 

101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46%
53%
1%
Status of action taken by the Ministry in 
respect of 137th Report of the Committee
Recommendations/ Observations
accepted by the Government
Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of Ministry's replies
Committee has made further
recommendations

102 
 
 
 
Minutes  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

103 
 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
 
           The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. onMonday, t he 11 th December, 2023 in Committee 
Room-4, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
6. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
7. Dr. Santanu Sen 
8. Shri A. D. Singh  
LOK SABHA 
9. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
10. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
11. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
12. Shri K. Navas Kani 
13. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
14. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
15. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
16. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
17. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
18. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S.  
19. Shri Anurag Sharma 
20. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
21. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan  - Director  
3. Dr Saket Kumar   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Noyaline Vinitha F.C.  -         Joint Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them 
about the agenda for the day, i.e.  to consider and adopt *** draft Reports, namely, (i) Draft 150th 
Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendati ons/ Observations 
contained in the 137 th Report on “Vaccine Development, Distribution Management and 
Mitigation of Pandemic COVID-19”  of the Committee; (ii) ***and (iii) ***  

104 
 
3. The Committee then considered the draft 150 th, *** and *** Reports of the Committee . 
***.  After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the 150 th  and *** Reports. ***. The 
Committee also authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors in the 150th  
and *** Reports, if necessary. 
4. The Committee  decided that the 150 th and *** Reports may be presented to the Rajya 
Sabha and simultaneously laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha in the ensuing Session.  
5. *** 
6.  ***.  
7. The meeting adjourned at 4:30 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** pertains to other matter  