 
 
              
                                                                                       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2022/ Asvina, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
REPORT NO. 
142 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
136th REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2022-23 (DEMAND NO. 
4) OF THE MINISTRY OF AYUSH .  
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail :  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2022/ Asvina, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED FORTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 136th 
REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2022-23 (DEMAND NO. 4)   
OF THE MINISTRY OF AYUSH .  
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 (i)  
2. PREFACE 
 
(ii) 
3. ACRONYMS 
 
(iii) - (iv) 
4. REPORT 1 - 76 
 Chapter–I –  Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Ministry 
 
2 - 29 
 Chapter–II – Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee does not desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Ministry 
 
30 - 39 
 Chapter–III –  Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the 
Committee and makes further observation/recommendation 
 
40 - 72 
 Chapter–IV- Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Ministry have not been received 
 
73 - 76 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A  
GLANCE 
77 - 83 
6. MINUTES 84 - 86 
7. ANNEXURES 87 - 95 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Dr. Anil Agarwal     
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Vacant 
5. Vacant 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Shri A. D. Singh  
8. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
9. Vacant 
10. Vacant 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shrimati Kavitha Malothu 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjun Lal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
22. Shri K. Navaskani 
23. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil 
24. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
25. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
26. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
27. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
31. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                          Additional Director 
4. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
5. Shrimati Harshita Shankar     Deputy Secretary 
6. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma  Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Ms. Monika Garbyal   Assistant Committee Officer 
(i) 

 
 
PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this One Hundred Forty Second Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 136th Report on Demands 
for Grants 2022-23 (Demand No. 4) of the Ministry of Ayush.  
2. The One Hundred Thirty Sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 24th March, 2022. The Action Taken Notes of the Government on the 
recommendations contained in  the Report was received from the Departments on 17th June, 
2022.   
3.  The Committee made a total of 88 recommendations in the 136th Report, out of which  27 
recommendations have been accepted by the Ministry and has been categorized under Chapter I. 
There are 14 recommendations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Ministry‟s replies that have been categorized under Chapter II. There a re 27 recommendations/ 
observations, in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the 
Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon and has been 
categorized under Chapter III while 7 recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Ministry have not been received, has been categorized under Chapter IV. 
4. The Committee, in its meeting held on the  8th September, 2022 considered the Draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
8th  September, 2022 
Bhadra,  (Saka) 
 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
CHAIRMAN 
Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary                                                                                           
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 
(ii)  

 
 
                          ACRONYMS 
 
AYUSH 
AI 
AIIMS 
Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy 
Artificial Intelligence 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AMR 
BE 
BMGF 
BSL 
CCMB 
CCRAS 
Antimicrobial Resistance  
Budget Estimate 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation  
Bio safety Level 
Centre for Cellular & Molecular Biology 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences 
CBNAAT Cartridge Based Nucleic Acid Amplification Test 
CSIR 
CNRT 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
Centre for Promotion of Nutrition Research and Training  
CoE 
DCGI 
Center of Excellence 
Drugs Controller General of India  
DBT 
DBT 
Direct Beneficiary Module  
Department of  Biotechnology  
DHR    Department of Health Research 
DIAMOnDS 
DoI 
DoPT 
DRSC 
DST 
EQA 
FY 
GCLP 
GDP 
DHR-ICMR Advanced Molecular Oncology Diagnostic Services  
Declaration of Intent  
Department of Personal and Training 
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
Department of Science and Technology 
External Quality Assessment 
Fiscal Year 
Good Clinical Laboratory Practices 
Gross Domestic Product 
GIA Grants in Aid Scheme  
GHI Global Health Index 
HTAIn Health Technology Assessment in India  
HRD Human Resource Development 
HTA Health Technology Assessment 
ICMR 
ICRC 
ISRO 
Ig-ELISA 
IIT 
IDD 
INSACOG 
 
IRDA 
JRF 
LAMP 
MAFSU 
MD 
Indian Council of Medical Research 
India Cancer Research Consortium  
Indian Space Research Organisation 
Immunoglobulin-Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay test 
Indian Institute of Technology 
Iodine Deficiency Disorders 
Indian SARS-CoV-2 Consortium on Genomics or Indian SARS-CoV-2 
Genetics Consortium 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
Junior Research Fellowship  
Loop mediated isothermal amplification  
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University 
Doctor of Medicine 
ML Machine Learning 
MoA 
MoU 
Memorandum of Agreement 
Memorandum of  Understanding 
MRHRUs Model Rural Health Research Units 
 
(iii) 

 
 
MRUs 
MSEs 
MSMEs 
NAFLD 
NCDI 
Multidisciplinary Research Units 
Medium & Small Enterprises  
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease 
National Centre for Disease Informatics and Research 
NCDC National Control for Disease Control  
NER 
NIAID 
North Eastern Region 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 
NIN 
NITI 
National Institute of Nutrition 
National Institution for Transforming India 
NITM   National Institute of Traditional Medicine, Belagavi 
NIV National Institute of Virology, Pune 
PhD 
PMASBY 
QC 
QS 
RCRC 
Doctor of Philosophy  
Pradhan Mantri Atmanirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana 
Quality Control 
Quality Assurance 
Regional Clinical Research Centers  
RE Revised Estimate 
RMRC Regional Medical Research Centre 
RT-PCR Real Time Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction 
SARS-COV-2 Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2  
SDG Sustainable Development Goals  
SNCM 
SRG 
Standing National Committee on Medicines and other Health Care Products  
Start-up Research Grant  
STW 
STS 
Standard Treatment Workflow  
Short Term Studentship 
SFC 
S&T 
TB 
Standing Finance Committee 
Science & Technology 
Tuberculosis 
VCRC Vector Control Research Center 
VRDL Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratories 
UCs Utilization Certificates 
UTs Union Territories 
WHO World Health Organisation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

1 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 1 36th Report on on Demands for Grants 2022-
23 (Demand No. 4) of the Ministry of Ayush.  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Ayush  in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which hav e been accepted by the Government: 
2.10, 2.13, 2.17, 2.24, 2.34, 3.30, 3.39, 3.44, 3.53, 3.60, 3.65, 3.69, 3.71, 3.74, 
3.77, 3.93, 3.96, 4.2, 4.32, 4.7, 4.10, 4.11, 4.23, 4.26, 4.29, 4.40 and 4.41 
       Total–27 (Chapter-I)  
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies:  2.23, 2.26, 2.30, 2.36, 2.37, 3.12, 3.15, 3.35, 
3.36, 3.37, 3.89, 3.91, 3.92 and 4.30 
         Total– 14 (Chapter-II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 1.10, 2.2, 2.4, 2.6, 2.8, 2.28, 3.10, 3.17, 
3.24, 3.34, 3.41, 3.54, 3.57, 3.58, 3.68, 3.79, 3.81, 3.86, 3.98, 3.100, 3.103, 4.3, 
4.31, 4.34, 4.36,and 4.39  
       Total– 27 (Chapter-III)  
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of whic h final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 2.20, 2.21, 3.27, 4.5, 4.6, 4.37 and 4.38  
         Total - 7 (Chapter-IV) 
3.  The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the 
Report. 
  

2 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
1.1    Budgetary Allocation of Ministry of Ayush 
Recommendation 
1.1.1 The Committee notes that the allocation of Ministry of Ayush is 3.69% of the Health Budget 
in 2022-23 as against 4.17% of the Health Budget in 2021-22. Instead of a gradual increase over 
the years, this year has witnessed a marked reduction in allocation for the Ministry of Ayush 
compared to the allocation for Ministry  of Health & Family Welfare. The Committee is not 
happy with this reduction in allocation compared to Health Budget and would like to point out 
that the budget of Ministry of Ayush is still lower to 5% of the Health Budget. The Committee is 
of the consider ed view that Ministry of Ayush, intending to embark on a journey of AYUSH 
revolution, must be adequately funded and schemes meticulously executed so as to realize the 
full potential of AYUSH Systems. The importance of Ayush Systems, particularly in Covid t imes, 
is highly appreciated with rising popularity of these systems and their increasing acceptability as 
an economical and effective system of medicine. The Committee in its 128 th Report had 
emphasized upon appropriate financial support and had also recommended that 10% of the 
Health Budget should be given to Ministry of Ayush from 2022 -23 onwards. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that Ministry of Finance maybe approached to allocate atleast 8% of 
the Health Budget to Ministry of Ayush in RE 2022 -23 and 10% of the Health Budget from next 
financial year. 
(Para 2.10 of 136th Report) 
Action Taken 
1.1.2 The projected demand for the financial year 2022 -23 is Rs. 3139.53 crore against which an 
amount of Rs. 3050.00 crore has been allocated. Since projected demand is low due to the reasons 
explained in para 2.2 & 2.4 above, therefore, the allocation for Ministry of Ayush budget comes 
to only 3.67% of Health Ministry‟s budget. How ever, additional fund if any, will be demanded at 
RE stage after due examination. The recommendation of the Committee is noted and the ministry 
is actively considering the concern of the Committee. 
1.2    Realistic assessment of its funds requirement 
 Recommendation 
1.2.1 The Committee, while referring to „Meeting the targets through enhanced allocation of 
budget in the document proposal to 15 th Finance Commission of India on Promotion of AYUSH 
Services & Strengthen the Healthcare Delivery in the country, recommends the Ministry of Ayush  
to have a realistic assessment of its funds requirement keeping in view the larger objectives of the 
Ministry on holistic wellness based on the principles of prevention o f diseases and promotion of 
health with enhanced investment which will in turn reduce the out of pocket expenditure and 
financial burden on the population.  
(Para 2.13 ibid) 
 

3 
 
Action Taken 
1.2.2       Union Cabinet has approved Rs. 3399.35 Crore ( Rs. 2209.58 Crore as Central Share 
and Rs. 1189.77 Crore as State Share) for operationalization of  12,500 Ayush Health and 
Wellness Centres (HWCs) under Ayushman Bharat in a phased manner by from the year 2019 -20 
to 2023 -24.  The objective of AYUSH Health and  Wellness Centres (HWCs) is to establish a 
holistic wellness model based on AYUSH principles and practices, to empower masses for “self -
care” to reduce the disease burden, out of pocket expenditure and to provide informed choice to 
the needy public. The li fe style changes have been also targeted through operationalization of 
12,500 AYUSH Health Wellness Centres. Further, 7553 AYUSH HWCs have been approved 
from 2019 -20 to 2021 -22. Out of this, 3313 AYUSH HWCs have been made functional under 
progressive category. The recommendation of the Committee is noted and the ministry is actively 
considering the concern of the Committee. 
1.3    Construction Projects 
Recommendation 
1.3.1 The Committee observes with concern that except for NIH, Kolkata, Phase II, all the 
remaining construction projects are incomplete. The physical progress as on 31 st December, 
2021 for NIUM, Ghaziabad (73.96%), NIH, Narela (78.20%), AIIA, Sarita Vihar, Ph -II (54%), 
NISARG GRAM, NIN, Pune (74.34%) and NEIAH, Shillong, Ph -II (83.66%) and lik ely date of 
completion for these projects is 31st March,2022. The completion date for AIIA, Goa is 31.12.22 
and physical progress is 73.08%.  The Committee is surprised to find the NIL physical progress 
with respect to NIA, Panchkula wherein the completion  date is 30.06.22 and only Rs 10.68 
crore has been spent out of Rs. 85.67 crore. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
reasons for NIL physical progress of NIA, Panchkula. The Committee is of the view that the 
construction of these projects should  not be delayed as it may lead to time and cost overruns. 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to give attention to the infrastructure developments 
and closely monitor the progress made in the projects on a monthly basis and complete them in 
a time bound manner so that the Ministry is able to realize its vision 2047 smoothly. The 
Committee hopes that construction projects having the deadline till 31 st March, 2022 are 
completed within the same. 
(Para 2.17 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.3.2 The project of NIH, Kolkata  Ph-II was completed in Oct, 2021. The other projects i.e. 
NIUM- Ghaziabad, NIH-Narela, AIIA-Sarita Vihar Ph -II, NISARG GRAM – NIN Pune, AIIA-
Goa and NEIAH – Shillong were likely to be completed by March, 2022, but due to various 
reasons viz. Covid -19 pandemic, ban imposed by NGT etc. the work could not be completed in 
scheduled time and shall be completed by the end of 2022 except NIA, Panchkula which is 
expected to be completed by the end of 2023. 
1.3.3 The project of NIA, Panchkula is delayed due to obt aining NOC from Station Headquarter, 
Chandi Mandir, M/o Defence as the land allotted to NIA, Panchkula is adjacent of Station 
Headquarter, Chandi Mandir, Panchkula. The NOC was   granted by  Defence Authorities for 
Construction of NIA on 18 -1-2020. Further, delay is due to various clearances pending with the 
statutory authorities and now most of the clearances have been obtained.   Now, the Construction 
Activities are in full swing. 

4 
 
1.3.4 The Construction projects are being reviewed by Special Secretary (Ayush ) on regular 
basis as well as by Secretary (Ayush) from time to time. A brief status of the construction 
projects upto May, 2022 is as under : 
i. National Institute of Homoeopathy, Narela as satellite Institution of National 
Institute of Homoeopathy, Kolkata:  Construction of super structure of all the buildings 
i.e. Hospital & Academic building, Marriage Accommodation, Single Accommodation, 
Director‟s Bungalow, Residential Block have been completed. HVAC, finishing & 
painting works are in progress.   The supply & installation of furniture & equipment is in 
progress. The financial progress is about 100.00% and the physical progress is about 
85.00%. 
ii. National Institute of Unani Medicine, Ghaziabad as satellite Institution of National 
Institute of Unani Medicine, Ba ngaluru: All works in respect of all the buildings i.e. 
Type II, III, IV & V quarters, Girls & Boys Hostel and Guest House have been 
completed. The supply & installation of furniture & equipment is in progress. The 
financial progress is about 93.18% and the physical progress is about 82.65%. 
iii. All India Institute of Ayurveda, Goa as satellite Institution of All India Institute of 
Ayurveda, Sarita Vihar:  All works in respect of all the buildings i.e. Hospital & 
Academic building, Marriage Accommodation, Single  Accommodation, Director‟s 
Bungalow, Residential Block have been completed. The supply & installation of furniture 
& equipment is in progress. The financial progress is about 95.53% and the physical 
progress is about 90.00%. 
iv. National Institute of Ayurveda,  Panchkula as satellite Institution of National 
Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur:  The works in respect of construction of boundary walls, 
excavation of foundation of basement of Hospital Building, RCC works of College, 
Hostels, & residential buildings are in progress. The financial progress is about 32.10% 
and the physical progress is about 14.00%. 
v. NISARG GRAM, Pune as an Up -gradation centre of NIN, Pune:  Construction of 
super structure, block work & plastering of all the buildings i.e. Hospital building, 
Academic building, Residential Block   (Type II, III, IV & V) and girls & boys Hostel, 
common mess, Living Gandhi Memorial and Yoga Hall have been completed. The 
supply & installation of furniture & equipment is in progress. The financial progress is 
about 100% and the physical progress is about 88.76%. 
vi. All India Institute of Ayurveda Ph -II, Sarita Vihar:  Super structure of all the blocks 
i.e. block nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 & 8 are on the verge of completion and simultaneously, 
the work in respect of finishing a re in progress. The financial progress is about 87.88% 
and the physical progress is about 72.00%. 
vii. North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda & Homoeopathy:  Structure work, block work for 
Boys & Girls Hostel, staff quarter Type III, & Senior Resident Hostel, staff  quarter IVA 
& B, & Director's Banglow are completed. Finishing works is in progress. External 
development work like road, retaining wall and drain are under progress. The financial 
progress is about 94.40% and the physical progress is about 94.54%. 
  

5 
 
 1.4      Fund Absorbing Capacity of the Ministry  
 Recommendation 
1.4.1 The Committee while taking into consideration the capacity of the Ministry to absorb more 
than 98% of the funds allocated, believes that the Ministry can expand the whole gamut of 
activities/schemes with additional funds. Moreover, as per the Ministry‟s vision for 
AYUSH@2047, it becomes imperative to demand for enhanced funds so that planning is matched 
by implementation. The Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to expand its scop e and 
seek additional funds for its long term as well as short term goals. 
(Para 2.24 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
1.4.2 The recommendation of the committee has been noted, as indicated below :- 
 
Siddha and Unani Section 
 CCRS 
1.4.3 As suggested, the scope for Ayush systems as per the Ministry‟s vision for Ayush@2047 is 
enormous. Hence, collaborative proposals with ICMR, CSIR and reputed Medical Institutions 
like AIIMS, CMC,  etc,  will be  mooted by CCRS. 
 
 NIUM 
1.4.4 Proposal for additional funds as required shall be sent to the Ministry. 
 CCRUM 
1.4.5 The Council is working on the expansion of activities / schemes as per vision document 
2047 and additional funds for its long term as well as short term goals will be sought from the 
Ministry accordingly. 
National AYUSH Mission  
1.4.6 Union Cabinet has approved on 14.07.2021 for continuation of the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme of National AYUSH Mission from 1.04.2021 to 31.03.2026 vide letter no. 27/CM/2021 
(i) dated 19th July, 2021 (Case no. 116/27/2021 - item no. 3). Revis ed guideline of Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme of NAM have been finalized and according to revised guidelines, cost norms 
for different activities has been enhanced as well as public health programmes has been added as 
a new activities. Since, targets for the year 2022-23 have been fixed as per the newly approved 
revised NAM scheme and to meet the targets, additional funds are required for new approved 
public health programmes.  
1.4.7 Since, State/UT Governments have demanded more fund to strengthen the AYUSH health 
facilities, therefore, more funds are required for better access to AYUSH Services through 
increase in number of AYUSH Hospitals and Dispensaries, AYUSH HWCs and implementat ion 
of different AYUSH Public Health programmes. As per the new guidelines, the following new 
initiatives are being envisaged to be implemented  through States/UTs in coming years :- 
 

6 
 
1.4.8    AYUSH Public Health Programmes 
i. National Program for Prevention and Management of Musculoskeletal Disorders  
ii. Integration of AYUSH with National Programme for Prevention and Control of 
Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS)  
iii. SUPRAJA (AYUSH Maternal & Neo-natal Intervention): For strengthening Ayush based 
Maternal & Neo-natal Interventions through Ayush teaching hospitals 
iv. VAYO MITRA (AYUSH Geriatric Healthcare Services): Ayush Geriatric Healthcare 
Servicesis a program for senior citizens to live healthy productive lives. 
v. AYURVIDYA: (Promotion of healthy lifestyle through AYUSH System in 75000 
School) Ayurvidya program for Healthy Lifestyle through Ayush for School Children.  
vi. AYUSH Mobile Medial Unit: Mobile Medical Units are proposed for healthcare in 
underserved and far flung are as through Ayush systems. 
vii. KARUNYA: (AYUSH Palliative Services): Ayush Palliative Services aims to improve 
Quality of Life in patients under palliative care. 
viii. National Program on AYUSH for morbidity management and Disability Preve ntion 
(MMDP) of Lymphatic Filariasis (lymphoedema): Morbidity management and Disability 
Prevention (MMDP) of Lymphatic Filariasis (lymphoedema) through Ayush 
interventions. 
IC Section 
1.4.9 The Ministry is moving ahead in a systematic way by implementing I C scheme to achieve 
the set targets or its mandate, as indicated at reply for Para -1.10. The Ministry is continuously 
identifying the global challenges for getting recognition and acceptance of Ayush system at 
international level and to position India as g lobal leader in the field of traditional medicine and 
address them appropriately like, signing of MoUs  for research collaboration and for cooperation 
in the fiel d of Ayush/traditional medicine,  interaction/dialogue with international authorities, 
stakeholders, B2B & G2G meetings, deputation of exper ts at foreign countries, at WHO,  set up 
Ayush information cell/center, establishing Ayush chairs etc. WHO Global Centre for 
Traditional Medicine is being established in Jamnagar, Gujarat which will be beneficial  for the 
promotion of Ayush system globally as well as for positioning Ayush as an economical 
alternative system of medicine in mainstream public health delivery system.  
1.4.10 Moreover, Ministry has made the substantial changes in the IC scheme by includ ing 
additional provisions/components for promotion of Ayush globally i.e. Setting up and 
strengthening of Export promotion Council for Products and Services (the financial assistance of 
up to Rs. 50 lakhs per annum may be provided for taking up activities) , Establishment of 
International institutes/ research centers in India under various multi -country organizations / 
forums like BIMSTEC  (Financial assistance up to Rs. 200 crore may be provided for the same) 
etc. Additional funds for establishing interim o ffice of WHO GCTM at ITRA Jamnagar sought 
and received. Additional funds for establishing main office of WHO GCTM would be sought in 
current FY.  
 

7 
 
AEP-III Section 
1.4.11 Ministry of Ayush welcomes the suggestion of the Committee and it is committed to 
enhance the activities /schemes of Ayush with additional funds. 
 
1.5     UCs of National Ayush Mission 
Recommendation 
1.5.1 The Committee observes that maximum number of UCs of National Ayush Mission followed 
by National Medicinal Plants Board are  pending. Despite Ministry‟s efforts for liquidation of 
UCs with having one to one meetings with concerned States/UTs and also having a dedicated 
web portal for facilitating online submission of UCs, not much difference has been made. Even 
though 34 States /UTs have submitted their State Annual Action Plans through the web portal, 
only 13 States/UTs have submitted UCs online. As regards NMPB, the Committee believes that 
merely issuing periodical reminders is not bearing the desired results. The Committee, th erefore, 
recommends to the Ministry to tackle this problem on priority basis to pursue the concerned 
States/UTs proactively and persuade them to use the web portal for easy and quick submission of 
UCs. The Committee feels that the Ministry should appoint a  nodal officer for the purpose who 
regularly follows up and interact with the nodal officers in the States/UTs for the purpose. 
(Para 2.34 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.5.2 As of now, 20 State/UT Governments have submitted utilization certificates through the 
NAM web portal and submission by the remaining States/UTs is under process. Ministry of 
Ayush is continuously pursuing the States/UTs to submit the utilization certifica tes through the 
NAM web portal.    
1.5.3 With respect to implementation of NAM Scheme, a dedicated CPMU is established in the 
Ministry having provision of Programme Manager, Consultants, Finance Manager and Accounts 
Manager, etc. for monitoring the impleme ntation of NAM scheme including submission of 
Utilization Certificates. In this regard, States/UTs have been allocated among CPMU members 
for continuous follow up with States/UTs for implementation of NAM Scheme and submission 
of Utilization Certificates. Further, the officers of the NAM Cell are also pursuing with 
States/UTs to expedite the liquidation of UCs. 
1.5.4   For early liquidation of the pending UCs, NMPB has taken the following steps: 
Regional-cum-Facilitation Centres (RCFCs) have given the mandate to co -ordinate with 
reference to liquidation of pending UCs with respective States in addition to periodic Review 
meetings with Project Investigators.  Nodal Officers are also designated for each States/UTs to 
coordinate with them for early liquidation of pending UCs. The liquidation of Pending UCs has 
been given priority and the liquidation status are  monitored on weekly basis, in Senior officers 
Meeting headed by Secretary (Ayush). 
  

8 
 
1.6    Third Party Assessment 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.6.1 The Committee finds that the steps taken by the Ministry in response to on the key findings 
of Third Party Evaluation study are at various stages of planning and implementation. The 
Committee believes that the Ministry needs to lay special focus on the followi ng issues on priority 
basis:- 
i. Drafting of NAM guidelines to further strengthen the State Programe 
Management Units and District Progarmme Management Units in the 
States/UTs. 
ii. Legislation for the allied health care professionals to be finalized. 
iii. Formulation of a model Procurement Policy of AYUSH medicines. 
iv. Setting up of quality assurance Committees which will be monitored by Ministry 
of AYUSH.  
(Para 3.29 ibid) 
 
1.6.2 The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to prepare a Plan of Action for 
finalizing the above mentioned issues as they are vital for improvising the implementation of 
NAM to a great extent. The Committee desires that the Ministry should start work ing on these 
strategic plan without further procrastination in order to extract expected result. 
(Para 3.30 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.6.3 The following information is given:-  
 
(i) NAM guidelines have been finalized and shared with State/UT Governments for 
implementation. 
(ii) As far as NAM Cell is concerned information may be treated as NIL. However, this 
information may be sought from Education Policy-III Section. 
(iii) Final guidelines for procurement of essential ASU&H medicines have been included 
under NAM and shared with States/UTs for implementation. 
(i) State/UT Governments were requested to leverage existing purchase and 
procurement infrastructure for procurement of essential AYUSH medicines. It was 
also highlighted to the States to consolidate the infrastructure c reated for State 
AYUSH Pharmacies which were supported under NAM for supply of essential 
medicines to AYUSH hospitals and dispensaries. For seamless procurement of 
quality medicines, states were also asked to explore the tie up with existing Medical 
Services Corporations (wherever is applicable) in the States. 
(iv) State/s/UTs will be asked to set up quality assurance committees which will be 
monitored by the Ministry of Ayush. 
  

9 
 
1.7    Pending UCs of NMPB 
Recommendation 
1.7.1 The Committee is concerned over large number of UCs that are pending for NMPB. The 
Committee recapitulates that the situation was similar during last year too.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates that concerted efforts need to be made to liquidate the pe nding UCs and 
the matter should be taken up consistently with the concerned States/UTs to resolve the issue of 
pending UCs. 
(Para 3.39 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.7.2  For early liquidation of the pending UCs, NMPB has taken the following steps: 
(i) Regional-cum-Facilitation Centres (RCFCs) have been given the mandate to co -
ordinate with reference to liquidation of pending UCs with respective States in 
addition to periodic Review meetings with Project Investigators. 
(ii) Nodal Officers are also designated for each States/UTs to coordinate with them for 
early liquidation of pending UCs. 
1.8    Status of manpower and resources in each SMPB 
Recommendation 
1.8.1 The Committee would like to know the status of manpower and resources in each SMPB.  
The Committee also desires to know whether each SMPB has full time manpower for executing 
its mandate and has adequate funds to support programme of SMPB. The Committee believes 
that without the active cooperation and coordination of SMPB, the medicinal plants growing 
movement cannot to pick up momentum. Support in the form of grants -in-aid to SMPB for the 
new scheme is a welcome step.  The Committee believes that such grant -in-aid would strengthen 
the SMPBs and a robust structure with adequate manpower and infrastructure would be in place 
thus ensuring successful working of SMPBs. 
(Para 3.44 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.8.2 As per the information provided by 20  State Medicinal Plants Boards (SMPBs), the status 
of manpower and resources in respective SMPBs is given at Annexure – I. 
 1.9   Volume of Export of Ayush Raw Materials  
 Recommendation 
1.9.1 The Committee notes that due to a technicality of Harmonisation Codes, the real volume of 
export of Ayush raw materials and other products is not really accounted properly. The 
Committee appreciates that the Ministry has identified the glitch and is workin g on removing it 
so as to showcase the realistic status of volume of export of Ayush products. The Committee 
believes that this would increase the volume of exports by two to three times.  The Committee 
desires that the Ministry should leave no stone untur ned in making the concerted efforts to 
achieve the cherished objectives/goal. The Committee commends the Ministry for working with 
different bodies to develop international standards for Ayush products. The Committee is hopeful 

10 
 
that a separate Export Promo tion Council will certainly boost up exports of Ayush products, 
therefore, Government should not delay in assigning a separate Export Promotion Council 
especially to Ministry of AYUSH.   
(Para 3.53 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.9.2   The Following action have been taken:- 
(i) Ministry of Ayush has taken various initiatives to promote Indian Traditional system 
of medicine & also to increase the export of Ayush and herbal medicines/products, in 
last 8 years. The recent initiatives of the Ministry have led to multi -fold rise in export 
of products and services of Ayush. 
(ii) Ministry of Ayush has been working with International bodies like - WHO, ISO for 
developing International standards for Ayush products and services. Recently, WHO‟s 
benchmark for training in Ayurveda, Yo ga and Unani Systems of Medicines has been 
published.  
(iii) Ministry had taken initiative to form a  export promotion Council dedicated for Ayush 
Sector. The FICCI was requested to steer the formation of Council as an outcome, the 
Ayush Export Promotion Council (Ayushexcil) has been registered with Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs on 04.01.2022.  
1.10    Multi-Institutional Project 
Recommendation 
1.10.1 The Committee is of the considered view that adoption of the “Multi -institutional project 
entitled “Critical appraisal and validation of Local Health Traditions (LHTs), Oral Health 
Traditions (OHTs) and Ethno  Medicinal Practices (EMPs): An inclusive study among Ethnic 
communities of Northeast India” is a step in the right direction.  The Committee accords that the 
knowledge of ancient times of effective medicines and formulations of Indian systems of 
medicines by the native healers need to be accumulated, tested, scientifically validated and 
documented. Such a database would also help in improving the existing knowledge of Ayush 
drugs to treat new diseases and help in reviving the past glory of the Indian syste ms of medicine. 
The Committee expects that the Raw Drug Repositories will help in collection, identification and 
documentation of sorts of raw materials, herbs, medicinal plants in the regional and national 
repositories. 
(Para 3.60 ibid) 
 Action Taken 
1.10.2 National Medicinal Plants Board, Ministry of Ayush has initiated the establishment of 
National Raw Drug Repository (NRDR) and Regional Raw Drug Repositories (RRDR) in order 
to create raw drug repositories and research activities in respect of raw drugs  which are used in 
the ASU&H System of medicine under the Central Sector Scheme. Till date one NRDR and  
four RRDR projects are sanctioned and under progress.  The details of NRDR and RRDR are at 
Annexure – II. 
  

11 
 
 
1.11    Ayush Oushadhi Gunvatta Evam Uttpadan Samvardhan Yojana (AOGUSY) 
Recommendation 
1.11.1 The Committee endorses the intent of the Ministry of merging the drugs related component 
under one umbrella scheme, namely Ayush Oushadhi Gunvatta Evam Uttpadan Samvardhan 
Yojana (AOGUSY) for better coordination and synergy and strengthening the drug regul atory 
system of Ayush. The Committee believes that quality control of Ayush drugs is one of the most 
important area of concern in present times. The need of the hour is to strengthen the Central and 
State regulatory structures so that Ayush drugs are safe and efficacious.  The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to give equitable impetus to all components of AOGUSY in order to 
improve and strengthen quality control in AYUSH system. 
(Para 3.65 ibid) 
Action Taken 
          1.11.2   The concern of the Committee for better implementation is noted for compliance. 
 
1.12    Sourcing of the raw materials/medicinal plants and herbs 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.12.1 The attention of the Committee was drawn to adherence to differential approach/pattern 
in sourcing of the raw materials/medicinal plants and herbs alternating the effectiveness, 
quantity and quality of the drug formulations of ASU&H drugs.  The Committee takes note of the 
drug standardization exercises taken by the Ayush Institutes. The Committee is of the view th at 
efficacy of raw materials sourced from different regions needs to be researched and tested.  The 
Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to address the flagged issue in tandem with all 
institutes concerned and take appropriate measures to standardize the quality of Ayush drugs. 
(Para 3.69 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.12.2 For standardization of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy (ASU&H) medicines 
in the country, the Government has established Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine 
and Homoeopathy (PCIM&H) under the Ministry of AYUSH. The prime mandate of the 
Commission is to publish and revise Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India (API), Siddha 
Pharmacopoeia of India (SPI), Unani Pharmacopoeia of India (UPI) and Homoeopathic 
Pharmacopoeia of India (HPI). The Pharmacopoeial standards are basic need to ensure quality, 
safety and efficacy of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic medicines. The 
Pharmacopoeia Commission is also responsible to publish and revise Ayurvedic, Siddha and 
Unani official formularies and regulatory compendiums. These published standards become part 
of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules, 1945 for ascertaining the quality standards of Raw 
materials/drugs and implemented uniformly across India. Further, through Natio nal AYUSH 
Mission  the infrastructural and functional capacities of 33. Apart from these 67 Drug testing 
laboratories have been approved under Rule 160 -A to J of the Drugs & Cosmetics Rules, 1945 
for the testing of Ayurveda, Siddha & Unani drugs. 

12 
 
1.13  Procurement of authentic raw drugs for research 
Recommendation 
1.13.1  The Committee is in agreement with the Ministry that procurement of authentic raw 
drugs for research is of prime importance, therefore, the role of NMPB in collecting authentic 
raw drugs becomes immensely important. The Committee henceforth lends its support to NMPB 
in the matter. The Committee believes that funding for upgradation of laboratories for analysis 
of raw drugs for its authenticity and efficacy must be enhanced.  
(Para 3.71 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
1.13.2  Earlier through National AYUSH Mission the infrastructural and functional capacities of 
33 State Laboratories have been enhanced with the financial support provided to the States. 
Since September 2021 the Drugs Quality Control Component of National Ayush Mission have 
been submerged in Ayush Oushadhi Gunvatta Evam Uttpadan Samvardhan Yojana (AOGUSY). 
Under the scheme the State as well as Private DTLs for Ayush drugs is further supported with 
grant in aid of upto Rs. 3  cr. for State Govt DTL and Rs. 1.5 cr . for Private DTL for achieving 
higher standards/upgradation to NABL level. 
1.13.3 National Medicinal Plants Board, Ministry of Ayush has initiated the establishment of 
National Raw Drug Repository (NRDR) and Regional Raw Drug Repositories (RRDR) in order 
to develop raw drugs repositories and research activities in respect of raw drugs which are used 
in the ASU&H Systems of medicine under the Central Sector Scheme.  Till date, 01 NRDR & 04 
RRDR projects are sanctioned and under progress. 
1.13.4 These projects on raw drug repositories include funding for up gradation of laboratories 
for analysis of raw drugs for its authencity and efficacy. The details of NRDR and RRDR are as 
given in Annexure - II. 
 
1.14    Reported Presence of Heavy Metals 
Recommendation 
1.14.1 The Committee expresses serious concern over the reported presence of heavy metals 
contents, aflatoxines, microbiological  ingredients above the set standards. The Committee, in 
this regard, reiterates its recommendations to the Ministry to strive for a robust quality control 
mechanism as the compliance of prescribed standards for ASU&H drugs needs to be ensured.  
The Committ ee believes that training programmes for ASU&H drug regulators will certainly 
have a positive impact of ensuring that the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and 
Rules made thereunder are being enforced. In the event of non -compliance, the matt er is 
reported to State Authorities.  A stringent monitoring mechanism is essential for quality control 
of drugs which will not just coax drug manufacturers to comply with the said standards but also 
ensure fulfillment of research parameters for scientific and objective research findings. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends to strengthen the State regulatory authorities to take 
appropriate action in the matter. The Committee is hopeful that the effective implementation of 
Central Sector Scheme of Ayush Oush adhi Gunvatta Evam Uttpadan Samvardhan Yojana 
(AOGUSY) would help in strengthening the Central and State regulatory framework of quality 

13 
 
control along with the Pharmacopeia Commission of Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy 
(PCIM&H) for making standards of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy Drugs.  
(Para 3.74 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.14.2  The following course of action have been taken:- 
Siddha and Unani Section  
 CCRS 
1.14.3 Good manufacturing Practice (GMP) compliant Pharmacy ensuring the prescribed 
standards of ASU drugs and in-house quality control mechanisms are in place at CCRS. 
Drug Policy Section 
 
1.14.4 Under the Central Sector Scheme of Ayush Oushadhi Gunvatta Evam Uttpadan 
Samvardhan Yojana (AOGUSY) support is also being provided for Strengthening of Cent ral and 
State regulatory frameworks including Technical Human Resource & Capacity Building 
programs for control of quality, safety and efficacy aspects of Ayush drugs. The component 
provides support for 
 
(i) Expenditure on online portal maintenance and development of Ayush Drug 
Controller / Licensing Authority 
(ii) Expenditure on collection and testing of statutory / survey samples. 
(iii) Expenditure on training of technical staff at Pharmacopoeia Commission of Indian 
Medicine and Homoeopathy (PCIM&H)/ NABL as per approved cost norms.  
(iv) Expenditure on awareness programmes, IEC activities, documentation, publication, 
etc. 
 
1.15  Merger of two schemes i.e. Pharmacovigilance scheme and the Central Drug 
Controller of AYUSH with the new scheme AOGUSY 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.15.1 The Committee accords the merger of two schemes i.e. Pharmacovigilance scheme and 
the Central Drug Controller of AYUSH with the new scheme AOGUSY. The Committee feels that 
budgetary allocation for both the schemes is quite low and it s utilization in the year 2021 -22 is 
not satisfactory.  Nevertheless, with the merger of these two schemes with the umbrella scheme 
namely, AOGUSY, the Committee expects that there is substantial enhancement in fund 
allocation to the scheme and consequent marked progress is made in achieving the mission 
objectives of AOGUSY. 
(Para 3.77 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
          1.15.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and is under active consideration. 
 

14 
 
1.16  Revenue Generation of the Research Councils 
Recommendation 
1.16.1 The Committee acknowledges the efforts made by the Research Councils for revenue 
generation. The Committee, however, notes that the main source for revenue generation is user 
charges for OPD/IPD, investigations etc.  Increasing user charges for OPD/IPD indicates 
growing demand for seeking treatment under Ayush systems. The Committee appreciates that the 
Ayurvedic medicines like Ayush 64 for Malaria, Ayush 82 for Diabetes Mellitus and Ayush SG 
for Arthritis and repurpos ed Ayush 64 for dealing with covid 19 have benefitted many. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to emphasize on the commercialization of Ayush products 
especially Ayush medicines. With growing demand and increasing faith in Indian system of 
medicine, revenue generation of the Research Councils is certainly going to increase which can 
be used for furthering research.  The Committee, however, feels that the Government should 
boost upto the budgetary support to the Councils. 
(Para 3.93 ibid) 
Action Taken 
Siddha and Unani Section   
 CCRS 
1.16.2  CCRS has entered into MoU with Accelerating Growth of New India Innovation (AGNIi) 
06.11.2019 for commercialization of R& D technologies and products developed by CCRS. 
Efforts will be taken for revenue generation. 
 CCRUM 
1.16.3  The Council has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Accelerating 
Growth of New India‟s Innovation (AGNIi) for commercialization of the drugs developed by the 
Council. 
Ayurveda Section 
1.16.4  The suggestions/concern of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
Homoeopathy Section 
 CCRH 
1.16.5 The Council agrees with the recommendation of the committee that main source of 
revenue generation is from user charges implemented for OPD/IPD, invest igation etc. Other 
sources of revenue generation is through sale of journal, publications and plants. There is 
decrease in revenue generation in 2021-22 & 2022-23 due to suspension of OPD/IPD services in 
Covid 19 pandemic. The revenue generated in the last five years is as below:- 
 
 
 
Year Revenue generated (in Rupees) 
2017-18 561035.00 
2018-19 10660450.00 
2019-20 11617813.00 
2020-21 3892996.00 
2021-22 6072430.00 

15 
 
 
1.17    Development of New Drugs 
Recommendation 
1.17.1 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Research Councils in development of new 
drugs especially repurposed Ayush 64 in management of Covid -19. The Committee, however, 
would also like to be apprised of the efficacy and scientific validation of CARCTOL for treating 
cancer patients. The Committee would like to emphasize on evidence based scientific research 
and drug development process entailing pre clinical as well as clinical trials. The Committee 
believes that drug standardization of Ayush drugs would go a long way in enhancing th e 
credibility of Ayush systems. 
(Para 3.96 ibid) 
Action Taken  
Siddha and Unani Section 
 CCRS 
1.17.2 Drug Standardization Research is being carried out at CCRS and its peripheral institutes 
followed by pre-clinical studies  and clinical trials. 
 NIS 
1.17.3 The emphasize on evidence based scientific research and drug development process will 
definitely be followed. This would explore the rationale of use of AYUSH drugs for various 
ailments. The standard protocols for the same will be adhered. 
1.17.4  Standardization of AYUSH drugs is being adapted with existing guidelines. The 
development of quality control standards of individual single drugs and formulations will be 
strengthened by publishing further volumes of pharmacopeia. 
 CCRUM 
1.17.5 The CCRUM took note on the recommendation of the PSC. 
Ayurveda Section 
 CCRAS 
 
1.17.6 The Council has undertaken the scientific validation of Carctol -S through a systematic 
process of drug development. After drug standardization and preclinical safety/toxicity studies of 
Carctol S , the  Council has undertaken a clinical study  of Carctol S  entitled “A phase II trial to 
study efficacy, toxicity and immunomodulatory effect of Carctol -S in high grade serous 
epithelial ovarian cancer at first serological relapse”  in collaboration with Tata Memorial 
Hospital and Advanced Centre for Treatment, Res earch and Education in Cancer ( ACTREC) 
Mumbai in two phases. The first phase of the study is completed and the study is ongoing.  
1.17.7 Further, the council has also undertaken a collaborative project “ Understanding   the 
mechanistic role  of Carctol-S as immuno-modulatory and anti -cancer formulation against 

16 
 
Ovarian Cancer” in collaboration with Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research and Education 
in Cancer( ACTREC), Mumbai  which is in its initial phase. 
Homoeopathy Section 
 CCRH 
1.17.8 The Council noted the recommendation of the PSC to make efforts for scientific 
validation of homeopathic drugs using technological advancements to gain popularity among 
people. Scientific validation of existing drugs mentioned in pharmacopeia and development of 
new drugs re quire preclinical studies in laboratory and animals to assess the effect on human 
beings. Based on the evidence generated, further proving of drugs on apparently healthy human 
beings and efficacy in disease conditions in clinical trials. 
 
1.18      Ayush  Systems – The Way Forward  
Recommendation 
1.18.1 The Committee appreciates the long -term vision of the Ministry spanning over the next 
twenty-five years till 2047. Appreciating the focus on strategic areas of research, education and 
capacity building, healthcare, manufacturing and services, the Committee  would like to 
recommend that appropriate time lines and realistic targets for achieving the desired objectives 
must be made.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the plan of action of the Ministry 
for achieving vision@2047 and the projected budgetary requirements for the same.  
(Para 4.2 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.18.2     The following action have been taken:- 
CDN Section 
1.  Ministry of Ayush is participating in Vision documents for SGoS4 and SGoS8. Timeline for 
the the strategic area of   research, education and capacity building, healthcare, manufacturing 
and services is also being drawn to achieve the objectives. 
2.  A) For SGoS4 the near term objectives to be achieved up to 2027 include (a) Publication of 
50 peer-reviewed Ayush research in top 10 global journals of traditional medicine; (b) MoU‟s 
with other countries - to ease regulatory framework around manufacturing & exports, reduce 
import duty & taxes and further bilateral collaboration; and (c) Introduction of Ayush based 
National Health Programme parallel to conventional medicine. 
B) Medium term objectives to be achieved up to 2037 include ; (a) Development of at least 10 
New Drug from Ayush systems and translation into public health;   (b) Virtual Centers linking 
Indian and International researc h institutions to conduct combined studies and research related 
activities; ; (c) Development of nutraceuticals and maintenance of health of space scientists by 
Ayush modalities; and (d) Dedicated Export Promotion Council setup by Ministry of Ayush can 
extend support for service export. 

17 
 
C)  Long term objectives to be achieved up to 2047 include (a) Establishment of 10 Ayush 
research laboratories of international standards ; (b) 100 additional Centre Of Excellences by 
2047; (c) At least 1 -2 Ayush institutes among the top 10 research & academic institutes in the 
world; and (d) Ayush systems can target lifestyle -related conditions such as Diabetes, Blood 
Pressure, Obesity, Malnutrition, and target to reduce hospitalizations & deaths arising from these 
by upto 20%, till 2047 
3.   A) For SGoS8 the near term objectives to be achieved up to 2027 include (a) AI and ML 
enabled miniaturized  wearable devices; (b) Advanced bio -medical research   equipment design 
and  manufacturing (At Least 10); (c) 50 life -saving medical equipment as   listed by WHO; (d) 
Bio-design centers for building   biomedical devices; ( e ) Clinical trials network (INTENT) 
and  vaccine development; (f) Development of the controlled human   infection model; ( g) Point 
of care devices for estimating  multiple micro-nutrients in population; (h) Development of virtual 
hospitals,  telemedicine and tech enabled clinics ; (i) GMP grade AYUSH medicines ; (j) Tech 
enabled interface for rationalization   of traditional Pharmacopoeias ; (k) Universal Health 
Coverage (Health  Technology Assessment Board, Standard   Treatment Workflows , AI, ML); 
(l) Prakriti Diagnostic tool - proteomics; (j) genomics in Ayurvedic systems; and (k) Developing 
Ayush Grid IT backbone. 
B) Medium term objectives to be achieved up to 2032 inclu de (a) Reduce import dependence to 
less  than 30%; (b) Machine learning of multimodal   imaging data for assisting clinicians; (c) 
Advanced biomedical research  equipment design and manufacture   (At Least 50); (d) Ayurtech 
& intelligent manufacturing   units of Ayurvedic Drugs; (e)   Pandemic preparedness & 
health  security 
C) Long term objectives to be achieved up to 2047 include (a) Self -reliance in 
manufacturing  advanced bio -therapeutics, bio -  materials, bio -similars & devices; (b) Self -
reliance in bio -security; (c) Global leader in health research, (d) Significant global usage of 
AYUSH  medicine- 50 times growth in   AYUSH sector including exports; (e ) Standardization 
of AYUSH education across the globe; and (f) Leadership in CBRN drugs 
4. The necessary b udgetary projections will be done as per the milestones mentioned in the 
vision documents. The  budgetary allocation of the Ministry of Ayush has been increased to Rs. 
3050 Crore for 2022-23. 
1.19     Scope of Mixing Ayush and Modern System Of Medicine 
Recommendation 
1.19.1 The Committee has been given to understand that many AYUSH practitioners are also 
practising modern system of medicine. The Committee feels that scope of mixing Ayush and 
modern system of medicine may be clarified. 
(Para 4.32 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.19.2 The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM) Act, 2020 came into 
force with effective from 11th June, 2021 to regulate the education and practice of Indian System 
of Medicine. Similarly, the National Commission for Homo eopathy (NCH) Act, 2020 came into 
force with effective from 5th July, 2021 to regulate the education and practice of Homoeopathy. 

18 
 
1.19.3 Rights of person to practice Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy have been 
stipulated under the section 34 of the  NCISM act, 2020 and NCH, Act, 2020 respectively, 
wherein, Indian System of Medicine (Ayurveda, Unani, Suddha and Sowa - Rigpa ) and 
Homoeopathy practitioners allowed to practice Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy 
respectively as a qualified practitioners; hold office as a physician or surgeon or any other office, 
by whatever name called, which is meant to be held by a physician or surgeon, as the case may 
be; be entitled to sign or authenticated a medical of fitness certificate or any other certifica te 
required by law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified medical practitioners.   
1.19.4 However, section 34 (3) (b) of NCISM Act, 2020, stipulates as under: “ (b) the privileges, 
including the right to practice any system of medicine, conferred by or under any law for the 
time being in force in a State on the practitioners of Indian System of Medicine enrolled in the 
State register of that State. 
1.20     Challenges and the Way Ahead 
Recommendation 
1.20.1 The Committee appreciates the proposal of the Ministry submitted to Finance 
Commission encompassing the constraints and challenges and the way ahead to resolve those 
issues. The Committee is reassured that the Ministry of AYUSH recognizes the need for 
enhanced budgetary allocation for various schemes of the Ministry. The Committee also takes 
note of the budgetary constraints in implementing centrally sponsored schemes like National 
AYUSH Mission (NAM) as States express their inability to contribute their sh are of budget 
which results in delayed execution of projects.  Assessing the financial requirement of the 
Ministry especially for increasing the outreach of Ayush systems through operationalisation of 
HWCs, integrated hospitals in all districts etc and sub mitting its demand for funds is a step in 
the right direction. Such investment in AYUSH Sector will have long term dividends for the 
large population of the country preferring to  the Indian Systems of Medicines. 
(Para 4.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
NAM Section 
1.20.2 Union Cabinet has approved Rs. 3399.35 Crore ( Rs. 2209.58 Crore as Central Share and 
Rs. 1189.77 Crore as State Share) for operationalization of  12,500 Ayush Health and Wellness 
Centres (HWCs) under Ayushman Bharat in a phased manner by the year 2 023-24.  The 
objective of AYUSH Health and Wellness Centres (HWCs) is to establish a holistic wellness 
model based on AYUSH principles and practices, to empower masses for “self -care” to reduce 
the disease burden, out of pocket expenditure and to provide i nformed choice to the needy 
public. The life style changes have been also targeted through operationalization of 12,500 
AYUSH Health Wellness Centres. Further, 7553 AYUSH HWCs have been approved from 
2019-20 to 2021 -22. Out of this, 3313 AYUSH HWCs have be en made functional under 
progressive category.  
1.20.3 Further, under NAM, there is provision of financial assistance for setting up of up to 50 
/30 /10 bedded integrated AYUSH Hospitals. States/UTs may avail financial assistance by 
submitting proposals through State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs) as per NAM guidelines. Under 
NAM, till date 108 integrated AYUSH hospitals have been supported to States/UTs as per the 

19 
 
proposals r eceived from them. Further, State/UT Governments will be supported for 
establishment of integrated AYUSH hospitals as per provision of NAM guidelines. 
 
1.21  Vision Document 2030 for Research Policy 
Recommendation 
1.21.1 The Committee appreciates CCRAS for formulating a Vision Document 2030 for research 
policy. The intent to mainstream research activities based on scientific evidence, integrating 
ancient wisdom with modern technology, to bring Ayurveda in the public health system through 
innovations related  diagnostics, preventive, promotive as well as treatment methods is 
commendable. The Committee believes that standardization of research parameters would go a 
long way in making the research objective and scientific. Development of new, safe and 
efficacious drugs to be introduced to the people looking towards an alternative system of 
medicine would enhance the credibility and acceptability of not just Ayurveda but all the Indian 
systems of medicine. The Committee is of the view that all the Research Council s must strive 
forward keeping in view the Vision Document for mainstreaming of Ayush systems. 
(Para 4.10 ibid) 
Action Taken  
Ayurveda Section 
1.21.2 The suggestions of the committee have been noted and the CCRAS will ensure that the 
research is undertaken on as per the vision document 2030. The main features of Vision 
document 2030 are at Annexure –III. 
Homoeopathy Section 
 CCRH 
1.21.3 The Council has submitted its Vision 2030 document to the Ministry of AYUSH with 
main focus on Interdisciplinary and Integrated medicine & economy research and translation of 
research outcomes for benefit of public thereby enhancing popularization of AYUSH systems 
among p ublic. Under drug development, strengthening of drug standardization laboratories by 
acquiring modern facilities of international standards for quality production and harmonization of 
Homoeopathic pharmacopeias as per International guidelines is being unde rtaken. Focusing on 
diseases endemic in Tribal areas and exploring areas of homoeopathic research with 
development of Centre of excellences. 
 
Siddha and Unani Section 
 CCRS 
1.21.4 Certainly the vision document in similar lines will augment the mainstreaming of all 
Ayush streams. 
 
 

20 
 
 CCRUM 
1.21.5 The Clinical studies are carried out at the different institutes / Units of the Council. The 
basic ideas for the studies is conceptualised by the senior scientists of the Council. These are 
discussed in the Multi-disciplinary Internal Technical Committee which comprises of scientists 
of different fields including Unani medicine, clinical pharmacology, pharmacology, 
Pharmacognosy, Biochemistry, Pathology, Botany and Chemistry, etc. The projects are prepared 
in consultation with experts from different fields of allopathic medicine and allied subjects and 
presented before the clinical research Sub-committee. Finally these projects are placed before the 
Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) of the Council comprising  of the eminent scientists from 
different fields e.g. Unani medicine, Pharmacology, Modern medicine, Botany etc. The experts 
from Unani and Allopathic streams are involved in the vetting for the protocols for different 
research activities. All such researc h activities are being carried out based on the modern 
scientific parameters with background understanding of Unani medicine practices. Besides, 
much academic collaboration has also been done by the Council for different research activities. 
It is mandator y that all the proposals on biomedical research involving human participants are 
approved by a duly constituted Central Ethics Committee (CEC) and Institutional Ethics 
Committee (IEC) to protect their welfare and rights. 
 
1.22    Success Stories of the Effectiveness of AYUSH Medicines 
Recommendation 
1.22.1 The Committee would also like to recommend that the success stories of the effectiveness 
of AYUSH medicines need to be documented/published and should be popularised so that the 
common people are made a ware of the alternative system of medicine for various diseases 
thereby increasing its acceptability and demand.  
(Para 4.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
Siddha and Unani Section 
CCRS 
1.22.2 Indeed the success stories pertaining to effectiveness of Ayush medicines are being 
published in peer–reviewed indexed journals and IEC material in all formats are being prepared 
and propagated for creating awareness.  
NIS 
1.22.3 National Institute of Siddha is taking steps to prepare documentaries about Siddha System 
of Medicine with the help of National Film Development Corporation (NFDC). These will be 
telecast in various channels/Medias for propagation popularization of the siddha system of 
treatment 
CCRUM 
1.22.4 The Council has already published some success stories of the effectiveness of Unani 
medicine. 

21 
 
Homoeopathy Section 
CCRH 
1.22.5 Noted the recommendation of the committee and sustained efforts for documentation of 
the success stories is in process by creating a database Homoeopathic Clinical Case Repository.  
 
Ayurveda Section 
 CCRAS 
The Council undertakes validation of classical Ayurveda medicines to generate the tangible 
evidence of their clinical safety and efficacy in various disease conditions and also development 
of Ayurveda medicines taking leads from LHTs/classical Ayurveda texts. The research 
outcomes are being published i n the reputed journals and also available in Ayush research 
portal. Council has also brought out handbooks “Evidence Based Ayurvedic Practice (based on 
CCRAS R&D contributions)” and “Drug Development for Select Diseases Evidence Based 
Approach (Based on CCRAS R&D Contributions)” and Glimpses of CCRAS Contributions and 
CCRAS-Coffee table book "A Focus on Research and Development " which are available at 
Council‟s website and also disseminated among stakeholders  for wider publicity. Also, the 
Council has publ ished a Compendium of select research publications on “Evidence Base 
Clinical Efficacy and Safety o f Classical Ayurveda Medicines”. The CCRAS Institutes have 
been entrusted to conduct series of webinars for AYUSH Professionals, Clinicians, Colleges, 
Research Professionals and general public to disseminate the Ayush advisory, various 
researches conducted by CCRAS and their outcomes, best practices, IEC guidelines and 
information related to Ayush interventions in COVID-19.  
 
1.23  Ayush Systems to Mitigate Covid-19 
Recommendation  
1.23.1 The Committee takes cognizance of the research projects, advisories, prophylactic Ayush 
medicines, guidelines etc of the different Ayush systems to mitigate Covid -19. The Committee 
acknowledges the contribution of AYUSH manpower in coming to the forefront and offering their 
services during the most -testing times. The Committee understands that the repurposed AYUSH 
64 which could treat asymptomatic, mild and moderate COVID -19 infections as an adjunct to 
standard care is in deed a big achievement for the Ministry. The Committee, however, 
recommends the Ministry to step up its research for drug development for a number of deadly 
diseases like HIV, dengue and cancer, etc. 
(Para 4.23 ibid) 
  

22 
 
Action Taken 
Ayurveda Section 
 CCRAS 
 
1.23.2 The Council has undertaken the development of an Ayurvedic formulation Ayush PJ -7 in 
the management of Dengue through a systematic process of drug development. CCRAS has 
undertaken clinical research project entitled “ Evaluation of Add on Efficacy & Safety of an 
Ayurvedic Formulation in the Management of Dengue Fever & Prevention of its complications – 
A Double Blind Clinical Study‟‟  involving 3 institutes at Belagavi i.e.  KLEU‟s Shri BMK 
Ayurveda Mahavidyalaya, Belagavi,KLE University‟s, JN Medical C ollege, ICMR -National 
Institute of Traditional Medicine ( Formerly Regional Medical Research Centre  RMRC) ICMR, 
Nehru Nagar, Belagavi and Department of Integrative Medicine, SDUAHER, Kolar in 
association with NITM-ICMR Belgavito examine the efficacy of Ayurvedic intervention as add 
on to conventional management for the treatment of dengue. The study is completed and data is 
being analyzed to report the research outcomes.  
1.23.3 The Council has also undertaken development of Ayush QOL -2C for improving quality 
of life in Cancer patients and Carctol S in ovarian cancer . The  technical report of Ayush QOL -
2C has been published and research paper is being published  while clinical study of Carctol-S in 
high grade serous epithelial ovarian cancer at first serological relapse is ongoing. 
Homoeopathy Section 
 CCRH 
1.23.4 The Council has undertaken preclinical studies to assess safety, toxicity and immune 
modulatory potential of the homeopathic drugs. Prophylactic, clinical studies as standalone and 
integrative model as adjuvant /comparative /RCT‟s to evolve homoeopathy as evidence base 
medicine and meet global scientific scrutiny have been conducted. The evidence generated has 
fostered the system   to improve quality of care through the identification and promotion of 
practices that work, effectiveness of clinical intervent ions, their usefulness scrutinized and 
proven.  
1.23.5  Preclinical studies: - 
 Pre-clinical studies have been undertaken to study the effect of the nosodes(Malaria, 
Leishmaniasis, Nanocurcumin, Japanese encephalitis and Dengue) on appropriate animal 
models. The drugs are studied with respect to standardization, characterization, safety & 
toxicity.  
 Council has also undertaken basic research studies in physiochemical, biological models 
related to conditions like Malaria, Kala -Azar, Cancer, Diabetes Mellitus,  Kidney Stone, 
Japanese Encephalitis, Rheumatoid Arthritis, Fracture healing etc. to understand the 
mechanism of action and validate the clinical results of the known drugs.  
 Studies to assess the immunomodulatory effect of homoeopathic medicines like Arse nic 
album, Nanocurcumin, Bryonia, Rhustox, Camphor etc. are ongoing. 
 Studies to know the geno protective effect and for identification of correct species, 
purity and concentration of the required chemical compounds using DNA Barcode are 
proposed. 

23 
 
1.23.6  Prophylactic studies: - 
 Dengue, Chikungunya, and Influenza like illness to assess the prophylactic effects 
homeopathic medicines is being taken.  
 14 Prophylactic and add on treatment studies for COVID -19 to evaluate the efficacy of 
homeopathic medicines in prevention. 
 Studies on post COVID sequelae management with homeopathic medicine to understand 
the effect of medicines in such conditions. 
Clinical Research:  
1.23.7 Studies undertaken by CCRH both through intramural and collaborative research are 
based on scientifically designed protocols, time bound with predefined outcome parameters. This 
helps in generating, validating, and consolidating scientific evidence (in terms of safety, efficacy 
and effectiveness) of homoeopathic medications, and treatment regime s. 93 studies have been 
undertaken and 82 are concluded in which homoeopathic medicines have been validated in last 
fifteen years. Six studies on drug validation in asthma, dyspepsia, haemorrhoids, migraine, acne 
and cough   have been completed on 40 drugs . Studies on side effects of cancer chemotherapy 
oral mucositis have been undertaken and are in pipeline.   
Sidhha and Unani Section 
 CCRS 
1.23.8 CCRS has undertaken research on Dengue with ICGEB, New Delhi.   and initiated a 
clinical trial on Breast Cancer using a Siddha formulation at AIIA, New Delhi.  
 NIS 
1.23.9 National Institute of Siddha has prescribed Kabasura Kudineer to fight the Covid -19 
pandemic, which has been proved to be very useful in mitigating the effect of the pandemic in a 
large number of  people. This Institute is also freely distributing Kabasura Kudineer and other 
Siddha medicines to the general public as part of the AKAM program.  Steps are being taken to 
submit research proposals to develop medicines for deadly diseases like   HIV, dengu e and 
cancer, etc. 
 CCRUM 
1.23.10   The Council is undertaking following projects on dengue and Cancer - 
1. In vitro Evaluation of Antiviral activity of Unani Drugs and their Green Nano -particles 
against Dengue Virus, Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Sciences, Jamia Millia 
Islamia, New Delhi 
2. Identification of Anti -dengue Viral Compounds from Unani Medicinal Plants and 
formulations, Institute of Molecular Medicine, School of Interdisciplinary Sciences, Jamia 
Hamdard, New Delhi. 
3. “Evaluation of Anti -oxidant and Anticancer Effect of Unani medicine against the Liver 
cancer”, Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi. 
4. Phytochemical standardization and evaluation of anti -cancer and i mmune-modulatory 
activity of Unani formulation, Itrifal Ghudadi, Cell and Translational Research Division, 

24 
 
Interactive Research School for Health Affairs (IRSHA), Bharati Vidya Peeth University, 
Pune. 
5. Delineating the anti -cancer potential and the mechanism  of action of Unani medicinal 
formulation Itrifal -e-Aftimoon in Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia, Department of 
Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS), New Delhi 
6. Evaluation of Aftimoon (Cuscuta reflexa Roxb.) Plant and its Seeds on Differ ent Human 
Cancer (Sartan) Cell Lines, Department of Chemistry, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi 
1.23.11 Evaluation of the Anticancer Potential of a Unani Pharmacopoeial Formulation, „Dawa -
ul-Kurkum‟, Amity Institute of Pharmacy, Amity University, Noida. 
 
1.24     International Collaborations of Ministry of Ayush 
Recommendation 
1.24.1 The Committee takes note of the international collaborations of Ministry of Ayush to give 
scientific validity to India's traditional medicinal system. The Committee believes that the 
successful completion of two studies namely, “Ashwagandha for promoting recovery from 
Covid-19 in the UK” and “Understanding the molecular mechanism of Guduchyadi tablets in 
combating COVID-19 infection- In-vitro & in -vivo study” would be a major breakthrough for 
assured global acceptance of India's traditional healthcare regimens. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to facilitate the conduct of these two studies for aiming at research 
conclusion so as to translate the research into a ction. The Committee reiterates its 
recommendation as given in the 128 th report for establishing an India led global alliance for 
traditional system of medicine. A global alliance headquartered in India would give necessary 
fillip towards mainstreaming traditional systems of medicine.  
(Para 4.26 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.24.2 Ministry is facilitating the conduct of these studies i.e. one is with UK and another one 
with Germany and as soon the both studies will get completed, the conclusion of the studies will 
be taken into action. Regarding establishment of an India led global all iance for traditional 
system of medicine; it is conveyed that WHO Global Centre for Traditional Medicine (WHO 
GCTM) is being established in Jamnagar, Gujarat for which a Groundbreaking Ceremony 
organized at Jamnagar on 19.04.2022 and this Global centre wil l be work as Global alliance for 
traditional medicine.  
 
1.25   Quality of Education 
Recommendation  
1.25.1 The Committee is of the view that quality of education has been an area of concern and 
needs special focus and immediate upliftment. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
the Ministry to make concerted efforts in this direction. The Committee is op timistic that with 
NEET examinations now being held for selection of students for studying these systems and 
having adequate monitoring over the educational institutions imparting Ayush education, the 
desired level of improvement in Ayush education system will be in place. With the formation of 

25 
 
the two National Commissions for regulation of Education and practice of Indian systems of 
medicines, the Committee expects that there would a sea change in the quality of Ayush 
education in the near future. The Committee is hopeful that the students getting quality education 
would prove to be assets for propagation and practice of Indian systems of medicines. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to continue to monitor over quality of Ayush 
education. 
(Para 4.29 ibid) 
Action Taken 
AEP-III Section 
1.25.2 For monitoring of quality of Education, through NCISM Act, 2020 and NCH Act, 2020 
under Section 14 and Section 16 of the respective Act, there shall be a uniform National 
Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for admission to the undergraduate courses &  Post Graduate 
National Entrance Test for Post -graduation Course in each of the disciplines of the Indian 
System of Medicine & Homoeopathy in all medical institutions governed under these Acts.  
1.25.3 Accordingly,  National Eligibility Cum Entrance Test (NEET-UG) &All India Ayush Post 
Graduate Entrance Test (AIAPGET) are being carried out by National Testing Agency, An 
autonomous organization under the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education. 
1.25.4 Further,  under Section 15 of the aforesaid Act, there shall be a National Exit Test, a 
common final year undergraduate medical examination shall be held for granting licence to 
practice as medical practitioners & under Section 17 of the aforesaid Act, there shall be a 
National Teachers Eligibility Test shall be conducted separately for the post -graduates of ISM & 
Homoeopathy who desire to take up teaching profession in that discipline.   
1.25.5 NCH is planning to develop learning management system through which it will be able to 
monitor various academic activities of Homoeopathy Colleges on real time basis. There will be 
provision of student feedback system to check the quality of education. 
 
1.26   Key Challenges/Areas of Concern 
Recommendation 
1.26.1 The Committee notes that various new initiatives of the Ministry are aimed at 
propagating, strengthening as well as addressing the "Key Challenges/Areas of Concern" in the 
Ayush Sector like the AYUSH Grid, emphasis on scientific research and making guideli nes for 
clinical trials, developing standards for Ayush systems for promotion of Ayush products, 
strengthening of drug quality and standardization, Health & Wellness Centres, Yogasana 
announced as a sport, ayurveda departments to be opened at 19 AIIMS inst itutes as a step 
towards integrative health services, creation of a Strategic Policy and Facilitation Bureau, 
establishment of Forum on Indian Traditional Medicines, establishment of WHO Global Centre 
for Traditional Medicine etc.  
(Para 4.40 ibid) 
 
 

26 
 
Action Taken 
IC Section 
1.26.2 Ministry has already established a Forum on Indian Traditional Medicine (FITM) in RIS 
as a common platform for all sectors and stakeholders to come together to contribute to 
pragmatic policy making in the area and to develop a proactive strategy to be espoused by India 
at the international level for traditional medicine.  WHO Global Centre for Traditional Medicine 
(WHO GCTM), is to be established, in Jamnagar, Gujarat for which a Groundbreaking 
Ceremony organized at Jamnagar o n 19.04.2022 and this Global centre will be work as Global 
alliance for traditional medicine. An Interim Office for WHO GCTM is being set up at ITRA, 
Jamnagar, Gujarat to work out for establishment of WHO GCTM and to lay a strong foundation 
for the WHO Global Centre for Traditional Medicine.  
 
1.27  Ayush Revolution 
Recommendation 
1.27.1 The Committee is of the view that it is for the Ministry to steer Ayush Systems towards 
Ayush Revolution with strategic planning and adequate fund allocation and resources.  The 
Ayush systems have immense potential and the time has come for using traditional knowledge 
while keeping with modern technologies for better Ayush public health delivery services. The 
holistic approach aiming at wellness and prophylaxis is something w hich has come quite 
popular and Ayush systems can certainly occupy this space and become more competitive and 
affordable 
(Para 4.41 ibid) 
Action Taken 
NAM Section 
1.27.2 Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH Mission supports the effort of 
States/UTs Governments for providing AYUSH facilities in the country through various 
activities as per the provision of NAM guidelines against the proposals received in State Annua l 
Action Plans (SAAPs) from them.  
Ayurveda Section 
 CCRAS 
1.27.3 The Council has undertaken a project to demonstrate the impact of Ayurveda based 
lifestyle and practices in apparently healthy persons through 5 CCRAS institutes which is under 
preparatory phase. 
IC Section 
1.27.4 Ministry of Ayush has taken various initiatives for better Ayush public health delivery 
services with using modern technologies. IC section is concerned, WHO m -Yoga has been 
developed which is  an app for the general public to use regularly, providing Yoga learning and 
practice sessions of varying durations; NAMASTE Portal has been developed which is an 

27 
 
Comprehensive web -portal for Standardized Terminologies and National Morbidity Codes of 
Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Systems of Medicine and WHO -ICD-10 and ICD -11; WHO with 
the supports of Ministry of Ayush has published four benchmarks documents pertaining to 
training and practice of Ayurveda & Unani System on its IRIS repository etc.  
Homoeopathy Section 
 CCRH 
1.27.5 The Council through its outreach activities like mobile health camps, field surveys, OPD 
services in rural areas has improvised the public health delivery services. The holistic approach 
aiming at wellness and prophylaxis is promoted as a part of Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav by 
distribution of Arsenic album 30c as immune booster for Covid 19 pandemic. The efforts 
undertaken will contribute in providing accessible and affordable health care. 
 NIH 
1.27.6 NIH, Kolkata is delivering more services on wellness and prophylaxis through OPD 
sections. 
Sidhha and Unani Section 
 CCRS 
1.27.7 Research with Siddha formulations especially for the Covid -19 pandemic has proved its 
immense potential. The holistic approach mentioned in Siddha system of Medicine will be 
utilized for better public health. 
 NIS 
1.27.8 National Institute of Siddha has conducted clinical studies during 1 st and 2nd wave of the 
Covid-19 pandemic in collaboration with SRM Medical College Hospital and Research Institute, 
Kattankalathur and Chengalpattu Med ical College, Chengalpattu by administering Siddha 
Medicines along with Allopathic Medicines which has proved to be very effective in curing the 
patients from the disease within a short period of time.  Steps are being taken to continue the 
collaboration for creating a holistic approach aiming at the wellness of the people. 
 CCRUM 
1.27.9 The CCRUM is focusing more health care services through OPD and Outreach activity 
for wellness and prophylaxis. 
AEP-III Section 
1.27.10 The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM), Act, 2020 has an 
objective improves access to quality and affordable medical education, ensures availability of 
adequate and high quality medical professionals of Indian System of Medicine in a ll parts of the 
country; that promotes equitable and universal healthcare that encourages community health 
perspective and makes services of such medical professionals accessible and affordable to all the 
citizens; that promotes national health goals; that encourages such medical professionals to adopt 
latest medical research in their work and to contribute to research; that has an objective periodic 
and transparent assessment of medical institutions and facilitates maintenance of a medical 

28 
 
register of Indian System of Medicine for India and enforces high ethical standards in all aspects 
of medical services; that is flexible to adapt to the changing needs and has an effective grievance 
redressal mechanism and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
1.27.11 Similarly, the National Commission for Homoeopathy (NCH), Act, 2020 has an 
objective for achieve to improves access to quality and affordable medical education, ensures 
availability of adequate and high quality Homoeopathy medical professiona ls in all parts of the 
country; that promotes equitable and universal healthcare that encourages community health 
perspective and makes services of Homoeopathy medical professionals accessible and affordable 
to all the citizens; that promotes national heal th goals; that encourages Homoeopathy medical 
professionals to adopt latest medical research in their work and to contribute to research; that has 
an objective periodic and transparent assessment of medical institutions and facilitates 
maintenance of a Homoeopathy medical register for India and enforces high ethical standards in 
all aspects of medical services; that is flexible to adapt to the changing needs and has an effective 
grievance redressal mechanism and for matters connected therewith or incidental  thereto. To 
achieve the said objective, NCISM and NCH has been constituted under the respective Acts.  
Ayush Development Section 
1.27.12 Ministry of Ayush has aligned itself with other ministries for the promotion and 
development of Ayush system and to provide healthcare services. 
i) Ministry of Ayush signed a MoU with Ministry of Railway for Introduction of Ayush 
Systems in five Railways Hospitals. 
ii) Ministry of Ayush signed a MoU with Ministry of Defence for the integration of Ayush 
systems in the health establishments. 
iii) Ministry of Ayush signed a MoU with Ministry of MSME for the promotion of Ayush 
enterprises. 
(i) iv.) Ministry of Ayush has also proposed A  5-year Vision Plan for creating a robust 
landscape for innovation in Ayush to enable provision of funds for Ayush startups, 
leveraging incubator network, and provide market access opportunities. 
CDN Section 
1.27.13 Ministry of Ayush is participating in Vi sion documents for SGoS4 and SGoS8 which 
sets up timeline to achieve targets pertaining to the the strategic area of research, education and 
capacity building, healthcare, manufacturing and services. The objectives include   Publication 
of 50 peer -reviewed Ayush research in top 10 global journals of traditional medicine; 
Introduction of Ayush based National Health Programme parallel to conventional medicine; 
Development of New Drug from Ayush systems and translation into public health;   Virtual 
Centers linking Indian and International research institutions to conduct combined studies and 
research related activities; ; Establishment of Ayush research laboratories of international 
standards, Centre Of Excellences and at least 1 -2 Ayush institutes among the top 10 research 
& academic institutes in the world.  
1.27.14 SGoS8 focuses on the technology part of the vision.    The objectives 
include  Development of virtual hospitals,   telemedicine and tech enabled clinics; GMP grade 
AYUSH medicines; Tech enabled interfa ce for rationalization   of traditional Pharmacopoeias; 
Prakriti Diagnostic tool - proteomics; genomics in Ayurvedic systems; Developing Ayush Grid 
IT backbone; Ayurtech & intelligent manufacturing   units of Ayurvedic Drugs; Pandemic 

29 
 
preparedness & health  security; and Standardization of AYUSH education across the globe with 
a vision to be a Global leader in health research and services. 
1.27.15 Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS)  has formulated a 
Research Policy and Vision Document 2030 to mainstream the research activities. The main 
features of the Vision Document are enumerated in Annexure-III.  
 
 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
2.1  Utilization Trend of Ministry of Ayush 
Recommendation 
2.1.1 The Committee appreciates the utilization trend of Ministry of Ayush with more than 98% 
utilization over the last two years. As on 18.02.22, the actual expenditure of the Ministry has 
been Rs. 2171.76 crore which comes to 79.86%. The Committee hopes that the trend of 
utilization for this year 2021-22 also remains above 98% by the end of the financial year. 
(Para 2.23 ibid) 
Action Taken 
Budget Section 
2.1.2  The Actual Expenditure of Ministry of Ayush was Rs. 2538.42 crore i.e. 95.27% of the 
RE. The reasons for the low expenditure with reference to previous year are as under :- 
a. Less proposals received due to COVID-19. 
b. Non-filling up of vacant post under various institutes. 
c. Slow down of development/construction activities due to Covid-19.  
d. Technical problems in releasing funds through TSA system. 
e. Non-utilization of funds by Indian Mission through LOA. 
2.2  Funds Allocated to the Ministry 
Recommendation 
2.2.1 The Committee has noted that the quarter -wise expenditure status of the funds allocated to 
the Ministry is satisfactory. The Committee notes that expenditure increased gradually from first 
to second and third quarter. Even though the M inistry has been given relaxation to carry 
forward the unutilized fund of first, second and third quarter target from the Ministry of Finance, 
the Committee emphasizes upon maintaining the ceiling of expenditure per quarter so as to 
ensure fiscal discipline.  With more than 73% expenditure has been incurred with respect to BE, 
the Committee hopes that the remaining funds would be fully utilized by the end of financial 
year. 
(Para 2.26 ibid) 
Action Taken 
Budget Section 
2.2.2 The Actual Expenditure of Ministry of Ayush was Rs. 2538.42 crore i.e. 95.27% of the 
RE. The reasons for the low expenditure with reference to previous year are as under :- 
I.      Less proposals received due to COVID-19. 
II.     Non-filling up of vacant post under various institutes. 

31 
 
III.   Slow down of development/construction activities due to Covid-19.  
IV.   Technical problems in releasing funds through TSA system. 
V.     Non-utilization of funds by Indian Mission through LOA. 
2.3    Pending Utilization Certificate 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3.1 The Committee is concerned that a total of 1279 UCs involving an amount of Rs. 1413.59 
crore is pending.  It is, however, heartening to note that 294 UCs amounting to Rs. 322.70 crore 
has been liquidated in 2021-22 till 31.01.2022. The Committee has been emphasizing upon 
liquidation of pending UCs and also recommended the Ministry to take steps for expediting the 
process. Pending UCs not only blocks further release of funds for the schemes but hinder proper 
implementation of the scheme, also resulting into misappropriation and diversion of funds. The 
Committee, accordingly, reiterates its earlier recommendation that concerted efforts need to be 
made for expediting the liquidation of UCs with active engagement of the concerned States/UTs. 
(Para 2.30 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.3.2 The following efforts have been taken for expediting the liquidation of UCs: 
(i) In various meetings like Appraisal committee meetings and Mission Directorate 
meetings, States/UTs were continuously reminded for timely submission of UCs. 
(ii) Regular follow -up with States/UTs from officials of NAM Cell along with Central 
Program Management Unit (CPMU) is being undertaken along with hand holding for 
furnishing of UCs with relevant supporting documents. 
(iii) States/UTs were requested to attend meeting at Ministry of Ayush, physically, along 
with UCs and other supporting documents. 
(iv) As per requirement, officials of NAM Cell along with CPMU also visited physically to 
States/UTs to provide assistance for preparing UCs and other supporting documents. 
(v) Time to time correspondence has been made through different D.O. letters through 
Hon‟ble Minister of Ayush, Secretary (Ayush) and Joint Secretary (Ayush) to 
State/UT Governments for expediting the expenditure and submission of UCs.  
2.3.3  With all such steps taken by the Ministry for liquidation of UCs and as a result during 
this year Ministry has liquidated UCs for an amount of Rs. 31592.17554 lakhs (01.04.2021 to 
31.03.2022). 
Scheme Section 
2.3.4  Corrective steps taken by the AYURGYAN & AYURSWASTHA scheme divisions to 
liquidate the UCs are as under :- 
1. Grantee Institutions/Colleges are reminded regularly to submit pending UCs. 
2. Meetings are also held from time to time with the representatives of the grantee 
institutions/ colleges to expedite all the pending UCs. 
3. The PAO/Integrated Finance Division does not allow release of grants, if UCs are 
pending against the grantee institute. 

32 
 
NMPB Section 
2.3.5  For early liquidation of the pending UCs, NMPB has taken the following steps: 
Regional-cum-Facilitation Centres (RCFCs) have been given the mandate to co-ordinate 
with reference to liquidation of pending UCs with respective States in addition to periodic 
Review meetings with Project Investigators.  Nodal Of ficers are also designated for each 
States/UTs to coordinate with them for early liquidation of pending UCs. 
 
2.4     Expenditure on Research and Development 
Recommendation 
2.4.1 The Committee finds that the expenditure details on research and development is not 
praiseworthy as it includes general, capital heads and salaries of the Institutes and general 
expenditure details of allocation made. Expenditure details of erstwhile Extra  Mural Research 
Scheme and erstwhile CoE Scheme and of CCRH and CCRS only indicate specific figures for 
Research and development. Committee‟s attention, however, is drawn to CCRS figures which is 
given below: 
(Figures in crores) 
Year Nature of Budget Total 
Budge
t 
(In 
Crores
) 
Allocation 
to Research 
Activity (In 
Crores) 
Actual 
Expendit
ure (In 
Crores) 
Percentage of 
allocation to 
R&D w.r.t 
total Budget 
2016-17 Non -Plan/Plan 22.59 1.19 0.57 5.27 % 
2017-18 Non -Plan/Plan 26.94 4.75 3.18 17.63 % 
2018-19 Salary-GA-SAP 30.04 1.41 1.50 4.69 % 
2019-20 Salary-GA-SAP 33.00 1.16 2.50 3.52 % 
2020-21 Salary-GA-SAP 35.30 4.94 1.24 13.99 % 
 
(Para 2. 36 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
Siddha and Unani Section 
 CCRS 
2.4.2 The percentage of expenditure to R &  D w.r.t. total budget for the year 2021 -2022 is 
increased to 17.18 %.   Further attention will be provided to allocate more funds towards 
Research and Development in the coming years.  
  

33 
 
2.5    Allocation to Research and Development 
Recommendation 
2.5.1 The Committee finds that percentage of allocation to Research and Development with 
respect to total budget for the CCRS is quite low ranging from 5.27% in 2016 -17 to 13.09% in 
2020-21 thereby defeating very mandate of the Council.  The Committee is of the considered 
view that sufficient funds should be devoted to Research and Development. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that apart from allocation for salaries and other expenses, funds for 
research and development should be adequately allocated for as sured promotion and impetus to 
in-depth research and development in AYUSH System and translating the same into action. 
(Para 2.37 ibid) 
Action Taken 
Siddha and Unani Section 
Homoeopathy Section 
 CCRH 
2.5.2 The expenditure details on research and development for the last five years is as below:- 
 
Figures in crores 
 
 NIH 
2.5.3 Expenditure details on the project namely “ Understanding the mechanistic pathways of 
Homoeopathy medicine Cinchona (3C, 6C & 12C) through in vitro study for their potential 
application as anti-viral drug to fight against COVID-19” Project Proposal of NIH 
Total fund allocated for the project  Rs.27,78,000/-  
Total fund utilized for the project Rs.11,13,000-/- 
Total fund Unutilized  Rs.16,65,000/-  
 
Year Nature of Budget  Total 
Budget 
(RE)  
Allocati
on to 
Researc
h 
Activity  
Actual 
Expendit
ure for 
R&D   
Percentage of 
allocation to 
R&D w.r.t 
total Budget 
2016-
17* 
Non -Plan/Plan 108.06 69.69 67.13 64% 
2017-18 Non -Plan/Plan 112.50 91.89 86.32 82% 
2018-19 Salary-GA-SAP 109.14 96.26 83.72 88% 
2019-20 Salary-GA-SAP 128.83 109.83 87.24 85% 
2020-21 Salary-GA-SAP 130.50 113.50 86.19 87% 
*: Total budget of Rs.108.06 is including of Rs. 29.14 cr received for AIIMS, 
Narela, Rigpa Sowa and Seminar. 

34 
 
2.5.4 The Institute agrees with the observation of the committee that the percentage of allocation 
to Research and Development is low. In the year 2020 -21 an amount of Rs.30.87 lakh was 
allocated for Research. 
2.6     Funds Approved by the EFC/Cabinet 
Recommendation 
2.6.1 The Committee has noted that the funds approved by the EFC/Cabinet have not been 
actually allocated for the scheme during the last four years and falls too short.  The Committee 
also noted that against the allocation of Rs 500.00 crore in RE 2021 -22, expenditure incurred is 
Rs. 351.43 crore as on 15.02.2022. The Committee believes that the Ministry is capable to fully 
utilize the funds allocated to it by the end of the financial year. The Committee would like to 
emphasize that since the Ministry has been allocated Rs. 800.00  crore as projected for the year 
2022-23, it must focus on proper and full utilization of funds allocated. The Committee believes 
that utilization trends for a scheme and its absorption capacity justifies the demand for enhanced 
funds.  NAM, being the only  Centrally Sponsored Scheme of the Ministry with a wide range of 
components, the Committee believes that the funds should be optimally utilized in revitalizing 
and improving the AYUSH systems in the public health delivery service. 
(Para 3.12 ibid) 
Action Taken  
NAM Section 
2.6.2 Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure has issued an OM vide no. F.N.1(13) 
PFMS/FCD/2020 dated 23.03.2021 regarding procedure for release of funds for the financial 
year 2021-22 under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and monitoring utilization of the 
funds. According to new procedure, it was suggested that (i) State may designate a Single Nodal 
Agency (SNA) for each CSS & open single nodal account for each SNA (ii) Funds available in 
the bank account of all the I mplementing Agency (IAs) below the SNA are transferred to the 
bank account of the SNA concerned with clear bifurcation of the Central and the State share. (iii) 
Zero balance bank accounts of the IAs down the ladder are opened & mapped in PFMS (iv) 
Separate budget lines for Central and State shares are opened by every State Government (iv) in 
the beginning of a financial year the Ministries/Departments will release not more than 25% of 
the amount earmarked for a State for a CSS for the financial year. Additi onal central share (not 
more than 25% at a time) will be released upon transfer of the stipulated State share to the Single 
Nodal Account and utilization of at least 75% of the funds released earlier (both Central and 
State share) and compliance of the conditions of previous sanction.  
2.6.3 In the light of above mentioned procedure, Ministry has released the Grant -in-aid to those 
States/UTs whose are onboard on SNA module of PFMS and also submitted utilization 
certificate of at least 75% of funds released.  
2.6.4 It is pertinent to mention here that Ayush HWCs is the new component approved on 
20.03.2020 under NAM and it is the flagship program of the Ministry, which is being weekly 
monitored at the Cabinet Secretariat level, the Ministry requested the Depar tment of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance to accord one -time relaxation to the Ministry of Ayush for 
release of funds to those States/UTs which are not fulfilling the conditionality of submission of 
utilization certificate as per GFR 2017 and as mentioned in the criteria issued by department of 
expenditure vide OM no. 1(13) PFMS/FCD/2020 dated 23.03.2021 regarding procedure for 

35 
 
release of funds under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and monitoring of utilization of 
the funds released. Accordingly, the D epartment of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance vide its 
OM No. 1(13)/PFMS/FCD/2020 dated 17.12.2021, allowed the Ministry of Ayush to release 
funds for up gradation of additional Ayush facilities as Health and Wellness Centers relaxing the 
condition of 75% utilization of funds released earlier and only for new Ayush HWCs. 
2.6.5 After getting the relaxation, the Ministry released the grant in aid of Rs. 230.66 Crore for 
up gradation of 3048 health facilities as Ayush HWCs in 27 States/UTs in the month of 
December, 2021.  
2.6.6 During the different review meetings, State/UT Governm ents requested that due to Covid -
19 their most of the staffs were engaged on Covid duty which hampered the major activities i.e. 
construction, purchase of medicines and other flexipool activities, etc. therefore, they have not 
made expenditure upto 75%. 
2.6.7 All the conditionalties, as issued by DoE on dated 23.03.2021, could not be complied by 
different States/UTs, even after repeated follow up by the Ministry. Further, during different 
review meeting States/UTs have raised their concern about non -compliance of the all stipulated 
conditionalties by 31.03.2022 and requested to the Ministry for providing some relaxation, so 
that grant-in-aid may be released to them for 2021 -22 approved SAAPs.  Accordingly, Ministry 
of Ayush has submitted a Proposal for relea se of the funds to the States/UTs for 25% eligible 
grant-in-aid (including 2nd instalment to those States/UTs for whom 1 st instalment has already 
been released) under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH Mission (NAM) vide 
F. No. S -16030/7/2022-NAM dated 03rd March, 2022. In this reference, Department of 
Expenditure (DoE) has issued certain relaxations subject to fulfillment of specific 
conditionalities for further release of funds under NAM for the FY 2021 -22 vide its OM 
1(19)/PFMS/FCD/2022 dated 11th March 2022 and as per the relaxation received grant -in-aid of 
Rs. 107.136 Crore .has been released in the month of March 2021 to States/UTs.  Accordingly, 
under NAM, total amount of Rs. 458.87 crore incurred as on 31.03.2022 against the allocation o f 
Rs 500.00 crore in RE.  
2.7    Efforts to Liquidate Pending UCs 
Recommendation 
2.7.1 The Committee acknowledges that the Ministry has made concerted efforts to liquidate 
pending UCs by engaging the States/UTs. The Committee feels that such an effort of the 
Ministry has made itself aware of the challenges being faced and it should chalk out strategic 
course of action to phase out pending UCs. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to address the „Key Areas of Concern‟ especially administrative hurdles and delay in 
release of budget so that the States/UTs submit UCs on time and clear off the pending ones. 
The Committee believes that pendency of UCs affects the implementation of the scheme and 
will block further release of funds for the scheme. Th e Committee, therefore, reiterates that 
UCs pending for NAM must be liquidated with active engagement of the concerned States/UTs. 
(Para 3.15 ibid) 
Action Taken 
NAM Section 
2.7.2 The following efforts have been taken for expediting the liquidation of UCs: 

36 
 
(i) In v arious meetings like Appraisal C ommittee meetings and Mission Directorate 
meetings, States/UTs were continuously reminded for timely submission of UCs. 
(ii) Regular follow -up with States/UTs from officials of NAM Cell along with Central 
Program Management Unit (CPMU) is being undertaken along with hand holding for 
furnishing of UCs with relevant supporting documents. 
(iii) States/UTs were requested to attend meeting at Ministry of Ayush, physically, along 
with UCs and other supporting documents. 
(iv) As per requirement, officials of NAM Cell along with CPMU also visited physically 
to States/UTs to provide assistance for preparing UCs and other supporting 
documents. 
(v) Time to time correspondence has been made through different D.O. letters through 
Hon‟ble Minister of Ayush, Secretary (Ayush) and Joint Secretary (Ayush) to 
State/UT Governments for expediting the expenditure and submission of UCs.  
2.7.3 With all such ste ps taken by the Ministry  for liquidation of UCs and as a result during this 
year Ministry has liquidated UCs for an amount of Rs.  31592.17554 lakhs (01.04.2021 to 
31.03.2022).  
2.8     Budgetary allocation to NMPB 
Recommendation 
2.8.1 The Committee notes that BE 2020-21 for NMPB was Rs. 62.13 crores.  BE 2022 -23 for 
NMPB is Rs. 13.82 crore indicating further decrease in allocation. The Ministry has clarified 
that due to separation of head for the newly created „Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, 
Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plant‟ from the administrative heads 
of NMPH which is now being operated separately under Central Sector Scheme Section.  As a 
result, the allocation under RE 2021-22 and BE 2022-23 has been reduced. 
(Para 3.35 ibid) 
2.8.2 The Committee notes that BE 2020 -21 for NMPB was Rs. 62.13 crores.  BE 2022 -23 for 
NMPB is Rs. 13.82 crore indicating further decrease in allocation. The Ministry has clarified 
that due to separation of head for the newly created „Central Sec tor Scheme for Conservation, 
Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plant‟ from the administrative heads 
of NMPH which is now being operated separately under Central Sector Scheme Section.  As a 
result, the allocation under RE 2021-22 and BE 2022-23 has been reduced. 
(Para 3.36 ibid) 
Action Taken 
NMPB Section 
          2.8.3 Factually correct. 
 
2.9     Inadequate Budgetary Support to NMPB 
Recommendation  
2.9.1 The Committee observes that out of Rs. 18.15 crore allocated for NMPB at RE 2021 -22, 
expenditure incurred is Rs. 14.66 as on 31.01.2022 and the BE 2022-23 is only Rs. 13.82 crore. 

37 
 
The Committee feels that the quantum/amount of budgetary allocation made to NMPB is not 
adequate.  Given the fact that it is the apex organization to coordinate all matters relating to 
medicinal plants, the budgetary allocation should be made commensurate with the mandate of 
the Board. 
(Para 3.37 ibid) 
Action Taken 
NMPB Section 
2.9.2 From the Head NMPB only establishment expenditure of NMPB like Salary, Domestic 
Travel Expenses, Professional Services, Other Administrative are met. For all other activities 
like Information, Education & Communication (IEC), Research and Development , Marketing & 
Trade, Conservation and Institutional Strengthening, expenditure are met from the Central Sector 
Scheme for Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plants. The 
Budget Estimate for the Scheme is Rs. 48.49 cr. 
2.10     Utilization of Funds by the Research Councils 
Recommendation 
2.10.1 The Committee appreciates the utilization of funds by the Research Councils and believes 
that the impressive utilization trends indicate the growing absorption capacity of these Counci ls 
for more research and other tasks assigned. The Committee observes that BE 2022 -23 for all the 
Councils has witnessed an increase in allocation except for CCRH. The Committee expresses 
concern over stagnant allocation for CCRH and recommends that requis ite fund may be sought 
at RE stage for carrying out research activities of CCRH.  
(Para 3.89 ibid) 
Action Taken 
Homoeopathy Section 
 CCRH 
2.10.2 The Council‟s total allocation of funds during the years 2021 -22 & 2022 -23 is similar 
i.e.143.70 crores due to less demand under capital head during 2022 -23 as most of the capital 
projects are nearing completion or completed. However, there is an increase in allocation under 
general head from Rs.44.50 cr to Rs.53.00 cr in 2022 -23. Details of allocation head wise du ring 
2021-22 & 2022-23 are given below:- 
(Rs. In Crore) 
GIA Heads 2021-22  2022-23 
Allocation  (RE) Allocation( BE) 
General 44.50 53.00 
Capital 35.00 20.00 
Salary 58.58 65.00 
SAP 0.15 0.20 
SCSP 3.00 3.00 
NER 2.35 2.50 
Total 143.58 143.70 

38 
 
2.11  Research Outcomes on Clinical Efficacy and Safety of Classical Ayurveda 
Formulations 
Recommendation 
2.11.1 The Committee feels that research outcomes on clinical efficacy and safety of classical 
Ayurveda formulations in various disease conditions may be pivotal for integration as well as 
positioning of Ayurveda at national and global level as well as help in wider utility of these 
medicines by Ayurveda practitioners. This will also help Ayurveda drug industry to capitalise the 
market potential of Ayurveda medicines. 
(Para 3.91 ibid) 
Action Taken 
Ayurveda Section 
 CCRAS 
2.11.2 Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) New Delhi  is already 
undertaking this activity.  The Council will continue its endeavour in this direction.    
 
2.12      Ayurveda Drugs and Its Commercialization  
Recommendation 
2.12.1 The Ayurveda drugs undertaken for drug development based on the leads from 
LHTs/Ayurveda texts has led to expansion of Ayurveda medicines in diseases of national 
importance and the commercialization of the products developed by the Council has  provided 
benefit to Ayurveda industry directly and the practitioners also and the public has the access to 
take benefits of quality assured medicines.  
(Para 3.92 ibid) 
Action Taken 
Ayurveda Section 
 CCRAS 
2.12.2 Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) New Delhi will continue 
its endeavour in this direction.    
 
 
2.13     Employability of AYUSH 
Recommendation 
2.13.1 The Committee would also like the Ministry to focus on the employability of AYUSH 
under-graduates and graduates in the health sector of the nation. The Committee recommends 

39 
 
the Ministry to consider the terms and service conditions of the AYUSH doctors to b e at par with 
doctors of modern medicine, so as to mitigate the difference in the remuneration given to them. 
(Para 4.30 ibid) 
 
AEP-III Section 
2.13.2 Regular employment of AYUSH doctors in the Central Government are at par with 
doctors of modern medicine in terms, service condition and remuneration. 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
3.1    Key Initiatives   
Recommendation 
3.1.1 The Committee takes cognizance of the growing importance and emergence of AYUSH 
systems in public healthcare system. The Committee notes that with a wide functional area and 
proper institutional support of research councils, educational institutes, regulatory bodies etc, it 
is evident that the Ministry is treading towards establishing itself as a strong alternative system 
of medicine with growing number of people reposing their faith in its efficacy. The Committee 
appreciates that the National Health Policy (NHP) 2017 had strongly advocated  mainstreaming 
the potential of AYUSH within a pluralistic system of Integrative healthcare and re -emphasizing 
the need for integrating AYUSH in the National Health Mission, research and education. The 
Committee, therefore, believes that the Ministry has a  very important mandate to strategize and 
devise ways to galvanize the AYUSH system with a definite roadmap for quality education, 
quality healthcare delivery system, safety and efficacy of AYUSH drugs, promotion to exports 
etc. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to lay focus on the implementation of 
its schemes, maintaining high standards of education and research and regulation and control 
over quality and safety of AYUSH drugs. 
 
(Para 1.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.2 The recommendation of the committee has been noted. The Ministry of AYUSH has 
implemented a new Central Sector Scheme namely AYURGYAN during FY 2021 -22.  The 
main aim of the Scheme is to support Education, Research & Innovation in AYUSH by 
providing academ ic activities, training, Capacity Building etc. The Scheme has 02 sub -
components viz. Capacity Building and Continuing Medical Education (CME) in AYUSH and 
Research and Innovation in AYUSH. The scheme has been designed to encourage AYUSH 
personnel to under go need-based professional training and bridge the knowledge gaps; and t o 
encourage R & D activities in priority areas so that the research findings lead to validation of 
claims and acceptability of the AYUSH approach and drugs. 
 
3.1.3 The Ministry of Ayush is implementing a Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National 
AYUSH Mission (NAM) in the country for promotion and development of AYUSH system of 
medicines through States/UTs. Grant-in-aid is provided to the States/UTs as per the proposals  
submitted through State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs). The Mission inter -alia makes provision 
for the following activities for promotion and development of AYUSH system of medicines: - 
(i) AYUSH Health & Wellness Centres under Ayushman Bharat 
(ii) Co-location of AYU SH facilities at Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community 
Health Centres (CHCs) and District Hospitals (DHs).  
(iii) Upgradation of existing standalone Government AYUSH Hospitals. 
(iv) Upgradation of existing/setting up of new standalone Government/ Panchayat 
/Government aided AYUSH Dispensaries. 

41 
 
(v) Setting up of up to 50 /30 /10 bedded integrated AYUSH Hospitals.  
(vi) Supply of essential drugs to Government AYUSH Hospitals, Government 
Dispensaries and Government/Government aided Teaching Institutional AYUSH 
Hospitals.  
(vii) AYUSH Public Health Programmes. 
(viii) Infrastructural development of State Government Under -Graduate and post -Graduate 
Educational Institutions. 
(ix) Establishment of new AYUSH Colleges in the States where availability of AYUSH 
teaching institutions is inadequate in the Government Sector. 
3.1.4 Grant-in-aid of Rs. 3119.46 Crore has been released from 2014-15 to 2021-22 for different 
activities as per the proposals received from State/UT Governments.  The major steps taken to 
promote Ayurveda education during 2014-21 are as under: 
i. Establishment of North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy, Shillong in 
2016. 
ii. Establishment of All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi.  It was dedicated to the 
Nation by Hon‟ble Prime Minister on 17.10.2017. 
iii. Conferring the status of D eemed to be university to National Institute of Ayurveda, 
Jaipur.  It was dedicated to the Nation by Hon‟ble Prime Minister on 13.11.2020. 
iv. Conferring the status of Institute of National Importance to the Institute of Teaching 
and Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar.  It was dedicated to the nation by Hon‟ble 
Prime Minister on 13.11.2020. 
v. Change of nomenclature and mandate of North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine, 
Pasighat as North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Folk Medicine Research, 
Pasighat in 2021. 
vi. The following two satellite Institutes of existing National Institutes will be 
operationalized soon: 
S.No. Existing Institutes Satellite Institute 
1 National Institute of Ayurveda, 
Jaipur 
National Institute of 
Ayurveda, Panchkula 
2 All India Institute of Ayurveda, 
New Delhi 
All India Institute of 
Ayurveda, Goa 
 
2.      Setting up of WHO GCTM organizing GAIIS.   
3.     The newly planned scheme „Programme on Ayurveda Biology Integrated Health Research‟ 
is in draft form. The „in -principle‟ approval on the said scheme is still awaited from Ministry of 
Finance (DoE).   
3.1.5 Ministry of Ayush has implemented the Central Sector Scheme of Ayush Oushadhi 
Gunvatta Evam Uttpadan SamvardhanYojana (AOGUSY) since September 2021 with a financial 
outlay of Rs.122 cr. for the period2021-2026with the following four components: 
 
i. Strengthening and upgradation of Ayush Pharmacies and Drug Testing Laboratories to 
achieve higher standards. 
ii. Pharmacovigilance of ASU&H drugs including surveillance of misleading 
advertisements. 

42 
 
iii. Strengthening of Central and State regulatory frameworks including Technical Human 
Resource & Capacity Building programs for control of quality, safety and efficacy 
aspects of Ayush drugs. 
iv. Support for development of standards and accreditation/certification of Ayush products & 
materials in collaboration with BIS, QCI and other relevant scientific institutions and 
industrial R&D centres. 
 
3.1.6 The objective of the Scheme is to promote and project quality, acceptability, and visibility 
of AYUSH products for enhancing people‟s confidence in their use for healthcare and for 
improving trade and to inculcate culture of quality production of AYUSH products assured with 
safety and efficacy. 
3.1.7 The Ministry developed a Central Sector Scheme for promotion of Inter national 
Cooperation (IC Scheme).  The scheme is having various provisions to achieve the following 
objectives: 
(i) To promote and strengthen awareness and interest about AYUSH Systems of Medicine 
at international level.  
(ii) To facilitate International promotion,  development and recognition of Ayurveda, 
Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa-Rigpa and Homoeopathy;  
(iii)To foster interaction of stakeholders and market development of AYUSH at 
international level;  
(iv) To support international exchange of experts and informa tion for promotion and 
propagation of AYUSH systems;  
(v) To give boost to AYUSH products/ services / education/ research/ training globally;  
(vi) To promote academics and research through establishment of AYUSH Academic 
Chairs in foreign countries. 
3.1.8 Ministry of Ayush under its various components of IC scheme undertakes various activities 
for promotion of Ayush globally maintain high standards of education, research and regulation 
and control over quality & safety of Ayush drugs. As of now, Ministry of Ayush has collaborated 
with more than 50 countries for promotion of Ayurveda, Yoga and all Ayush systems by virtue 
of signing of country to country MoU, research collaborations, MoU for establishing academic 
chairs of Ayush in foreign universities, setting up of Ayurveda/Ayush hospitals/academic 
institute, setting up of herbal garden, exchange of experts, deputation of Ayush experts, 
organizing workshops, conferences etc., providing financial support to Ayush 
doctors/researchers to present their research at intern al platforms. Ministry of Ayush offers 104 
scholarships every year to the eligible foreign nationals from 99 countries for pursuing 
undergraduate (UG), postgraduate (PG) and Ph. D courses in Ayush stream in premier Institutes 
in India.  
(i) National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM) has been constituted 
to improve the quality of education, through regulatory provisions & streamlining of 
registration, ethical practice throughout the Country of Indian System of Medicine. 
 
(ii) National Commission for Homoeopathy (NCH) has been constituted to improve the 
quality of education, through regulatory provisions & streamlining of registration, 
ethical practice throughout the Country for Homoeopathy System of Medicine. 
 

43 
 
(iii) National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (Minimum Standards of 
Undergraduate Ayurveda Education) Regulations -2022 come to effect from 
16.02.2022 to provide for a medical education system that improves access to quality 
and affordable medical education ensures availability of adequate and  high quality 
medical professionals of Indian System of Medicine in all parts of the country. 
 
(iv) For monitoring of quality of Education, through NCISM Act, 2020 and NCH Act, 
2020 under Section 14 and Section 16 of the respective Act, there shall be a uniform  
National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for admission to the undergraduate courses & 
Post Graduate National Entrance Test for Post -graduation Course respectively in 
each of the disciplines of the Indian System of Medicine & Homoeopathy in all 
medical institutions governed under these Acts.  
 
(v) Further, under Section 15 and Section 17 of the aforesaid Act, there shall be a 
National Exit Test, a common final year undergraduate medical examination shall be 
held for granting licence to practice as medical practit ioners &under Section 17 of 
the aforesaid Act, there shall be a National Teachers Eligibility Test shall be 
conducted separately for the post -graduates of ISM & Homoeopathy who desire to 
take up teaching profession in that discipline.   
(vi) NCH envisage to develop competency based dynamic curriculum. 
 
(vii) NCH has envisioned raising competencies and skills of teaching faculties in 
alignment with modern understanding with a regular update vis -à-vis technological 
advancements. 
 
i. Ministry of Ayush had developed a Central Sector Scheme namely Champion 
Services Sector Scheme for Medical Value Travel .The scheme was launched in the 
late 2019, unfortunately coincided with the Covid 19 pandemic putting restrictions on 
foreign travel as well as limitations imposed on Vis a to foreigners willing to travel to 
India. Since the scheme was intended to promote Ayush based medical Value travel 
by providing Ayush medical and health services to foreigners, the purpose itself was 
defeated to the pandemic. Therefore, the scheme could  not get the desired response 
from the private investors. 
ii. Skill Training programs were also hampered due to the restrictions on hands on 
training in the second and third wave of the COVID-19. 
iii. The scheme was approved till march, 2022 only.  Ministry of Ayush has initiated the 
process of continuation of scheme beyond March 2022. 
Further Recommendation 
3.1.9 The Committee hopes that the Programme on Ayurveda Biology Integrated 
Health Research would get the 'in principle' approval from the Ministry of Finance, the 
sooner the better. The Committee would like to be apprised of the objective, scope, 
financial outl ay sanctions and timeframe of the said programme. As regards the 
Central Sector for promotion of International Co -operation (IC -Scheme), the 
Committee seeks to know the physical achievement against the set target in the field of 
International Promotion, de velopment & recognition of Ayurveda, Yoga, 
Naturallopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowarigpa and homeopathy. The Ministry may also 

44 
 
acquaint the Committee with physical outcome of other components of IC Scheme 
against the set target during the last three years.   
3.2    Macro Analysis of Budgetary Allocation 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.2.1 The Committee observes that the projected demand of the year 2022 -23 is only Rs. 3139.43 
crore which is way less than the projected demand for last year i.e. Rs. 5435.55 crore.  The 
Committee may be apprised of the rationale for such low projection of demands compared to last 
year‟s projections. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for projected demand 
of Rs. 5435.55 crore for the year 2021 -22 along with the reasons for projected demands of Rs 
3139.43 crore for the year 2022-23. 
(Para 2.2 ibid) 
3.2.2 The Committee notes that the projected demand of the Ministry which has been witnessing 
a consistent increase over the years and so has the actual allocation but the year 2022 -23 is an 
exception. Such drastic reduction in projected demand for the year 2022 -23 does not seem 
commensurate with the Government‟s focus on holistic health and the major initiatives of the 
Ministry planned for the year. The Committee feels that the increase in budget of the Ministry for 
the year 2022-23 is miniscule and finds it to be grossly insufficient. The Committee is unable to 
understand how the Ministry plans to achieve all its objectives with just Rs. 3050.00 crore 
allocated for 2022 -23. The Committee has been emphasizing repeatedly on enhancement of 
budgetary allocation for the Ministry so that the Ministry may achieve its myriad objectives as 
well as focus on revival and promotion of Indian system of Medicine with a fast pace.  
(Para 2.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
3.2.3 An amount of Rs. 5435.55 crore was projected in 2021 -22 since there were requirement of 
funds for the ongoing construction activities under various Autonomous Bodies. Further one new 
scheme, namely Pradhan Mantri Vriksh Ayush Yojana under Atma Nirbhar Bhar at was under 
active consideration for which Cabinet note was submitted and an amount of  Rs.  2056.00 crore 
was projected for 2021-22 the same . 
3.2.4 For the year 2022 -23 the projection was only Rs. 3139.43 crore and the low demand as 
compare to the previous year projection was mainly due to the following reasons:- 
(i)  Completion of various construction activities under Autonomous Bodies. 
(ii) Pending approval of some schemes namely Pradhan Mantri Vriksh Ayush Yojana and 
Programme on Ayurveda – Integrated Health Research 
3.2.5 However, additional demand, if any, will be raised at the time of RE 2022 -23 stage after 
due examination. 
Further Recommendation 
3.2.6 The Ministry may furnish the Committee the list of ongoing construction projects 
during 2021 -22, estimated cost with timeframe of completion. The Committee aspires to 
know how much the amount out of projected demand to the tune of Rs. 5435.55 Cr. was to 
be appropriated on various ongoing construction projects and how much amount out of BE 

45 
 
actual allocation in the year 2021 -22 was actually appropriated for completion of ongoing 
construction projects. The Committee seeks to be informed by the Ministry about t he 
reasons for delayed approval of Pradhan Mantri Vriksh Ayush Yojna and programme on 
Ayurveda - Integrated Health Research and the implementation status of the scheme so far. 
The Committee takes into account that Champion Service Sector Scheme for medical  value 
Travel launched by the Ministry of Ayush in 2019 under Central Sector Scheme suffered 
the 'Execution Setback' due to Outbreak of Pandemic Covid -19. However, the Committee 
wants to be apprised of steps taken by the Ministry to incentivize the desired response from 
private investor to give a flip to the kick start the implementation of the scheme in the post 
pandemic covid -19 phase. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to make 
concerted efforts to promote the Ayush based Medical Value Travel b y providing Ayush 
Medical and Health Services to foreigners on mass level and thus popularizing the scheme 
among the foreigners. At the same time the Committee wills to know the fate of 
continuation of the scheme beyond March, 2022. The Committee further h opes that the 
Ministry could promote the 'Skill Training Programme' to the logical conclusion through 
endowing new direction and dimension to the Programme in order to achieve its set 
objectives.    
3.3    All India Institute of Ayurveda 
Recommendation 
3.3.1 The Committee notes that All India Institute of Ayurveda and Pradhan Mantri Vriksh Ayush 
Yojana are the ones having major variation between the projected demand and allocated funds. 
The Committee hopes that the All India Institute of Ayurveda is able  to manage with the shortfall 
of Rs 22.83 crore. On the other hand, Rs. 1.00 crore allocation for the new scheme Pradhan 
Mantri Vriksh Ayush Yojana against the projected demand of Rs. 25.00 crore indicates lack of 
faith of the government in the Ministry to  implement the scheme in the financial year 2022 -23. 
The Committee believes that the said scheme has got all the necessary approvals for it to be 
initiated and implemented this year 2022 -23 and in this direction, recommends the Ministry to 
lay serious focus on the implementation of the scheme.  
(Para 2.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.3.2 The recommendation of the committee has been noted and the latest status is that the 
Fund of Rs.227.10 Crore has been allocated to All India Institute of Ayurveda for the Financial 
Year 2022-23 which is sufficient for implementation of Annual Action Plan and carry out the 
planned activities.  The PMVAY is under process of approval by the Competent Authority. 
 
3.3.3 Ministry of Ayush, Government of India has formulated a draft scheme namely “Pradhan 
Mantri VRIKSH AYUSH Yojana”. The scheme aims to promote Cultivation of Medicinal 
Plants, Post-harvest management and Marketing support by involving farmers and the AYUSH 
industry. The proposed scheme was submitted for the approval of the Ca binet.  As suggested by 
PMO vide ID No. 3553697/PMO/2020 -SW dated 25.02.2022, NMPB has written to the Cabinet 
for withdrawal of Cabinet note on Vriksha Ayush Yojana in present form. Till date NMPB has 
not received any communication in this regard. 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3.4 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over procedural delay in 
approval of PM -VAY. Keeping in view, snail pace of approval, the Committee apprehend 
its execution aspects and its success. The Committee, therefore,  recommends the Ministry 
for obtaining approval of PM -VAY by the competent authority without further delay so 
that the said yojna can see the light of the day.  
 
3.4   Budgetary Allocation 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.4.1 The Committee notes that the percentage of BE with respect to GDP has been gradually 
increasing with 0.009% in 2016 -17 to 0.015% in 2022 -23.  The Committee feels that realization 
of the vision of AYUSH sector contributing to 7.7% of GDP by 2047 seems to be a distant dream 
considering the percentage  of BE with respect to GDP at a negligible 0.015% level. The 
Committee, accordingly, strongly recommends that Ministry should systematically move ahead 
for strengthening AYUSH system through series of measures that need to be undertaken.  Long -
term as well  as short term planning needs to be chalked out by the Ministry to achieve the 
envisaged goals.  The Committee hopes that sea changes in the AYUSH systems would not only 
revive the past glory of Indian systems of medicine but also establish the system in i ts right place 
with utmost credibility based on scientific validation.  The Committee also believes that the 
Ministry needs to identify the challenges and address them so that the immense potential of 
AYUSH is tapped for positioning it as an economical alt ernative system of medicine in 
mainstream public health delivery system. Further, to achieve the target of contributing 7.7% to 
GDP by 2047, the Committee feels that the Ministry must put up appropriate and adequate 
demand for funds for its various initiat ives and ventures and utilize the funds judiciously and 
optimally. 
(Para 2.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
 CCRS 
3.4.2 Yes CCRS welcomes the move that appropriate funds is needed to achieve the short-term 
and long term goals envisaged in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and National 
Health Policy 2017. 
 NIS 
Year BE(cr) RE (cr) Actual Released 
2015-16 30.50 26.00 26.00 
2016-17 28.00 25.00 25.00 
2017-18 29.42 29.42 29.42 
2018-19 35.50 35.50 35.50 
2020-21 50.81 50.56 50.56 
2021-22 47.58 47.58 47.58 
2022-23 49.09 44.765 44.765 
 

47 
 
3.4.3 From the above table it may be seen that there is a considerable increase in release of 
grants over the years. The Institute is in the process of expanding of its activities. The Institute 
has already submitted application for granting Deemed to be Univers ity Status. After the status 
is accorded this Institute will be in a position to start new PF, PG Diploma courses which will 
further expand its scope. The Institute has also submitted application for grant of permission for 
starting UG Course. 
3.4.4 We ant icipate a considerable increase in Recurring and Non recurring expenditure 
requirement after obtaining the status of Deemed to be University and Starting of UG courses. 
As such our demand in BE/RE will also increase in subsequent years.   
 CCRUM 
3.4.5 The CCRUM took a note on the recommendation of the Department - Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee. The CCRUM is strengthening its infrastructure, facilities, 
research and outreach activities under the direction of Ministry of Ayush, so that Unani system  
of medicine may be used economical alternative system of medicine in mainstream public 
health delivery system. A vision document 2047 has also been prepared by the Council to chalk 
out the envisaged goals. 
 NIUM 
3.4.6 Proposal shall be submitted to the Ministry to achieve the targets. 
 CCRH 
3.4.7 The Council noted the recommendation of the committee. During the last five years, the 
Council has placed adequate demand or funds for its various initiatives and ventures and utilize 
the funds judiciously andoptima lly. The details of budget propos ed and allocated is given 
below:- 
Figures in crores 
YEAR PROPOSED  BE  ALLOCATED  RE  
2017-18 95.5 112.50 
2018-19 109.5 109.14 
2019-20 118.53 128.83 
2020-21 138.50 130.50 
2021-22 167.58 143.58 
2022-23 143.70 - 
 NIH 
3.4.8 The Institute noted the recommendation of the committee. This Institute under the aegis of 
the Ministry of Ayush is working on making Homoeopathy as an economical alternative system 
of medicine in mainstream public health delivery system.  In this reg ard, the Institute has also 
prepared a vision document 2047 of NIH and will work in tandem with Ministry of Ayush.  
3.4.9 Different new AYUSH Public Health Programmes have been included as per the 
recommendation made by the NITI Aayog after third party eva luation and observations made 
by Ministry during the implementation of National AYUSH Mission . With regards to new 
initiative undertaken along with existing activities of NAM, need of substantial funds have been 
proposed to Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). Accordingly, as per recommendation of 

48 
 
EFC, Union Cabinet has approved the continuation of Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National 
AYUSH Mission (NAM) from 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 with financial implication of Rs. 4607.30 
lakhs (Rs. 3000.00 lakhs as centra l share and Rs. 1607.30 lakhs as state share). The following 
new initiatives are envisaged under National AYUSH Mission for strengthening AYUSH 
system: 
(i) Setting up of 30 bedded Integrated AYUSH Hospital 
(ii) Setting up of 10 bedded Integrated AYUSH Hospital 
(iii) Establishment of new AYUSH Colleges in the States where availability of AYUSH 
teaching institutions is inadequate in Government Sector. 
(iv)  AYUSH Public Health Programs:  
(a) National Program for Prevention and Management of Osteoarthritis& other 
Musculo skel etal Disorders (b) SUPRAJA (AYUSH Maternal & Neo -
natalIntervention) (c) Integration of AYUSH with National Programme for 
Prevention and            Control of Cancer,   Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and 
Stroke (NPCDCS) (d) VAYO MITRA  (AYUSH Geriatric Healthcare Services) (e) 
AYUSH Mobile Medical Unit (f) KARUNYA (AYUSH Palliative Services) (g) 
AYURVIDYA (Healthy Lifestyle through AYUSH for School Children) (h) 
National Program on  AYUSH for Morbidity   Management and   Disability 
Prevention (MMDP) of Lymphatic Filariasis (lymphoedema) 
3.4.10 The Ministry is moving ahead in a systematic way by implementing IC scheme to achieve 
the set targets or its mandate. The Ministry is continuously identifying the global challenges for 
getting recognition and acceptance of Ayush system at international level and to position India as 
global leader in the field of traditional medicine and address them appropriately like; signing of 
MoUs  for research collaboration and for cooperation in the field of Ayush/traditional me dicine; 
interaction/dialogue with international authorities, stakeholders, B2B & G2G meetings, 
deputation of experts at foreign countries, at WHO; set up Ayush information cell/center, 
establishing Ayush chairs etc. WHO Global Centre for Traditional Medici ne is being established 
in Jamnagar, Gujarat which will be beneficial for the promotion of Ayush system globally as 
well as for positioning Ayush as an economical alternative system of medicine in mainstream 
public health delivery system.  
3.4.11 Moreover, Ministry has made the substantial changes in the IC scheme by including 
additional provisions/components for promotion of Ayush globally i.e. Setting up and 
strengthening of Export promotion Council for Products and Services (the financial assistance of 
up to Rs. 50 lakhs per annum may be provided for taking up activities), Establishment of 
International institutes/ research centers in India under various multi -country organizations / 
forums like BIMSTEC  (Financial assistance up to Rs. 200 crore may be pr ovided for the same) 
etc. Additional funds for establishing interim office of WHO GCTM at ITRA Jamnagar sought 
and received. Additional funds for establishing main office of WHO GCTM would be sought in 
current FY.  
3.4.12 NCISM Act, 2020 and NCH Act, 2020 has a provision under Section 40 of Chapter VII, 
which state that there shall be constituted a fund to be called “the National Commission Fund 
for Homoeopathy” and there shall be credited thereto - (a) all Government grants, fee, penalties 
and charges received by the Commission and the Autonomous Boards; (b) all sum received by 
the Commission from such other sources as may be decided by it.   

49 
 
3.4.13 Ministry of Ayush has initiated the process of approval for continuation of scheme beyond 
March 2022. Further, Ministry of Ayush is in process to introduce a separate scheme for 
Establishment of Ayush Grid .This scheme component has been revised and focus on IT support 
for Medical Value Travel & skill development. 
Further Recommendation 
3.4.14 Against the estimati on of Ministry of Ayush the Committee does not find 
considerable increase in release of grants i.e. Rs. 50.56 Crore, Rs. 47.58 Crore and Rs. 
44.765 Crore during 2020 -21, 2021-22 and 2022 -23, respectively, to CCRS to achieve the 
short term and long term goa ls as envisaged in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 
and National Health Policy 2017. The Committee understands that there would be 
quantum jump in recurring and non -recurring expenditure once the institutes gets status 
of 'Deemed to be University' a nd permission to start UG Course, PF, PG -Diploma is 
granted to the Institute. The Committee, therefore, recommends that pending application 
for grants of demand to be university is granted to CCRS without delay and adequate 
budgetary grant should be alloca ted CCRS to meet the recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure. The Committee further desires to know the physical achievement in regard 
to strengthening of infrastructure facilities research and outreach activities as done by 
CCRUM to prepare the Unani Syst em of Medicine as economical and alternative system 
of medicine.  
3.4.15 The Committee further desires to be informed about the outcome of steps taken in 
regard to Ayush Public Health Programme under NAM during last two years viz. 
Integration of Ayush with  NPCDCS,  VAYO Mitra, Ayush Geriatric Services, morbidity 
management and disability prevention. The Ministry may also furnish the details of 
objective of establishment of Ayush Grid, its intended institutional structure and proposed 
functions.  
 
3.5    Merger of Erstwhile Schemes in New Schemes 
Recommendation 
3.5.1 The Committee observes that due to the merger of erstwhile schemes in new schemes, funds 
allocated for AYUSH and Public Health, Assistance to accredited AYUSH Centres of excellence 
in non -governmental/private sector engaged in AYUSH education/drug development & 
research/folk medicine etc, Extra Mural Research projects, Re -orientation training programme 
of AYUSH personnel/continuing medical education, were not used. Allocation for 
Pharmacovigilance of ASU drugs, Central Drug Controller for AYUSH also could not be 
utilized. The Committee has noted that erstwhile schemes were doing well before their merger 
into new schemes except for the Central Drug Controller for AYUSH. The Ministry should have 
worked out the details of the new schemes well in advance so that funds allocated do not remain 
idle. The Committee recommends the Ministry to complete the procedural formalities and 
finalize the components of the new merged schemes at the earliest so that they are implemented 
without further delay. Further, two new schemes, Programme on Ayurveda -Biology Integrated 
Health Research and Pradhan Mantri Vriksh Ayush Yojana could not get approvals and hence 
the funds allocated could not be devolved upon. The Comm ittee has time and again emphasized 
upon completing the preparatory exercises beforehand so that unnecessary delay in 

50 
 
commencement of the new schemes is avoided. The Committee hopes that implementation of 
these two schemes sees the light of the day, sooner the better. 
(Para 2.28 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.5.2 The recommendation of the committee has been noted . The Ministry has completed all 
the procedural formalities and finalized the components of 02 new Schemes namely 
AYURGYAN & AYURSWASTHA Yojana.   Further, proposals are also being received and 
supported as the new Scheme Guidelines. 
 
3.5.3 Existing central sector schemes of Pharmacovigilance Initiative, Central Drug Controller of 
Ayush and Drugs Quality Control Component of National Ayush Mission have been submerged 
in AOUGSY. The schemes under Ministry of Ayush which had Ayush drugs related component 
has been brought under one umbrella for better coordination and channelization/sharing of 
knowledge and resources from one to another. The scheme advocates str engthening and 
rationalizing the drug regulatory system, promotion of research and development in the 
pharmaceutical sector and building synergy and evolving a convergent approach with related 
sectors. 
 
3.5.4 Ministry of Ayush, Government of India has form ulated a draft scheme namely “Pradhan 
Mantri VRIKSH AYUSH Yojana”. The scheme aims to promote Cultivation of Medicinal 
Plants, Post-harvest management and Marketing support by involving farmers and the AYUSH 
industry. The proposed scheme was submitted for the approval of the Cabinet.   As suggested by 
PMO vide ID No. 3553697/PMO/2020 -SW dated 25.02.2022, NMPB has written to the Cabinet 
for withdrawal of Cabinet note on Vriksha Ayush Yojana in present form. Till date NMPB has 
not received any communication in this regard. 
 
Further Recommendation  
 
3.5.5 The Committee appreciates that the Ministry, subsequent to the completion of the 
procedural formalities, has finalized the components of 'AYURGYAN' & 
'AYURSWASTHA' Yojna. The Committee, however, desires that th e new scheme 
guidelines are formulated without further delay so that the actual 
operationalization/execution of the scheme takes place on the ground level and the said 
targets of the scheme are achieved within stipulated timeframe. The Committee hopes that  
the Ministry may inform about the operationalization and outcome of execution of 
AOUGSY. The Committee further feels that the Ministry should approach the Cabinet 
Secretariat urging that the Cabinet Note on PM -VAY stands withdrawn and a fresh 
Cabinet Note is required to be placed to give a flying start to the PM-VAY.     
 
3.6    Schemes of the Ministry 
Recommendation 
3.6.1 The Committee has been given to understand that the Ministry had projected a demand of 
Rs 800.00 crore for NAM and it is heartening to see that it has been allocated the same amount 
in BE 2022 -23. The Committee is pleased to note that demand for enhanced f unds was due to 

51 
 
demand of States/UTs for strengthening Ayush health facilities in their respective States/UTs. 
NAM encompasses a variety of components with the objectives of providing cost effective 
AYUSH services, co -location of AYUSH facilities, strength ening institutional capacity at State 
level through upgradation of educational institutions, State government ASU&H pharmacies, 
Drug testing laboratories etc. The Committee looks forward to effective implementation of the 
various components of NAM after fi nalization of the new guidelines leading to enhanced cost 
norms for different activities. The Committee recommends the Ministry to utilize the allocated 
funds judiciously and optimally as also to closely monitor the implementation of the scheme to 
achieve the desired objectives. 
(Para 3.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.6.2 Union Cabinet has approved on 14.07.2021 for continuation of the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme of National AYUSH Mission from 1.04.2021 to 31.03.2026 vide letter no. 27/CM/2021 
(i) dated 19th July, 2021 (Case no. 116/27/2021 - item no. 3). Revised guidelines o f Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme of NAM have been finalized and accordingly cost norms for different 
activities have been enhanced as well as public health programmes have been added as new 
activities. Since, targets for the year 2022 -23 has been fixed as per the newly approved revised 
guidelines of NAM scheme and to meet the targets, additional funds are required.  
3.6.3 Since, State/UT Governments have demanded more fund to strengthen the AYUSH health 
facilities, therefore, more funds are required for better access to AYUSH Services through 
increase in number of AYUSH Hospitals and Dispensaries, AYUSH HWCs and implementation 
of different AYUSH Public Health Programmes. As per the new guidelines, the following new 
activities of AYUSH Public Health Programmes ar e envisaged to be implemented  through 
States/UTs in coming years :- 
i. National Program for Prevention and Management of Musculoskeletal Disorders  
ii. Integration of AYUSH with National Programme for Prevention and Control of 
Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Dis eases and Stroke (NPCDCS)  
iii. SUPRAJA (AYUSH Maternal & Neo-natal Intervention): For strengthening Ayush based 
Maternal & Neo-natal Interventions through Ayush teaching hospitals 
iv. VAYO MITRA (AYUSH Geriatric Healthcare Services): Ayush Geriatric Healthcare 
Servicesis a program for senior citizens to live healthy productive lives. 
v. AYURVIDYA: (Promotion of healthy lifestyle through AYUSH System in 75000 
School) Ayurvidya program for Healthy Lifestyle through Ayush for School Children.  
vi. AYUSH Mobile Medial Unit: M obile Medical Units are proposed for healthcare in 
underserved and far flung are as through Ayush systems. 
vii. KARUNYA: (AYUSH Palliative Services): Ayush Palliative Services aims to improve 
Quality of Life in patients under palliative care. 
viii. National Program on  AYUSH for morbidity management and Disability Prevention 
(MMDP) of Lymphatic Filariasis (lymphoedema): Morbidity management and Disability 

52 
 
Prevention (MMDP) of Lymphatic Filariasis (lymphoedema) through Ayush 
interventions. 
3.6.4 Under NAM, allocation of resource pool has already been communicated to all States/UTs 
with a request that they have to submit the State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs) to the Ministry 
latest by 15.03.2022, so that further process regarding appraisal/approval of SAAP may be 
completed for timely release of Grant-in-aid.  
3.6.5 Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, Government of India vide OM No. F. 
No. 1(13) PFMS/FCD/2020 dated 23.03.2021 has issued a guidelines regarding procedure for 
release of funds  under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and monitoring utilization of 
the funds released. In this regard, State/UT Governments are required to ensure the 
compliance of different conditionalities of the above issued guidelines of Department of 
Expenditure, so that further grant-in-aid may be released. 
Further Recommendation 
3.6.6 The Committee recommends the Ministry to furnish details of appropriation of 
amount out of earmarked fund to the tune of Rs. 800.00 cr. in BE 2022 -23 to National 
Ayush Mission and achievement thereof against the set physical target vis-à-vis each 
component of the Mission. The Committee hopes that judicious and optimal utilization of 
funds would yield desired result of the scheme on the ground level.   
3.6.7 The Committee takes i nto account the fact that State/UT Governments have 
demanded more fund to strengthen the AYUSH health facilities, therefore, more funds 
are required for better access to AYUSH Services through increase in number of 
AYUSH Hospitals and Dispensaries, AYUSH H WCs and implementation of different 
AYUSH Public Health Programmes. The Committee, accordingly recommends the 
Ministry to approach the Ministry of Finance to earmark the requisite fund to the 
scheme for its successful implementation. 
 
3.7   AYUSH Co-located Facilities 
Recommendation 
3.7.1 The Committee observes that in the 36 States/UTs, a total of 487 AYUSH Co -located 
facilities are at District Hospitals level, 2811 at CHCs level and 7452 at PHCs level. Maximum 
number of AYUSH co-located facilities are available in the States of Orissa and Uttar Pradesh. 
It also notes that Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Kerala have NIL  Ayush Co -located facilities 
at all the three levels of District Hospitals, CHCs and PHCs. Bihar has AYUSH co -located 
facilities only at District Hospitals level while Gujarat has co -located facilities only at PHCs 
level. The Committee, in its earlier 128 th Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No.4) of the 
Ministry of AYUSH for the year 2021-22, had emphasized for making efforts for mainstreaming 
AYUSH services from the peripheral to the district level. With the rising popularity of AYUSH 
systems amongst the people of the country, the Committee believes that it is high time that 
focused attention is given to making Ayush healthcare facilities available through co -location 
facilities in order to provide an alternative system of medicine which is effective and 
economical to the poor masses at the ground level. The Committee is of the considered opinion 
that with adequate fund allocation by the Government and concerted efforts of the Ministry, the 

53 
 
access to Ayush healthcare services can be improved considerably. However, monitoring of the 
quality of the Ayush healthcare services being provided at PHCs, CHCs and DHs level is 
essential along with provision of required infrastructure and human resources. 
(Para 3.17 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 
3.7.2 Government of India has adopted a strategy of Co -location of AYUSH facilities at 
Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community Health Centres (CHCs) and District Hospitals 
(DHs), thus enabling choice to the patients  for different systems of medicines under single 
window. The engagement of AYUSH Doctors/ paramedics and their training is supported by the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare under National Health Mission (NHM), while the support 
for AYUSH infrastructure, equipment/furniture and medicines are provided by Ministry of 
Ayush under Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH Mission (NAM).  State/UT 
Governments will be supported for co -location of AYUSH facilities at PHC, CHCs & DHs as 
per the proposal submitted by them. 
Further Recommendation 
3.7.3 The Committee believes that Ayush co -located facilities at all three levels of 
healthcare viz. Primary Health Centre (PHC), Community Health Centres (CHC) and 
District Hospitals  (DHs) in all States/UTs is essential for popularizing and propagating 
Ayush S ystem as viable alternative system of medicine among common masses. Being 
economical and effective the Central Government should incentivize and encourage 
State/UTs Government to give flip to the Ayush co -location facilities having adequate 
technical facilities and human resources. The Ministry may emphasis on even distribution 
of Ayush location facilities in all States/UTs. 
3.8    Operationalization of AYUSH HWCs 
Recommendation 
3.8.1 The Committee understands the challenges being faced in operationalization of AYUSH 
HWCs due to Covid -19, however, feels that with the situation improving and things returning 
to normalcy, the operationalisation of HWCs can be expedited.  The Committee notes that 
during the year 2020-21, number of progressive functional HWCs was 1763 and the amount of 
Central share of Rs. 18,046.38 lakh was released during the month of December, 2020, 
however, it seems that the number of progressive functional HWCs in 2021 -22 is NIL even 
though the amount released as Central sha re is Rs. 23,063.71 lakh.  The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the reasons for such a contradictory scenario. The Committee has been given 
to understand that the approximate cost for upgradation of Ayush dispensary into HWC is Rs. 
16.22 lakh and for  upgradation of Sub Health Centre into Ayush HWC is Rs. 15.744 lakhs. 
Also the approximate time in making one HWCs functional is within two years of its approval. 
Given this estimation of time and cost, the Committee believes that the Ministry should focus  
on making the approved HWCs functional as per prescribed timeline by ensuring adequate and 
timely release of funds. 
(Para 3.24 ibid) 
 

54 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.8.2 During the year 2021-22, 3,105 Ayush HWCs were approved by the Mission Directorate of 
NAM. However, the grant -in-aid could not be released due to non -compliance of conditionality 
regarding PFMS and expenditure as issued by the Department of Expenditure vid e OM No. 
1(13) PFMS/FCD/2020 date 23.03.2021. 
3.8.3 Since the Ayush HWCs is the new component approved on 20.03.2020 under NAM and it 
is the flagship programme of the Ministry, which is being weekly monitored at the Cabinet 
Secretariat level, the Ministry requested the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance to 
accord one -time relaxation to the Ministry of Ayush for release of funds to those States/UTs 
which are not fulfilling the conditionality of submission of utilization certificate as per GFR 
2017 and as mentioned in the criteria issued by department of expenditure vide OM no. 
1(13)PFMS/FCD/2020 dated 23.03.2021 regarding procedure for release of funds under the 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and monitoring of utilization of the funds released.  
Accordingly, the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance vide its OM No. 
1(13)/PFMS/FCD/2020 dated 17.12.2021, allowed the Ministry of Ayush to release funds for up 
gradation of additional Ayush facilities as Health and Wellness Centers relaxing th e condition of 
75% utilization of funds released earlier and only for new Ayush HWCs. 
3.8.4 After getting the relaxation, the Ministry released the grant in aid of Rs. 230.66 Cr for up 
gradation of 3048 health facilities as Ayush HWCs in 27 States/UTs in t he 3rd quarter of the 
2021-22. As the funds were released in the month of December, 2021, the States/UTs have 
initiated the work of operationalization of Ayush HWCs and the Ayush HWCs will be functional 
very soon. 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.8.5 The Committee is of the considered view that the operationalization of Ayush Health 
and Wellness Centers (HWCs) would definitely accelerate in post pandemic covid -19 phase 
as the situation arising of pandemic is gradually moving towards normalcy. The Ministry 
has already granted Rs. 230.66 cr. in third quarter of the year 2021 -22 for upgradation of 
3048 health facilities in 27 States/UTs. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
monitor the completion of operationalization of Ayush HWCs within stipulated timeframe. 
 
3.9   Pradhan Mantri Vriksh Ayush Yojana 
 
Recommendation 
 3.9.1 Taking note of the major components of the Scheme as well as the economic package 
announced by Finance Minister under Atma Nirbhar Bharat, the Committee appreciates the 
ambitious plan of  action of the Ministry for promotion of herbal cultivation. The Committee 
believes that NMPB has a major role to play in widening the network of aushadhi dhams, area 
covered for herbal cultivation etc. The Committee hopes that the said scheme is finalized , 
approved and implemented on priority. 
(Para 3.34 ibid) 
 
 

55 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.9.2 Ministry of Ayush, Government of India has formulated a draft scheme namely “Pradhan 
Mantri VRIKSH AYUSH Yojana”. The scheme aims to promote Cultivation of Medicinal 
Plants, Post-harvest management and Marketing support by involving farmers and the AYUSH 
industry. The proposed scheme was submitted for the approval of the Cabinet.   As suggested by 
PMO vide ID No. 3553697/PMO/2020 -SW dated 25.02.2022, NMPB has written to the Cabine t 
for withdrawal of Cabinet note on Vriksha Ayush Yojana in present form. Till date NMPB has 
not received any communication in this regard. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.9.3 The Committee stipulates that ones the PM -VAY is finalized, approved and 
implemented and the network of the 'Aushdhi Dhams' is evenly expanded across the 
country there would be increase in cultivation of medical plants. The Committee believes 
that the Coun try would become a hotspot for 'Medical Tourism' for foreigners willing to 
have treatment through Ayush System.   
 
3.10     Creation of 24 Posts for NMPB 
Recommendation 
3.10.1 The Committee is deeply disappointed with the never -ending procedure of the creation 
of 24 posts for NMPB.  The Committee in its 128 th Report had emphasized on fulfilling the 
human resource requirement of the Board but the issue remained unresolved due to procedural 
complexity. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to expedite the 
process of creation of posts and fil l up the created posts as early as possible.  The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry would not procrastinate and complete the whole process to fill up these 
posts.  The Committee believes that the stop gap arrangement of loaning officers does not seem 
suitable and focus should be on recruiting permanent and dedicated manpower, without which 
the functions of the Board are likely to suffer. 
(Para 3.41 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.10.2 After studying the work handled by existing officers/Staff in NMPB in the 2nd meetin g 
of the NMPB Committee held on 21.06.2019, the Committee discussed the proposal of creation 
of new posts.  After detailed discussion and deliberations about posts/staff required in NMPB to 
deal the technical and administrative work at different levels in hierarchy, the Committee 
recommended for creation of 24 (20 Technical and 04 Non -Technical) posts in NMPB in place 
of 65 (24 Technical and 41 Non-Technical) posts. 
 
3.10.3 A proposal was sent to Staff Inspection Unit (SIU), Department of Expenditure, Ministry 
of Finance for creation of 24 posts in NMPB. In response, Staff Inspection Unit (SIU), 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance informed that “ the proposal of Ministry of 
Ayush for creation of 24 additional posts in National Medicinal Plant s Board (NMPB) has been 
examined and to say that SIU has no comments to offer as SIU had already nominated a core 
member in the matter. However, M/o Ayush is advised to approach E.Coord. -I, Department of 

56 
 
Expenditure for necessary action.”  Accordingly, a pr oposal for creation of 24 posts in NMPB 
has been submitted to E.Coord. -I, Department of Expenditure through Integrated Finance 
Division of the Ministry. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.10.4 The Committee expects the Ministry to furnish the details regarding the  duration 
since when the proposal of creation of 24  posts for NNPB is pending in E. Coord.-I of 
Department of Expenditure. The Ministry may again approach the Department of 
Expenditure to obtain green signal to the proposal. The Ministry may apprise to the 
Committee that response of the Department of Expenditure in the matter. 
 
 
3.11     India as Exporter of Medicinal Plants, Herbs, Spices 
 
Recommendation 
3.11.1 The Committee is of the considered view that India is becoming an important exporter of 
medicinal plants, herbs, spices, etc and is gaining ground quite rapidly especially after the 
popularity of such plants in pandemic times.  India‟s impressive two -fold increase in export of 
these plants, herbs, spices indicate the start of an era of AYUSH revolutio n globally.  The 
Committee believes that Ministry of AYUSH must tap the potential of growing demand of such 
items and lay focus on increasing the volume of exports internationally. The Committee 
recommends to the Ministry to encourage sustainable cultivati on of such medicinal plants, 
herbs and spices and lay emphasis on the quality and quantity of these items. 
(Para 3.54 ibid) 
3.11.2 The Committee would like NMPB to initiate the assessment of consumption and supply 
status of medicinal plants in the country which  will help the Ministry in designing strategies 
for the growth of herbal sector and contributes significantly towards the growth of herbal 
sector in the country. The Committee believes that the new scheme Pradhan Mantri Vriksh 
Ayush Yojana for the pr omotion of medicinal plant cultivation, post -harvest management and 
marketing support by involving farmers and AYUSH industry would be beneficial in the 
cultivation of such plants and a herbal revolution in the country.  The Committee hopes that the 
scheme is approved and is implemented as early as possible for ensuring supply of raw 
material/medicinal plants and benefits both to the farmers as well as AYUSH industry.  The 
Committee further recommends that the AYUSH Ministry to experiment with „Baitarani, 
Odisha model of livelihood assessment‟ as an intervention for enhancing the production of 
high quality herbal raw material and enhancing the profit making herbal growers. 
(Para 3.57 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.11.3 Ministry of Ayush, Government of India has formulated a draft scheme namely “Pradhan 
Mantri VRIKSH AYUSH Yojana”. The scheme aims to promote Cultivation of Medicinal 
Plants, Post-harvest management and Marketing support by involving farmers and the AYUSH 
industry. The proposed scheme was submitted for the approval of the Cabinet.   As suggested by 
PMO vide ID No. 3553697/PMO/2020 -SW dated 25.02.2022, NMPB has written to the Cabinet 

57 
 
for withdrawal of Cabinet note on Vriksha Ayush Yojana in present form. Till date NMPB has 
not received any communication in this regard. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.11.4 The Committee wants the Ministry of Ayush to proactively execute the scheme for 
encouraging export of herbal medicines and spices to usher Global Ayush Revolution l ed 
by India. The Committee reiterates its recommendation to the Ministry to examine an 
experiment with Odisha Model of livelihood assessment called Baithrani as an intervention 
for enhancing the production of high quality herbal raw material and enhancing the profit 
making herbal growers.  
 
3.12     Cultivating Medicinal Plants 
Recommendation 
3.12.1 The Committee also believes that the NMPB should explore the possibility of establishing 
medicinal plants farms across the country especially in Karnataka, Kerala, West Bengal and 
North Eastern Areas where conditions are quite favourable for cultivating medicinal plants.  The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to invest more in such farms and request for 
enhanced funds for NMPB to empower it to take more initiatives. 
(Para 3.58 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.12.2 Ministry of Ayush, Government of India under its Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 
National AYUSH Mission (NAM) was providing financial assistance to the farmers to encourage 
farming/cultivation of medicinal plants throughout the country from the F.Y. 2015 -16 to 2020 -
21. Under NAM scheme, there was a component on „Medicinal Plants‟ which was primarily 
aimed at supporting cultivation of medicinal plants on farmer‟s land with backward linkages 
through establishment of nurseries for supply of quality planting material, and forward linkages 
for post -harvest management. The cultivation programme was implemented through the 
identified implementing agency of concerned state. 
  
3.12.3 In this regard it is to inform that medicinal plant component is no more part of National 
Ayush Mission scheme under which cultivation activities were supported by Ministry of Ayush 
from the financial year 2015 -16 to 2020 -2021.  Presently, there is no scheme for cultivation of 
medicinal plants in Ministry of Ayush. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.12.4 The Committee understands that PM -VAY, that aims to promote cultivation of 
medical plants, post harvest management and marketing support, need to be approved and 
effectively implemented wi thout further procrastination. The Committee believes that it 
would be appropriate for the Ministry and more specifically the NMPB to work in tandem 
with farmers and Ayush industry to encourage cultivation of medical plants. In the 
estimation of the Commit tee, the provision of financial assistance to the farmers to 

58 
 
encourage farming/cultivation of medical plants should have continued under the centrally 
sponsored scheme. 
3.13    Quality Control of Ayush Drugs 
Recommendation 
3.13.1 The Committee takes cognizance of the major steps taken by the Ministry with intent to 
improve and strengthen quality control of Ayush drugs in the year 2021 and appreciates that the 
Ministry is making efforts for quality control of AYUSH drugs. The Committee comments that 65 
Drug testing labo ratories have been approved under Rule 160 -A to J of the Drugs & 
Cosmetics Rules, 1945 for the testing of Ayurveda, Siddha & Unani drugs, 30 Ayurvedic Drug 
Manufacturing Units have been granted WHO –GMP (CoPP) till date. Moreover,  e-aushadhi 
portal aims at promoting transparency and uniformity in the enforcement of regulatory 
provisions. The Committee notes that as of now 34 State Licensing Authorities, 180 State Drug 
Inspectors and about 1550 Ayush drug manufacturers from 29 States have already registered o n 
the portal for ensuring transparency and uniformity in the enforcement of regulatory provision. 
The Committee notes that the Pharmacopeia Commission of Indian Systems of Medicine & 
Homoeopathy has been established by merging the HPL and PLIM and expects that the 
Commission can act effectively as the Central Commission Drug Testing Appellate Laboratory. 
The Committee, however, is of the firm view that the role of CDSCO is of immense importance in 
upholding quality of Ayush drugs, however, the Committee is apprehensive over the temporary 
arrangements made without the incumbents in place. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 
the Ministry to firm up its regulatory framework to ensure that quality of ASU drugs is not 
compromised and ASU drugs get global recognition and acceptance. 
(Para 3.68 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 CCRS 
 
3.13.2 CCRS felt the mandatory requirement to ensure the quality of ASU drugs. In this regard, 
the Siddha Pharmacopoeia Committee (SPC) is currently functioning at CCRS Headquarters, 
Chennai. Siddha Pharmacopeia & formulary works are being carried in collaboration with 
Pharmacopeia Commission of Indian Systems of Medicine &Homoeopathy  (PCIMH) to ensure 
quality of Siddha drugs.  Ministry of Ayush may kindly firm up its regulatory framework.  
 
3.13.3 Ministry of AYUSH notified advertisements of 05 regulatory posts including one post of 
Deputy Drugs Controller, four posts of Assistant Drugs Controllers (one each for Ayurveda, 
Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs). The recruitment to these posts is u nder process. Two 
officers have been deputed to work in CDSCO as an interim arrangement and additional charge 
of the Nine regulatory posts have been given to Officers of Ministry of Ayush and PCIM &H. 
Further Recommendation 
3.13.4 The Committee is of the f irm view that assured quality control of AYUSH drugs is 
vital for global recognition and acceptance of AYUSH system of medicine. The Committee 
is however, constrained to express its displeasure over dilly dallying approach of the 
Ministry in taking final and firm decision on strengthening of its regulatory framework i.e. 
adequate staffing of CDSCO. The Committee advises the Ministry that ad -hoc and interim 

59 
 
arrangement would not be capable of strengthening the Ayush regulatory mechanism, 
therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to fill up 9 vacant posts in CDSCO, 05 
regulatory posts including one post of Deputy Drugs Controller, four posts of Assistant 
Drugs Controllers (one each for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs) 
without further delay so that the quality of the Ayush drugs is assured. 
 
3.14    Ayush Vertical CDSCO 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.14.1 The Committee is concerned about the pace at which the process of recruitment of 
incumbents for the nine posts is moving in AYUSH vertical CDSCO. The temporary arrangement 
of giving additional charge of these posts to technical officers of the Ministry does not seem 
proper for such an important mandate of the Drug Controller of Ayush. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to expedit e the recruitment process so that Central 
Drug Controller for Ayush becomes functional in the real sense with its incumbents in place. 
 
(Para 3.79 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
          3.14.2     The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
Further Recommendation 
3.14.3 The Committee reiterates its recommendation to the Ministry to expedite the 
recruitment process to fill up 09 Posts in CDSCO on regular basis to complete institutional 
Ayush Vertical CDSCO so that Central Drugs Controller for Ayush can play pivotal role. 
 
3.15    Pharmacovigilance Centre 
 
Recommendation  
 
3.15.1 The Committee finds that except for Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra, most of the 
other States have only one Pharmacovigilance Centre.  The Committee is of the view that the 
presence of these Centres in each State should be assessed keeping in view the p opulation and 
number of Ayush drugs manufacturers in the State as well as the popularity of the Indian System 
of Medicine.  The Ministry may take into account the number of reporting of misleading claims 
and advertisement and adverse drug reactions in a St ate. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends the Ministry to expand the network of Pharmacovigilance centres so that there is 
assured quality control of ASU&H drugs.  
(Para 3.81 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.15.2 As on date there are 74 Peripheral, 5 intermediary  and 1 national centre is functioning 
under the scheme. Attempts have been made to at least identify one centre in each State /UT. 

60 
 
Further in the last PSC of the Scheme further 25 new centers has been approved as Peripheral 
Pharmacovigilance centres. 
Further Recommendation 
3.15.3 The Committee recommends that the network of Pharmacovigilance centre should 
be evenly distributed across the country, of course, keeping in view the population and 
number of the Ayush drugs manufacturers and number of misleading c laims and 
advertisement. The Committee believes that such consideration and adherence to the 
measure would definitely assure the quality control of Ayush drugs.  
3.16     Shortage of Manpower in Pharmacovigilance Centres 
Recommendation 
3.16.1 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take up the issue of shortage of 
manpower in Pharmacovigilance Centres seriously.  The Committee is not convinced with the 
fact that Programme Assistants are recruited in 64 centers whereas recruitment of D ata Entry 
Operator is not supported as the Programme is just initiated and no such quantum of work is 
expected in the initial phase of the Programme.   The Committee is of the view that with the 
growing popularity and acceptability of AYUSH drugs, there ar e mushrooming of Ayush drugs 
manufacturers.  In such a scenario, quality control of AYUSH drugs can be ensured and 
regulated under Pharmacovigilance Scheme which regulates the misleading advertisements and 
claims, adverse drug events, etc.  The Committee, accordingly, strongly recommends to the 
Ministry to lay stress on having adequate manpower at these centers so that the objectives of the 
new scheme namely AOGUSY are realized.  
(Para 3.86 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
3.16.2 As per the scheme guidelines of AOGUSY there is scope for two technical program 
officer and one Data entry operator (DEO) at NPVcC one Program Associate and one DEO at 
each IPVcC one Program Assistant at each PPVcC 
Further Recommendation 
3.16.3 The Committee takes into account that, as per the scheme guidelines of AOGUSY 
there is scope and requirement of two technical program officer and one Data entry 
operator (DEO) at NPVcC one Program Associate and one DEO at each IPVcC one 
Program Assistant at each PPVcC. The Committee, accordingly, recommen ds the Ministry 
to consider the proposal for adequate manpower at each Pharmacovigilance Centre to 
ensure the achievement of cherished objectives of AOGUSY. 
3.17   NABH Accreditation 
Recommendation 
3.17.1 The Committee expresses its concern that NABH accreditation is pending for three 
institutes under CCRH, CCRYN, 14 clinical institutes under CCRAS, one Institute of CCRS and 
also for other institutes like NEIAH, NEIAFMR, NISR and RAV.  The Committee has als o noted 
that RAV is located in a rented building and lack of basic hospital infrastructure. The 

61 
 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to seek appropriate funds for providing basic 
physical infrastructure for RAV so that it can initiate NABH accredi tation after having its own 
building.  The Committee, however, appreciates the efforts made by the Institutes under CCRAS 
for making efforts for NABH accreditation.  The Committee appreciates step wise time frame to 
get NABH accreditation and training programme.  The Committee, therefore, recommends to the 
Institutes to follow the step -wise timeframe and make serious endeavors for getting accredited.  
The Committee underscores the need to get accredited on i.e. to improvise the quality and 
competency of the Institute in the delivery of health services. 
(Para 3.98 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 CCRS 
3.17.2 Siddha Central Research Institute, Chennai is working for obtaining NABH. Steps are 
being taken in preparing the technical standards and complying with the structural standards. 
 NIS 
3.17.3 The Ayothidoss Pandithar Hospital  attached to Nation Institute of Siddha has been 
granted NABH Accreditation. 
 NIUM  
3.17.4 NIUM got NABH accredited for three years i.e from Jan 2021 to Jan 2024. 
 CCRH 
3.17.5 The Council has initiated NABH accreditation for its three institutes viz. 
1.    Dr. D.P.R. Central Research Institutes (H), NOIDA (Uttar Pradesh) 
2.    National Homoeopathic Research Institute for Mental Health, Kottayam (Kerala) 
3.    Regional Research Institute (H), Gudivada (Telangana) 
3.17.6 All the 03 Institutes are working to fulfil the compliances as per NABH pre -requirements. 
Documentation process is underway, sensitization programs and trainings are being conducted 
regularly and all efforts are being made to comply with  the applicable statutory requirements. To 
facilitate this process, the Council nominated 08 scientists to attend a virtual online course 
"NABH AYUSH Assessor Training Program".   The time frame for completion of NABH 
accreditation is 6 months. 
 NIH 
3.17.7 NIH hospital has been awarded the NABH accreditation for the period 24.02.2019 to 
23.02.2022. The matter of renewal of NABH accreditation is under process. 
 RAV 
3.17.8 The suggestions of the committee have been noted for compliance.  

62 
 
 NEIAH 
3.17.9 The Institute being new is still in the process of fulfilling the requisite criteria for 
applying for NABH accreditation and it will make an endeavour to get NABH soon.   
 
 NEIAFMR 
3.17.10 The Institute‟s IPD is not operational yet due to shortage of manpow er. Some more time 
would require for its operationalization after creation of posts. At this stage, the Institute is not in 
a position to apply for NABH accreditation. 
 CCRAS 
3.17.11 The Council has prepared detailed time frame for getting NABH accreditatio n for its 
Institutes involved in clinical activities including Implementation of NABH Standards in the 
institutes, Self Assessment, Observance period of actual functionalities of NABH standards, 
submission of application to QCI for NABH accreditation, pre -assessment by NABH team, 
compliance to pre -assessment report and final -assessment by the team of NABH and award of 
certificate etc. by September, 2022. 
 3.17.12 The institutes have also been strictly instructed to follow the stipulated time frame for 
getting NABH Accreditation. To achieve this, 10 training programs have also been planned for 
imparting training to all the institutes during the months of April and May 2022 starting from 
25th April, 2022.  NIH hospital has been awarded the NABH accreditation fo r the period 
24.02.2019 to 23.02.2022. 
Yoga & Naturopathy Cell 
3.17.13 The recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
Further Recommendation 
3.17.14 The Committee understands that the significance of NABH accreditation for health 
institutions as the same endorse goodwill to the quality and competency of the institute in 
the delivery of the services. In this regard, the Committee recommends Sidha Centra l 
Institute Chennai to acquire the technical and institutional standard as the same condition 
is pre-requisite to obtain NABH accreditation. The Committee observes that CCRH is also 
required to complete documentation process, sensitization programme and NA BH Ayush 
Assessor Training Programmes to obtain NABH accreditation for its three institutes. The 
Committee recommends the NEIAH, NEIAFMR, CCRAS to take requisite steps 
immediately to obtain NABH accreditation for its institutes. The Committee expresses 
concern over undue delay in grating adequate funds for construction of building and 
acquirement of other physical, technical and trained manpower to obtain NABH 
accreditation.  
 
  

63 
 
3.18   Vacant Posts in the Five Research Councils 
 
Recommendation 
  3.18.1 The number of vacant posts in the five Research Councils is a matter of concern. The 
maximum number of vacant posts is in CCRAS with 1977 sanctioned posts, only 866 posts have 
been filled up and 1111 posts are lying vacant.  The Committee strongly recommends f or 
expediting the filling up vacant posts at the earliest in all the Research Councils in order to 
promote fast paced progress in the AYUSH Systems. 
(Para 3.100 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 CCRS 
3.18.2 Out of the total no. of 287 posts, only 171 posts have been filled up and the remaining 
20 technical posts are under process for recruitment. Action has been initiated to revive the 
abolished administrative posts and also creation / up -gradation of required number of new 
posts as per the norms. 
 CCRUM 
3.18.3 The CCRUM has already started filling up the vacant posts of the Council. Some 
vacant posts of Research Officer (Unani), Research Assistant (Chemistry), Research Officer 
(Clinical Pharmacology) have already been filled. Other posts i.e. Research Officer 
(Biochemistry), Investigator, Research Assistant (Botany), Senior Production Assistant, 
Accountant (Internal Audit) etc. have already been published and scrutiny is under process. 
 CCRAS 
3.18.4 The work study of the Council was conducted during the year 2016 -17 and submitted 
its report on 31.03.2017. The IWSU has recommended to retain 472 posts of 481 lapsed 
posts. The proposal for revival of 472 posts is under consideration in consultation with 
Ministry of Finance.  On receipt of approval of revival proposal,  the action for filling up the 
revived posts shall be taken. The Council is taking action to fill up the live vacant posts and 
the process is expected to be completed during the current financial year.   
 CCRH 
3.18.5 The Council is in the process of filling up the posts which are lying vacant in various 
cadres. Recently the Council has advertised for filling up the posts in administration section.  
Post Sanctioned Filled Vacant 
Group A 148 101 27 
Group B 98 62 36 
Group C 112 60 52 
Group D* 122 48 74 
Total 460 271 189 
            *Filled on contract basis presently 
 

64 
 
3.18.6 The Council is in process of filling up the vacant posts. The status is as follows:- 
Group A –  
- 03 posts of Assistant Director (Homoeopathy)- under process 
- 23 posts of Research Officers (Homoeopathy) - Applications invited, SOP being developed 
for conducting exam   
- Assistant director(Admin)- Interview for selection to be held on 2/5/2022. 
Group B -  ARO (Pharmacognosy) - 01; stenographer grade II - 01, lab technician -22; JAO, 
assistant, senior technical assistant, 07 staff nurse  is in the process of recruitment. 
Group C: -  
Post of 26 LDC advertised and is the process of selection being done by CCRA S. Lab assistant- 
01, pharmacist-03, junior steno- 01 is in the process of recruitment. 
Yoga & Naturopathy Cell 
3.18.7  The Ministry has been requesting CCRYN to fill up the vacant posts at the earliest. 
Further Recommendation 
3.18.8 The Committee is not happy to note that still  numerous posts in 5 Ayush council 
stands vacant. In CCRAS, out of total sanctioned strength of 287 posts a total of 116 posts 
are vacant while in CCRH out of sanctioned 460 posts the number of vacant posts stands to 
be 189. In CCRA S the proposal for revival of 472 posts hangs fire pending under 
consideration of the Government. A number of posts are vacant in CCRUM and the 
Ministry has directed CCRYN to fill up the vacant posts. The Committee, therefore, urges 
the Ministry to closely monitor the recruitment process in Ayush 5 research councils.  
3.19    Research Management Information System (RMIS) 
Recommendation 
3.19.1 The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by CCRAS in maintaining a customized 
Clinical Trials Registry -India and Research Management Information System (RMIS) portal.  
The Committee takes into account the guidelines made by the Council for Clinical evaluation of 
Ayurvedic intervention, Drug development Safety/toxicity evaluation of Ayurvedic formulations a 
robust mechanism to ensure quality, safety and efficacy. The Committee recommends that the 
mechanism of CTMS must be adopted by the Research counc ils for better management of 
research projects entailing all details. It also believes that the mechanism can be further 
customized for Indian Systems of medicines which can promote objectivity, transparency and 
sharing of R& D outcomes. 
(Para 3.103 ibid) 
Action Taken  
 CCRAS 
3.19.2 The Clinical Trial Management System (CTMS) is an inbuilt mechanism existing within 
CCRAS research policy in order to ensure quality/safety/efficacy. The Council has developed 

65 
 
and published guidelines for (i) Drug Development, (ii) Safety Evaluation and (iii) Clinical 
Research separately and also adopts the Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines for ASU drugs 
published by Ministry of AYUSH along with other  prevalent guidelines such as ICMR-National 
ethical guidelines for Biomedical & Health Research involving Human Participants and 
guidelines issued by WHO etc. 
3.19.3 The clinical studies/ trial are monitored and evaluated by various internal committees as 
well as scientific committees such as Internal Scrutiny Committee (ISC), Project Evaluation and 
Monitoring Committee (PEMC), Scientific Advisory Groups (SAG), Scientific Advisory Board 
(SAB) of the council from time to time.  
The adoption of above said guidelines including the guidelines developed by the council 
contributes to robustness, transparency and quality research outcome. Further customized data 
set on Ayurveda of CTRI also adds value to this proposition. 
 CCRH 
3.19.4 The Council noted the recommendation of the committee  for registration of all clinical 
trials to promote objectivity, transparency and sharing of R& D outcomes, however all the drug 
and clinical research trials are being registered on Clinical Trial Registry of India. 
 CCRS 
3.19.5 Clinical Trial Management System (CTMS) will be implemented. 
 CCRUM 
3.19.6 The CCRUM took note on the recommendation of the PSC. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.19.7 The Committee appreciates that CCRAS and CCRH have adopted the CTMS for 
better management of research projects. The Committee, however, desires that CCRS and 
CCRUM should also adhere to CTMS to promote objectivity, transparency and sharing of 
R&D outcomes. Other research councils should also follow the suit of CCRAS in regard to 
drug development, safety evaluation, clinical research, besides adopting to the good clinical 
practices (GCP).   
3.20    Grand Vision of the Ministry 
Recommendation 
3.20.1 The Committee is of the view that the grand vision of the Ministry entailing important 
strategic areas to be worked upon in the next twenty -five years and the growing popularity of 
AYUSH systems amidst pandemic times do not reflect in the assessment of its fun d requirements. 
The Committee believes that without adequate funds, all the envisioned areas would remain only 
on paper with cosmetic changes.  The era of AYUSH Revolution (2022 -47) would only be 
realized and be successful if there is substantial enhanceme nt of funds for the Ministry and the 
action starts from this year itself. 
(Para 4.3 ibid) 
 

66 
 
Action Taken   
3.20.2 The necessary budgetary projections are being done as per the milestones identified. in the 
vision documents. The  budgetary allocation of the Ministry of Ayush has been increased to Rs. 
3050 Crore for 2022 -23.  Ministry of Ayush will take the necessary steps for achieving the 
objectives as envisioned for next 25 years. Timeline for the strat egic areas of research, education 
and capacity building, healthcare, manufacturing and services will be followed while projecting 
the budget requirements. 
Further Recommendation 
3.20.3 Keeping in view the short term, medium term and the long term course of  action 
pertaining to vision @ 2047 of the Ministry of Ayush, especially SGoS4 and SGoS8, the 
Committee considers urgent need of quantum increase in the Budgetary Allocation of the 
Ministry for overhauling the strategic areas of research, education and cap acity building, 
healthcare manufacturing and services. The Committee, therefore, recommends for 
realistic assessment of budgetary requirement of the Ministry and urges the Ministry of 
Ayush to approach the Ministry of Finance for obtaining the budgetary gr ant as per the 
requirement.  
3.21   Swearing in Process by Doctors 
Recommendation  
3.21.1 The Committee‟s attention is drawn to an issue relating to the swearing in process by 
doctors wherein there is confusion whether the AYUSH doctors would take the Hippocratic Oath 
or the Charak Oath. The Committee is of the firm view that such confusion should be removed at 
the earliest and the Ministry should take it up with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to 
resolve the issue. 
(Para 4.31 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 CCRS 
3.21.2 As far as Siddha system of Medicine is concerned, the oath prescribed by Siddhars will be 
taken by Siddha doctors to avoid confusion. 
 NIS 
3.21.3 Presently the system of taking Hippocratic Oath is being followed by BSMS and MD 
(Siddha) students while their degrees are awarded. 
IC Section 
3.21.4 Ministry through its concern section may take up the matter with MoHFW.  It is proposed 
that Aysuh doctors may take the Charak Oath.  
 
 

67 
 
 NIH 
3.21.5 The principles concerning the Homoeopathic subjects are mainly related to Modern 
System of Medicine. But Homoeopathy is a part of Ministry of Ayush so Hippocratic Oath is 
being taken. Suggestion of the Committee has been noted and necessary step shall be taken in 
consultation with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to resolve the issue. 
Further Recommendation 
3.21.6 The Committee is not happy with the response of the Ministry in regard to the 
suggestion of the Committee for taking up the matter to the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare to resolve the burning question relating to the swearing in process by doctors 
wherein there is confusion whether the AYUSH doctors would take the Hippocratic Oath 
or the Charak Oath. The Committee finds that the Ministry is retorting that suggestion of 
the Committee has been noted and necessary step shall be taken in consultation wit h the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to resolve the issue. The Committee, therefore, 
believes that the Ministry of Ayush in tandem with the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare would remove the confusion of the Ayush medical practitioners at the earliest.  
3.22   Vacant Posts in Various Ayush Institutes 
Recommendation 
3.22.1 The Committee notes with concern the large number of vacant posts in various Ayush 
Institutes that must be hampering the efficient and effective working of Ayush Institutes thereby 
slowing down their efforts to achieve the mission objectives and set goals. The Committee, time 
and again, has been emphasizing on filling up of vacant posts and had recommended for taking 
suitable measures for the purpose. The Committee believes t hat with things returning to 
normalcy after Covid 19, all out efforts would be made by each Institutes to fill up the vacant 
posts. The Committee recommends the Ministry to lend all its support to the institute and monitor 
the filling up of vacant posts and resolve administrative hurdles, if any. 
(Para 4.34 ibid) 
Action Taken  
3.22.2 The status of  vacancies in various Ayush Institutions and regions therefore, are as under:- 
 NEIAH 
Sanctio
ned 
posts 
Filled 
up 
posts 
Vacant 
Posts 
Reason for Vacant posts 
112 55 57 
Out of 112 sanctioned posts, 55 (Group A, 
Group B and Group C) posts have been filled 
up. 
The advertisement for various vacant posts 
was published on 11.08.2019 and on 
11.01.2020.  However, the selection proves 
could not materialize.  The effects are b een 
made to fill up the post at the earliest.  

68 
 
 
 NIA 
Sanctione
d posts 
Filled 
up posts 
Vacant 
Posts Reason for Vacant posts 
330 283 47 
(i) 25 vacancies (Teaching and Non -
Teaching posts) will be filled up within 3 -4 
months as these have 
been notified on all India basis and the 
scrutiny of applications is in progress.  
(ii) Details of remaining 22 Vacant posts are 
as under:- 
Selected 
Candidate yet 
to join 
1 Assistant Professor 
Promotions to 
be made 
soon(Current 
Vacancy) 
2 L D C 
Current 
Vacancies 
after last 
Advertisement
.  These Posts 
will be 
notified soon 
and will  be 
filled in 
another 6 
Months 
8 
Nursing 
Officer 
1 
L D C 1 
M T S 6 
 
Posts 
identified for 
Promotion in 
Reserved 
Categories of 
SC and ST, 
but no eligible 
incumbents 
available and 
cannot be 
filled for the 
present 
4 
Professo
r 
2 
Associat
e 
Professo
r 
2 
 
Posts 
identified for 
Promotion, but 
no eligible 
incumbents 
available in 
4 
Adminis
tr-ative 
Officer 
1 
U D C 3 
 

69 
 
the Feeder 
Cadre and 
cannot be 
filled for the 
present 
Post kept for 
Surrender in 
lieu of 
Creation of the 
Post of Vice -
Chancellor 
1 Pathologist 
Posts not to be 
filled for the 
present 2 
Radiologi
st 
1 
Biochemis
t 
1 
 
 
 
 CCRAS 
3.22.3 The work study of the Council was conducted during the year 2016 -17 and submitted its 
report on 31.03.2017. The IWSU has recommended to retain 472 posts of 481 lapsed posts. The 
proposal for revival of 472 posts is under consideration in consultation with Ministry of Finance.  
On receipt of approval of revival proposal, the action for filling up the revived posts shall be 
taken. The Council is taking action to fill up the live vacant posts and the process is expected to 
be completed during the current financial year.   
 CCRH 
3.22.4 The Council is talking all efforts to fill the vacant posts at the earliest. The detail already 
furnished at para no. 3.10. 
 NIH 
3.22.5  Efforts have been taken to fill up the existing vacancies against sanctioned post at NIH, 
Kolkata at the earliest. 
 CCRS 
3.22.6 Out of the total no. of 287 posts, only 171 posts have been filled up and the remaining 20 
technical posts are under process for recruit ment. Action has been initiated to revive the 
abolished administrative posts and also creation / up -gradation of required number of new posts 
as per the norms. 
 NIS 
3.22.7 National Institute of Siddha has issued Advertisement to fill up the vacant posts of 4 
Assistant Professors and 3 Professors recently.  
 CCRUM 
3.22.8 The CCRUM took note on the recommendation of the PSC. 

70 
 
 NIUM 
3.22.9 All vacant posts are already advertised. Recruitment is under process. The National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine ( NCISM) Act, 2020 came into force with effective 
from 11th June, 2021 to regulate the education and practice of Indian System of Medicine.  
Similarly, the National Commission for Homoeopathy (NCH) Act, 2020 came into force with 
effective from 5th July, 2021 to regulate the education and practice of Homoeopathy. 
3.22.10 Rights of person to practice Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy have been 
stipulated under the section 34 of the NCISM act, 2020 and NCH, Act, 2020 respectively, 
wherein, Indian System o f Medicine (Ayurveda, Unani, Suddha and Sowa - Rigpa ) and 
Homoeopathy practitioners allowed to practice Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy 
respectively as a qualified practitioners; hold office as a physician or surgeon or any other office, 
by whatever name called, which is meant to be held by a physician or surgeon, as the case may 
be; be entitled to sign or authenticated a medical of fitness certificate or any other certificate 
required by law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified medic al practitioners.  
However, section 34 (3) (b) of NCISM Act, 2020, stipulates as under: “ (b) the privileges, 
including the right to practice any system of medicine, conferred by or under any law for the 
time being in force in a State on the practitioners of Indian System of Medicine enrolled in the 
State register of that State; 
Yoga & Naturopathy Cell 
3.22.11 Ministry has been requesting MDNIY & NIN to fill up the vacant posts at the earliest. 
Further Recommendation 
3.22.12 The prevalence of large number of vacant posts in various Ayush Institutes viz. 57 
in NEIAH, 47 in NIA, revival of 470 posts in CCRAS, 189 posts in CCRH, 7 posts in NIS 
and likewise vacancy in other Ayush institutes are matter of concern to the Committee. The 
Committee feels that had the Ministry lend its support to the institute and monitored the 
recruitment process in various Ayush Institutes for filling up the vacant posts, there would 
have not been so much procrastination in filling up the vacant posts.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to coordinate with the Ayush Institutes and resolve the 
administrative stumbling block or whatever challenges come across over the recruitment 
process.  
3.23   Legislation on Yoga and Naturopathy 
Recommendation 
3.23.1 The Committee agrees with the Ministry that this legislation would be a game changer in 
the regulation of Yoga and Naturopathy with the rising popularity of these systems as this is the 
need of the hour.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to make efforts for 
expediting the said legislation. 
(Para 4.36 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.23.2    Legislation to regulate the Yoga and Naturopathy is under active consideration with the 
Ministry. 

71 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.23.3 The Committee expresses its concern over undue procrastination in bringing forth 
the necessary legislation to regulate the Yoga and Naturopathy. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates its recommendation suggesting the Ministry to make concerted efforts for 
expediting the said legislation keeping in view with the fact that the said legislation would 
be a game changer in the regulation of Yoga and Naturopathy due to increasing acceptance 
and popularity of the Yoga and Naturopathy in changing the lifestyle and a s the mode of 
preventing the disease.   
 
3.24     Tap the Huge Potential of Ayush Systems 
Recommendation 
3.24.1 Since the time the Ministry of Ayush emerged as an independent Ministry, focused 
attention is being given to Ayush Systems. Efforts are being made to revive the traditional 
Indian systems of medicine with scientific vigor and tap the huge potential of Ayush sys tems. 
Given the huge disease burden in the country, Ayush Systems can offer an affordable and 
efficacious line of treatment. The growth and popularity of Ayush Systems rose tremendously 
during the pandemic Covid -19 with high demand for  immunity booster med icines and mass 
following of the guidelines and advisories issued by the Ministry to manage Covid -19. Ayush 
systems gained popularity and recognition not only in the country but abroad too. 
Importance of yoga is being recognized globally. Ayush Medical and wellness tourism is also 
growing. The Ministry, therefore, strive towards accelerated growth of the Ayush systems by 
strengthening its regulatory system, infrastructure, enhanced budgetary investment, ensuring 
the accessibility of Ayush services in un -served and far flung rural, urban slum and tribal 
areas etc. The need of the hour is strategic long term planning and enhanced investment for 
Ayush sector. 
(Para 4.39 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.24.2 To tap the huge potential in the Ayush systems, focus is being given on strategic 
planning. The strategic areas of  research, education and capacity building, healthcare, 
manufacturing and services and technology based solutions are being strengthened. It has got 
definite impact on disease burden reduction. During the recent years, people across the globe 
have witnessed the impact of Ayush systems in maintaining healthy life and reducing disease 
burden.  
3.24.3 The Ministry is strengthening its regulatory framework while ensuring ease of doing 
business. A new section „H eal in India and Heal by India‟ has been formed to tap the 
potential in wellness tourism. The necessary budgetary projections are being done as per the 
milestones identified. in the vision documents. The  budgetary allocation of the Ministry of 
Ayush has been increased to Rs. 3050 Crore for 2022-23. 
3.24.4 Ministry of Ayush successfully conducted three days GAIIS at Gandhinagar, Gujarat 
from 20 -22nd April 2022 which was inaugurated by Honorable Prime Minister Shri Narendra 
Modi. The Global Ayush Investment and Innovation Summit concluded on a high note, with 

72 
 
Ayush sector witnessing letter of intents (LoIs) over Rs. 9,000 crore in only three days. The  
investments come across major categories like FMCG, Medical Value Travel (MVT) and 
services, pharmaceuticals, technology & diagnostics, and farmers & agriculture. During the 
summit, more than 70 memorandum of understanding (MoUs) were signed between Count ries, 
prestigious research institutes, the farmer groups and industry. The Summit wrapped up with a 
total of five plenary sessions, eight roundtables, six workshops, and two symposiums, all packed 
into a short time span of three days. The summit witnessed the presence of 90 eminent speakers 
and 100 exhibitors. 
Further Recommendation 
3.24.5 The Committee appreciates 3 days GAIIS at Gandhinagar, Gujarat - Global Ayush 
Investment and Innovation Summit, from 20 -22 April, 2022, that collected Letter of 
Interest (LoI) over 9000 crore, 70 MoUs signed between countries, research institutes, 
farmer groups and industry. The Committee recommends that investment and MoUs so 
gathered must be optimally and opportunistically utilized in reviving the traditional Indian 
medicine and popularizing the same amongst countrymen as well as foreign health tourists. 
Besides, the enhanced budgetary grant, the Government should organize such Ayush 
Global Summit more frequently for inviting heavy investment in Ayush Sector for its 
assured promotion and propagation on the basis of rendering quality healthcare services. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

73 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
4.1    Champion Sector Scheme 
Recommendation 
4.1.1 The Committee notes that the allocation of Rs. 60.22 crore in the year 2022 -23 for 
Champion Sector Scheme is only for meeting the committed liabilities of the proposals received 
till March, 2022 as well as to meet the salaries of the Program Manageme nt Unit staff. The 
Committee believes that the components of this scheme are of vital importance and should be 
continued for tapping the potential of Ayush Systems. Special focus needs to be laid on the 
establishment of Ayush Super Specialty Hospitals/Day Care Centres and make efforts to attract 
investors in this arena. 
(Para 2.20 ibid) 
Action Taken 
Ayush Development Section 
4.1.2 The Ministry of Ayush has initiated the process of   continuation of scheme beyond March 
2022. 
4.2  Viable and Complete Proposals from Investors and Stakeholders 
Recommendation 
4.2.1 The Committee understands that pandemic Covid -19 has hindered the progress of the 
scheme at desirable pace. However, with the situation returning to normalcy, the Ministry must 
make efforts to invite better response in terms of viable and complete proposals from investors 
and stakeholders. Out of RE budget of Rs. 29.63 crore in 2021 -22, expenditure incurred is Rs. 
24.76 crore, with maximum expenditure incurred on Establishment of Ayush Grid (Rs.14.24 
crore) followed by Skill Development (Rs10.36crore) and Rs. 0.16 crore on Establishment of 
Ayush Super Specialty Hospitals/Day Care Centres. The Committee, accordingly, believes that 
there is immense scope for utilization of funds and the Ministry must dema nd additional funds at 
the RE stage after receiving the necessary approvals for continuation of the scheme and pursue 
the objectives of the scheme in the right earnest. 
(Para 2.21 ibid) 
Action Taken 
Ayush Development Section 
4.2.2 An amount of Rs.60.22 Cr. has been allocated under Champion Services Sector Scheme for 
Establishment of Ayush Super Specialty Hospitals/ Day Care    Centers for committed liabilities 
during Financial Year 2022 -23. Ministry of Ayush has initiated the process of   continuation of 
scheme beyond March 2022. If approval of continuation of the scheme is granted appropriate 
requirement of funds will be placed at RE stage. 
 

74 
 
4.3  Time Bound Operationalisation of HWCs 
Recommendation 
4.3.1 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry for time bound 
operationalisation of HWCs. Close monitoring on monthly and quarterly basis along with field 
visits to different States/UTs will certainly help in addressing the areas of concern at the 
ground level. The Committee would like to emphasize that the target of the Ministry to 
operationalize 12,500 Ayush HWCs by 2023 -24 would only be achieved if time schedule is 
followed strictly along with provision of adequate funds. 
(Para 3.27 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
NAM Section 
 
4.3.2 The Ministry has approved 7,553 Ayush HWCs and thus achieved the target for the year 
2021-22. Further the Ministry is making continuous effort to achieve the target of 
operationalization of 12,500 Ayush HWC in time bound manner by 2023-24. 
 
4.4  Ayush Systems' Holistic Approach 
Recommendation 
4.4.1 The Committee agrees with Ministry's view that Ayush systems' holistic approach, 
strength in disease prevention, management of non -communicable diseases, socio -cultural 
acceptability, evidence base, availability of talented human resource and national priorities 
has brought the traditional systems to the forefront. The Committee lauds Ministry of Ayush for 
planning to establish i ntegrated AYUSH hospitals with inpatient fa cilities at every district of 
the country to provide the population with an option of availing referral services in AYUSH 
systems of medicine. 
(Para 4.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
NAM Section 
4.4.2 Under NAM, there is provision of financial assistance for setting up of up to 50 /30 /10 
bedded integrated AYUSH Hospitals. States/UTs may avail financial assistance by submitting 
proposals through State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs) as per NAM guidelines. Under NAM, till 
date 108 integrated AYUSH hospitals have be en supported to States/UTs as per the proposals 
received from them. Further, State/UT Governments will be supported for establishment of 
integrated AYUSH hospitals as per provision of NAM guidelines. 
4.5  National Ayush Mission (NAM) 
Recommendation 
4.5.1 The Committee has been given to understand that National Ayush Mission (NAM) is a 
centrally sponsored scheme where Center and States have fund share like 60% and 40%. Some 

75 
 
States/ UTs express their inability to contribute their share. Further, the financia l flow from 
State treasuries to State implementing agencies under Centrally Sponsored Scheme of NAM is 
considerably delayed affecting time bound implementation of the envisaged activities under the 
mission. The Ministry is facing huge financial crunch in t ranslating schematic provisions into 
actions. Due to the resource crunch, the Mission is not effective in achieving goals. Under the 
NAM, infrastructure upgradation such as building of integrated AYUSH hospitals, Drug testing 
Laboratories, State AYUSH Pharmacies has been taken place to limited extent but they are not 
fully functional due to unavailability of funds for deploying adequate manpower. However, 
considering that the Ministry is facing huge financial crunch in translating envisaged 
provisions into actions, the Committee is apprehensive that the funds constraints would pose 
big hurdles in realizing set goals of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, believes that 
enhanced budgetary allocation is the need of the hour to properly implement the various  
schemes. 
(Para 4.6 ibd) 
Action Taken   
NAM Section 
4.5.2 Union Cabinet has approved continuation of National AYUSH Mission from 2021 -22 to 
2025-26 with escalation in cost norm of some activities and added some new activities. 
Therefore, in order to accommodate the cost escalation and implement new activities of NAM, 
sufficient budgetary allocation may be provided for effective and smooth implementation of the 
scheme. Further, in order to achieve the target of operationalization of AYUSH HWCs in time 
bound manner, sufficient budget may be also provided to NAM scheme, so that AYUSH related 
health facilities may be accessed by the large population in the country. 
 
4.6  Government’s Focus on Holistic Health & Well 
Recommendation 
4.6.1 The Committee believes that in the recent past there is a positive trend in the people at 
large for keeping themselves fit to ward off diseases.  The government‟s focus on holistic health 
& well being is also contributing greatly towards fit India programm e. The Committee, 
therefore, feels that the Ministry should focus more on preventing diseases by promoting Yoga & 
bringing about life style changes & change in food habits of the people.  The Committee 
recommends that besides treatment, the patients at wel lness centers should compulsorily be 
advised to follow a specific food habit and life style to cure his disease.   
(Para 4.37 ibid) 
Action Taken 
Yoga & Naturopathy Cell 
4.6.2 MDNIY, an autonomous body under Ministry of Ayush conducts various Yoga education, 
training and certificate programmes which brings lifestyle changes in people‟s lives. The details 
of the programmes are available at yogamdniy.nic.in. 

76 
 
4.7  Music Therapy for Treatment 
Recommendation 
4.7.1 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should emphasize on stress related 
diseases and explore the possibility of including music therapy for treatment alongwith 
medications at AYUSH Centres.  
(Para 4.38 ibid) 
Action Taken 
NIN, Pune and MDNIY 
          4.7.2 The suggestion of the Committee is noted. Possibilities will be explored in this direction. 
  

77 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS- AT A GLANCE 
 
KEY INITIATIVES   
 The Committee hopes that the Programme on Ayurveda Biology Integrated Health 
Research would get the 'in principle' approval from the Ministry of Finance, the sooner the 
better. The Committee would like to be apprised of the objective, scope, financial outl ay 
sanctions and timeframe of the said programme. As regards the Central Sector for 
promotion of International Co -operation (IC -Scheme), the Committee seeks to know the 
physical achievement against the set target in the field of International Promotion, 
development & recognition of Ayurveda, Yoga, Naturallopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowarigpa 
and homeopathy. The Ministry may also acquaint the Committee with physical outcome of 
other components of IC Scheme against the set target during the last three years.   
(Para 3.1.9) 
 
MACRO ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 The Ministry may furnish the Committee the list of ongoing construction projects 
during 2021 -22, estimated cost with timeframe of completion. The Committee aspires to 
know how much the amount out of projected demand to the tune of Rs. 5435.55 Cr. was to 
be appropriated on various ongoing construction projects and how much amount out of BE 
actual allocation in the year 2021 -22 was actually appropriated for completion of ongoing 
construction projects. The Committee seeks to be informed by the Ministry about t he 
reasons for delayed approval of Pradhan Mantri Vriksh Ayush Yojna and programme on 
Ayurveda - Integrated Health Research and the implementation status of the scheme so far. 
The Committee takes into account that Champion Service Sector Scheme for medical  value 
Travel launched by the Ministry of Ayush in 2019 under Central Sector Scheme suffered 
the 'Execution Setback' due to Outbreak of Pandemic Covid -19. However, the Committee 
wants to be apprised of steps taken by the Ministry to incentivize the desired response from 
private investor to give a flip to the kick start the implementation of the scheme in the post 
pandemic covid -19 phase. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to make 
concerted efforts to promote the Ayush based Medical Value Travel b y providing Ayush 
Medical and Health Services to foreigners on mass level and thus popularizing the scheme 
among the foreigners. At the same time the Committee wills to know the fate of 
continuation of the scheme beyond March, 2022. The Committee further h opes that the 
Ministry could promote the 'Skill Training Programme' to the logical conclusion through 
endowing new direction and dimension to the Programme in order to achieve its set 
objectives.  
(Para 3.2.6)   
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA 
The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure over procedural delay in 
approval of PM -VAY. Keeping in view, snail pace of approval, the Committee apprehend 
its execution aspects and its success. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry 

78 
 
for obtaining approval of PM -VAY by the competent authority without further delay so 
that the said yojna can see the light of the day.  
(Para 3.3.4) 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Against the estimation of Ministry of Ayush the Committee does not find 
considerable increase in release of grants i.e. Rs. 50.56 Crore, Rs. 47.58 Crore and Rs. 
44.765 Crore during 2020 -21, 2021-22 and 2022 -23, respectively, to CCRS to achieve the 
short term and long term goals as envisaged in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 
and Na tional Health Policy 2017. The Committee understands that there would be 
quantum jump in recurring and non -recurring expenditure once the institutes gets status 
of 'Deemed to be University' and permission to start UG Course, PF, PG -Diploma is 
granted to the Institute. The Committee, therefore, recommends that pending application 
for grants of demand to be university is granted to CCRS without delay and adequate 
budgetary grant should be allocated CCRS to meet the recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure. The Committee further desires to know the physical achievement in regard 
to strengthening of infrastructure facilities research and outreach activities as done by 
CCRUM to prepare the Unani System of Medicine as economical and alternative system 
of medicine.  
(Para 3.4.14) 
The Committee further desires to be informed about the outcome of steps taken in 
regard to Ayush Public Health Programme under NAM during last two years viz. 
Integration of Ayush with NPCDCS,  VAYO Mitra, Ayush Geriatric Services, morbidity 
management and disability prevention. The Ministry may also furnish the details of 
objective of establishment of Ayush Grid, its intended institutional structure and proposed 
functions.  
(Para 3.4.15) 
MERGER OF ERSTWHILE SCHEMES IN NEW SCHEMES 
The Committee appreciates that the Ministry, subsequent to the completion of the 
procedural formalities, has finalized the components of 'AYURGYAN' & 
'AYURSWASTHA' Yojna. The Committee, however, desires that the new scheme 
guidelines are formulated without  further delay so that the actual 
operationalization/execution of the scheme takes place on the ground level and the said 
targets of the scheme are achieved within stipulated timeframe. The Committee hopes that 
the Ministry may inform about the operational ization and outcome of execution of 
AOUGSY. The Committee further feels that the Ministry should approach the Cabinet 
Secretariat urging that the Cabinet Note on PM -VAY stands withdrawn and a fresh 
Cabinet Note is required to be placed to give a flying start to the PM-VAY.   
(Para 3.5.5) 
 
SCHEMES OF THE MINISTRY 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to furnish details of appropriation of 
amount out of earmarked fund to the tune of Rs. 800.00 cr. in BE 2022 -23 to National 

79 
 
Ayush Mission and achievement thereo f against the set physical target vis-à-vis each 
component of the Mission. The Committee hopes that judicious and optimal utilization of 
funds would yield desired result of the scheme on the ground level.   
(Para 3.6.6) 
The Committee takes into account the  fact that State/UT Governments have 
demanded more fund to strengthen the AYUSH health facilities, therefore, more funds 
are required for better access to AYUSH Services through increase in number of AYUSH 
Hospitals and Dispensaries, AYUSH HWCs and impleme ntation of different AYUSH 
Public Health Programmes. The Committee, accordingly recommends the Ministry to 
approach the Ministry of Finance to earmark the requisite fund to the scheme for its 
successful implementation. 
(Para 3.6.7) 
AYUSH CO-LOCATED FACILITIES 
 The Committee believes that Ayush co -located facilities at all three levels of 
healthcare viz. Public Health Centre (PHC), Community Health Centres (CHC) and 
District Hospitals  (DHs) in all States/UTs is essential for popularizing and propagating 
Ayush System as viable alternative system of medicine among common masses. Being 
economical and effective the Central Government should incentivize and encourage 
State/UTs Government to give flip to the Ayush co -location facilities having adequ ate 
technical facilities and human resources. The Ministry may emphasis on even distribution 
of Ayush location facilities in all States/UTs. 
(Para 3.7.3) 
OPERATIONALIZATION OF AYUSH HWCS 
 The Committee is of the considered view that the operationalization of Ayush 
Health and Wellness Centers (HWCs) would definitely accelerate in post pandemic covid -
19 phase as the situation arising of pandemic is gradually moving towards normalcy. The 
Ministry has already granted Rs. 230.66 cr. in third quarter of the year 2021-22 for 
upgradation of 3048 health facilities in 27 States/UTs. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to monitor the completion of operationalization of Ayush HWCs within stipulated 
timeframe. 
 
(Para 3.8.5) 
PRADHAN MANTRI VRIKSH AYUSH YOJANA 
 
  The Committee stipulates that ones the PM -VAY is finalized, approved and 
implemented and the network of the 'Aushdhi Dhams' is evenly expanded across the 
country there would be increase in cultivation of medical plants. The Committee believes 
that the Cou ntry would become a hotspot for 'Medical Tourism' for foreigners willing to 
have treatment through Ayush System.   
(Para 3.9.3) 
 

80 
 
CREATION OF 24 POSTS FOR NMPB 
 
 The Committee expects the Ministry to furnish the details regarding the duration 
since when the  proposal of creation of 24 posts for NNPB is pending in E -Coord.-I of 
Department of Expenditure. The Ministry may again approach the Department of 
Expenditure to obtain green signal to the proposal. The Ministry may apprise to the 
Committee that response of the Department of Expenditure in the matter. 
(Para 3.10.4) 
 
 
INDIA AS EXPORTER OF MEDICINAL PLANTS, HERBS, SPICES 
 
 The Committee wants the Ministry of Ayush to proactively execute the scheme for 
encouraging export of herbal medicines and spices to usher Global Ayush Revolution led 
by India. The Committee reiterates its recommendation to the Ministry to examine an 
experiment with Odisha Model of livelihood assessment called Baithrani as an intervention 
for enhancing the production of high quality herbal raw material and enhancing the profit 
making herbal growers.  
(Para 3.11.4) 
CULTIVATING MEDICINAL PLANTS 
 The Committee understands that PM -VAY, that aims to promote cultivation of 
medical plants, post harvest management and marketing support, need to be approved and 
effectively implemented without further procrastination. The Committee believes that it 
would be appropriate for the Ministry and more specifically the NMPB to work in tandem 
with farmers and Ayush industry to encourage cultivation of medical plants. In the 
estimation of the Committee, the provision of financial assistance to the farmers to 
encourage farming/cultivation of medical plants should have continued under the centrally 
sponsored scheme. 
(Para 3.12.4) 
QUALITY CONTROL OF AYUSH DRUGS 
The Committee is of the firm view that assured quality control of AYUSH drugs is 
vital for global recognition  and acceptance of AYUSH system of medicine. The Committee 
is however, constrained to express its displeasure over dilly dallying approach of the 
Ministry in taking final and firm decision on strengthening of its regulatory framework i.e. 
adequate staffing of CDSCO. The Committee advises the Ministry that ad -hoc and interim 
arrangement would not be capable of strengthening the Ayush regulatory mechanism, 
therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to fill up 9 vacant posts in CDSCO, 05 
regulatory posts  including one post of Deputy Drugs Controller, four posts of Assistant 
Drugs Controllers (one each for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs) 
without further delay so that the quality of the Ayush drugs is assured. 
(Para 3.13.4) 
 

81 
 
AYUSH VERTICAL CDSCO 
 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation to the Ministry to expedite the 
recruitment process to fill up 09 Posts in CDSCO on regular basis to complete institutional 
Ayush Vertical CDSCO so that Central Drugs Controller for Ayush can play pivotal role. 
(Para 3.14.3) 
PHARMACOVIGILANCE CENTRE 
 
The Committee recommends that the network of Pharmacovigilance centre should 
be evenly distributed across the country, of course, keeping in view the population and 
number of the Ayush drugs manufacturers and number of misleading claims and 
advertisement. The Committee believes that such consideration and adherence to the 
measure would definitely assure the quality control of Ayush drugs.  
(Para 3.15.3) 
SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER IN PHARMACOVIGILANCE CENTRES 
  The Committee takes into account that, as per the scheme guidelines of AOGUSY 
there is scope and requirement of two technical program officer and one Data entry 
operator (DEO) at NPVcC one Program Associate and one DEO at each IPVcC one 
Program Assistant at each PPVcC. The Committee, accordingl y, recommends the Ministry 
to consider the proposal for adequate manpower at each Pharmacovigilance Centre to 
ensure the achievement of cherished objectives of AOGUSY. 
(Para 3.16.3) 
NABH ACCREDITATION 
The Committee understands that the significance of NABH  accreditation for health 
institutions as the same endorse goodwill to the quality and competency of the institute in 
the delivery of the services. In this regard, the Committee recommends Sidha Central 
Institute Chennai to acquire the technical and instit utional standard as the same condition 
is pre-requisite to obtain NABH accreditation. The Committee observes that CCRH is also 
required to complete documentation process, sensitization programme and NABH Ayush 
Assessor Training Programmes to obtain NABH ac creditation for its three institutes. The 
Committee recommends the NEIAH, NEIAFMR, CCRAS to take requisite steps 
immediately to obtain NABH accreditation for its institutes. The Committee expresses 
concern over undue delay in grating adequate funds for con struction of building and 
acquirement of other physical, technical and trained manpower to obtain NABH 
accreditation.  
(Para 3.17.14) 
 
 
VACANT POSTS IN THE FIVE RESEARCH COUNCILS 
 
 The Committee is not ignorant of outcry of unemployed youth in the country on the 
one hand but unfortunately on the other hand the Committee finds it ironical that 
numerous posts in 5 Ayush council stands vacant. In CCRAS, out of total sanctioned 

82 
 
strength of 287 posts a total of 116 posts are vacant while in CCRH out of sanctioned 460 
posts the number of vacant posts stands to be 189. In CCRAS the proposal for revival of 
472 posts hangs fire pending under consideration of the Government. A number of posts 
are vacant in CCRUM and the Ministry has directed CCRYN to fill up the vacant posts. 
The Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry to closely monitor the recruitment process in 
Ayush 5 research councils.  
(Para 3.18.8) 
RESEARCH MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM (RMIS) 
The Committee appreciates that CCRAS and CCRH have adopted the CTMS for 
better management of research projects. The Committee, however, desires that CCRS and 
CCRUM should also adhere to CTMS to promote objectivity, transparency and sharing of 
R&D outcomes. Other research councils should also follow the suit of CCRAS in regard to 
drug development, safety evaluation, clinical research, besides adopting to the good clinical 
practices (GCP).   
(Para 3.19.7) 
GRAND VISION OF THE MINISTRY 
Keeping in view the short term, medium term and the long term course of action 
pertaining to vision @ 2047 of the Ministry of Ayush, especially SGoS4 and SGoS8, the 
Committee considers urgent need of quantum increase in the Budgetary Allocation of the 
Ministry for overhauling the strategic areas of research, education and capacity building, 
healthcare manufacturing and services. The Committee, therefore, recommends for 
realistic assessment of budgetary requirement of the Ministry and urges the Ministry of 
Ayush to approach the Ministry of Finance for obtaining the budgetary grant as per the 
requirement.  
         (Para 3.20.3) 
 
SWEARING IN PROCESS BY DOCTORS 
The Committee is not happy with the response of the Ministry in regard to the 
suggestion of the Committee for taking up the matter to the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare to resolve the burning question relating to the swearing in process by doctors 
wherein there is confusion whether the AYUSH doctors would take the Hippocratic Oath 
or the Charak Oat h. The Committee finds that the Ministry is retorting that suggestion of 
the Committee has been noted and necessary step shall be taken in consultation with the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to resolve the issue. The Committee, therefore, 
believes th at the Ministry of Ayush in tandem with the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare would remove the confusion of the Ayush medical practitioners at the earliest.  
(Para 3.21.6) 
 
 

83 
 
VACANT POSTS IN VARIOUS AYUSH INSTITUTES 
 The prevalence of large number of vacant posts in various Ayush Institutes viz. 57 in 
NEIAH, 47 in NIA, revival of 470 posts in CCRAS, 189 posts in CCRH, 7 posts in NIS and 
likewise vacancy in other Ayush institutes are matter of concern to the Committee. The 
Committee feels that had the Ministry lend its support to the institute and monitored the 
recruitment process in various Ayush Institutes for filling up the vacant posts, there would 
have not been so much procrastination in filling up the vacant posts.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to coordinate with the Ayush Institutes and resolve the 
administrative stumbling block or whatever challenges come across over the recruitment 
process.  
(Para 3.22.12) 
LEGISLATION ON YOGA AND NATUROPATHY 
 The Committee expresses its concern over undue procrastination in bringing forth the 
necessary legislation to regulate the Yoga and Naturopathy. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates its recommendation suggesting the Ministry to make concerted efforts for 
expediting the said legislation keeping in view with the fact that the said legislation would 
be a game changer in the regulation of Yoga and Naturopathy due to increasing acceptance 
and popularity of the Yoga and Naturopathy in changing the lifestyle and a s the mode of 
preventing the disease.   
(Para 3.23.3) 
TAP THE HUGE POTENTIAL OF AYUSH SYSTEMS 
The Committee appreciates 3 days GAIIS at Gandhinagar, Gujarat - Global Ayush 
Investment and Innovation Summit, from 20 -22 April, 2022, that collected Letter of 
Interest (LoI) over 9000 crore, 70 MoUs signed between countries, research institutes, 
farmer groups and industry. The Committee recommends that investment and MoUs so 
gathered must be optimally and opportunistically utilized in reviving the traditional Ind ian 
medicine and popularizing the same amongst countrymen as well as foreign health tourists. 
Besides, the enhanced budgetary grant, the Government should organize such Ayush 
Global Summit more frequently for inviting heavy investment in Ayush Sector for i ts 
assured promotion and propagation on the basis of rendering quality healthcare services. 
(Para 3.24.5) 
  

84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
  

85 
 
 
 
XVI 
 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 12.00 Noon on Thursday, the 8th September, 2022 in 
Committee Room-A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shri A.D. Singh 
5. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
7. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
8. Shri Arjun Lal Meena 
9. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
10. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
11. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
12. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
13. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director  
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
4. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Harshita Shankar                  Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed that the meeting has been  convened to consider and adopt four draft 

86 
 
Reports namely *** Draft 142nd  Report  on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 136th Report on Demands for 
Grants 2022-23 (Demand No. 4) of the Ministry of Ayush.  
3.1 ***  
3.2 ***  
3.3 *** 
3.4 Finally, the Committee considered the draft 142 nd Report which comprised 
of 23 observations/recommendations and was adopted without any modification by 
the Committee.  
4. ***  
5. ***  
5.1 ***   
5.2 ***  
5.3 *** 
6. ***  
6.1 ***  
 6.2  *** 
6.3 ***  
7. ***   
8. The Committee then adjourned at 12.52 p.m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter 
 
 
  

87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
  

88 
 
Annexure – I 
THE STATUS OF MANPOWER AND RESOURCES IN STATE MEDICINAL PLANTS 
BOARDS 
S. 
No. State/UT Name of 
SMPB Manpower 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
A.P. Medicinal 
and Aromatic 
Plants Board 
Andhra 
Pradesh  
On Deputation basis 
1. Chief Executive Officer  
(Commissioner Ayush holding Additional charge) 
2. Deputy Executive Officer  
3. Forest Range Officer  
4. Horticulture Officer 
On Outsourcing basis 
5. Accountant   
6. Senior Assistant  
7. Data Entry Operator  
8. Office Subordinate  
2 Arunancha
l Pradesh 
Arunachal 
Pradesh State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board                                                                                   
1. Chief Executive Officer  
(Additional Charge)  
 
Deputed on diverted capacity from SRFI 
2. RO (Scientist - B)  
3. RA (R&D)  
Deputed on diverted capacity from Wildlife Division 
4. OA cum Accountant  
 
3 Assam State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board, 
Assam 
1. Member Secretary 
(Chief Conservator of Forests holding Additional Charge) 
4 Bihar State AYUSH 
Society, Bihar 
1. Chief Forest Officer-cum-Chief Executive Officer  
(Additional Charge) 
5 Gujarat Gujarat 
Medicinal 
Plants Board– 
Gujarat 
Incharge from AYUSH Department 
1. Chief Executive Officer  
2. Technical Officer  
(Incharge, B.Pharm Assistant) 

89 
 
S. 
No. State/UT Name of 
SMPB Manpower 
Outsource Service 
3. Personal Assistant  
4. Accountant 
5. Project Assistant  
6. Data Entry Operator  
7. Peon  
8. Peon Cum driver 
 
6 Haryana State 
Medicinal 
Plant Board, 
Haryana 
1. Director General Ayushcum Chief Executive Officer  
2. Incharge SMPB 
(Officer from Ayush Department) 
7 Himachal 
Pradesh 
State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board 
Himachal 
Pradesh               
1. Member Secretary  
(Director Ayush) 
Staff from Ayush Department 
2. Nodal Officer  
3. One Supporting Staff  
8 Jammu & 
Kashmir  
Jammu & 
Kashmir State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board 
1. Chief Executive Officer  
(Director, Ayush) 
Staff from Ayush Department 
2. Nodal Officer  
9 Karnataka Karnataka 
State 
Medicinal 
Plants 
Authority 
Deputation basis  
1. Chief Executive Officer 
(Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests) 
Contract Staff 
2. Office Management Consultant  
3. Peon/Messenger  
4. Driver  
10 Kerala State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board 
Kerala 
Regular, on deputation basis 
1. Chief Executive Officer  
2. Senior Scientific Officer  
 

90 
 
S. 
No. State/UT Name of 
SMPB Manpower 
Regular 
3. Junior Scientific Officer  
4. Technical Assistant   
 
Regular, on deputation basis 
5. Lower Division Clerk  
 
Contract basis 
6. Casual Sweeper -2 
11 Ladakh State 
Medicinal 
Plants 
Board,Ladakh 
1. Chief Executive Officer  
(Director, Ayush) 
12 Manipur Manipur State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board 
1. Chief Executive Officer  
(Director Ayush, Additional Charge) 
 
Regular Staff 
2. Computer Assistant/Office Assistant 
13 Meghalaya Meghalaya 
State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board 
1. Chief Conservator of Forests, Social Forestry & 
Environmentcum Chief Executive Officer  
(Part time)  
2. Conservator of Forests, Social Forestry & Environment 
Cum Deputy Chief Executive Officer  
(Part time) 
Temporary 
3. LDA cum Data Entry Operator  
4. Peon   
Contractual 
5. Technical Assistant   
6. Field Assistant  
7. Driver  
Muster Roll 
8. Office Peon  
9. Cleaner  
14 Mizoram State 1. Chief Executive Officer  

91 
 
S. 
No. State/UT Name of 
SMPB Manpower 
Medicinal, 
Mizoram 
(Assistant Director, Ayush) 
2. Programme Officer 
15 Odisha State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board, 
Odisha 
Regular 
1. Chief Executive Officer  
2. Deputy Conservator of Forests 
 
Contractual Basis 
3. Data Entry Operator -2 
4. Peon  
16 Rajasthan Rajasthan 
State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board 
1. Chief Executive Officer  
(Additional Director, Department of Ayurveda on 
Deputation) 
 
Permanent 
 
2. Senior Medicinal Officer, Ayurveda  
(Grade-1) 
3. Senior Medicinal Officer, Ayurveda  
(Grade-2) 
4. Programme Officer, Ayurveda  
5. Assistant Administrative Officer  
 
Deputation 
 
6. Junior Accountant 
7. Senior Assistant 
Permanent 
8. Junior  Assistant  
17 Sikkim State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board 
Sikkim 
1. Chief Executive Officer 
(Director, NTFP from Forest & Environment 
Department) 
2. Nodal Officer  
(Joint Director, NTFP from Forest & Environment 
Department) 
 
18 Telangana Telangana 
State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board 
On deputation basis from Forest Department 
1. Chief Executive Officer  
(IFS officer) 
2. Deputy Executive Officer  

92 
 
S. 
No. State/UT Name of 
SMPB Manpower 
3. Deputy Range Officer  
On Outsourcing  basis 
4. Office Manager  
5. Senior Assistant  
6. Junior Assistant  
19 Uttarakhan
d 
State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board  
Uttarakhand 
1. Chief Executive Officer 
(Additional Charge) 
Regular 
2. Scientist - 6 
3. Stenographer 
4. Assistant Accountant 
5. Senior Assistant 
6. Lower Assistant– 2 
 
20 West 
Bengal 
West Bengal 
State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board 
1. Member Secretary (Nodal Officer)  
(Additional Charge) 
2. Member Treasure/Director  
(Additional Charge)  
Contractual 
3. Technical Officer  
4. Accountant-cum-Office Assistant  
5. Computer Operator-cum-Stenographer  
6. Clerk  
7. Technical Assistant  
8. Peon  
 
No Work no Pay 
9. Daily wage labor - 9 
 
  

93 
 
Annexure – II 
NATIONAL RAW DRUG REPOSITORY (NRDR) AND REGIONAL RAW DRUG 
REPOSITORIES (RRDR) 
 
  
Name of 
RRDR  
Organization 
details  
Area 
covered 
Year Budge
t 
sancti
oned  
(In  
Cr.) 
Target 
(No. of 
raw 
drugs) 
Duration 
of the 
project 
(in years) 
NRDR  
 
Central Ayurveda 
Research Institute 
(CARI-
CCRAS),Jhansi, 
Uttar Pradesh 
INDIA 2019-
20 
10.0 500 5 
RRDR(Southern 
Plateau Region) 
National Institute 
of 
Siddha,Chennai,T
amil Nadu 
2.Siddha Central 
Researh 
InstituteChennai,
Tamil Nadu 3. 
Regional 
Research Institute 
for 
UnaniMedicine,C
hennai,Tamil 
Nadu 
Karnataka, 
Andhra 
Pradesh,An
daman,Pond
ichery,Tami
l Nadu 
2020-
21 
5.0 500 5 
RRRDR(Trans 
Ganga Plain 
Region) 
All India Institute 
of 
Ayuerveda,Gauta
mpuri 
,SaritaVihar,New 
Delhi 
Haryana,De
lhi,Chandig
arh,Punjab 
2020-
21 
5.0 500 5 
RRDR(Western 
Region) 
National Institute 
of 
Ayuerveda(NIA),
Jaipur 
Gujarat,Raj
asthan 
2020-
21 
5.0 
 
500 5 
RRDR(Gangetic 
Plain Region) 
Pharmacopeia 
Commission for 
Indian Medicine 
& Homeopathy 
(PCIM&H),Ghazi
abad(UP) 
 Uttar 
Pradesh,Bih
ar,,West 
Bengal 
2021-
22 
5.0 500 5 

94 
 
Annexure-III 
VISION DOCUMENTS 
1. Vision Document  of CCRAS  envisages to develop scientific evidence in Ayurvedic 
Principles, drug therapies by way of integrating ancient wisdom with modern technology and to 
bring Ayurveda to the people through innovations related diagnostics, preventive, promotive as 
well as trea tment methods and also introduce scientific research for sustained availability of 
quality natural resources, to translate them into products and processes and in synergy with 
concerned organizations to introduce these innovations into public health systems.  
2. The main features  are Translation of research outcome into clinical practice through 
commercialization of new drugs developed by CCRAS through translational research for making 
them accessible to the public; Mainstreaming of Ayurveda therapies throu gh integration and 
including them in a National Health Programme;  Integration of Ayurveda in National 
Reproductive and Child Health Programme  by developing evidence based Ayurvedic 
interventions for Ante Natal, Post Natal and Child Health Care; Development of new 
drugs/combinations based on the leads from classical literature and also from local health 
traditions on different conditions to meet the demand of unmet medical needs;Development of 
safe /effective products for diseases of national and global impo rtance as add -on/ adjuvant 
therapies and also for standalone management for improvement of quality of life;Generation of 
scientific evidence on safety of Ayurvedic formulations and therapies; Development of the 
Directives addressing different research needs  viz. i. Drug development (addressing issues of 
quality, shelf life, safety issues and other requirements), ii. Safety evaluation (pre -clinical) and 
iii. Clinical research for AYUSH interventions; Validation of Fundamental principles of 
Ayurveda including Ayurveda biology; Development of comprehensive, pragmatic, adaptable an 
Ayurvedic user‟s friendly format for clinical diagnosis and clinical examination for utilization 
among health care professionals and its validation;  Development and validation of Clini cal 
Decision Support Systems and HIMS and e -management; Development of Standard Ayurvedic 
terminologies and its publication in different volume in a phased manner; Occupational Health  
such as Generalized Anxiety Disorder/Stress etcAnd Outreach programmes f or extending health 
care and documentation and institutional linkages with reputed institutes such as CSIR and 
ICMR collaboration 
 
3. The Council has strived to actualize research in most of the areas envisaged in the Vision 
Document 2030 . The Council has  validated Ayurveda classical formulations in identified 
disease conditions to generate tangible evidence on their clinical safety and efficacy and 
undertaken drug development in various identified disease conditions such as Ayush PJ -7 in 
Dengue, Ayush SL in chronic lymphedema, Ayush D in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, Carctol S in 
Ovarian Cancer, Ayush HR &Ayush M3 in  Essential Hypertension, C1 oil for wound healing, 
Ayush Manas in Cognitive deficit etc which are under different phases of drug development. The 
Council developed Ayurveda formulations viz.AYUSH  64 , Ayush SG (ShunthiGuggulu) , 
Ayush 82 and transferred their technology through NRDC for making them accessible to the 
public. Also, AYUSH 64 was repurposed for the management of asymptomatic, mild to 
moderate COVID -19 based on the tangible evidence generated through robust studies and made 
available to the public through technology transfer. The Council has also undertaken studies to 
evaluate the clinical efficacy of Ayurveda formulations in Occupatio nal stress in IT 
persons/Nurses. 

95 
 
4. Envisioning the integration of Ayurveda into the National Reproductive and Child Health 
Programme, the Councilha simplemented a collaborative projectin association with Govt. of 
Maharashtra to  see the feasibility of intr oducing Ayurvedic interventions in Reproductive and 
Child Health (RCH) through integrative health care services in 30 selected PHCs of Gadchiroli 
district of Maharashtra,which is ongoing. 
5. The Council brought three general guidelinesfor (i)Drug development  (ii) safety /toxicity 
evaluation and (iii) Clinical evaluation of  Ayurvedic formulations/interventions. 
6. The council developed Standard Ayurvedic terminologies through consultation and 
published the document and  also hosted National AYUSH Morbidity and Standardized 
Terminology Electronic Portal (NAMASTE) for uniform centralized collection of AYUSH 
morbidity statistics.For validation of fundamental principles, the Council developed and 
validated the “Prakriti Assessment Scale” and designed a user frie ndly web portal namely 
“AYUR Prakriti Web Portal” for Prakriti assessment, validated Ayurveda diagnostic tools are 
also being developed for identified disease conditions, Swasthya Assessment Scale (SAS) to 
assess the Health status of a person through a val idated questionnaire for use by Ayurveda 
physicians.Also implemented A-HIMS in its institutes engaged in OPD/IPD services 
7. Council is also delivering health care services through different ongoing outreach 
programmes viz. THCRP, AMHCP (SCSP), RCH & NE. I n which health care services are being 
provided through OPD (Camps).  
8. Collaborative research projects were undertaken with reputed institutes such as ICMR. 
CSIR, AIIMS New Delhi, IIT New Delhi , IIT-Guwahati etc. 
 
***** 