PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
52  
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
ON 
 
  ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND 
FAMILY WELFARE ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ 
OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS 43 
RD   
REPORT ON ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
AND FAMILY WELFARE ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ 
OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN IT’S 38 
TH   
REPORT ON MAJOR ISSUES CONCERNING THE THREE VACCINE  
PRODUCING PSUs, NAMELY, THE CENTRAL RESEARCH 
INSTITUTE  (CRI), KASAULI, THE PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF  INDIA 
(PII), COONOOR, AND THE BCG VACCINE LABORATORY 
(BCGVL), CHENNAI. 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4 TH  MARCH, 2011)               
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4 TH  MARCH, 2011) 
   
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELH 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)  
 


PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
ON 
 
  ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND 
FAMILY WELFARE ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ 
OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS 43 
RD   
REPORT ON ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
AND FAMILY WELFARE ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ 
OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN IT’S 38 
TH   
REPORT ON MAJOR ISSUES CONCERNING THE THREE VACCINE  
PRODUCING PSUs, NAMELY, THE CENTRAL RESEARCH 
INSTITUTE  (CRI), KASAULI, THE PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF  INDIA 
(PII), COONOOR, AND THE BCG VACCINE LABORATORY 
(BCGVL), CHENNAI. 
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4 TH  MARCH, 2011)               
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4 TH  MARCH, 2011) 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 


C O N T E N T S 
 
                                
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE------------------- ---------              (i) 
 
2. PREFACE----------------------------------------- --------------------                    (ii)-(iii) 
  
3. REPORT-----------  ----------------------------- ---------------------------  1-44 
 
 INTRODUCTION-------------------------------------- -------------------            1-2 
 
 CHAPTER I Recommendations/Observations in respect o f which     
Replies of the Government have been accepted by 
  the Committee 
 [ Para 2.11, 3.6,  4.3, 4.4, 5.3, 7.5, 8.2 & 8.3 = 8]---------        3-7 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which the C ommittee   
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
replies 
[ Para 1.3, 1.5, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 & 2.8 = 7]-------------------     8-13 
       
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which              
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee  
                   [Para 2.9,3.1,3.2,3.3,3.5,6.2,6.3,6.4,7.3,7.4, 9.2,9.4& 9.6=13]-- 14-43 
 
      
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of      
which the final replies of the Government  
are still awaited    [Para  NIL] --------------------------------- 44 
 
4. RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE ----      45-62        
 
   5. MINUTES-------------------------------------- ----------------------------           63-65 
 6. ANNEXURES I & II------------------------------- ----------------------           66-74 
                  
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-2011) 
        
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak     -    Chairman  
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi  
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
5. Shri Balbir Punj 
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat 
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
9. Shri Rasheed Masood  
*10. Shrimati B. Jayashree 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Ashok Argal 
12. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Baghel Singh 
13. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
14. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan 
15. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
16. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai 
17. Dr. Kruparani Killi 
18. Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
19. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
20. Shri Datta Meghe 
21. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
22. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
23. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri M. K Raghavan 
26. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid 
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha  
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma   
29. Shrimati Meena Singh   
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
31. Shri Ratan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
              
 Shrimati Vandana Garg,          Additional Secreta ry 
Shri R.B.Gupta,                           Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta,   Joint Director 
               Shri Dinesh Singh,                     Assistant Director 
 Shri Satis Mesra                          Committe e Officer 
 
___________________________________________________ __________________________________ 
*     nominated to the Committee w.e.f  21/9/2010 
 (i) 

PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare, having been  authorised by the 
Committee on its behalf, do hereby present this Fif ty-second Report of the 
Committee on the action taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
on the recommendations/ observations of the Committ ee  contained in its  
Forty–third  Report on the action taken by the Department on th e 
recommendations/ observations of the Committee cont ained in its Thirty-eighth 
Report  on ‘Major issues concerning the three vacci ne-producing PSUs, namely, 
the Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), 
Coonoor and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.’ 
 
2. The Committee had made an extensive study on the  various issues 
connected with the suspension of manufacturing lice nse of the three vaccine 
producing PSUs, namely, the Central Research Instit ute (CRI), Kasauli, the 
Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory 
(BCGVL), Chennai; the problems ailing them, their r evival; effect of the closure 
of the vaccine manufacturing PSUs on the Universal Immunisation Programme 
underway in the country; resultant spiraling vaccin e prices in the country; 
vaccine security in the country etc. and presented to the Parliament  three reports 
i.e., the 34 th  Report on the ‘functioning of the three vaccine pr oducing PSUs, 
namely, the Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasau li, the Pasteur Institute of 
India (PII), Coonoor, and the BCG Vaccine Laborator y (BCGVL), Chennai, the 
38 th  Report on the ‘Major issues concerning the three v accine producing PSUs, 
namely the Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasaul i, the Pasteur Institute of 
India (PII), Coonoor, and the BCG Vaccine Laborator y (BCGVL), Chennai and 
the  43 rd  Report on the action taken by the Department of He alth and Family 
Welfare on the recommendations/observations contain ed in the  38 th  Report of 
the Committee.  Since the closure of the vaccine-pr oducing PSUs had very far 

reaching consequences on the Universal Immunization  Programme underway in 
the country, it was felt expedient to pursue the ma tter as a number of important 
issues required further clarification from the Depa rtment. Accordingly, the 
Committee had called for an action taken note from the Department on the 
recommendations/observations contained in its  43 rd  Report.  
3. Meanwhile, the Committee which had been set up unde r the 
Chairmanship of Shri Javid Choudhary, former Secret ary in the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, to determine the reasons  for the suspension of the 
manufacturing license of the three vaccine-producin g units and to draw a road-
map for their revival, had presented its Final Repo rt to the Ministry on the 10 th  
September, 2010. 
4.  The Committee had the opportunity to go through th is Report and found 
that it inter-alia  confirmed the apprehensions highlighted and the co nclusions 
arrived at by the Committee in its 34 
th , 38 th  and 43 rd  Reports. 
5.        The Draft Report, which is primarily base d on the Action Taken Note of 
the Department, and also on the recommendations/obs ervations made in the 
Final Report of the Javid Chowdhury Committee, was considered and adopted 
by the Committee on the 18 th  February, 2011. 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the o bservations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report.    
 
NEW DELHI   
FEBRUARY 18, 2011 ,  
MAGHA 29, 1932 (Saka)  
BRAJESH PATHAK 
 
           Chairman ,  
 Department-related Parliamentary   
Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare 
 
  
(ii) 

 
REPORT 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Over the past couple of years, the Department-relat ed Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare has been pursuing the various issues connected 
with the suspension of manufacturing license of the  three vaccine producing PSUs, 
namely, the Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasau li, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), 
Coonoor, and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Ch ennai; the problems ailing 
them, their revival; effect of closure of the vacci ne manufacturing PSUs on the 
implementation of the Universal Immunisation Progra mme in the country; resultant 
vaccine security in the country etc.,. Since then, the Committee has given three reports on 
the above-related subject, namely, the 34 th  Report on the ‘Functioning of the three 
vaccine producing PSUs, namely, the Central Researc h Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the 
Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL) 
Chennai presented to the Parliament on 18 th  February 2009, the 38 th  Report on the ‘Major 
issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs,  namely the Central Research 
Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the BCG 
Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai presented to th e Parliament on the 18 th  
December, 2009 and the 43 rd  Report on the action taken by the Department of He alth and 
Family Welfare on the recommendations/observations contained in its  38 th  Report of the 
Committee presented to the Parliament on 4 th  August 2010.  
 
These Reports were based on extensive and in-depth analysis done by the 
Committee in the light of inputs received from the Ministry, interaction with the then 
Secretaries from the Department of Health and Family Welfare and all concerned officers 
including the DGHS and the DCGI.  
 
The Committee was happy to note that the Government  had assured in the 
Presidential address to  both Houses of the Parliam ent, and at different fora from time to 
time, that  it would make every effort to ensure th at these three vaccine producing PSUs 
are revived and made cGMP compliant. As a sequel to  this commitment, the Department 
appointed a three-member Committee under the Chairm anship of Shri Javid Chowdhury, 

former Health Secretary, on the 25 th  September, 2009 to examine the ‘reasons for 
suspension of manufacturing licenses from the histo rical, technological, 
administrative/organizational and other perspective s’ of the three PSUs, the roadmap for 
their revival and their future role and submit its report within three months. The 
Committee submitted its Interim Report on the 5 th  February, 2010. A perusal of the said 
Interim Report revealed that the fact-finding Commi ttee’s conclusions were in 
consonance with the inferences drawn by this Commit tee, as reflected in its various 
reports. The conclusions drawn by the four-member E xpert Committee (including two 
technical members having expertise in the product/ manufacturing standards of drugs and 
pharmaceuticals), emphatically established that the  decision to suspend the 
manufacturing licence of the premier vaccine-produc ing institutes was not only ill-
advised but also led to acute shortage of vaccines,  - the most essential component of 
Universal Immunisation Programme. It may also be me ntioned that the fact-finding 
Committee has submitted to the Ministry its Final Report on the 10 th  September, 2010.  
 
It was on 26 th  February, 2010 that the Government ordered revocat ion of 
suspension of the licenses of these Institutes. Aft er finding from a perusal of the Action 
Taken Note on its 38 th  Report received from the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare that a number of important issues still rem ained unanswered or the replies 
furnished by the Department were unsatisfactory, th e Committee presented the 43 rd  
Report on the action taken by the Department of Hea lth and Family Welfare on the 
recommendations/observations contained in its  38 th  Report of the Committee to the 
Parliament on 4 th  August 2010. The Department has submitted to the C ommittee its 
Action Taken Note on the recommendations/observatio ns of the Committee contained in 
the Committee’s  43 rd  Report on the 6 th  December 2010. 
 
The Committee’s comments on some of the issues on w hich the action taken by 
the Government is found wanting and/or require furt her action on the part of the latter 
have been placed in Chapter III of this Report.  
 
 
 
  

 CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH RE PLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
II INTEGRATED VACCINE COMPLEX, CHENGALPATTU 
 
VACCINE-PRODUCING PSUs vis-à-vis  VACCINE POLICY 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
 
2.11 The Committee finds that no mention has been m ade about the proposed move to 
formulate a vaccine policy which would be the decid ing factor about the kind of 
production to be carried out at the three units. Th e Committee was given to understand 
that the Secretary, Department of Health Research h ad been requested to organize a 
discussion with all concerned. In the absence of an y response from the Ministry in this 
regard, the Committee can presume that no such disc ussion has taken place so far. The 
Committee would like to point out that with the Int erim Report of the Javid Chowdhary 
Committee establishing beyond doubt the manufacturi ng capacity of the three units, their 
viability i.e. continuing to fulfill the vaccine re quirement of the country has already been 
confirmed. Vaccine policy, as and when formulated, can focus on the policy-related 
issues and not on which units are to be closed down or to start functioning. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry:          
                           
 Observation has been noted. As directed by the Com mittee, the Department of 
Health Research (DHR)/ Indian Council of Medical Re search (ICMR) will focus only on 
policy related matters pertaining to researchable i ssues and /or research findings about 
need/ use of vaccines and will not deal with aspect  such as which vaccine units are to be 
closed or start functioning. DHR/ICMR has not made any recommendations on this 
aspect of PSU vaccine units so far. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
3.6 On the issue of M/s HLL Lifecare Ltd. being eng aged as the Project Consultant 
for making CRI, Kasauli GMP compliant, the Committe e has a word of caution. Every 
conceivable step needs to be taken so as to ensure that the very discouraging experience 
of M/s HSCC, Noida is not repeated once again. Comm ittee’s apprehensions arise from 
the fact that experience and expertise of HLL Lifec are Ltd. is of the same level as of M/s 
HSCC, Noida commented upon by the Javid Chowdhury Committee also. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry: 
 
 
 The project is being monitored by Directorate Gene ral of Health 
Services/Ministry/ DCG(I) from time to time to ensu re its timely completion and making 
it GMP compliant.   HSCC is a PSU under this Minist ry with core competence in civil 
construction activities for health sector whereas H LL is basically  a manufacturing 
company and has diversified its activities into oth er segments of health sector and has 

acquired the required competencies for manufacturin g, marketing and project activities.   
HLL is doing the project with the in-house vaccine experts, engineering and project 
management team of HLL alongwith the detailed engin eering partner- NNE Pharmaplan. 
All efforts are being made to ensure that a cGMP compliant facility is set up in time.  
 
IV BCG VACCINE LABORATORY, CHENNAI. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
 
4.3 The Committee observes that consequent to submi ssion of the Interim Report of 
the Javid Chowdhary Committee on the 5 th  February, 2010 three months’ time, as 
observed in the above Report, has already passed by . The Committee can easily presume 
that work, on a fast track mode had been initiated by the Department as per the 
assessment in the Interim Report. However, as no concrete information on the progress of 
work relating to BCGVL, Guindy has been furnished i n the ATN, the Committee has no 
other alternative but to conclude that the rectific ation exercise - as envisaged to make 
these units fully functional, has not been complete d.  The Committee, therefore, 
apprehends that if such is the case then production  of vaccines by the unit is bound to be 
stalled further.                   
 
Action Taken by the Ministry:  
 
 The order suspending the licence for manufacturing   of vaccines has been 
revoked vide order dated 26 th  February, 2010 and BCG VL, Guindy has been directe d to 
ensure that the production line is made fully compliant with cGMP standards within three 
years.  The actions to rectify the deficiencies poi nted out in the WHO-NRA report were 
initiated by the former Director who was holding ad ditional charge of BCG VL, Guindy.  
However, the vendors left the work unfinished deman ding payments.  The matter has 
since been resolved and administrative approval has  been issued amounting to 
Rs.2,47,70,282/- for payments to the vendors for co mpletion of the work relating to the 
rectification of deficiencies. In BCGVL , the revamping of working condition in old areas 
of Culture, Quality Control, Quality Assurance, Was hing Sterilization , Physical 
verification of vials and Animal House have been pa rtially done.  Standardization of the 
Technical Procedures have been completed.  Filling area and Packing areas have been 
identified to start the filling and packing work. New areas of culture, quality control- 30% 
has been completed.  Validation studies of Bio-burd en in old production is being done. 
Regular filling has been done in FD-Hull and FD-SMH   in  September, 2010 which has 
been successfully completed. In this filling  83,13 9 vials have been freeze dried which 
comes to 8.3. lakhs doses. Production schedule of v accine as provided by the Institute is 
at Annexure-II.  Production of BCG vaccine was started in July, 201 0 and is in full 
swing.   
 
 
 

Recommendations/Observations 
4.4 The Committee was given to understand that due to non-availability of land for 
making BCGVL GMP compliant, it was proposed to shift the production work along with 
the manpower to the upcoming vaccine complex at Che ngalpattu.   However, from the 
perusal of the Interim Report of the Javid Chowdhur y Committee, it has become 
abundantly clear that there should not be any probl em in building multi-floored structure 
compliant to international standards at BCGVL, Guin dy as there is ample scope for 
additional construction on the plot of land on whic h the Institute is situated. The 
additional permissible construction would not merel y cover the requirement for the new 
production line but would also be available for sub sequent expansion of the unit. In view 
of the factual position at the ground level and rectification of all the deficiencies, the only 
line of action on the part of the Ministry in co-or dination with the Institute authorities, is 
to take all the required measures for restructuring  the Institute. The Committee, 
accordingly, urges the Department to take utmost ca re and remain vigilant so that the 
revival of the Institute is not trapped in the laby rinths of procedural formalities resulting 
in undue delays and cost-escalations.  The Committe e would also appreciate if the 
proposed move of shifting the Institute along with its manpower to the Vaccine Complex 
at Chengalpattu is reviewed objectively and the correct decision taken in this regard. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry:  
 
The order suspending the licences for manufacturing  of vaccines has been 
revoked vide order dated 26 th  February, 2010 and BCG VL, Guindy has been directe d to 
ensure that the production line is made fully compliant with cGMP standards within three 
years.   Administrative approval has been issued am ounting to Rs.2,47,70,282/- for 
payments to the vendors for completion of the work relating to the rectification of 
deficiencies. Revamping has been carried out in old  areas for production. Production of 
BCG vaccine was started in July, 2010 afresh and th e same would be released for 
commercial use only after the mandatory quality tes ting. It has also been decided that 
revival of the Institute and making it cGMP complia nt would be done within the existing 
structure/facility.   
 
 
V PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF INDIA, COONOOR 
Recommendations/Observations 
5.3 The Committee is deeply disturbed to note that once again the Department has no 
action taken report to offer. Reasons for such an a pproach by the Ministry are beyond the 
comprehension of the Committee. The Committee is fo rced to conclude that no progress 
worth mentioning has been made inspite of its very critical observations. Not only this, 
the Committee finds that the Javid Chowdhary Commit tee, after its inspection of the 
Institute from 19 
th  to 22 nd  December, 2009, was of the view that the existing production 
line could resume operations for fresh production i n 6 months. The Committee is not 
aware whether the requisite funds for the upgradati on/ modification work on the existing 
production line, as recommended by the Javid Chowdh ary Committee, have been made 
available to the Institute so far. If not, the Comm ittee can only conclude that this is a 

sorry state of affairs. The Committee would also take the opportunity to point out that this 
very Committee had also given its considered opinio n about the viability of setting up a 
new production line at the Institute due to the ava ilability of enough naturally terraced 
land, ideal for such a requirement. The Committee w ould appreciate if the Department 
plays the role of a nodal authority for initiating the preparation of a detailed project report 
in this regard, if not already done so far. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry:  
 Government is  determined to the commitment made t hrough the Presidential 
address to the both houses of the Parliament and at  different fora  from time to time  and 
making every efforts to ensure their (these three  Institutes ) becoming cGMP compliant . 
Central Government in exercise of its powers under Sub rules (3) of Rule 85 of the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 have ordered revocation o f suspension of the licenses of the 
these  Institutes vide order No. X.11035/2/2010-DFQC dated 26/2/2010.  These Institutes 
have also been asked to ensure that the production line is made fully compliant with 
GMP standards within three years. After a prelimina ry study report of M/s HLL LCL, 
there is a proposal for revival of PII, Coonoor by investing Rs. 70 Crores for making the 
existing vaccine manufacturing facilities cGMP comp liant through M/s HLL LCL. 
During the review of financial assets of PII, Coono or, it has been noticed that funds in 
their corpus fund can be used for revival of PII, C oonoor along with funds to be met by 
the Ministry. The Ministry will provide necessary f unds required for making all the three 
vaccine producing units Schedule M compliant. 
 
Recommendations/Observations                  
 
7.5       The Committee is in full agreement with the observation of the Javid Chowdhury 
Committee that by closing down the existing public sector vaccine production units in 
advance, the country would be exposing itself to va ccine insecurity for five years or 
possibly, even a much longer period. The Committee,  therefore, once again impresses 
upon the Ministry that keeping in view the public i nterest at large the three vaccine 
producing units are made fully functional without a ny further delay. The Committee 
foresees no hindrances in accomplishment of this ta sk due to the very specific and 
foolproof assessment made by the Javid Chowdhury Co mmittee about the inbuilt 
capacity of the three premier units. With constant monitoring and availability of required 
funds and manpower, the Ministry - the nodal author ity in this crucial area, can very 
well succeed in achieving this social responsibility.                   
     
Action Taken by the Ministry: 
 Government is  bound by the commitment made throug h the Presidential address 
to the both houses of the Parliament and at differe nt fora  from time to time  and making 
every efforts to ensure their (these three Institut es ) becoming cGMP compliant . Central 
Government in exercise of its powers under Sub rule s (3) of Rule 85 of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Rules, 1945 have ordered revocation of su spension of the licenses of these 
Institutes vide order No. X.11035/2/2010-DFQC dated  26/2/2010.  These Institutes have 
also been asked to ensure that the production line is made fully compliant with GMP 

standards within three years. Ministry will commit necessary funds and manpower 
required for making all the three vaccine producing units Schedule M Compliant. 
 
VII SHORTAGE OF VACCINES 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
8.2 The Committee notes that the recommendation of the Committee for assessing the 
actual requirements of vaccines by different States followed by monitoring of their timely 
utilization has been acknowledged by the Department  for future compliance. However, 
this alone would not serve the purpose. That the Committee's apprehensions in this regard 
were not baseless have been proved by the findings of Javid Chowdhary Committee 
contained in its Interim Report. While analyzing th e impact of the closure of the three 
public sector vaccine producing units on the UIP, i t has been stated that a number of 
States like Orissa, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Prades h, Assam, Punjab, West Bengal and 
Kerala did face shortfall of BCG, DPT, TT, OPV and Measles vaccine during 2008-09. 
As a result, the Ministry had to draw on the buffer stock available with these States.  
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 8.3  The Committee would like to point out that man y of the above States that have 
faced shortages have been placed under the category  of High Focus States by the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare on the basi s of their health indicator  
performance. Hence, shortage of vaccines in these S tates is bound to have an adverse 
impact on their immunization programme. In any case , the act of drawing upon buffer 
stock to mitigate shortfalls can never be termed as  a healthy practice. The Committee 
would like to add here that the reason for price sp iral of vaccines owes its origin to 
shortages in its supply at the outset. The Committe e, therefore, advises the Department to 
bear this in mind for all future references relatin g to making available critical healthcare 
component such as vaccines/ sera under various national healthcare initiatives.    
Action Taken by the Ministry: 
 Noted. Mechanisms have been put in place to ensure that there is regular supply 
of vaccines and no interruption occurs. Buffer stock is being maintained at various levels. 
Three months’ buffer is maintained in the State at two levels; one at State level and the 
other at District level. Vaccines under Universal I mmunization Programme (UIP) are 
supplied to most of the States directly by the manufacturer on bimonthly basis. Therefore, 
the State /district needs to keep small quantity of buffer. Procurement of vaccines is made 
for 15 months of which 3 months quantity is kept as  buffer for the delayed/late supply in 
the beginning of the next financial year. Buffer is  maintained also at the national level in 
4 Government Medical Store Depots (GMSDs) . If the stock at State level falls 
significantly due to any reasons, supplies are made  through GMSDs to avoid any 
shortage. 

                  CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO ES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
INTEGRATED VACCINE COMPLEX, CHENGALPATTU 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.3 The Committee had hoped that the Department wou ld come out with follow-up 
action in the true sense along with clear cut plan of action for the future. Unfortunately, 
the Committee is surprised to observe that the feed back furnished by the Ministry belies 
the very idea of Action Taken Note. The Committee's  pointed 
recommendations/observations on quite a few pertine nt and crucial issues have either 
simply remained unanswered or are circumlocutory in  nature and lack conviction. Not 
only this, in response to a number of recommendatio ns/observations on entirely different 
aspects, the Ministry has simply repeated the same reply.  
 
1.5 However, on a perusal of the Interim Report, th e Committee is somewhat 
surprised to observe that the conclusions drawn by the four-member Expert Committee 
(including two technical members having expertise i n the product/ manufacturing 
standards of drugs and pharmaceuticals), are not on ly  similar to its findings but also 
emphatically establish that the decision to suspend  the manufacturing licence of the 
premier vaccine-producing institutes was not only i ll-advised but also led to acute 
shortage of vaccines, -  the most essential compone nt of Universal Immunisation 
Programme.  The Committee has the following observa tions/ recommendations to make 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry: 
 The Ministry is making sincere efforts to revive t he Vaccine Manufacturing Units 
and to resume production of the vaccines in these I nstitutes. If the Committee feels that 
the Ministry has not addressed any issue raised by the Committee or given repetitive 
replies, it is assured that all points would be addressed in this Action Taken Report. 
 
II. REVIVAL OF VACCINE -PRODUCING PSUs  
 Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.2 Before giving its observations on the action ta ken by the Ministry for revival of 
the three units, the Committee would like to draw t he attention to the Interim Report of 
Javid Chowdhury Committee which has expressed serio us reservations on the very 
motive behind such a move, in the following manner: 
 
"1.10   From the records it appears that the final decision to suspend the license 
was taken by the DCGI after extended consultations with the Ministry. The examination 
of the issue in the Ministry was extremely circumlocutory and scattered over several files. 
An explicit decision has not been recorded at any p lace based on an analysis of the 
issues. At one point of the record it is crypticall y stated that the Minister, Health and 

Family Welfare has approved the issuance of the sho w cause notices for suspension of 
the licenses. This note is signed by everyone in th e administrative line-of-command 
including the Minister. However, as stated earlier,  there is nothing substantial on record 
analyzing the grounds on which the decision was taken".    
  
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.3 The above observations clearly indicate that th e decision for discontinuance of 
vaccine production was not guided by sound reasonin g. The Committee observes that 
finally the three vaccine producing PSUs i.e. CRI, Kasauli, PII, Coonoor and BCGVL, 
Guindy, which have been the mainstay of vaccine pro duction and supply in the country, 
have been conferred a new lease of life. The Depart ment has informed that production of 
DT and TT vaccines at CRI, Kasauli was to start fro m the month of April, 2010. The 
Committee would have appreciated if specific feedba ck about the actual production had 
been furnished by the Ministry. Similarly, producti on of DPT vaccine at PII, Coonoor is 
anticipated to begin from December, 2010. The Commi ttee, however, finds that although 
suspension of manufacturing license of BCGVL, Guind y also stands revoked, the 
Ministry has remained silent as regards the revival  of production schedule at this unit. 
The Committee would have appreciated if production had started here also.   
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.4 The Committee would like to quote from the Inte rim Report with regard to the 
status of manufacturing facilities at the three units: 
 
"7.1  The last detailed inspection report was submitted i n early January, 
2008, after the receipt of the reply from the units  to the show cause notice, 
and immediately prior to the suspension of the manu facturing licenses. Out of 
the total of 129 deficiencies raised in the reports, about 71 observations are of 
a minor nature, not significantly affecting the man ufacturing standards. Some 
58 others require improvement or upgradation - wall s not having a smooth 
surface; junctions, corners, window/ door frames no t being smooth and dust 
free; animal house requiring minor improvement; SOP s requiring revision; 
need for introduction of new documentation; need fo r calibration of different 
equipments; separation of different work areas; etc . About 60% of this second 
category of work has already been completed. The re maining work in this 
category can comfortably be completed within two months.  
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.5 The above analysis is self-explanatory about th e present status of the three 
vaccine-producing units and establishes beyond doub t their manufacturing capacity. The 
Committee is happy to note that its assessment abou t the circumstances leading to the 
closure of the premier vaccine-producing units and urgency for their revival has been 
emphatically endorsed by the fact-finding Committee  appointed by the Ministry. The 
Committee would have appreciated if the Ministry wa s more forthcoming while 
furnishing details regarding the progress made in t he manufacturing status and quantum 
of vaccines produced from February onwards. Mere st atement about planned and 
anticipated schedule of vaccine supply at these uni ts not only falls much below the 

expectation but also indicates that the Ministry ha s failed to show any pro-active action 
so far. The Committee, therefore, once again reiterates that the Ministry has to vigorously 
monitor the functioning of these units so as to ens ure the optimum utilization of their 
manufacturing capacity.                           
 
Action Taken by the Ministry:  
 
 Final decision to suspend the license after issuan ce of show cause notice was 
taken by DCG(I)  .  It is clearly recorded in the s how cause notices dated 14 
th  December, 
2007 that due to various deficiencies reported in i nspection report, which were self 
explanatory , a show cause notice was issued to PSU s. The analysis of the sequence of 
the  events and the matter is also recorded in the suspension letter that due to failure of 
the PSUs to comply with those deficiencies and cond itions of the license , the licenses 
were suspended as per rule 85(1) of Drugs and Cosme tics Act.  Therefore, it may not be 
appropriate to imply that analysis of the matter was not recorded.  Invoking  provisions of 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and  Rules,  eval uation of impact on the post-
suspension era in terms of the availability and pri ces of these vaccines on the Universal 
Immunization Programme and  taking into account  su bstantial compliance status 
furnished by the appellant institutes and the param ount public interest involved in 
generating and maintaining its own captive production capacity in the Government sector 
,  revocation of suspension of the licenses of the Institutes have been ordered on 26 th  
February, 2010.  These Institutes have also been as ked to ensure that the production line 
is made fully compliant with GMP standards within three years.  
 
 In CRI, Kasauli production of TT, Diphtheria, Yell ow Fever Vaccine, AKD 
Tyhoid, ARS, DATS and ASVS has started in the existing facilities.  Supply of DPT, TT, 
ASVA and YF vaccine have been released for use. Upg radation of DPT facilities is also 
in progress. Copy of the latest  quarterly report a s available for the period July- 
September, 2010 is enclosed at Annexure I. 
  
In BCGVL, Guindy , actions to rectify the deficienc ies were initiated by the 
former Director who was holding additional charge o f BCG VL Guindy.  However, the 
vendors left the work unfinished demanding payments .  The matter had been resolved 
and administrative approval was issued amounting to  Rs.2,47,70,282/- for payments to 
the vendors for completion of the work relating to the rectification of deficiencies pointed 
out in the WHO-NRA report. Revamping has been carried out in old areas for production. 
Production of BCG vaccine was started in July, 2010  afresh and the same could be 
released for commercial use only after the mandatory quality testing. 
 
In BCGVL, the revamping of working condition in old  areas of Culture, Quality 
Control, Quality Assurance, Washing Sterlization , Physical verification of vials and 
Animal House have been partially done.  Standardiza tion of the Technical Procedures 

have been completed.  Filling area and Packing have  been identified to start the filling 
and packing work. New areas of culture, quality con trol- 30% have been completed.  
Validation studies of Bio-burden in old production are done. Regular filling has been 
done in FD-Hull and FD-SMH in September 2010 which was successfully completed. In 
this filling 83,139 vials have been freeze dried wh ich comes to 8.3 lakhs doses. 
Production schedule of vaccine as provided by the Institute is at Annexure-II.   
 
In PII, Coonoor, at Diphetheria Laboratory, 14 batc hes of culture have been 
produced. 6 batches have reached concentration and purification stage. A total dosage of 
15.00 million doses at crude stage is available at present, which is sufficient to prepare 
12.00 million doses of final vaccine after further purification.  In Pertussis Laboratory ,  
26 batches of culture have been produced .  2 pools  were prepared. A total dosage of 
10.00 million doses at crude stage is available at present, which is sufficient to prepare 
8.00 million doses of final vaccine after concentra tion. In the Tetanus Laboratory, 14 
batches of culture have been produced. 7 batches ha ve  reached concentration and 
purification stage. A total dosage of 25.00 million  doses at crude stage is available at 
present, which is sufficient to prepare 20.00 milli on doses of final vaccine after further 
purification.  In Gel & Mixing Laboratory, 22 batch es of adjuvant (aluminum phosphate 
gel) have been prepared which is sufficient to form ulate 12.00 million doses of DPT 
vaccine. 
 
In addition, all the critical production equipments  are functional.  Certain civil 
works like flooring, painting, electrification are being carried out.  Microbial air 
monitoring test was carried out by Quality Assuranc e Department and appropriate action 
initiated. Calibration of most of the equipments an d the instruments are put into regular 
use. Critical raw material are regularly being purc hased. Breeding of Mice and Guinea 
pigs have been strengthened. Required Quality Control tests are being performed.  
 
A feasibility study has been conducted and approval  was granted to revamp the 
existing facilities at PII, Coonoor for making it G MP compliant.  Since the existing 
facilities are more than 60 years old, the Institut e has been directed to study the structural 
feasibility for revamping the same for GMP compliance. 
 
 
INTEGRATED VACCINE COMPLEX, CHENGALPATTU 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
 
2.8 The Committee would like to point out that it h as no objection to establishment of 
well-equipped vaccine manufacturing units meeting i nternational standards in the 
country. However, that cannot be at the cost of our  age-old premier units fulfilling the 
vaccine requirements of the country for the past hu ndred years or so. The foremost 
objective before the Committee is to ensure availab ility of cheap and affordable health 
care for the infants and children in the country, -  in this case availability of vaccines at 

affordable prices which was being accomplished by t hese units so far. The Committee 
would like to point out that PII, Coonoor had been issued the ISO 9001:2000 Certificate 
in February, 2003 which was valid till 2006. Similarly, BCG Vaccine Laboratory, Guindy 
had obtained a certificate under ISO 9001:2000 in O ctober, 2001 which was extended 
upto January, 2007. Nobody would deny the fact that  ISO certification implies 
recognition of a high standard of management system s in the establishment. With the 
limited experience and exposure to implementing hea lth care projects in the country, the 
Committee has had its own apprehension regarding HL L Lifecare Ltd's ability to give a 
final shape to the Integrated Vaccine Complex proje ct. The Committee is not aware 
whether the selection of M/s NNE Pharmaplan has bee n based on its experience and 
expertise in the field of setting up of scientific infrastructure as required under the IVC 
project.  The Ministry has chosen to remain silent on the progress made in the first phase 
of the IVC project which was to take off in January , 2010. From the time-line projected 
by the Ministry about the completion of this complex, it is anticipated to be completed by 
December, 2012.      
 
Action Taken by the Ministry: 
 
 
The ISO 9001 lays down the requirements for a quali ty management system and 
do not certify the facility as cGMP compliant . The  GMP certifications are regulatory 
requirements mandated by law and for manufacturing vaccines or any pharmaceutical/bio 
pharmaceutical products, the facility must be in co mpliance with these regulations. ISO , 
on the other hand is an optional certification obtained by a company when they determine 
that the certification is beneficial to their opera tions for building up and maintaining 
appropriate systems.  
As regards apprehensions raised about the capabilit y of HLL, it is submitted that, 
apart from its manufacturing operations spread over  six locations, HLL offers 
consultancy services for procurement and infrastruc ture building to various agencies 
within and outside India and has made considerable growth in the last decade . HLL 
undertakes direct contracts for supply of equipment s , services and constructions . It also 
undertakes projects as Project Management Consultan t. It has been reported the current 
turnover of the Company is Rs. 444 Crore. However, including business handled as  
Project Management Consultant , the  total business  handled by HLL is Rs. 1296 Crores. 
HLL has demonstrated capabilities of implementing p rojects such as expansion of 
Jawaharlal Institute of Post Graduate Medical Educa tion and Research (JIPMER), 
Puducherry and other healthcare infrastructure proj ects under the Pradhan Mantri 
Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) in a time bound ma nner. HLL has its own vaccine 
process experts and HLL’s detailed engineering part ner, NNE Pharmaplan is a renowned 
consultant for Pharma/Biotech projects all over the  globe with expertise  in vaccine 
facility designing.  NNE Pharmaplan has implemented  several projects successfully in 
Biopharma /Vaccine field.  NNE Pharmaplan is a Dani sh German multinational company 
specialized in providing Engineering , Consulting a nd plant supplies services exclusively 
to the Healthcare Industry. NNE Pharmaplan’s area o f expertise covers Sterile infusions/ 
liquids , containment facilities , solid dosage for ms, Biotech and Vaccine plants, Bulk 
Pharmaceutical Chemical, Medical disposable and Qua lity system (GMP, Validation, 
Qualification, implementation and training) . M/s N NE Pharmaplan has been selected on 

the basis of International Competitive Bidding proc ess by M/s HLL for the Integrated 
Vaccines Complex Project.  
 
The PIB memorandum for establishment of Integrated Vaccine Complex (IVC) at 
Chengalpattu, near Chennai, Tamil Nadu and the project report are under circulation with 
the PIB members, Planning Commission and Finance Mi nistry for approval. M/s HLL 
Lifecare Ltd. alongwith the Project management Cons ultant, M/s NNE Pharmaplan has 
already completed various pre project activities li ke Conceptual design, layout 
preparation, basic engineering etc. Planning Commis sion has given “in-principle” 
approval to the proposal. Department of Economic Af fairs and Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation , Department of Expenditur e have also supported the 
proposal with some observations.  
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH RE PLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
II INTEGRATED VACCINE COMPLEX, CHENGALPATTU 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.9 As pointed out by the Committee earlier, vaccin e requirements of the country will 
be mainly met by the private sector at least during this period of three years. This position 
has been further complicated by the three units rem aining shut during the last two years. 
Not only this, it cannot be guaranteed that the pro posed Integrated Vaccine Complex will 
be completed within the prescribed time-limit, spec ially due to lack of experience/ 
expertise of the implementing agency, i.e. HLL Life care Ltd. The Committee, therefore, 
is of the firm view that priority should be making the three vaccine-producing units fully 
functional by restoring their production capacity. Simultaneously, the process of making 
them GMP compliant may also continue. Besides that,  the Committee would like to 
emphasize once again, that there is a need for revi ew of the ambitious project of 
Integrated Vaccine Complex. If all the required sup port of every kind,- be it 
infrastructure, manpower, technical expertise, mode rn equipment and machinery is 
placed at the disposal of all the three units, the requirement of the proposed complex may 
perhaps not arise.  
 
Action Taken by the Ministry: 
 
 
Government is committed to fulfilling the assurance  made through the 
Presidential address to  both houses of the Parliam ent and at different fora  from time to 
time  and is making every effort to ensure their (t hese three Institutes ) becoming cGMP 
compliant . Thus, Central Government in exercise of  its powers under Sub rules (3) of 
Rule 85 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 have  ordered revocation of suspension 
of the licenses of the these  Institutes vide order  No. X.11035/2/2010-DFQC dated 
26/2/2010.  These Institutes have also been asked t o ensure that the production line is 
made fully compliant with GMP standards within three years. 
 
To augment production capacity of the units new cGM P compliant plant is being 
built at CRI Kasauli.  Separate plant has also been  approved for PII Coonoor which shall 
be executed shortly.  BCG VL, Guindy too has restar ted work on the 
construction/maintenance work. Revamping of an exis ting production facility is a  time 
consuming process.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 The Committee is happy to note that the Department has given a categorical 
assurance on making the three PSUs GMP compliant wi thin a period of three years 

for which revamping of the existing production faci lities at each location is in 
progress. However, the Committee notes that the Dep artment’s reply is silent about 
the Committee’s recommendation regarding reviewing the requirement of the 
proposed Integrated Vaccine Complex. In the light o f the new developments 
regarding making the three PSUs GMP compliant, the Committee would like to 
reiterate its recommendation made in Para 2.9 of th e 43 rd  Report, as quoted above, 
that the Department undertake a review of the requi rement of the proposed 
Integrated Vaccine Complex. 
 
III CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, KASAULI   
Recommendations/Observations 
 
3.1 In its 34 th  and 38 th  Reports, the Committee had taken serious note of m ishandling 
of a project for creating new facilities at CRI, Ka sauli by M/s HSCC, Noida. The 
following recommendation for initiation of immediat e corrective measures including 
action against the project agency was, accordingly, made by the Committee. 
 
       The Committee observes that the reply of the Minist ry regarding the 
Action Taken by the Ministry against M/s HSCC, Noid a for its failure to build 
a GMP compliant structure at CRI, Kasauli is simply  untenable. The 
Committee also raises serious doubts on the process  of awarding the contract 
to M/s HSCC, Noida. The process of awarding contrac t for building a GMP 
complaint structure to an agency which did not have  the technical competence 
to build such a unit itself speaks volumes of a fau lty process of selection ab 
initio.  The Committee observes that it seems that from 1997-98 until 
December, 2006 – the time when M/s HSCC, Noida expr essed its inability in 
completing the project, monitoring as required was not done by the Ministry to 
assess the progress of work undertaken by the agency. (Para 3.3) 
 
      The Committee also finds that the action initi ated by the Ministry against 
M/s HSCC, Noida has been perfunctory in nature. Ins tead of pursuing the 
matter vigorously, the Ministry has moved at a snai l’s pace which is evident 
from the fact that action against the company has b een initiated only after the 
matter was reported upon by the Committee in its 34
th  Report in February 
2009, and thereafter also, it took the Ministry mor e than six months to reach a 
decision regarding referring the matter to CVC for advice and almost nine 
months to issue a notice to M/s HSCC.  The reasons as to why the matter has 
remained pending from December, 2006 till date with out any substantial 
action being initiated against the defaulter compan y simply escapes the 
Committee's comprehension. The Committee also feels  that the tardy pace of 
Action Taken by the Ministry so far clearly indicates dilatory tactic on the part 
of the Ministry. The Committee’s apprehensions in t his regard get reinforced 

from the fact that the records pertaining to this c ase, which were forwarded to 
the CVC on 31 st  August, 2009, were not furnished in the prescribed  new 
reporting format. The Committee is simply not ready  to buy the argument that 
it took more than two months for the CVO of the Min istry to come to know that 
the communication from the Ministry to CVC was not forwarded as per the 
new reporting format. The Committee is constrained to call into question the 
seriousness of the Ministry to take stringent actio n against those who were 
responsible for this mix-up. The Committee, therefo re, recommends that the 
Departmental Inquiry under progress may be complete d within a strict time 
frame and action may be initiated against those res ponsible without further 
delay. The Committee would like the Ministry to pro vide a copy of the enquiry 
report as well as the follow-up Action Taken by the  Ministry thereon. (Para 
3.4)        
 
Recommendations/Observations 
          
3.2 The Committee notes with surprise that the Depa rtment has not furnished any 
information regarding the Action Taken by the Minis try against M/s HSCC, Noida for 
breach of agreement nor has furnished any details r egarding the Action Taken by the 
Ministry against those who were responsible for the mix-up. The Committee expresses its 
grave concern on the matter and observes that the M inistry has been perfunctorily 
pursuing the matter. From the information furnished  to it during September last year, the 
Committee is aware that the matter was in the proce ss of being referred to the CVC for 
further investigation. The Committee is also aware that the CVO of the Ministry had 
advised that since the case pertained to profession al impropriety rather than financial 
impropriety, the administrative division should pro cess the case for taking administrative 
action against the officers as deemed fit. However,  the absence of any committed action 
on the part of the Ministry only reinforces the Com mittee's apprehensions that perhaps 
the Ministry is not keen to bring this issue of grave impropriety involving huge amount of 
public funds to a logical conclusion.  
 
Recommendations/Observations                  
 
3.3 The Committee fails to comprehend the sheer lac k of action on the part of the 
Ministry. It seems that the observations/ recommend ations of a Parliamentary Committee 
do not evoke any sense of pro-active initiative in the Ministry. Ideal position would have 
been that the Ministry had taken all the corrective  measures on its own.  Considerable 
time has passed since M/s HSCC, Noida was issued a notice for breach of their 
agreement and administrative division of the Minist ry was advised by its CVO to process 
the case for taking administrative action against t he officers as deemed fit. The very fact 
that the Ministry has chosen not to come forward wi th any further report speaks for itself 
that perhaps it is not keen to pursue the matter. The Committee strongly feels that such an 
approach of the Ministry is a fit case of a deliber ate attempt to ignore the 
recommendations of a Parliamentary Committee. The C ommittee, therefore, calls upon 
the Ministry to expedite the required action with f inal disposal of the case and furnish a 
status report in this case as soon as the Committee Report is presented to Parliament.                      

Action Taken by the Ministry: 
 A Committee under the Chairmanship of Director Gen eral of Health Services 
was 
constituted to fix the responsibility against the o fficers who were involved in the project 
on renovation/upgradation of DPT manufacturing faci lity at CRI, Kasauli undertaken by 
HSCC.  Show-cause notices were issued to the office rs concerned of Directorate General 
of Health Services and HSCC. All the officers conce rned have denied the charges in their 
reply.  For taking/deciding further action against these officers, matter is under 
consideration.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee is deeply disturbed by the sheer ina ction on the part of the 
Department in taking appropriate steps against M/s HSCC, Noida for its failure to 
build a GMP compliant structure at CRI, Kasauli. Al though four years have 
elapsed since M/s HSCC had expressed its inability to complete the structure in 
December, 2006, yet the only tangible step taken so  far by the Ministry against the 
agency for breach of agreement has been the issuanc e of a show-cause notice on 16 th  
November, 2009, - about which the Ministry had info rmed the Committee way back 
in November 2009.  Though more than a year has pass ed by since then, the 
Department has failed to come up with a worthy repl y in the matter. The 
Committee calls into question the approach adopted by the Department in the 
matter and observes that in this context it puts th e governance in very poor light. It 
observes that if the punitive process in the Minist ry moves at such a tardy pace then 
the Department is offering no checks on repetition of instances of such nature in 
future. The Department has not informed about the t imelines by when the officers 
were issued show-cause notices and the replies of t he officers and HSCC received 
thereto. The Committee is also unaware as to what a mount of time would be 
required for considering the further course of acti on and what degree and 
magnitude of action is proposed. The Committee note s that it is high time that the 
Department put the matter on a fast-track mode and set a deadline for taking action 
in a time-bound manner so that the issue doesn’t ge t engulfed in the labyrinths of 
red-tape.  The Committee desires to be kept apprise d of the final action taken in the 
matter. 
 
 

Recommendations/Observations                  
3.5 The latest feedback of the Ministry simply indi cates that the project of CRI, 
Kasauli becoming GMP compliant is currently under e xecution by M/s HLL Lifecare 
Ltd. (HLL LCL) which had been directed to take up t he work on fast-track mode and is 
being closely monitored. In the absence of any spec ific time-bound Action Plan indicated 
by the Ministry, the Committee is not in a position  to assess the progress made so far. 
The only authentic information available with the Committee is that the Javid Chowdhury 
Committee had visited the unit from 21 
st  to 23 rd  November, 2009 and had found that out 
of the 65 deficiencies pointed out in the NRA Inspection Report, 44 deficiencies had been 
rectified and in 21 deficiencies, the upgradation w ork was under way. These remaining 
deficiencies in the existing line could be rectifie d in 3 months. After completion of the 
upgradation of the existing line, fresh production could start in 3 months. The Committee 
hopes that the full manufacturing capacity of CRI, Kasauli must have been restored by 
now. 
Action Taken by the Ministry: 
 The project is being executed by M/s HLL LCL on fa st track mode. A meeting 
was convened under the Chairmanship of Additional S ecretary on 3 
rd  November, 2010 
with all stakeholders viz. Directors, CRI, M/s HLL LCL, Dte. GHS and DCG (I) to 
review the progress made in the revival of the vacc ine manufacturing units. It has been 
informed by HLL that Commissioning and validation o f the equipments would be 
finished in the Mid May, 2011 and commercial produc tion can be started from June, 
2011.  It has been informed by the Institute that a ctions on some of the deficiencies are 
dependent on construction of new facility which is being executed by M/s HLL LCL.   
However, production of the vaccines in the existing  facility has been started at the 
Institute as stated earlier.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
 
The Committee is happy to note that the revival of the vaccine 
manufacturing unit is underway and that production of the vaccines in the existing 
facility has also started at the Institute.  The Department has informed that M/s HLL 
LCL has informed the former that commissioning and validation of the equipments 
would be finished by the Mid-May, 2011 and commerci al production can be started 
from June, 2011. From the reply stated above by the  Department it is unclear as to 
whether a mechanism is in place to assess the progr ess of work being carried out. 
Keeping in view the bitter past experience of the a borted execution of the GMP-
compliant project by HSCC, the Committee feels that  strict monitoring of the 
progress of the work underway at all the three Inst itutes needs to be made by the 

Department to avoid unnecessary delays and to addre ss the bottlenecks in achieving 
the targets within the set timelines. The Committee  would like to be apprised about 
the timelines set for completing GMP-compliant structures at all the three Institutes 
and the progress made in this regard on a quarterly  basis till the projects are 
completed and also the details of the monitoring me chanism put in place for the 
projects by the Ministry.   
VI VACANCY POSITION IN THE VACCINE-PRODUCING UNITS 
Recommendations/Observations                  
 
6.2    The Committee is somewhat surprised to obser ve that no response has been 
forthcoming from the Ministry on such a vital issue . It seems that Committee’s repeated 
efforts to draw the attention of the Ministry in th is regard during the last two-three years 
have gone unnoticed. The Ministry has not considere d it important enough to initiate any 
action so far. This is the case when two of the uni ts, i.e. CRI, Kasauli and BCG VL, 
Guindy are subordinate offices of DGHS while PII, C oonoor is an autonomous body 
under the Ministry.     
 
Recommendations/Observations                  
 
   
6.3 The Committee has no other alternative but to d raw the attention of the Ministry 
to the following recommendations made in the Interi m Report of the Javid Chowdhury 
Committee, constituted by the Ministry itself: 
 
"10.1      For close to a decade now, these three v accine manufacturing units 
have been tottering with poor continuity in the tenure of the Directors. A large 
section of the vacant posts are those that lapsed a fter remaining vacant for 
over one year under the economy orders of the Minis try of Finance. The staff 
in these establishments have been so comprehensivel y depleted that they do 
not even retain the critical mass of man-power requ ired to implement a 
revival programme. The filling up of vacant posts is urgently required. 
 
10.2   The new manufacturing lines, which will be f or much larger capacities, 
will no doubt, require a package of additional post s. In order to kick-start the 
revival process, the Committee would urge that the creation of new technical 
posts for the new production lines not be processed  in the conventional 
manner. For this category of posts, the Committee w ould recommend that the 
authority to create new technical posts be entruste d to an Empowered Group 
headed by a reputed scientist-administrator. Only s uch a modality will ensure 
that the additional staff required for the new prod uction lines will be 
approved in reasonable time with well-informed obje ctivity. For the 
additional administrative posts for the new product ion lines, the normal 
procedure adopted in government would serve the purpose adequately. 
 

10.3 As for the vacant posts linked to the existing  production lines, 
government should consider a ‘single-shot’ revival methodology. These posts 
have fallen vacant only because there was no one to  even plead the case for 
their continuance to run the units. The processing of these posts through the 
normal procedure applicable to new posts would take  anything up to two 
years. Any plan of the Ministry to implement the ne w projects would be 
critically handicapped as a result of such a large vacancy position. The posts 
had lapsed because of neglect, after all it is no o ne’s case that the manpower 
requirement for the existing production line has di minished over time. It is in 
these circumstances that the Committee makes the un conventional 
recommendation that Government as a special case (n ot to be treated as a 
precedent), revive the vacant posts with immediate effect and to hasten the 
selection process, contractual appointments should be considered. It is felt 
that this would go a long way in strengthening the team that will have to 
implement the new projects."                                 
 
Recommendations/Observations                  
 
6.4 The purpose of the Committee for quoting from t he Javid Chowdhury Committee 
Report is only to emphatically impress upon the Min istry to initiate immediate action for 
making available the required manpower for the exis ting production lines. Similar 
exercise is required to be initiated for the new pr oduction lines also. The Interim Report 
was submitted by the Javid Chowdhury Committee on t he 5 th  February, 2010. The 
Committee would be happy if the sense of urgency fo r making available the required 
manpower at the three units reflected in the Report  has not escaped the attention of the 
Ministry and some corrective exercise has already s tarted. The Committee would 
appreciate if a Status Note in this regard is submitted to it at the earliest.  
 
 Action Taken by the Ministry:
 
 
 The SFC proposal for revival of the vaccine manufa cturing facilities at CRI, 
Kasauli which included not only setting up of a new  cGMP compliant plant but also the 
additional manpower, had been approved in the meeti ng held on 6 
th  July, 2010. The 
Director General of Health Services who has direct administrative control over CRI, 
Kasauli was instructed to take urgent action to fill up the required number of vacant posts 
to make the facilities cGMP compliant. DGHS after c onsultation with experts, has asked 
Director, CRI, Kasauli to submit proposal to fill u p the vacant posts. The Committee 
under the Chairmanship of DGHS has recommended for requirement of total 98 staff for 
DTP vaccine manufacturing facility. Out of 98 staff  required, 56 staff are already 
available and 42 staff are required to be appointed . Out of 42 staff required to be 
appointed, 33 staff would be appointed against vaca nt positions in CRI, Kasauli and 9 
posts which are not on the strength of CRI, Kasauli  are required to be created and filled 
up. For BCGVL, Guindy and PII, Coonoor , no proposa l has been received for filling up 
of the posts so far. In order to operate CRI, Kasau li as per GMP, training to CRI staff has 
also been imparted at already operational GMP facility. 
 

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee notes that the matter concerning the filling up of the vacant 
posts was approved in the meeting held on 6 th  July, 2010. The Director General of 
Health Services who has direct administrative contr ol over CRI, Kasauli was 
instructed to take urgent action to fill up the req uired number of vacant posts to 
make the facilities cGMP compliant and that the wor k in this regard is under 
progress.  
 Before proceeding further on any discussion in this  regard, the Committee 
would like to draw the attention of the Ministry to  its comments/observation made 
in the matter in its 34 th  Report:  
“5.6 CRI, Kasauli has also stated that it has extre me shortage 
of scientists.  It has also reported that there hav e been no regular 
Director at the Institute after 1997 onwards and al so that the 
present incumbent is on deputation basis. A conside rable number 
of vacancies existed in the Technical Staff at the middle and the 
higher levels. The Committee understands that the p ower to fill 
up the vacancies in Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ posts i n these 
Institutes lies with the office of the Director Gen eral of Health 
Services and not the Institutes. It is also clear f rom the 
information provided in the Status Report that the Institutes had 
forwarded a number of proposals to the Ministry for  filling up of 
vacancies of group ‘A’ and ‘B’ services. But, it se ems that the 
matter was not taken up in the right earnest by the  Ministry to fill 
up these vacancies. The Committee has also observed  that a 
number of posts have either lapsed/ abolished or pr oposed to be 
lapsed/ abolished. The Committee would also like to  state here 
that in comparison to CRI and BCG VL, the PII which  is an 
autonomous body functioning under the Ministry has not 
reported any shortage of manpower. The Committee be lieves that 
if similar administrative autonomy had been delegat ed to CRI 
and BCG VL, the problems relating to shortage of manpower and 
many other such issues could have been sorted out e arly. The 
Committee would appreciate if a work study about th e staff 
requirement in accordance with GMP norms is initiat ed at the 
earliest both at CRI and BCG VL so as to have a via ble set up 
there.” 
 
The Committee observes that the main reason for del ays in obtaining 
sanction for filling up of posts at CRI owes to the fact that till date all administrative 

powers relating to CRI Kasauli have remained concen trated with the office of the 
DGHS under the Ministry. The Committee notes that w ith the existing workload of 
the office of DGHS, it would take some length of ti me before any pressing matter 
regarding these Institutes get noticed by the admin istrative office at New Delhi. To 
substantiate, the Committee would like to state her e that the Department has 
informed in its reply that at CRI, Kasauli, out of the 98 staff required, 56 personnel 
are already available and 42 personnel are yet to b e appointed. Out of these 42 
personnel required to be appointed, 33 personnel ar e to be appointed against vacant 
positions in CRI, Kasauli and 9 posts which are not  on the strength of CRI, Kasauli 
are required to be created and filled up. The Depar tment has informed further that 
the matter concerning the filling up of the vacant posts was approved in the meeting 
held on 6 th  July, 2010.  Though six months have elapsed since then yet no tangible 
progress in the matter seems to be visible.  This i s also the case with respect to 
BCGVL Guindy and PII, Coonoor, from where no propos al has been received for 
filling up of the posts so far. The Committee obser ves that it was this concern which 
was foremost in its mind while offering the above-c ited comments in its 34 th  Report. 
The Committee stands by the same view today.  
It is pertinent to state here that the above view o f the Committee stands 
vindicated by the following observation/ recommenda tion made in the Final Report 
of the Javid Chowdhury Committee: 
 
“8.1   The Committee has observed that one crucial underlying 
cause for the malfunctioning of the manufacturing U nits is the 
unsuitable organizational structure they are frozen in. Because of 
a historical handicap, the public sector vaccine/se ra units have 
an organizational structure that belongs to a past age – CRI, 
Kasauli and BCGVL, Guindy are still departmental 
undertakings; while PII, Coonoor is a registered so ciety. The 
Committee is unable to understand what purpose is s erved in this 
day and age by keeping CRI Kasauli and BCGVL Guindy  bound 
down as departmental undertakings. These two undert akings are 
narrow-band, high-tech units. Most officials and te chnical staff 
have specialist skills only in the line of manufacture of the limited 
items produced there. Not many of them can be inter changed 
even within the three units under review here. It i s near 
impossible to find an official in the Directorate w ho could assist 

a manufacturing unit in a technical problem relatin g to the 
manufacture of vaccine/sera. …….. 
….. The Committee would suggest that these units be mad e 
autonomous at the earliest, by registering them as a non-profit 
company under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956  or 
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 . …….. 
……… To sum up, the Committee is of the considered view that 
the units working as attached offices to Directorat e – CRI, 
Kasauli and BCGVL, Guindy – are completely hamstrun g. It 
therefore recommends that the Ministry consider mak ing them 
autonomous by registering them independently under the 
Companies Act/ Societies Registration Act. The Comm ittee 
suggests that this should be done on priority basis  with 
adequate financial powers delegated to the management .”  
 
The Committee is in broad agreement with the above recommendation of the Javid 
Chowdhury Committee. The Committee fears that unles s autonomy is conferred 
upon these Institutes, given the present state of f unctioning of the Directorate, a 
situation similar to that of CRI, Kasauli would res urface in the coming years. The 
Committee, hence, recommends that the Ministry conf er autonomy on CRI, Kasauli 
and BCGVL, Guindy at the earliest.  
 
VII PROCUREMENT PRICE OF VACCINES 
Recommendations/Observations                  
 
 
 
7.3 The Committee notes that the reply of the Depar tment to very specific 
observations regarding rising prices of vaccines si nce the closure of three public sector 
vaccine producing institutes is completely evasive. The Committee would like to make it 
abundantly clear, even at the cost of being repetit ive, that the foremost objective before 
the Committee is to ensure availability of cheap an d affordable vaccines for infants and 
children in the country. It is for this reason that  stabilization of the prices of vaccines in 
the country is critical and the role of public sector units in ensuring low and stable prices 
acquires utmost importance. It is an undisputed fac t today that since the closure of CRI, 
Kasauli, BCGVL, Guindy and PII, Coonoor - the three  vaccine producing units, the 
prices of vaccines supplied under UIP have shot up.  Committee's analysis of the rising 
procurement prices of vaccines and observations the reto have been bolstered by similar 
findings in the Interim Report of the Javid Chowdhury Committee which has pointed out 
that between the years 2007-08 and 2009-10, the pri ces of vaccines purchased per vial 
have increased by 30 per cent (2008-09) and by 59 p er cent in 2009-10 on a year-on-
year basis over the prices of 2007-08 for BCG, betw een 25 to 63 per cent for DPT  for 
the same time periods.    
 
 

Action Taken by the Ministry: 
 It is a fact that procurement rates of DPT and BCG  Vaccine have risen 
marginally in 2008-09 but drastically in 2009-10.  
 
Recommendations/Observations                  
 
7.4 Since it is not clear as to what quantum of vac cines have been procured during 
2010-11 from the private sector vis-à-vis the publi c sector, the Committee apprehends 
that the prices of vaccines would have increased fu rther over that of the past year. The 
Department has informed that CRI, Kasauli would be supplying DPT and TT vaccine 
since April, 2010, and also supply of DPT by PII, C oonoor from December 2010. Under 
the above circumstances, the cost of supply of the various vaccines by the private sector 
units which were being supplied earlier by the thre e vaccine producing public sector 
units would remain a matter of concern.                    
 
  Action Taken by the Ministry: 
 
 
 Quantum of DPT and TT vaccine being procured during  2010-11 from the private 
sector vis-a vis public sector and the procurement prices of these vaccines during           
2010-11 are given as under:- 
 
Vaccine Total order 
placed ( In lakh 
doses) 
Order placed in 
Vaccine Institute 
Rate (In 
Rs.) 
Order placed on 
private 
manufacturers (In 
lakh doses)  
Rate (In Rs.) 
TT  1112 490 lakhs doses 
(CRI) 
16.45 
** 
621.62 16.45 + Sales 
Tax 
DPT 1641 630 lakhs doses (PII 
320 + CRI 310) 
23.53 
** 
1010.76 23.53+ Sales 
Tax 
** Rate is provisional. The final rate is to be decided by Cost Account Brach, Deptt. of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. 
Procurement price of DPT and TT vaccines during 2010-11 are slightly lower than the 
procurement price of these vaccines during 2009-10. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry has finally acknowledged the drastic 
rise in cost of vaccines in 2009-10. The Committee would like to state here that in its 
38 th  Report, it had pointed out to the unacceptably dra stic increase in the 
procurement rates of BCG, DPT and TT Vaccines in 20 09-10. It escapes the 
Committee’s comprehension as to why the entities co ncerned did not take recourse 
to a reasoned analysis of these factors before susp ending the licenses of the three 
PSUs in the name of non-compliance of cGMP norms. T hat there are gaping holes 
in the CLAA’s interpretation of the rules governing  implementation of GMP norms 

by the three PSUs are exposed in the Javid Chowdhur y Committee‘s Report,- a fact 
which makes the Department’s decision all the more untenable. The Committee 
feels that the least the Department should have don e is to play a pro-active role in 
stabilizing the prices of vaccines in view of the fact that the vaccines, required under 
the Universal Immunisation Programme, fall under es sential category. Here the 
Committee would like to quote a very telling commen t made by the Javid 
Chowdhury Committee : 
“Para 5.1 ….. To insulate the UIP from price and supply shocks, 
a cardinal principle of public health policy requir es the sourcing 
of the vaccines from public sector manufacturing un its to a 
substantial extent.”   
The Committee is pained to note that the passive ro le played by the Department 
subjected the prices of these vaccines to become captive to private entities. 
 Undeniably, the private sector units that were awa rded the contract of 
vaccine supply during the closure of the vaccine pr oducing PSUs embarked upon 
making super-normal profits during 2008-09 and espe cially during 2009-10. The 
Committee feels that enforcing the excessively high  cost of these vaccines on the 
public has been an erroneous move and has hit the p ockets of the poor and 
marginalized people adversely,- as also the Governm ent exchequer,- thereby 
defeating the very motive of welfare. The Departmen t has informed in its Action 
Taken Reply that production of BCG, DPT, DT and TT vaccines at CRI Kasauli, 
BCGVL, Guindy and PII, Coonoor are in full swing since July 2010. The Committee 
fails to comprehend the reasons for procurement of vaccines from these PSUs at the 
same rate as was being procured from the private manufacturers during 2009-10, as 
is evident from the data supplied by the Department. It has, however, been informed 
that the final rates would be decided by Ministry of Finance. 
 Now that the vaccine-producing PSUs have begun pro duction, the 
Committee recommends that a reasonable estimate of the cost of these vaccines be 
made and their prices be brought down from the rate s at which they were procured 
during 2010-11, so that the economically weaker and  marginalized people are not 
put through further hardships. The Committee also v iews with concern the 

considerable gap in the quantum of orders for diffe rent vaccines placed with public 
sector units vis-à-vis private manufacturers in 201 0-11. This crucial aspect also 
needs to be given the required attention while placing the orders during 2011-12. 
 
IX GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
 
9.2 The Committee is inclined to agree with the inf erence drawn by the Javid 
Chowdhary Committee. While inspection per se is a c ommendable course of action 
specially to ensure the quality of products related  to the life of infants, it is also required 
to be followed by the requisite corrective measures . In units under Government control, 
this should become the priority of all concerned. Unfortunately, this did not happen in the 
case of these three units. Track-record of the last  decade is ample proof. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly feels that review and revamping  of our drug regulatory machinery 
should be taken up at a priority level.  
     
 
  
Action Taken by the Ministry: 
 As per Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rule, DCG(I) do es not have licensing & de-
licensing power for all the 10,000 manufacturing un its mentioned in the report. These 
licenses are given by State Drugs Controllers.  
 DCG(I) is the Central License Approving Authority as per Rule 68-A of Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act and Rule for Blood Banks, LVP, Va ccine and sera, r-DNA product 
and notified Medical Devices only. Therefore, he ha s to compulsorily inspect the vaccine 
units and ensure the compliance within the conditions of the license(s).  
 The three PSUs were not inspected in 2001 & 2004 a long with WHO observer 
even though NRA assessment was also conducted in th ese years.   These PSUs were 
inspected as per regular inspection procedures thri ce from 2001 onwards which was also 
done for all the vaccine manufacturing units, witho ut any special emphasis or increased 
frequency of inspection for PSUs.  
 The WHOs NRA assessment programme focuses mainly o n the control of 
regulator (NRA) on vaccine manufacturing activity as per legal provisions, irrespective of 
its status as private or public. The three vaccine producing PSUs were inspected 
alongwith NRA assessment on prior approval from Min istry. Therefore, it is not 
appropriate to conclude that three vaccines produci ng PSUs were given exceptional 
attention & assume or indicate that others were not  (for which DCG(I) is not a licensing 
or central licensing approving authority).  
 The deficiencies pointed out were serious in natur e and were required to be 
complied with by the PSUs as per Drugs and Cosmetic s Act & Rules. However, the 

issuance of show cause notice & suspension of licen se was not a problem because of 
weak or selective drugs regulatory machinery, but b ecause of non upgradation of 
manufacturing unit and practice by PSUs as per law of the land (Drugs and Cosmetics 
Act and Rule) in timely or proactive manner.  
 The review of the drug regulatory machinery was al ready undertaken by 
Mashelkar Committee in year 2003 and the measures f or its revamping were suggested. 
Accordingly, steps are also being undertaken by Cen tral Government, in which, under 
Drugs & Cosmetic Act (a) Penalties for manufacture or sale of spurious, substandard 
drugs are increased up to life imprisonment (b) Var ious offences are made cognizable 
and non bailable; (c) provision of establishment of special courts is included.  
 Central Drug Authority Bill is being introduced wh erein a separate Central Drug 
Authority is being contemplated and a separate chap ter each on control of Medical 
Devices, clinical trials and exports are being intr oduced. Central Government is also 
increasing its infrastructure with respect to offic es, laboratories, manpower, testing 
capabilities etc. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
From a perusal of the submissions made by the Depar tment in its action 
taken note, the two assertions that have caught the  attention of the Committee are 
the perceived gravity of deficiencies pointed out i n the WHO-NRA Inspection 
Report of the three PSUs in terms of the Drugs & Co smetics Act and Rules, and 
invoking of legal provisions for allowing WHO to ex ercise a supervisory authority 
over the Indian NRA. The Committee feels that the t win issues are of vital 
importance and intricately linked. Hence, they are required to be analysed 
objectively before any conclusion can be drawn.  
 
One of the major reasons which had been offered by the Department for 
shutting down the three public-sector vaccine-produ cing PSUs was the issue of de-
recognition of NRA by WHO. The Committee, during th e course of its examination 
of the closure of the vaccine-producing PSUs,  was given the impression on more 
than one occasion that if the National Regulatory A uthority, who is the Drug 
Controller General of India, adopts a dual standard  by imposing certain GMP 
norms on private sector but having a completely non -compliant public sector, he 
would stand de-recognized by the World Health Organ isation (WHO) which is the 

main agency for getting the country’s exports to th e other countries. Consequently, 
this would render the private sector vaccine produc ing units ineligible for listing on 
the WHO’s pre-qualified vendor list. However, it wa s the considered view of the 
Committee then that in the name of exports, GMP com pliance and new technology, 
the entire vaccine market cannot be handed over to the private sector and thereby 
push the nation towards an impending danger of vaccine insecurity. The Committee 
was of the view that such an approach by WHO would be tantamount to 
interferences in the sovereign functioning of India  – a fact unacceptable by any 
standards.  The Javid Chowdhury Committee, which ex amined the issue in greater 
detail, held similar views. Some of its comments re levant to the context of the 
present discussion are placed below: 
 
Para 1.4  In the year 2001 and 2004 inspection was carried o ut 
exclusively by Indian Inspectors authorized by the DCGI.   In the 
year 2001, WHO had asked to be associated with the inspection, but 
permission, was explicitly denied by the Indian Gov ernment.  The 
position then taken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare was 
that in the course of the inspection, the NRA is di scharging a 
sovereign function in which an international agency cannot become a 
partner.   In year 2004 the WHO was not associated with the 
inspection.  However, in 2007, the WHO asked to be associated and 
the Ministry agreed to the request with the approval of HFM. 
 
Para 3.3  …..The Committee notes that the DCGI’s proposal di d not 
give any reason for departing from the earlier deci sion taken by the 
government in year 2002 to not permit WHO to join t he NRA 
Inspection . ……    
 
Para 4.3  ……..  Repeatedly, emphasis has been focused on the line 
that, if the NRA is derecognized, the private manuf acturers will be 
treated as ineligible for WHO pre-qualification as vendors. The 
risk or damage to public interest resulting from cl osure of the 
public sector units has never been considered : though, on a few 
occasions mention has been made that steps will hav e to be taken to 
secure alternate sources of supplies for vaccines.  In sum, it is the 
view of the Committee that the Ministry (including the DGHS and the 
DCGI) did not carry out an appropriately structured  analysis of the 
sensitive issue under review.  The discharge of the  responsibility of 
due diligence by the Ministry required that the var ious facets of the 
issue be discussed in a simple structured manner so  that pros and 

cons were transparent.  The Committee is of the con sidered view that 
had this been done, the Ministry would not have com e to a decision 
to close the units in an abrupt manner.  
 
Para 4.4.1.2   ……… the advice/information offered by WHO- about 
improvement in product standards and technical proc esses, 
advancement in treatment regimen and new diagnostic s – is of 
immense value. However, in order to maintain a harm onious 
working relationship, it is important to accurately  demarcate the 
boundary between the reach of WHO’s advocacy and th e irreducible 
extent of exercise of sovereign authority by the Indian Government.  It 
is known that the WHO has been offering technical a dvice to the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on GMP- relat ed issues. 
However, no matter how useful WHO’s advice may be, the NRA’s 
sovereign function under statute, of inspecting the  manufacturing 
standards of drugs and pharmaceutical units, cannot  be discharged 
in partnership with an international organisation. Under the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act and Rules, the DCGI is an apex po int of the 
Indian Regulatory System. This was the position tak en by the 
Government in year 2002 when it denied WHO the perm ission to 
conduct inspections jointly with the NRA……….. It is seen that the 
decision taken by HFM on 10-05-07, to permit WHO in spectors to 
be associated with the NRA inspection, is on an opaque note stating 
that Secretary (HFW) has opined that we should not object to the 
participation of WHO representatives in the NRA ins pection. The 
note does mention that in the past the Ministry had  not agreed to 
this request of WHO. However, there is no analytica l discussion as 
to why we should reverse the earlier position of the government. 
 
 
Para 4.4.1.3  ………. However, the assertion which seems to 
have been made by WHO- that if WHO was not permitted to inspect 
public sector manufacturing units (even if these ha d no intention 
of applying for WHO’s pre-qualified vendor’s list),  this would 
result in the de-recognition of the Indian NRA, and  would 
consequently render the private vaccine units ineli gible for listing 
on WHO’s pre-qualified vendor list –seems to be an arbitrary 
conclusion.    On the basis of what has been mentioned earlier,  it is 
apparent to the Committee that WHO does not exercis e any 
supervisory authority over the Indian NRA.  Hence t he question of 
de-recognition of the Indian NRA cannot arise.  WHO  would 
naturally be entitled to make an independent assess ment of the 
level of cGMP compliance of those manufacturing uni ts that apply 
for pre-qualified vendor-listing with WHO.  Needless to say, the 
NRA in India can take a differing view on the statu s of compliance 
for the very same units for its own purpose.   ………… Treating the 

eligibility of individual applicants as contingent upon public sector 
units meeting eligibility standards, would clearly be arbitrary.  
  Incidentally, it may be mentioned that after the vi ew 
expressed in the above paragraph had been incorpora ted in the 
interim Report, the issue of de-recognition of the NRA by WHO 
seems to have been dropped, and the Indian supplier s of vaccines 
to international agencies have suffered no disadvantage.  
 
Para 4.4.1.4   The Committee is of the considered view that ther e is 
considerable confusion in the dialogue between the Ministry and the 
WHO on the issue relating to the GMP standards requ ired to be 
achieved by public sector vaccine units. The WHO ha s not set out its 
position/explicitly in writing at any time. The onl y mention of their 
position is in passing notes of different Indian of ficials. These Notes 
mention that WHO has been insisting that if India d oes not permit 
the inspection of public-sector manufacturing units , WHO will de-
recognise the Indian NRA. Also, that if the Indian NRA is de-
recognised, no unit, including private units that o therwise are 
compliant with the WHO GMP norms, will be eligible for listing as 
WHO’s pre-qualified vendors. The only communication on record 
on this subject is a letter dt 17-5-06 addressed to  HFM from the 
Additional Director General, WHO. This letter doesn ’t state that 
WHO will de-recognise the Indian NRA if it is not a llowed to 
inspect the public sector manufacturing units, or, if in their 
assessment the public sector manufacturing units ar e seen to be 
non-compliant with WHO GMP norms.  Clearly, the context of this 
letter only relates to the requirements of eligibil ity for pre-qualified 
listings as vendors for purchases relating to inter national 
programmes.  The letter however, does assert the vi ew of the WHO, 
that India has followed dual GMP standards, for vac cines, with 
comparatively weak enforcement of GMP for public se ctor units.  By 
way of a caution, the letter does say that there ma y be a major 
negative impact should the NRA assessment fail to m eet the critical 
indicators required for the WHO pre-qualification s cheme. The 
Committee is of the considered view that as a matte r of 
administrative practice, in the normal course, the Ministry should 
have obtained the position of the WHO on this sensi tive issue in 
explicit terms in writing. It is considered to be i mprudent for the 
Ministry to arrive at a decision on this important issue merely on 
the basis of impressions and conjecture of some off icials in the 
Indian administration.  
 
Para 4.4.1.5  ……… While no one disagreed with this line of action, 
the suggestion was never pursued.   The Committee had also 
recommended in its Interim Report that the Ministry  may consider 
taking up the issue with the DG, WHO, as the differ ences appeared 

to be on account of a misunderstanding between the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare and the WHO.  While four of the 
Committee’s recommendations made in the Interim Rep ort have 
been accepted by the government and implemented, th is particular 
recommendation does not seem to have caught the att ention of the 
Ministry.  Even at the cost of repetition, the Committee woul d again 
suggest that the Ministry may consider entering int o a candid 
dialogue with the DG of the WHO so that the country ’s position is 
clearly understood by the WHO, and no unnecessary 
misunderstanding persists between the two.  
 
4.4.1.7   Despite having arrived at the above posit ion on the 
question of de-recognition, the Committee considers  it necessary to 
address the worst-case scenario, one in which, at s ome distant date 
when even those Indian manufacturers that are compl iant with 
WHO-level GMP norms, are not included in the pre-qu alified list of 
vendors. India has been a growing exporter of drugs/ vaccines under 
internationally-funded relief programmes. Exports o f drugs and 
vaccines from the country under such programme are of a value of 
about Rs. 500 crores annually i.e. US$ 0.1 billion.  Even if we 
hypothetically assume that these exports run the ri sk of being 
discontinued, the impact will be nominal, as the va lues of these 
exports is miniscule compared to the aggregate nati onal export 
earnings of about US$ 180 billion annually. In the perception of 
the Committee, the export earnings foregone, if such an eventuality 
arises, would be insignificant compared to the gain  through 
enhanced vaccine security for the country over the long run.  
 
From the excerpts above, it is abundantly clear tha t the case for suspension of the 
licenses of the three public-sector vaccine-produci ng PSUs, inter alia, rested on a 
major misconception and misinterpretation of certai n unclear signals passed 
through the communication from the office of the WH O. A prudent step that was 
blatantly missed by the Ministry was to determine a t the outset the exact position in 
this regard from the WHO. What is astonishing is the fact that it was not considered 
to be clarified later although the matter surfaced time and again (precisely five 
times in the notes at various levels in the Ministr y).  The Ministry’s decision to 
recommend the closure of the three vaccine-producin g PSUs was not only myopic 
but also exposed the nation to an unacceptable risk in vaccine security, while several 
states reeled under vaccine shortages. As has been discussed in the earlier Reports 
of the Committee, in the absence of supply of vacci nes from the public sector, the 

cost of vaccines in the domestic market appreciated  by 50-70 percent within a span 
of two years from the closure of the three vaccine-producing PSUs.  
 The Committee observes that it is high time that t he role and locus standi  of 
the NRA vis-a-vis the WHO are made clear. In the absence of any clear -cut 
boundary in the matter, it is left to the subjective interpretation of the officials at the 
helm of affairs at any point of time. In the view o f the Committee, such a precarious 
situation leaves ample scope for cases like that of  the three vaccine-producing PSUs 
to re-surface in future.  Hence, it strongly recomm ends that the Ministry, which is 
the prime intermediary between the WHO and the NRA,  should take up the matter 
with the WHO and clarify the position at the earlie st. The Committee would like to 
be apprised about the progress made by the Ministry in this regard. 
  
The other point on which the Committee would like t o focus on is the issue of 
the Department’s treatment of the compliance of GMP  norms by three vaccine-
producing PSUs. From the outset, the Department, wh ile justifying its decision to 
suspend the manufacturing licenses of the PSUs, has  offered that they had failed to 
comply with the GMP norms specified under the Drugs  & Cosmetics Act and Rules 
made thereunder. However, in the wake of the fact t hat the vaccines produced by 
the PSUs conformed to the standards of safety, effi cacy and quality, - a fact which 
was admitted by the then Secretary during the cours e of her deposition before the 
Committee on 26 th  October, 2009, - the Committee has been stressing in its 34 th , 38 th 
and 43 rd  Reports that the decision of the Department to clo se these PSUs on the 
grounds of non-compliance lacked justification. The  Committee is, therefore, 
perturbed to note that the Department, instead of a dmitting the fallacy of the 
decision taken by them earlier, continues to harp o n the lack of compliance of GMP 
norms by the three PSUs in its latest ATN also.  Th e Committee would like to state 
here that its observations regarding the Department ’s unfounded decision to close 
the three PSUs has been upheld by similar findings of the Javid Chowdhury 
Committee which has demolished the very grounds on which the Department’s 
decision in this regard was based. The Committee wo uld like to quote the following 
specific comments from the Final Report of the Javid Chowdhury Committee: - 

4.4.2.2    The extant national GMP standards for dr ug/ vaccine 
manufacture are largely identical to the cGMP stand ards 
recommended by the WHO. The standards, inter alia a pplicable to 
vaccine/ sera manufacturing units are set out in Pa rt I and Part IA of 
Schedule M of the D&C Rules. A perusal of this Schedule reveals 
that it covers a vast array of specifications that collectively impact 
on the quality of the manufacturing process. By the ir very number, 
nature and span of application, all these standards  cannot be met to 
the fullest extent by every manufacturing facility . …….. 
………. Also, legal compliance does not require that each o f the 
norms be individually met to the fullest extent, bu t rather that, the 
overall compliance of the various norms, should be adequate.  A 
shortcoming in some of the non-essential/ minor are as – need for 
re-configuration of production line; need for smoot h surfaces and 
dust-free junctions, corners and door-frames; defec ts in the animal 
house; need for amendment of SOPs and new documenta tion; 
calibration of equipment- does not automatically ca ll for 
suspension/ cancellation of the license……….. 
 
4.4.2.3 ………All three units have what can be called an 
unmatched corpus of experience in the area of manuf acture of 
vaccine/ sera. Here it may be mentioned that manufa cture of vaccine/ 
sera is not only an application of technology/ scie nce but it is also a 
quasi-art. The technical man-power in these units o ver time has 
acquired what can be called a unique experience in this line of 
activity. The private sector manufacturers of vacci ne/sera in the 
country are relatively recent entrants and the expe rience they draw 
upon is largely through the technical staff of publ ic sector units who 
are either retirees, or have been poached from publ ic sector units. 
The vaccine/sera supplied by the public sector manu facturers 
rigorously meet product standards notified under th e D & C Act and 
Rules- these units have had an unblemished production record.  
 
4.4.2.11 At this stage, the Committee would like to set-out its 
understanding of the key phrase of the GMP, which c onstitutes the 
overarching objective; to design the work area ‘to allow the 
production preferably in uni-flow and with logical sequence of 
operation’. In the view of the Committee, the key word in the 
provision is ‘preferably’.  Quite obviously this word was used to imply 
that the principle of logical sequence of operations would be enforced 
to the extent it is possible to optimize the workin g, in the 
circumstances in which the manufacturing units oper ate………The 
rate of progressive tightening of the compliance to  the GMP norms 
would be judged by the NRA in the totality of the c ircumstances. The 
facilities existing at the time of suspension of op erations were 
designed in an age when the idea encapsulated in th e phrase quoted 

at the start of the paragraph was non-existent. How ever, within the 
given space/ plot constraints at the three location s, it was noted by 
the Committee that much has been achieved by way of  rationalization 
of the flow of men and material in the manufacturin g process.  In fact, 
in all the units, within each section of the manufa cturing process…. 
the lay out and the manufacturing sequence has been  optimized.  It 
can safely be claimed that within each section of t he manufacturing  
line, production ‘in uni-flow and with logical sequ ence of 
operations’ has been achieved ………..To achieve the ultimate 
optimization through the entire process line, a new  production line 
will have to be established by incorporating the es sential technical 
features in the original design. ………  
 
4.4.2.12 ……..The standards set out in Schedule M of  the Rules do 
not require that all the specifications be met in t he most rigorous 
interpretation of the norms.  The Committee (which includes two 
technical members having expertise in the product/ manufacturing 
standards of drugs and pharmaceuticals) was of the considered view 
that it would be safe and in public interest, to re start the 
manufacturing activities in the existing production  lines with 
immediate effect. More explicitly, it was the consi dered view of the 
Committee that, the operation of the units would, i n the totality of the 
prevailing circumstances be in compliance with the GMP standards. 
 
 
 
The Committee notes that in view of the meticulous analysis and erudite comments 
of the Javid Chowdhury Committee in the matter no p urpose will be served by 
stating over and above what has already been set fo rth in the preceding paras. The 
Committee would only expect the Department to exerc ise greater caution and 
prudence while handling such issues in future and start taking remedial measures in 
right earnest. 
Recommendations/Observations             
     
 
9.4 The Javid Chowdhury Committee had rightfully co ncluded that it needs to be 
recognized that the sudden-death approach to the im plementation of the GMP standards 
would serve no public purpose; it would only bring about a crisis, as the operations of a 
larger portion of the domestic drug sector would co me to a halt. The above facts clearly 
indicate that so far judicious applicability of Dru gs and Cosmetics Rules has been 
lacking. The case of the three public sector units is a classic example of total lack of 
accountability of all concerned. It is time that a fool-proof mechanism for regulating the 
manufacturing units of all categories- both in the private and public sector, is evolved. 
Simultaneously, review of infrastructure and manpow er of the drug regulatory body also 
needs to be taken on a priority basis.  
 

Action Taken by the Ministry: 
 Sudden death approach is not allowed legally in th e implementation of Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act and Rule including GMP through its in built provisions. The rule 85(1) of 
Drugs & Cosmetics Act requires that, the manufactur er shall be given the opportunity to 
show-cause (detailing the deficiencies) prior to ta king action like suspension or 
cancellation. 
 
 This kind of provisions only has allowed our domes tic drug industry to grow to a 
turnover of Rs. 1 lakh crore per annum in 2010 with out any observable crisis especially 
with respect to this procedure for suspension of licensees. 
 
 The Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules, in itself h as various mechanism like (1) 
Mandatory provision to issue show-cause notice prio r to suspension/cancellation of 
license, (2) Provision of appeal to  the Government   by the aggrieved party to challenge 
the suspension/cancellation and power to the Centra l/State Government to allow or to set 
aside that order. Therefore, there is in- built mec hanism for judicious applicability of 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules. 
 
 The three PSUs have also gone through all these pr ocess of inspection in August, 
2007, issue of the show-cause notice on 14 th  December 2007.  Re-inspection in January, 
2008 and review of reply of PSUs and then suspensio n of license. The Central Govt. had 
revoked the licenses of these units in 2010 under t he provisions of the Drugs and 
Cosmetic Act and Rules made thereunder. 
As per rule, the compliance to essential GMP standa rds for the product quality 
and public health cannot be substituted by anything  else and the fulfillment of the 
requirement has to be done by manufacturer and not by regulator.  It is not appropriate to 
link the non-compliance and serious irregularities in the PSUs to goodness or badness of 
regulatory machinery. 
 
 
 Certainly, it is a time for evolving the foolproof  mechanism for regulating the 
manufacturing units of all categories both in priva te & public sector, without any bias or 
special consideration (for Government or private), keeping safety, efficacy and quality of 
the product . In general sense, it means a strong &  effective drug regulatory mechanism 
acting equally for private or public sector. Review of the infrastructure and man power of 
drugs regulatory body was undertaken by Mashelkar c ommittee in 2003. The committee 
has suggested various measures. Accordingly, steps are also being undertaken by Central 
Government in which under Drugs & Cosmetic Act:- 
 
(a) Penalties for manufacturer or sale of spurious, sub standard drugs have been increased up 
to life imprisonment 
(b) Various offences are made cognizable and non bailable. 
(c) Provision of establishment of special court is included. 
 
 The Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill 2007 prov iding inter alia for 
creation of a Central Drugs Authority and Central L icensing of Drugs was introduced in 
Rajya Sabha on 21st August, 2007. The Bill was refe rred to the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on the 23 rd  August, 2007 for examination and report. 

The Parliamentary Standing Committee submitted its observation/recommendations in its 
30 th  Report on the Bill on the 21 st  October, 2008, which is under 
examination/consideration in the Ministry. Further, fresh views of State/UT Governments 
have been asked for which are being received. 
 
  The Expert Committee on Drug Regulatory Issues un der the chairmanship of Dr. 
R.A. Mashelkar in its report had concluded that the  existing infrastructure at the Centre 
and States was not adequate to perform the assigned  functions efficiently and speedily. 
The Committee felt that creating another authority would not solve the problem at hand. 
It was essential to strengthen the existing organiz ations to enable them to undertake all 
the functions envisaged for NDA. 
2. The manpower infrastructure available with the C DSCO prior to review as a 
result of the Dr. R.A. Mashelkar Committee recommendations in 2008 was as under:- 
Sr.No. Name of post & Pay scale No. of posts 
1 Drugs Controller (India)/Rs.18400-22400 1 
2 Joint DC(I)/14300-18300 1 
3 Deputy DC(I)/12000-16500 9 
4 Asstt. DC(I)/10000-15200 16 
5 Biochemist/10000-15200 1 
6 Drugs Inspector/7500-12000 32 
7 Technical Officer/7500-12000 14 
8 Sr.Technical Asstt./6500-10500 17 
9 Technical Asstt./4500-7000 21 
 Total 112 
 
3. However, during the year 2008, 62 additional pos ts of Drugs Inspectors and 10 
Technical Officers were created with the concurrence of the Finance Ministry. During the 
year 2009, further 144 new posts were also created in CDSCO with the approval of the 
Finance Ministry as under: 
 
Sr.No. Name of post & Pay scale No. of posts 
1 Joint DC(I)/14300-18300 1 
2 Deputy DC(I)/12000-16500 10 
3 Asst. DC(I)/10000-15200 25 
4 Drugs Inspector/7500-12000 75 
7 Asst. Drugs Inspector/ G.P.4200/PB-2 31 
8 Biomedical Engineer/PB-3+G.P.6600 1 
9 Sr. Biomedical Engineer/PB-3+G.P.7600 1 
 Total 144 
 
Action has been initiated for filling up of these posts.  
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
9.6   The Committee is of the firm view that the in -depth analysis of all the critical issues 
related to the viability and manufacturing capacity  of the three premier public sector 

vaccine producing units clears all the ambiguity, c omplexities and contradictions 
involved. The Committee can only say that the administrative Ministry which is the nodal 
authority for all such policy matters/ as well as o bjective interpretation of statutory 
powers simply failed to come up to the rightful expectations. The Committee is not aware 
of the final report to be given by the Javid Chowdh ary Committee by 25 th  March, 2010. 
However, since the Interim Report of the Javid Chow dhury Committee given on the 5 th  
February, 2010, sufficient time has passed for the Government to take all the required 
corrective measures. The Committee believes that fo llow-up action on the Interim Report 
and recommendations made by the Committee in its pr esent Report in the real sense will 
make available the required vaccines - both qualita tive and cheap, for the infants. Status 
Note on the follow-up action taken on the Javid Cha udhary Committee Report as well as 
the recommendations made in the present Report may be submitted to the Committee at 
the earliest.  
 
Action Taken by the Ministry:  
 
             Final Report of the Javid Chowdhury Co mmittee has been submitted.  Summary 
of the recommendations made in the Interim Report of the Committee   are:-  
 
(i)        The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare co nsider revoking the suspension orders 
issued against the three public sector vaccine manu facturing units in response to the 
appeals filed under Rule 85(3) of the D&C Rules. Th e revocation may be made 
subject to the conditions that the new production l ine fully compliant with GMP 
standards be installed and commissioned within a period of three years. 
(ii)       The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare con sider directing the units 
holding finished products to confirm their quality standard and then supply 
and use them under the UIP before the date of their expiry of the products. 
(iii)       The Ministry of Health and Family Welfa re urgently make funds available to 
the units to complete the remaining upgradation wor ks on the existing 
productions lines. 
(iv)       The Core Committee piloting the upgradation o f the manufacturing units 
urgently intervene to resolve the existing deadlock  between the management 
of the units and the contractors executing the upgr adation works in the 
existing production lines. 
(v)       The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare consider the recommendations for 
reviving / filling up the vacant posts in the units  through the summary 
procedure suggested in this Section 11 (recommendation part) of the report, in 
order to expeditiously install the necessary manpow er to effectively pilot the 
implementation of the new production lines. Also, t he Ministry considers the 
recommended summary procedure for sanctioning the m an power for the new 
production line. 
(vi)       The Core Committee be advised to urgently und ertake the various 
responsibilities listed in Section 10 of the report  (mainly for filling up of 
vacant posts) for implementing the new production lines in the three units.  
 
 Central Government in exercise of its powers under Sub rules (3) of Rule 85 of 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 have ordered re vocation of suspension of the 

licenses of these Institutes vide order no. X.11035/2/2010-DFQC dated 26/2/2010.  These 
Institutes have also been asked to ensure that the production line is made fully compliant 
with GMP standards within three years.  
 
 The three vaccine producing units have initiated v accine manufacturing process.   
 
 Therefore, Recommendations at points (i), (ii) hav e been implemented and for 
point (iii) CRI, Kasauli and BCGVL, Guindy have been sanctioned funds for their revival 
and PII, Coonoor have also been sanctioned grants t o meet their expenditure. Follow up 
action on the remaining recommendations is under consideration.    
 
   The Director General of Health Services who has direct administrative control 
over CRI, Kasauli was instructed to take urgent act ion to fill up the required number of 
vacant posts to make the facilities cGMP compliant.  DGHS after consultation with 
experts has asked Director CRI, Kasauli to submit p roposal to fill up the vacant posts. 
The Committee under the Chairmanship of DGHS has re commended for requirement of 
total 98 staff for DTP vaccine manufacturing facili ty. Out of 98 staff required, 56 staff 
are already available and 42 staff are required to be appointed. Out of 42 staff required to 
be appointed, 33 staff would be appointed against v acant positions in CRI, Kasauli and 9 
posts which are not on the strength of CRI, Kasauli  are required to be created and filled 
up. For BCGVL, Guindy and PII, Coonoor, no proposal  has been received for filling up 
of the posts so far. In order to operate CRI, Kasau li as per GMP, training to CRI staff has 
also been imparted at already operational GMP facil ity. In addition, as and when training 
programmes are announced by Institute like National  Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research (NIPER), Mohali on GMP, offi cials from CRI are invariably 
deputed to undergo such trainings.  
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee fully agrees with the Department’s co ntention that sudden 
death approach is not legally allowed in the implem entation of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act and Rule including GMP through its in built provisions. The 
Committee, however, notes that this line of action was not followed in letter and 
spirit in the instant case. The Committee would lik e to cite here that in its 34th and 
38 th  Reports it had made abundantly clear that the repl ies filed by these Institutes 
were not given reasonable consideration in the ligh t of the rectifications carried out 
by them nor due consideration was given to the Depa rtment’s role and 
responsibility in making them GMP compliant (since two of the Institutes i.e., CRI 
Kasauli and BCGVL Guindy are subordinate offices un der it). Voicing its concerns 
on the manner in which the case of the three vaccin e-producing Institutes was 
handled by the Department, the Committee had observ ed that “…….. (it) strongly 

feels that a pre-conceived view about there being n o possibility of BCGVL (as well 
as the other Institutes) becoming GMP compliant is very dominant. (para 4.5 of its 
38 th  Report)”.  
 The Department, in its action taken reply, has tri ed to justify by stating that 
the three PSUs had gone through the due process of inspection in August, 2007, 
issued show-cause notices on 14 th  December 2007, and finally, re-inspected in 
January, 2008 and their replies reviewed before their licenses were suspended.  
 The Committee feels that at this juncture, it woul d be well within the context 
to place below certain pertinent findings from the Final Report of the Javid 
Chowdhury Committee:  
 
Para 3.15    When reviewing the recent history of the three 
public sector vaccine manufacturing units, one aspe ct is eye-catching 
- that these units have received an exceptional deg ree of attention 
from the regulatory authorities. Over the years, th e units have been 
inspected by the state and central drug control aut horities time and 
again (BCG, Guindy (5/2001 to 2/2008) – 10 inspecti ons; PII, 
Coonoor (10/99 to 3/2008) – 9 inspections; and CRI,  Kasauli (9/2002 
to 1/2008) – 5 inspections). The NRA has itself ins pected the units in 
2001, 2004 and 2007. While diligence in the regulat ory duties is 
something which should be commended, it must not ta ke the shape 
where it is perceived that these units are particul arly targeted. There 
are over 10,000 drugs and vaccine/ sera units in th e country. Out of 
which all but 350 are in the small-scale sector. DC GI has 40 drug 
inspectors under him who carry out statutory inspec tions on his 
behalf. The number of inspections carried out by th e central drug 
inspectors in different years is as under: 
 
Inspections carried out by Central Drug Inspectors 
  
              Year            Number of Inspections 
2004-05 1163 
2005-06 847 
2006-07 775 
2007-08 889 
2008-09 764 
 
Para 3.16    Under the law, the DCGI (CLAA) has jurisdiction 
over all drugs and pharmaceutical manufacturing uni ts in the 
country, including those categories for which the r egistration powers 
are with the State Government. However, the DCGI ha s informed the 

Committee that the central inspectors are carrying out inspections of 
only certain categories of items- Vaccines & Sera. Large volume 
parenterals, notified medical devices, blood banks and units applying 
for certificate of pharmaceutical products under WH O GMP 
Certification Scheme. The Committee is surprised to  note the role 
allotted to itself by the DCGI. Though it has a sup ervisory 
responsibility over the entire range of drug manufa cturing units, it 
has withdrawn itself from the inspection of the dru g units, except on 
request. Considering that it has jurisdiction over 10,000 
manufacturing units, the above table reveals that a  paltry number of 
manufacturing units were inspected. Given that in y ear 2007-08, the 
year in which the licenses of the pubic vaccine uni ts were suspended, 
the central inspectors only carried out 889 inspect ions, it is 
remarkable that the regulatory authority found it p ossible to spare so 
much attention for the three public sector vaccine manufacturing 
units. 
 
Para 4.4.3.2  ………. it will be seen that the crunch-decision take n by 
the DCGI, was accepted at the highest levels in bot h the political and 
bureaucratic executive line-up of the Ministry.  Re sponsibility for the 
flawed advice given to the DCGI would substantially  rest at those 
two levels – HFM and Secretary (HFW). 
 
Para 4.4.3.4  The Committee is surprised to note the procedure 
adopted by the DCGI after the receipt of the repres entations in 
response to the show-cause notices.  The action of the DCGI in 
ordering the suspension of the licenses without eve n going through 
a ritual of considering the representation, and the  subsequent 
inspection report, is plainly illegal .  …… 
   
Para 4.4.3.5  …… With disappointment, the Committee is 
constrained to note that at no level was the duty –  of ensuring a 
rigorous and objective analysis - discharged with t he necessary 
diligence.  In fact, evidence on record indicates t hat, in the midst of 
the administrative process, the decision was being treated as pre-
judged. 
 
Para 4.4.3.6  …………… In defending the closure of the 
manufacturing units, the HFM ( who had met the Committee on 13-
05-10)  had mentioned that during his period a large number of units 
had been closed down in the country for non-complia nce with the 
GMP standards.   For verifying this, the DCGI’s office was asked to 
provide information on the number of units whose li cense was 
suspended/cancelled in the last five years for non- compliance with 
the GMP standards. Despite several reminders, and d espite the 
caution that failure to furnish the information wou ld only be 

construed as deliberate to avoid embarrassing facts , these figures 
have not been furnished to the Committee.  The gene ral impression 
of the knowledgeable officials in the Ministry is t hat this number 
would be very small, if not nil.  Thus, the former-HFM’s impression 
about large-scale cancellation of licenses during h is period in office 
is mistaken. 
 
A startling information has been recorded by the Ja vid Chowdhury 
Committee in it’s Final Report that repudiates all claims of the Department that due 
procedure was followed by the Ministry before the c ancellation of the licences of the 
three vaccine-producing PSUs and upholds the Committee’s view that they were not 
treated fairly. From the records made available to the Javid Chowdhury Committee 
it was found that while PII Coonoor sent its reply on 4 th  January, 2008 to the show-
cause notice issued to it on 14 th  December, 2007, a second inspection of the Institu te 
was carried out on 3 rd  January, 2008 – i.e. before the representation was  sent by the 
Unit against the show-cause notice.   In addition, another disturbing fact that caught 
the Committee’s attention substantiating its above viewpoint while perusing the 
Javid Chowdhury Committee’s Final Report is placed below:  
 
Para 4.4.3.8  The Committee notes that another important point 
mentioned in DCGI’s note dt. 16-1-08 relates to a m eeting held on 
17-18 th  Dec, 2007 between Secy. (HFW) and the DCGI on the side 
of the Ministry, and Additional Director General an d his team from 
the side of WHO.  In the Interim Report, the Ministry 
representatives had inadvertently been mentioned as  Secretary 
(HFM) and DGHS.  DCGI has recorded that in this mee ting 
relating to the GMP standards of public sector unit s, the Ministry 
had agreed to suspend/cancel the licenses of the pu blic sector units 
by 15-1-2008.   
 
Para 4.4.3.9    The record doesn’t explain under what 
circumstances, and with whose authority, this assur ance was given. 
The show-cause notice for suspension/cancellation o f the license 
was issued on 14-12-07. It seems that almost immedi ately after the 
Secy. (HFW) went to Geneva, where he attended the m eeting on 
17 th  -18 th  December 2007. Looking to these facts, there is no  
gainsaying that, even before the notice period was over, and 
without taking into account the unit’s representati on into account, 
the assurance gave an unmistakable indication that the outcome 
was pre-decided. ….. 
 

Para 4.4.7.4 All in all the decision of the Ministry, both in le gal 
terms and on consideration of the merits, was palpa bly incorrect.  
Because the outcome of the evaluation process had b een pre-
determined the entire process was null and void.  On the other hand 
on consideration of the pros and cons from the view  point of public 
interest, the decision was unjustified. Despite applying the most 
liberal interpretation to the events, the Committee  could not uncover 
any rational reasons for the conclusion that was ar rived at in the 
Ministry.   The decision of the Ministry left the country wit hout any 
supply from the public sector, thus exposing it to an unacceptable 
risk in vaccine security. As a result of total depe ndence on private 
suppliers, the Ministry became captive to private c ommercial 
pressures.  The price of the domestic primary vacci nes rose by 50-
70% in the two years after the closure of the publi c sector units, and 
several key states experienced critical shortages o f the vaccines .  In 
view of this the Committee concludes, that, the pal pably incorrect 
decision of the Ministry based on an illegal proced ure and a flawed 
appreciation of the issues – was against broad community interest .”  
 
 At this stage, the Committee feels it expedient to bring into record that its concerns 
voiced in its earlier Reports on the subject regard ing the underplaying of their role 
by the Ministry or the Director General Health Services in making the three vaccine 
producing PSUs GMP compliant, especially when CRI, Kasauli and BCG VL, 
Chennai were functioning as subordinate offices und er the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, and the PII, Coonoor, functioned as  an autonomous institution 
under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare sta nds vindicated by the Javid 
Chowdhury Committee.  
 
From the forgone discussion, the Committee feels that the Ministry, the office 
of the DGHS and the DCGI cannot absolve themselves from the responsibility of the 
manner in which the case of the vaccine-producing P SUs was dealt with. The 
Committee finds the tenor of the action taken note,  which is inclined towards 
absolving the top authorities of the responsibility  for singling out the three PSUs 
while sparing the private players, to be unacceptab le. The Committee observes with 
anguish that by trying to defend its decision to cl ose down the three PSUs the 
Department has sought to deviate from the core conc erns expressed by the Javid 
Chowdhury Committee. In view of the provisions of t he Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
the mandate of the DCGI ensuing therefrom and the a ction of suspending the 

licenses of the PSUs, the Department’s argument tha t a fair treatment was meted 
out to them is a specious one which only seeks to s kirt the issue raised by the Javid 
Chowdhury Committee. It is apparent that effective corrective measures need to be 
initiated so that such a precarious situation does not recur in future.  
 
 The Committee urges upon the Department to take rem edial steps to address 
the shortcomings highlighted by the Javid Chowdhury  Committee. It also desires to 
be furnished with a point-wise Action Taken Note on  the recommendations/ 
observations of the Final Report of the Javid Chowdhury Committee. 
 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS --- AT A GLANCE 
 
II INTEGRATED VACCINE COMPLEX, CHENGALPATTU 
 
 The Committee is happy to note that the Department has given a categorical 
assurance on making the three PSUs GMP compliant wi thin a period of three years 
for which revamping of the existing production faci lities at each location is in 
progress. However, the Committee notes that the Dep artment’s reply is silent about 
the Committee’s recommendation regarding reviewing the requirement of the 
proposed Integrated Vaccine Complex. In the light o f the new developments 
regarding making the three PSUs GMP compliant, the Committee would like to 
reiterate its recommendation made in Para 2.9 of th e 43 rd  Report, as quoted above, 
that the Department undertake a review of the requi rement of the proposed 
Integrated Vaccine Complex.              (Para 2.9)  
 
III CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, KASAULI   
 
 The Committee is deeply disturbed by the sheer ina ction on the part of the 
Department in taking appropriate steps against M/s HSCC, Noida for its failure to 
build a GMP compliant structure at CRI, Kasauli. Al though four years have 
elapsed since M/s HSCC had expressed its inability to complete the structure in 
December, 2006, yet the only tangible step taken so  far by the Ministry against the 
agency for breach of agreement has been the issuanc e of a show-cause notice on 16 th  
November, 2009, - about which the Ministry had info rmed the Committee way back 
in November 2009.  Though more than a year has pass ed by since then, the 
Department has failed to come up with a worthy repl y in the matter. The 
Committee calls into question the approach adopted by the Department in the 
matter and observes that in this context it puts th e governance in very poor light. It 
observes that if the punitive process in the Minist ry moves at such a tardy pace then 
the Department is offering no checks on repetition of instances of such nature in 
future. The Department has not informed about the t imelines by when the officers 
were issued show-cause notices and the replies of t he officers and HSCC received 
thereto. The Committee is also unaware as to what a mount of time would be 

required for considering the further course of acti on and what degree and 
magnitude of action is proposed. The Committee note s that it is high time that the 
Department put the matter on a fast-track mode and set a deadline for taking action 
in a time-bound manner so that the issue doesn’t ge t engulfed in the labyrinths of 
red-tape.  The Committee desires to be kept apprise d of the final action taken in the 
matter.          (Para 3.1, 3.2 & 3.3) 
 
  
The Committee is happy to note that the revival of the vaccine 
manufacturing unit is underway and that production of the vaccines in the existing 
facility has also started at the Institute.  The Department has informed that M/s HLL 
LCL has informed the former that commissioning and validation of the equipments 
would be finished by the Mid-May, 2011 and commerci al production can be started 
from June, 2011. From the reply stated above by the  Department it is unclear as to 
whether a mechanism is in place to assess the progr ess of work being carried out. 
Keeping in view the bitter past experience of the a borted execution of the GMP-
compliant project by HSCC, the Committee feels that  strict monitoring of the 
progress of the work underway at all the three Inst itutes needs to be made by the 
Department to avoid unnecessary delays and to addre ss the bottlenecks in achieving 
the targets within the set timelines. The Committee  would like to be apprised about 
the timelines set for completing GMP-compliant structures at all the three Institutes 
and the progress made in this regard on a quarterly  basis till the projects are 
completed and also the details of the monitoring me chanism put in place for the 
projects by the Ministry.                (Para 3.5)  
VI VACANCY POSITION IN THE VACCINE-PRODUCING UNITS 
The Committee notes that the matter concerning the filling up of the vacant 
posts was approved in the meeting held on 6 th  July, 2010. The Director General of 
Health Services who has direct administrative contr ol over CRI, Kasauli was 
instructed to take urgent action to fill up the req uired number of vacant posts to 
make the facilities cGMP compliant and that the wor k in this regard is under 
progress.  

 Before proceeding further on any discussion in this  regard, the Committee 
would like to draw the attention of the Ministry to  its comments/observation made 
in the matter in its 34 th  Report:  
“5.6 CRI, Kasauli has also stated that it has extre me shortage 
of scientists.  It has also reported that there hav e been no regular 
Director at the Institute after 1997 onwards and al so that the 
present incumbent is on deputation basis. A conside rable number 
of vacancies existed in the Technical Staff at the middle and the 
higher levels. The Committee understands that the p ower to fill 
up the vacancies in Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ posts i n these 
Institutes lies with the office of the Director Gen eral of Health 
Services and not the Institutes. It is also clear f rom the 
information provided in the Status Report that the Institutes had 
forwarded a number of proposals to the Ministry for  filling up of 
vacancies of group ‘A’ and ‘B’ services. But, it se ems that the 
matter was not taken up in the right earnest by the  Ministry to fill 
up these vacancies. The Committee has also observed  that a 
number of posts have either lapsed/ abolished or pr oposed to be 
lapsed/ abolished. The Committee would also like to  state here 
that in comparison to CRI and BCG VL, the PII which  is an 
autonomous body functioning under the Ministry has not 
reported any shortage of manpower. The Committee be lieves that 
if similar administrative autonomy had been delegat ed to CRI 
and BCG VL, the problems relating to shortage of manpower and 
many other such issues could have been sorted out e arly. The 
Committee would appreciate if a work study about th e staff 
requirement in accordance with GMP norms is initiat ed at the 
earliest both at CRI and BCG VL so as to have a via ble set up 
there.” 
 
The Committee observes that the main reason for del ays in obtaining 
sanction for filling up of posts at CRI owes to the fact that till date all administrative 
powers relating to CRI Kasauli have remained concen trated with the office of the 
DGHS under the Ministry. The Committee notes that w ith the existing workload of 
the office of DGHS, it would take some length of ti me before any pressing matter 
regarding these Institutes get noticed by the admin istrative office at New Delhi. To 
substantiate, the Committee would like to state her e that the Department has 
informed in its reply that at CRI, Kasauli, out of the 98 staff required, 56 personnel 
are already available and 42 personnel are yet to b e appointed. Out of these 42 
personnel required to be appointed, 33 personnel ar e to be appointed against vacant 

positions in CRI, Kasauli and 9 posts which are not  on the strength of CRI, Kasauli 
are required to be created and filled up. The Depar tment has informed further that 
the matter concerning the filling up of the vacant posts was approved in the meeting 
held on 6 th  July, 2010.  Though six months have elapsed since then yet no tangible 
progress in the matter seems to be visible.  This i s also the case with respect to 
BCGVL Guindy and PII, Coonoor, from where no propos al has been received for 
filling up of the posts so far. The Committee obser ves that it was this concern which 
was foremost in its mind while offering the above-c ited comments in its 34 th  Report. 
The Committee stands by the same view today.  
It is pertinent to state here that the above view o f the Committee stands 
vindicated by the following observation/ recommenda tion made in the Final Report 
of the Javid Chowdhury Committee: 
 
“8.1   The Committee has observed that one crucial underlying 
cause for the malfunctioning of the manufacturing U nits is the 
unsuitable organizational structure they are frozen in. Because of 
a historical handicap, the public sector vaccine/se ra units have 
an organizational structure that belongs to a past age – CRI, 
Kasauli and BCGVL, Guindy are still departmental 
undertakings; while PII, Coonoor is a registered so ciety. The 
Committee is unable to understand what purpose is s erved in this 
day and age by keeping CRI Kasauli and BCGVL Guindy  bound 
down as departmental undertakings. These two undert akings are 
narrow-band, high-tech units. Most officials and te chnical staff 
have specialist skills only in the line of manufacture of the limited 
items produced there. Not many of them can be inter changed 
even within the three units under review here. It i s near 
impossible to find an official in the Directorate w ho could assist 
a manufacturing unit in a technical problem relatin g to the 
manufacture of vaccine/sera. …….. 
….. The Committee would suggest that these units be mad e 
autonomous at the earliest, by registering them as a non-profit 
company under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956  or 
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 . …….. 
……… To sum up, the Committee is of the considered view that 
the units working as attached offices to Directorat e – CRI, 
Kasauli and BCGVL, Guindy – are completely hamstrun g. It 
therefore recommends that the Ministry consider mak ing them 
autonomous by registering them independently under the 
Companies Act/ Societies Registration Act. The Comm ittee 

suggests that this should be done on priority basis  with 
adequate financial powers delegated to the management .”  
 
The Committee is in broad agreement with the above recommendation of the Javid 
Chowdhury Committee. The Committee fears that unles s autonomy is conferred 
upon these Institutes, given the present state of f unctioning of the Directorate, a 
situation similar to that of CRI, Kasauli would res urface in the coming years. The 
Committee, hence, recommends that the Ministry conf er autonomy on CRI, Kasauli 
and BCGVL, Guindy at the earliest.       (Para 6.2,  6.3 & 6.4) 
 
VII PROCUREMENT PRICE OF VACCINES 
 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry has finally acknowledged the drastic 
rise in cost of vaccines in 2009-10. The Committee would like to state here that in its 
38 th  Report, it had pointed out to the unacceptably dra stic increase in the 
procurement rates of BCG, DPT and TT Vaccines in 20 09-10. It escapes the 
Committee’s comprehension as to why the entities co ncerned did not take recourse 
to a reasoned analysis of these factors before susp ending the licenses of the three 
PSUs in the name of non-compliance of cGMP norms. T hat there are gaping holes 
in the CLAA’s interpretation of the rules governing  implementation of GMP norms 
by the three PSUs are exposed in the Javid Chowdhur y Committee‘s Report,- a fact 
which makes the Department’s decision all the more untenable. The Committee 
feels that the least the Department should have don e is to play a pro-active role in 
stabilizing the prices of vaccines in view of the fact that the vaccines, required under 
the Universal Immunisation Programme, fall under es sential category. Here the 
Committee would like to quote a very telling commen t made by the Javid 
Chowdhury Committee : 
“Para 5.1 ….. To insulate the UIP from price and supply shocks, 
a cardinal principle of public health policy requir es the sourcing 
of the vaccines from public sector manufacturing un its to a 
substantial extent.”   
The Committee is pained to note that the passive ro le played by the Department 
subjected the prices of these vaccines to become captive to private entities. 

 Undeniably, the private sector units that were awa rded the contract of 
vaccine supply during the closure of the vaccine pr oducing PSUs embarked upon 
making super-normal profits during 2008-09 and espe cially during 2009-10. The 
Committee feels that enforcing the excessively high  cost of these vaccines on the 
public has been an erroneous move and has hit the p ockets of the poor and 
marginalized people adversely,- as also the Governm ent exchequer,- thereby 
defeating the very motive of welfare. The Departmen t has informed in its Action 
Taken Reply that production of BCG, DPT, DT and TT vaccines at CRI Kasauli, 
BCGVL, Guindy and PII, Coonoor are in full swing since July 2010. The Committee 
fails to comprehend the reasons for procurement of vaccines from these PSUs at the 
same rate as was being procured from the private manufacturers during 2009-10, as 
is evident from the data supplied by the Department. It has, however, been informed 
that the final rates would be decided by Ministry of Finance. 
 Now that the vaccine-producing PSUs have begun pro duction, the 
Committee recommends that a reasonable estimate of the cost of these vaccines be 
made and their prices be brought down from the rate s at which they were procured 
during 2010-11, so that the economically weaker and  marginalized people are not 
put through further hardships. The Committee also v iews with concern the 
considerable gap in the quantum of orders for diffe rent vaccines placed with public 
sector units vis-à-vis private manufacturers in 201 0-11. This crucial aspect also 
needs to be given the required attention while placing the orders during 2011-12.  
                            (Para 7.3 & 7.4) 
IX GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 
 
From a perusal of the submissions made by the Depar tment in its action 
taken note, the two assertions that have caught the  attention of the Committee are 
the perceived gravity of deficiencies pointed out i n the WHO-NRA Inspection 
Report of the three PSUs in terms of the Drugs & Co smetics Act and Rules, and 
invoking of legal provisions for allowing WHO to ex ercise a supervisory authority 
over the Indian NRA. The Committee feels that the t win issues are of vital 
importance and intricately linked. Hence, they are required to be analysed 
objectively before any conclusion can be drawn.  
 

One of the major reasons which had been offered by the Department for 
shutting down the three public-sector vaccine-produ cing PSUs was the issue of de-
recognition of NRA by WHO. The Committee, during th e course of its examination 
of the closure of the vaccine-producing PSUs, was g iven the impression on more 
than one occasion that if the National Regulatory A uthority, who is the Drug 
Controller General of India, adopts a dual standard  by imposing certain GMP 
norms on private sector but having a completely non -compliant public sector, he 
would stand de-recognized by the World Health Organ isation (WHO) which is the 
main agency for getting the country’s exports to th e other countries. Consequently, 
this would render the private sector vaccine produc ing units ineligible for listing on 
the WHO’s pre-qualified vendor list. However, it wa s the considered view of the 
Committee then that in the name of exports, GMP com pliance and new technology, 
the entire vaccine market cannot be handed over to the private sector and thereby 
push the nation towards an impending danger of vaccine insecurity. The Committee 
was of the view that such an approach by WHO would be tantamount to 
interferences in the sovereign functioning of India  – a fact unacceptable by any 
standards.  The Javid Chowdhury Committee, which ex amined the issue in greater 
detail, held similar views. Some of its comments re levant to the context of the 
present discussion are placed below: 
 
Para 1.4  In the year 2001 and 2004 inspection was carried o ut 
exclusively by Indian Inspectors authorized by the DCGI.   In the 
year 2001, WHO had asked to be associated with the inspection, but 
permission, was explicitly denied by the Indian Gov ernment.  The 
position then taken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare was 
that in the course of the inspection, the NRA is di scharging a 
sovereign function in which an international agency cannot become a 
partner.   In year 2004 the WHO was not associated with the 
inspection.  However, in 2007, the WHO asked to be associated and 
the Ministry agreed to the request with the approval of HFM. 
 
Para 3.3  …..The Committee notes that the DCGI’s proposal di d not 
give any reason for departing from the earlier deci sion taken by the 
government in year 2002 to not permit WHO to join t he NRA 
Inspection . ……    
Para 4.3  ……..  Repeatedly, emphasis has been focused on the line 
that, if the NRA is derecognized, the private manuf acturers will be 
treated as ineligible for WHO pre-qualification as vendors. The 

risk or damage to public interest resulting from cl osure of the 
public sector units has never been considered : though, on a few 
occasions mention has been made that steps will hav e to be taken to 
secure alternate sources of supplies for vaccines.  In sum, it is the 
view of the Committee that the Ministry (including the DGHS and the 
DCGI) did not carry out an appropriately structured  analysis of the 
sensitive issue under review.  The discharge of the  responsibility of 
due diligence by the Ministry required that the var ious facets of the 
issue be discussed in a simple structured manner so  that pros and 
cons were transparent.  The Committee is of the con sidered view that 
had this been done, the Ministry would not have com e to a decision 
to close the units in an abrupt manner.  
 
Para 4.4.1.2   ……… the advice/information offered by WHO- about 
improvement in product standards and technical proc esses, 
advancement in treatment regimen and new diagnostic s – is of 
immense value. However, in order to maintain a harm onious 
working relationship, it is important to accurately  demarcate the 
boundary between the reach of WHO’s advocacy and th e irreducible 
extent of exercise of sovereign authority by the Indian Government.  It 
is known that the WHO has been offering technical a dvice to the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on GMP- relat ed issues. 
However, no matter how useful WHO’s advice may be, the NRA’s 
sovereign function under statute, of inspecting the  manufacturing 
standards of drugs and pharmaceutical units, cannot  be discharged 
in partnership with an international organisation. Under the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act and Rules, the DCGI is an apex po int of the 
Indian Regulatory System. This was the position tak en by the 
Government in year 2002 when it denied WHO the perm ission to 
conduct inspections jointly with the NRA……….. It is seen that the 
decision taken by HFM on 10-05-07, to permit WHO in spectors to 
be associated with the NRA inspection, is on an opaque note stating 
that Secretary (HFW) has opined that we should not object to the 
participation of WHO representatives in the NRA ins pection. The 
note does mention that in the past the Ministry had  not agreed to 
this request of WHO. However, there is no analytica l discussion as 
to why we should reverse the earlier position of the government. 
 
 
Para 4.4.1.3  ………. However, the assertion which seems to 
have been made by WHO- that if WHO was not permitted to inspect 
public sector manufacturing units (even if these ha d no intention 
of applying for WHO’s pre-qualified vendor’s list),  this would 
result in the de-recognition of the Indian NRA, and  would 
consequently render the private vaccine units ineli gible for listing 
on WHO’s pre-qualified vendor list –seems to be an arbitrary 
conclusion.    On the basis of what has been mentioned earlier,  it is 
apparent to the Committee that WHO does not exercis e any 

supervisory authority over the Indian NRA.  Hence t he question of 
de-recognition of the Indian NRA cannot arise.  WHO  would 
naturally be entitled to make an independent assess ment of the 
level of cGMP compliance of those manufacturing uni ts that apply 
for pre-qualified vendor-listing with WHO.  Needless to say, the 
NRA in India can take a differing view on the statu s of compliance 
for the very same units for its own purpose.   ………… Treating the 
eligibility of individual applicants as contingent upon public sector 
units meeting eligibility standards, would clearly be arbitrary.  
  Incidentally, it may be mentioned that after the vi ew 
expressed in the above paragraph had been incorpora ted in the 
interim Report, the issue of de-recognition of the NRA by WHO 
seems to have been dropped, and the Indian supplier s of vaccines 
to international agencies have suffered no disadvantage.  
 
Para 4.4.1.4   The Committee is of the considered view that ther e is 
considerable confusion in the dialogue between the Ministry and the 
WHO on the issue relating to the GMP standards requ ired to be 
achieved by public sector vaccine units. The WHO ha s not set out its 
position/explicitly in writing at any time. The onl y mention of their 
position is in passing notes of different Indian of ficials. These Notes 
mention that WHO has been insisting that if India d oes not permit 
the inspection of public-sector manufacturing units , WHO will de-
recognise the Indian NRA. Also, that if the Indian NRA is de-
recognised, no unit, including private units that o therwise are 
compliant with the WHO GMP norms, will be eligible for listing as 
WHO’s pre-qualified vendors. The only communication on record 
on this subject is a letter dt 17-5-06 addressed to  HFM from the 
Additional Director General, WHO. This letter doesn ’t state that 
WHO will de-recognise the Indian NRA if it is not a llowed to 
inspect the public sector manufacturing units, or, if in their 
assessment the public sector manufacturing units ar e seen to be 
non-compliant with WHO GMP norms.  Clearly, the context of this 
letter only relates to the requirements of eligibil ity for pre-qualified 
listings as vendors for purchases relating to inter national 
programmes.  The letter however, does assert the vi ew of the WHO, 
that India has followed dual GMP standards, for vac cines, with 
comparatively weak enforcement of GMP for public se ctor units.  By 
way of a caution, the letter does say that there ma y be a major 
negative impact should the NRA assessment fail to m eet the critical 
indicators required for the WHO pre-qualification s cheme. The 
Committee is of the considered view that as a matte r of 
administrative practice, in the normal course, the Ministry should 
have obtained the position of the WHO on this sensi tive issue in 
explicit terms in writing. It is considered to be i mprudent for the 
Ministry to arrive at a decision on this important issue merely on 

the basis of impressions and conjecture of some off icials in the 
Indian administration.  
 
Para 4.4.1.5  ……… While no one disagreed with this line of action, 
the suggestion was never pursued.   The Committee had also 
recommended in its Interim Report that the Ministry  may consider 
taking up the issue with the DG, WHO, as the differ ences appeared 
to be on account of a misunderstanding between the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare and the WHO.  While four of the 
Committee’s recommendations made in the Interim Rep ort have 
been accepted by the government and implemented, th is particular 
recommendation does not seem to have caught the att ention of the 
Ministry.  Even at the cost of repetition, the Committee woul d again 
suggest that the Ministry may consider entering int o a candid 
dialogue with the DG of the WHO so that the country ’s position is 
clearly understood by the WHO, and no unnecessary 
misunderstanding persists between the two.  
 
4.4.1.7   Despite having arrived at the above posit ion on the 
question of de-recognition, the Committee considers  it necessary to 
address the worst-case scenario, one in which, at s ome distant date 
when even those Indian manufacturers that are compl iant with 
WHO-level GMP norms, are not included in the pre-qu alified list of 
vendors. India has been a growing exporter of drugs/ vaccines under 
internationally-funded relief programmes. Exports o f drugs and 
vaccines from the country under such programme are of a value of 
about Rs. 500 crores annually i.e. US$ 0.1 billion.  Even if we 
hypothetically assume that these exports run the ri sk of being 
discontinued, the impact will be nominal, as the va lues of these 
exports is miniscule compared to the aggregate nati onal export 
earnings of about US $180 billion annually. In the perception of 
the Committee, the export earnings foregone, if such an eventuality 
arises, would be insignificant compared to the gain  through 
enhanced vaccine security for the country over the long run.  
 
From the excerpts above, it is abundantly clear tha t the case for suspension of the 
licenses of the three public-sector vaccine-produci ng PSUs, inter alia, rested on a 
major misconception and misinterpretation of certai n unclear signals passed 
through the communication from the office of the WH O. A prudent step that was 
blatantly missed by the Ministry was to determine a t the outset the exact position in 
this regard from the WHO. What is astonishing is the fact that it was not considered 
to be clarified later although the matter surfaced time and again (precisely five 
times in the notes at various levels in the Ministr y).  The Ministry’s decision to 

recommend the closure of the three vaccine-producin g PSUs was not only myopic 
but also exposed the nation to an unacceptable risk in vaccine security, while several 
states reeled under vaccine shortages. As has been discussed in the earlier Reports 
of the Committee, in the absence of supply of vacci nes from the public sector, the 
cost of vaccines in the domestic market appreciated  by 50-70 percent within a span 
of two years from the closure of the three vaccine-producing PSUs.  
 The Committee observes that it is high time that t he role and locus standi  of 
the NRA vis-a-vis the WHO are made clear. In the absence of any clear -cut 
boundary in the matter, it is left to the subjective interpretation of the officials at the 
helm of affairs at any point of time. In the view o f the Committee, such a precarious 
situation leaves ample scope for cases like that of  the three vaccine-producing PSUs 
to re-surface in future.  Hence, it strongly recomm ends that the Ministry, which is 
the prime intermediary between the WHO and the NRA,  should take up the matter 
with the WHO and clarify the position at the earlie st. The Committee would like to 
be apprised about the progress made by the Ministry in this regard. 
  
The other point on which the Committee would like t o focus on is the issue of 
the Department’s treatment of the compliance of GMP  norms by three vaccine-
producing PSUs. From the outset, the Department, wh ile justifying its decision to 
suspend the manufacturing licenses of the PSUs, has  offered that they had failed to 
comply with the GMP norms specified under the Drugs  & Cosmetics Act and Rules 
made thereunder. However, in the wake of the fact t hat the vaccines produced by 
the PSUs conformed to the standards of safety, effi cacy and quality, - a fact which 
was admitted by the then Secretary during the cours e of her deposition before the 
Committee on 26 th  October, 2009, - the Committee has been stressing in its 34 th , 38 th 
and 43 rd  Reports that the decision of the Department to clo se these PSUs on the 
grounds of non-compliance lacked justification. The  Committee is, therefore, 
perturbed to note that the Department, instead of a dmitting the fallacy of the 
decision taken by them earlier, continues to harp o n the lack of compliance of GMP 
norms by the three PSUs in its latest ATN also.  Th e Committee would like to state 
here that its observations regarding the Department ’s unfounded decision to close 
the three PSUs has been upheld by similar findings of the Javid Chowdhury 

Committee which has demolished the very grounds on which the Department’s 
decision in this regard was based. The Committee wo uld like to quote the following 
specific comments from the Final Report of the Javid Chowdhury Committee: - 
4.4.2.2    The extant national GMP standards for dr ug/ vaccine 
manufacture are largely identical to the cGMP stand ards 
recommended by the WHO. The standards, inter alia a pplicable to 
vaccine/ sera manufacturing units are set out in Pa rt I and Part IA of 
Schedule M of the D&C Rules. A perusal of this Schedule reveals 
that it covers a vast array of specifications that collectively impact 
on the quality of the manufacturing process. By the ir very number, 
nature and span of application, all these standards  cannot be met to 
the fullest extent by every manufacturing facility . …….. 
………. Also, legal compliance does not require that each o f the 
norms be individually met to the fullest extent, bu t rather that, the 
overall compliance of the various norms, should be adequate.  A 
shortcoming in some of the non-essential/ minor are as – need for 
re-configuration of production line; need for smoot h surfaces and 
dust-free junctions, corners and door-frames; defec ts in the animal 
house; need for amendment of SOPs and new documenta tion; 
calibration of equipment- does not automatically ca ll for 
suspension/ cancellation of the license……….. 
 
4.4.2.3 ………All three units have what can be called an 
unmatched corpus of experience in the area of manuf acture of 
vaccine/ sera. Here it may be mentioned that manufa cture of vaccine/ 
sera is not only an application of technology/ scie nce but it is also a 
quasi-art. The technical man-power in these units o ver time has 
acquired what can be called a unique experience in this line of 
activity. The private sector manufacturers of vacci ne/sera in the 
country are relatively recent entrants and the expe rience they draw 
upon is largely through the technical staff of publ ic sector units who 
are either retirees, or have been poached from publ ic sector units. 
The vaccine/sera supplied by the public sector manu facturers 
rigorously meet product standards notified under th e D & C Act and 
Rules- these units have had an unblemished production record.  
 
4.4.2.11 At this stage, the Committee would like to set-out its 
understanding of the key phrase of the GMP, which c onstitutes the 
overarching objective; to design the work area ‘to allow the 
production preferably in uni-flow and with logical sequence of 
operation’. In the view of the Committee, the key word in the 
provision is ‘preferably’.  Quite obviously this word was used to imply 
that the principle of logical sequence of operations would be enforced 
to the extent it is possible to optimize the workin g, in the 

circumstances in which the manufacturing units oper ate………The 
rate of progressive tightening of the compliance to  the GMP norms 
would be judged by the NRA in the totality of the c ircumstances. The 
facilities existing at the time of suspension of op erations were 
designed in an age when the idea encapsulated in th e phrase quoted 
at the start of the paragraph was non-existent. How ever, within the 
given space/ plot constraints at the three location s, it was noted by 
the Committee that much has been achieved by way of  rationalization 
of the flow of men and material in the manufacturin g process.  In fact, 
in all the units, within each section of the manufa cturing process…. 
the lay out and the manufacturing sequence has been  optimized.  It 
can safely be claimed that within each section of t he manufacturing  
line, production ‘in uni-flow and with logical sequ ence of 
operations’ has been achieved ………..To achieve the ultimate 
optimization through the entire process line, a new  production line 
will have to be established by incorporating the es sential technical 
features in the original design. ………  
 
4.4.2.12 ……..The standards set out in Schedule M of  the Rules do 
not require that all the specifications be met in t he most rigorous 
interpretation of the norms.  The Committee (which includes two 
technical members having expertise in the product/ manufacturing 
standards of drugs and pharmaceuticals) was of the considered view 
that it would be safe and in public interest, to re start the 
manufacturing activities in the existing production  lines with 
immediate effect. More explicitly, it was the consi dered view of the 
Committee that, the operation of the units would, i n the totality of the 
prevailing circumstances be in compliance with the GMP standards. 
 
 
 
The Committee notes that in view of the meticulous analysis and erudite comments 
of the Javid Chowdhury Committee in the matter no p urpose will be served by 
stating over and above what has already been set fo rth in the preceding paras. The 
Committee would only expect the Department to exerc ise greater caution and 
prudence while handling such issues in future and start taking remedial measures in 
right earnest.                 (Para 9.2) 
 
 The Committee fully agrees with the Department’s co ntention that sudden 
death approach is not legally allowed in the implem entation of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act and Rule including GMP through its in built provisions. The 
Committee, however, notes that this line of action was not followed in letter and 

spirit in the instant case. The Committee would lik e to cite here that in its 34th and 
38 th  Reports it had made abundantly clear that the repl ies filed by these Institutes 
were not given reasonable consideration in the ligh t of the rectifications carried out 
by them nor due consideration was given to the Depa rtment’s role and 
responsibility in making them GMP compliant (since two of the Institutes i.e., CRI 
Kasauli and BCGVL Guindy are subordinate offices un der it). Voicing its concerns 
on the manner in which the case of the three vaccin e-producing Institutes was 
handled by the Department, the Committee had observ ed that “…….. (it) strongly 
feels that a pre-conceived view about there being n o possibility of BCGVL (as well 
as the other Institutes) becoming GMP compliant is very dominant.                              
(Para 4.5 of its 38 th  Report)”.  
 The Department, in its action taken reply, has tri ed to justify by stating that 
the three PSUs had gone through the due process of inspection in August, 2007, 
issued show-cause notices on 14 th  December 2007, and finally, re-inspected in 
January, 2008 and their replies reviewed before their licenses were suspended.  
 The Committee feels that at this juncture, it woul d be well within the context 
to place below certain pertinent findings from the Final Report of the Javid 
Chowdhury Committee:  
 
Para 3.15    When reviewing the recent history of the three 
public sector vaccine manufacturing units, one aspe ct is eye-catching 
- that these units have received an exceptional deg ree of attention 
from the regulatory authorities. Over the years, th e units have been 
inspected by the state and central drug control aut horities time and 
again (BCG, Guindy (5/2001 to 2/2008) – 10 inspecti ons; PII, 
Coonoor (10/99 to 3/2008) – 9 inspections; and CRI,  Kasauli (9/2002 
to 1/2008) – 5 inspections). The NRA has itself ins pected the units in 
2001, 2004 and 2007. While diligence in the regulat ory duties is 
something which should be commended, it must not ta ke the shape 
where it is perceived that these units are particul arly targeted. There 
are over 10,000 drugs and vaccine/ sera units in th e country. Out of 
which all but 350 are in the small-scale sector. DC GI has 40 drug 
inspectors under him who carry out statutory inspec tions on his 
behalf. The number of inspections carried out by th e central drug 
inspectors in different years is as under: 
 
 
 

Inspections carried out by Central Drug Inspectors 
  
              Year            Number of Inspections 
2004-05 1163 
2005-06 847 
2006-07 775 
2007-08 889 
2008-09 764 
 
Para 3.16    Under the law, the DCGI (CLAA) has jurisdiction 
over all drugs and pharmaceutical manufacturing uni ts in the 
country, including those categories for which the r egistration powers 
are with the State Government. However, the DCGI ha s informed the 
Committee that the central inspectors are carrying out inspections of 
only certain categories of items- Vaccines & Sera. Large volume 
parenterals, notified medical devices, blood banks and units applying 
for certificate of pharmaceutical products under WH O GMP 
Certification Scheme. The Committee is surprised to  note the role 
allotted to itself by the DCGI. Though it has a sup ervisory 
responsibility over the entire range of drug manufa cturing units, it 
has withdrawn itself from the inspection of the dru g units, except on 
request. Considering that it has jurisdiction over 10,000 
manufacturing units, the above table reveals that a  paltry number of 
manufacturing units were inspected. Given that in y ear 2007-08, the 
year in which the licenses of the pubic vaccine uni ts were suspended, 
the central inspectors only carried out 889 inspect ions, it is 
remarkable that the regulatory authority found it p ossible to spare so 
much attention for the three public sector vaccine manufacturing 
units. 
 
Para 4.4.3.2  ………. it will be seen that the crunch-decision take n by 
the DCGI, was accepted at the highest levels in bot h the political and 
bureaucratic executive line-up of the Ministry.  Re sponsibility for the 
flawed advice given to the DCGI would substantially  rest at those 
two levels – HFM and Secretary (HFW). 
 
Para 4.4.3.4  The Committee is surprised to note the procedure 
adopted by the DCGI after the receipt of the repres entations in 
response to the show-cause notices.  The action of the DCGI in 
ordering the suspension of the licenses without eve n going through 
a ritual of considering the representation, and the  subsequent 
inspection report, is plainly illegal .  …… 
   
Para 4.4.3.5  …… With disappointment, the Committee is 
constrained to note that at no level was the duty –  of ensuring a 
rigorous and objective analysis - discharged with t he necessary 
diligence.  In fact, evidence on record indicates t hat, in the midst of 

the administrative process, the decision was being treated as pre-
judged. 
 
Para 4.4.3.6  …………… In defending the closure of the 
manufacturing units, the HFM ( who had met the Committee on 13-
05-10)  had mentioned that during his period a large number of units 
had been closed down in the country for non-complia nce with the 
GMP standards.   For verifying this, the DCGI’s office was asked to 
provide information on the number of units whose li cense was 
suspended/cancelled in the last five years for non- compliance with 
the GMP standards. Despite several reminders, and d espite the 
caution that failure to furnish the information wou ld only be 
construed as deliberate to avoid embarrassing facts , these figures 
have not been furnished to the Committee.  The gene ral impression 
of the knowledgeable officials in the Ministry is t hat this number 
would be very small, if not nil.  Thus, the former-HFM’s impression 
about large-scale cancellation of licenses during h is period in office 
is mistaken. 
 
A startling information has been recorded by the Ja vid Chowdhury 
Committee in it’s Final Report that repudiates all claims of the Department that due 
procedure was followed by the Ministry before the c ancellation of the licences of the 
three vaccine-producing PSUs and upholds the Committee’s view that they were not 
treated fairly. From the records made available to the Javid Chowdhury Committee 
it was found that while PII Coonoor sent its reply on 4 th  January, 2008 to the show-
cause notice issued to it on 14 th  December, 2007, a second inspection of the Institu te 
was carried out on 3 rd  January, 2008 – i.e. before the representation was  sent by the 
Unit against the show-cause notice.   In addition, another disturbing fact that caught 
the Committee’s attention substantiating its above viewpoint while perusing the 
Javid Chowdhury Committee’s Final Report is placed below:  
 
Para 4.4.3.8  The Committee notes that another important point 
mentioned in DCGI’s note dt. 16-1-08 relates to a m eeting held on 
17-18 th  Dec, 2007 between Secy. (HFW) and the DCGI on the side 
of the Ministry, and Additional Director General an d his team from 
the side of WHO.  In the Interim Report, the Ministry 
representatives had inadvertently been mentioned as  Secretary 
(HFM) and DGHS.  DCGI has recorded that in this mee ting 
relating to the GMP standards of public sector unit s, the Ministry 
had agreed to suspend/cancel the licenses of the pu blic sector units 
by 15-1-2008.   
 

Para 4.4.3.9    The record doesn’t explain under what 
circumstances, and with whose authority, this assur ance was given. 
The show-cause notice for suspension/cancellation o f the license 
was issued on 14-12-07. It seems that almost immedi ately after the 
Secy. (HFW) went to Geneva, where he attended the m eeting on 
17 th  -18 th  December 2007. Looking to these facts, there is no  
gainsaying that, even before the notice period was over, and 
without taking into account the unit’s representati on into account, 
the assurance gave an unmistakable indication that the outcome 
was pre-decided. ….. 
 
Para 4.4.7.4 All in all the decision of the Ministry, both in le gal 
terms and on consideration of the merits, was palpa bly incorrect.  
Because the outcome of the evaluation process had b een pre-
determined the entire process was null and void.  On the other hand 
on consideration of the pros and cons from the view  point of public 
interest, the decision was unjustified. Despite applying the most 
liberal interpretation to the events, the Committee  could not uncover 
any rational reasons for the conclusion that was ar rived at in the 
Ministry.   The decision of the Ministry left the country wit hout any 
supply from the public sector, thus exposing it to an unacceptable 
risk in vaccine security. As a result of total depe ndence on private 
suppliers, the Ministry became captive to private c ommercial 
pressures.  The price of the domestic primary vacci nes rose by 50-
70% in the two years after the closure of the publi c sector units, and 
several key states experienced critical shortages o f the vaccines .  In 
view of this the Committee concludes, that, the pal pably incorrect 
decision of the Ministry based on an illegal proced ure and a flawed 
appreciation of the issues – was against broad community interest .”  
 
 At this stage, the Committee feels it expedient to bring into record that its concerns 
voiced in its earlier Reports on the subject regard ing the underplaying of their role 
by the Ministry or the Director General Health Services in making the three vaccine 
producing PSUs GMP compliant, especially when CRI, Kasauli and BCG VL, 
Chennai were functioning as subordinate offices und er the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, and the PII, Coonoor, functioned as  an autonomous institution 
under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare sta nds vindicated by the Javid 
Chowdhury Committee.  
 
From the forgone discussion, the Committee feels that the Ministry, the office 
of the DGHS and the DCGI cannot absolve themselves from the responsibility of the 
manner in which the case of the vaccine-producing P SUs was dealt with. The 

Committee finds the tenor of the action taken note,  which is inclined towards 
absolving the top authorities of the responsibility  for singling out the three PSUs 
while sparing the private players, to be unacceptab le. The Committee observes with 
anguish that by trying to defend its decision to cl ose down the three PSUs the 
Department has sought to deviate from the core conc erns expressed by the Javid 
Chowdhury Committee. In view of the provisions of t he Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
the mandate of the DCGI ensuing therefrom and the a ction of suspending the 
licenses of the PSUs, the Department’s argument tha t a fair treatment was meted 
out to them is a specious one which only seeks to s kirt the issue raised by the Javid 
Chowdhury Committee. It is apparent that effective corrective measures need to be 
initiated so that such a precarious situation does not recur in future.  
 
 The Committee urges upon the Department to take rem edial steps to address 
the shortcomings highlighted by the Javid Chowdhury  Committee. It also desires to 
be furnished with a point-wise Action Taken Note on  the recommendations/ 
observations of the Final Report of the Javid Chowdhury Committee.   
                 (Para 9.4 & 9.6) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

IX 
NINTH  MEETING 
 The Committee met at 2.00 p.m.  on Friday, the 18 th  February, 2011 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shrimati Brinda Karat     -    In the  Chair  
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
3. Shri Balbir Punj 
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
5. Shri Ashok Argal  
6. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Baghel Singh 
7. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
8. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
9. Shri N. Kristappa 
10. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
11. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
12. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
13. Shrimati Meena Singh 
                     
WITNESSES    
 I.      *  *  *  
 
II.    *  *  * 
III.  *  *  *      
 
IV      SECRETARIAT 
 
Shrimati Vandana Garg   Additional Secretary 
Shri R. B. Gupta    Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta        Joint Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh    Assistant Director 
Shri Satis Mesra    Committee Officer 
 
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman of the Committee,  Shrimati Brinda Karat presided 
over the meeting. At the outset, the Chairperson we lcomed the Members of the 
Committee and apprised them of the agenda of the me eting.  The Chairperson also 
informed the Members that based on the Action Taken Note furnished by the Department 
of Health and Family Welfare on the Committee’s 43 rd  Report on “Major Issues  
________________________________ 
***pertains to other matters 
 

concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs –the Ce ntral Research Institute (CRI), 
Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coon oor, and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory 
(BCGVL), Chennai”, draft 52 nd  Report has been prepared and circulated to them. 
 
3. *  *  *  
4. *  *  *    
5. *  *  *  
6. *  *  *  
7. *  *  *   
8. *  *  *  
9. *  *  *   
10. Thereafter the Committee considered its Draft 5 2 nd  Report on the Action Taken 
Note furnished by the Department of Health and Fami ly Welfare on the Committee’s  
43 rd  Report on “Major Issues concerning three vaccine p roducing PSUs– the Central 
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Inst itute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the 
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai” and after a brief discussion adopted the 
same with certain amendments. 
11. *  *  *                                                                                   
12. *  *  *  
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the mee ting was kept. 
 14. The Committee then adjourned at 4.26 p.m. 
 
 
 
_______________________________ 
***pertains to other matters 
 

 
 
 
 
 