 
            
                                                                                       
 
 
 
 
                              
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2015/Pausha, 1937 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTY-NINTH REPORT 
On 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
EIGHTY-SECOND REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR                       
GRANTS 2015-16 (DEMAND NOs. 48 and 50) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 2015) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd  December, 2015) 
REPORT NO. 
  89  

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December,  2015/Pausha, 1937 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTY-NINTH REPORT 
On 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
EIGHTY-SECOND REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR                       
GRANTS 2015-16 (DEMAND NOs. 48 and 50) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha  22nd December, 2015) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2015) 

 
CONTENTS 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE------------------------------------------------------  (i)  
 
2. PREFACE-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------    (ii)               
*3.            ACRONYMS (HEALTH, NHM SECTOR & NACO)-----------------------------------      (iii)                     
4. REPORT –PART A (HEALTH SECTOR)---------------------------------------------------------------   1- … 
 
Chapter–I –  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
                            Government have been accepted by the Committee  
 
Chapter–II –  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire  
to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies . 
 
Chapter–III –  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 
Chapter–IV -      Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies  
of the Government are still awaited 
 
 REPORT – PART B (NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION-NHM)-----------------------------------   1- … 
 
Chapter–I –  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
                            Government have been accepted by the Committee  
 
 
Chapter–II –  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire  
to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies . 
 
 
Chapter–III –  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 
Chapter–IV  – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies  
of the Government are still awaited 
 
 REPORT – PART C (NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL ORGANISATION-NACO)--------   1- … 
 
Chapter–I –  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
                            Government have been accepted by the Committee  
 
 
Chapter–II –  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire  
to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies . 
 
 
Chapter–III –  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 
Chapter–IV  – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies  
of the Government are still awaited 
 
*5. OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
  
 PART A –HEALTH SECTOR-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 PART B -  NHM------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 PART C - NACO------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
 
 
*6. MINUTES ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
*7. ANNEXURES------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
*to be appended later   
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2015-16) 
 
 
1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   -   Chairman 
  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 
2.  Shri Ranjib Biswal 
3.  Shri Rajkumar Dhoot  
4.  Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
5.  Shrimati B. Jayashree  
6.  Dr. R. Lakshmanan 
7.  Shrimati Kahkashan Perween 
8.  Shri Ambeth Rajan 
9.  Shri Jairam Ramesh 
10. Dr. T.N. Seema 
  
  
 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
11.  Shri Thangso Baite 
12.  Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
13.  Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt 
14.  Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan  
15.  Dr. Ratna De (Nag)  
16.  Shri Devendra alias Bhole Singh 
17.  Dr. (Smt.) Heena Vijay Gavit 
18.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
19.  Dr. K. Kamaraj 
20.  Shri Arjunlal Meena 
21.  Shri J. Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee 
22.  Shri Chirag Paswan 
23.  Shri C. R. Patil 
24.  Shri M.K. Raghavan 
25.  Dr. Manoj Rajoria 
26.  Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
27.  Shri R.K. Singh 
28.  Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
29.  Shrimati Rita Tarai 
30.  Shri Manohar Untwal  
31.  Shri Akshay Yadav 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu Joint Secretary 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi  Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh  Joint Director 
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma Assistant Director 
Shri Pratap Shenoy   Committee Officer 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
 
(i)

 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, 
hereby present this Eighty -Ninth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee‟s Eighty -second Report on Demands for 
Grants 2015-16 (Demand Nos. 48 and 50) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2015-16.  
 
2.     The Eighty -second Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24 th 
April, 2015 . Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received 
from the Department of Health and Family Welfare were considered by the Committee at its meeting  
held on the 18th December, 2015. 
 
 3.      The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on the 18th 
December, 2015.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;             PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
December 18, 2015        Chairman,  
________________         Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
 27, Agrahayana 1937 (Saka)                          Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  (ii) 
 
 

 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
(PART A–HEALTH SECTOR) 
 Ads - Additional Directors  
BE - Budget Estimates 
 CRI - Central Research Institute  
CDSCO - Central Drugs Standard Control Organization  
cGMP – Current Good Manufacturing Practice  
CGHS - Central Government Health Scheme  
CGEPHIS - Central Govt. Employees and Pensioners Health Insurance Scheme  
CIP - Central Institute of Psychiatry  
DNEA - Diploma in Nursing Education and Administration  
GIA - Grants-in-aid 
 IFD - Integrated Finance Division.  
ICU - Intensive Care Unit  
IVF - In Vitro Fertilization  
INC - Indian Nursing Council  
IPC - Integrated Purchase Committee  
LC - Letter of Credit  
LHMC - Lady Harding Medical College  
LRHS - Lady Reading Health School 
METI - Monitoring, Evaluation and Technical Cell of India  
NHM - National Health Mission  
NECB - New Emergency Care Building  
NIMHANS - National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences 
 NEIGRIHMS - North Eastern In dira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health And Medical Sciences 
NHAI - National Highway Authority of India  
NCDC - National Center for Disease Control  
PGIMER - Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education And Research  
PII - Pasteur Institute of India  
PMSSY - Pradhan Mantri Swasthaya Suraksha Yojana 
PMC - Project Management Committee  
RDs - Regional Directors  
RIMS - Regional Institute of Medical Sciences  
RML - Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital  
RSBY - Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
SSB - Super Specialty Block  
SOE - Statement of Expenditure  
SJH & - Safdarjung Hospital & Vardhman Mahavir Medical College  
VMMC UCs - Utilization Certificates  
UIP - Universal Immunization Programme 
(iii) 

 
(PART B–NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION) 
 
AIDS - Acquired Immuno-Defeciency Syndrome  
ASHAs - Accredited Social Health Activists  
ANM - Auxiliary Nurse Midwife  
BIMARU - Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh 
 BMFG - Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation  
BCC - Behaviour Change Communication  
CHCs - Community Health Centres  
CSSM - Child Survival and Safe Mother-hood Programme  
CSU - Central Surveillance Unit  
DOTS - Directly Observed Short Treatment Course  
DFID - Department for International Development  
DH - District Hospital  
EAG - Empowered Action Group  
EFC - Expenditure Finance Committee  
FRBM - Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management  
FRUs - First Referral Units  
FY - Financial Year  
Gol - Government of India  
Hib - Haemophilus Influenza Type b  
HPDs - High Priority Districts  
HBNC - Home Based Newborn Care 
 IEAG - India Expert Advisory Group 
IAPPD - Integrated Action Plan for Pneumonia and Diarrhoea  
IEC - Information, Education, Communication  
ICT - Information Communication Technology  
IMR - Infant Mortality Rate 
 IDD - Iodine Deficiency Disorder  
ISRO - Indian Space Research Organisation 
 IYCF - Infant and Young Child Feeding Practice 
IDSP - Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme  
INAP - India Newborn Action Plan  
IMNCI - Integrated Management of Neo-Natal and Childhood Illness  
IPHS - Indian Public Health Standards 

 
 
JSY - Janani Suraksha Yojana  
JSSK - Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram  
MMU - Mobile Medical Unit  
MMR - Maternal Mortality Ratio  
MCTS - Mother and Child Tracking System 
MoHFW - Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
MDGs - Millennium Development Goals  
NBSUs - New Born Stabilization Units  
NIPI - Norway Indian Partnership Initiative  
NGO - Non-Governmental Organization  
NCDC - National Centre for Disease Control  
NSSK - Navjat Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram  
NBSU - New Born Stabilisation Unit  
NIOS - National School of Open Learning  
NHSRC - National Health System Resource Centre  
NRHM - National Rural Health Mission 
 NRCs - Nutritional Rehabilitation Centres 
 NUHM - National Urban Health Mission  
NHM - National Health Mission  
NBSUs - New Born Stabilization Units  
NIDs - National Immunization Days  
NPCB - National Programme for Control of Blindness  
NIDSP - National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Programme 
 NCD - Non-Communicable Disease  
NOHP - National Oral Health Programme  
NVBCP - National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme 
NLEP - National Leprosy Eradication Programme  
NPCC - National Programme Coordination Committee 
 NTBCP - National Trachoma and Blindness Control Programme  
NPCDCS - National Programme for Prevention and Control Cancer, Diabetes, Card io-Vascular 
Diseases and Stroke  
OPV - Oval Vaccine Polio  
OOP - Out of Pocket  

PHCs - Primary Healthcare Centres 
PIP - Programme Implementation Plan  
PPI - Pulse Polio Immunisation  
RNTCP - Revised National TB Control Programme  
RCC - Regional Certification Commission  
RCHP - Reproductive and Child Health Project  
RBSK - Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakaram  
RMNCH+A - Reproductive Maternal Newborn Child and Adolescent Health  
RIOs - Regional Institutes of Opthalmology  
RCH - Reproductive Child Health 
 RKS - Rogi Kalyan Samitis  
SNCUs - Special New Born Care Units 
SCs - Sub-centres  
SOE - Statement of Expenditures  
SHS - State Health Societies 
 TFR - Total Fertility Rate  
UIP - Universal Immunization Programme  
UCs - Utilization Certificates  
UHCs - Universal Health Coverage  
UT - Union Territory  
USAID - United States Agency for International Development. 
 UNFPA - United Nations Fund for Population Activities  
VHNDs - Village Health Nutrition Days  
VHSCs - Village Health Sanitation Committees  
VBD - Vector Borne Disease  
VBDCP - Vector Borne Disease Control Programme  
WHO - World Health Organisation 

 
ACRONYMS (NACO) 
 
AIDS - Acquire Immunodeficiency Syndrome  
ART - Anti-retroviral Therapy  
BCC - Behaviour Change Communication  
CPFMS - Computerized Financial Management Systems  
CCEA - Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs  
DAPCUs - District AIDS Prevention and Control Units 
EOI - Expression of Interest FSW - Female Sex Workers  
HIV - Human Immuno Virus  
HSS - HIV Sentinel Surveillance  
IDUs - Integrated Drug Users  
IEC - Information. Education and Communication  
LWS - Link Worker Scheme  
MSM - Men having Sex with Men  
NACP - National AIDS Control Programme  
PLHIV - People Living with HIV  
STI/RTI - Sexually Transmitted Infections/ Reproductive Tract Infections TI Targeted Interventions

 
REPORT 
PART A-HEALTH SECTOR 
 The Report of the Committee deals with the Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighty -second Report of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants (Demand No. 48) of the Departm ent of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2015 -
16. 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the 82nd Report.  They have been categorized as follows: 
  (i)   Recommendations/Obser vations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
been accepted by the Committee:  1.16, 1.18, 1.27, 1.30, 1.33, 2.3, 2.5, 2.6, 2.13,5.10, 5.13, 
5.15, 7.4, 7.6, 8.3, 8.4, 9.4, 9.9, 10.5, 11.10, 11.11,13.4, 13.6, 14.15, 14.16, 15.5, 16.6,18.4,  
                                                                              Total    –    28         (Chapter I)                                                          
(ii)   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government‟s replies:  1.17, 1.25, 1.28, 2.7, 2.14, 3.5, 3.10, 5.6, 5.8, 5.9, 
6.4, 7.7, 9.7, 9.13, 9.15, 9.17, 11.8, 11.12, 14.12, 14.13, 14.14, 15.8, 16.7,  
                                                                   Total    –     23  (Chapter II)                                                                                                                                                                            
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government  
have not been accepted by the Committee:    1.15, 1.19, 1.24, 1.26, 2.10, 3.8, 3.12, 4.3, 4.4, 
4.5, 5.3, 5.16, 5.17, 5.18, 6.5, 9.11, 10.7, 10.11, 11.6, 12.6, 15.4, 17.5, 17.6  
                                                                               Total     –      23            (Chapter III)                   
                                                                                                                                                                           
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:    1.20, 1.21             
Total  -     2                 (Chapter-IV) 
 
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
PART A (HEALTH SECTOR) 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
I   BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 1.16) 
1.1 The Committee notes that due to broad budget ary cuts imposed by the Ministry of 
Finance, fifteen important Health Schemes of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
have been left without any budgetary provisions for 2015 -16. The Committee also notes 
that Ministry has furnished a list of nine scheme s of tertiary care (Table No. 2), which in 
the opinion of the Ministry are essential for correcting the existing imbalances in tertiary 
healthcare and therefore non-negotiable from the point of view of budgetary support but for 
which no funds have been allotted for 2015-16. The Committee is appreciative of the fiscal 
constraints faced by the Ministry of Finance due to moderation in economic growth and the 
impact of global slowdown. But given the fact that public funding is estimated to be of the 
order of on ly 19.67% of the expenses of healthcare in the country [as per National Health 
Accounts Estimates (2004 -05)] and most of private expenditure is Out -of-Pocket (OOP) 
expense which has the potential of pushing even the non -poor into poverty, the Committee 
is of the firm view that starving the above said health schemes of budgetary support may 
have catastrophic implications for the expansion of tertiary care facilities and equitable 
distribution of tertiary care to different segments of population. Keeping in v iew the 
slightly tight fiscal space the Government is in and seeking to strike a balance between 
public good and the need for containing fiscal deficit, the Committee recommends that out 
of the nine schemes indicated by the Ministry for providing budgetary outlay, the following 
five schemes are of critical importance: (i) Trauma Care (Capacity Building for 
Developing Trauma Care facilities in Govt. Hospitals on National Highways); (ii) National 
Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardi ovascular Diseases and 
Stroke; (iii) Health Care for Elderly; (iv) National Programme for Control of Blindness; 
and (v) Human Resource for Health. This recommendation of the Committee warrants 
utmost attention of Ministry of Finance. The Committee would li ke the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare to bring this recommendation to the notice of the Ministry of Finance 
with a sense of urgency and expediency and apprise the Committee of the follow -up action 
taken by them (i.e. Ministry of Finance). If adequat e budgetary provisions are not made for 

these schemes, the Committee may call the Secretary to acquaint itself with the reasons 
behind non allocation of funds for the schemes. 
Action Taken 
1.2 The Ministry of Finance has been apprised of the recommendation  of the 
Committee. 
 
1.3 Moreover, with a view to emphasise the need for allocation for the schemes of 
critical importance a D.O. reference was made  to the Ministry of Finance by Secretary 
(H&FW), wherein it was categorically mentioned that the primary and  secondary sector 
only could be part of  NHM.  The Tertiary sector being part of Health could not be 
subsumed with NHM and  it required additional funds to support ongoing activities which 
were  being continued from the eleventh plan and  there are committ ed liabilities.  
Accordingly, Supplementary Demand has been projected to the Ministry of Finance for 
consideration by Parliament during ensuing Monsoon Session.  The proposal seeks funds 
for the Schemes of critical importance, viz. (i) Assistance for Capac ity Building for 
Developing Trauma Care facilities in Govt. Hospitals on National Highways; (ii) National 
Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardio Vascular Disease and 
Stroke; (iii) Health Care for Elderly; (iv) National Programme f or Control of Blindness; 
and (v) Human Resources for Health & Medical Education. 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 1.18) 
1.4 The Committee also takes note of the Health Secretary‟s submission that there is a 
changeover from society route of funds to treasury route of funds. The Committee observes 
that with this changeover, UCs conditionality will no longer be an absolute bar for release 
of funds. The Committee hopes that this will have positive bearing on better utilization of 
budgeted funds as well a timely release of the funds. Though the changeover from society 
mode to treasury mode has been made for the purpose of better utilization of funds, the 
Committee would like the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to be vigilant and ensure 
that this chang eover does not lead to fiscal profligacy and funds so released result in 
corresponding benefits and assets creation on the ground. The Committee takes note of the 
Health Secretary's submission that this changeover has resulted in delay in transfer of funds  

to the Health Societies. The Committee would like the Ministry to initiate immediate 
remedial measures in coordination with the States and quickly iron out the hindrances 
coming in the way of speedy transfer of Central funds to the State Health Societies. 
Action Taken 
1.5 The Observation of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  In this regard  
the matter has since been taken up at higher levels with the State and U.T. Governments 
requesting them to ensure release from consolidated fund of States to State Health Societies 
(SHS) within 15 days of receipt of funds from Govt. of India, failing which they are liable 
for payment of penal interest.  The release of 2 nd tranche of funds is also contingent on the 
transfer of 1 st tranche of funds to SHS.  Tim ely availability of funds with State Health 
Societies is critical to effective implementation of  Programmes/Schemes in the States. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 1.27) 
1.6 A perusal of Annexure 1 reveals that in the Plan provision of the Health Secto r for 
2013-14, the actual expenditure was Rs. 4205.74 crore as against the BE of Rs. 8166.00 
crore which was reduced to  Rs. 5065.00 crore at RE stage. In 2014 -15 also, the actual 
expenditure has been Rs. 3457.49 crore as against the BE of Rs. 8733.00 cror e which was 
reduced to Rs. 6772.18 crore at the RE stage. The Committee is dismayed to observe that 
the slippages in utilization of the budgeted funds must have had an adverse bearing on 
moving towards the avowed objective of universal health coverage for the populace of the 
country. The Committee in its 67 th Report on Demands for Grants 2013 -14 had expressed 
concern at occurrence of huge savings and recommended that the Department should take 
concrete steps to ensure proper utilization of funds by means of  prudent assessment of the 
fund requirements and design effective mechanism to make a balance between spending 
and savings. The Committee again expresses its displeasure at substantial and recurrent 
underutilization of the allocated funds and observes that  such a state of affairs is indicative 
of serious shortcomings in budgetary planning and monitoring of utilization of the 
budgeted funds. The Committee, therefore, recommends that realistic projection of fund 
requirements should be given utmost priority at  the highest level of the Ministry and 
periodic meetings should be held to review and constantly monitor the progress of 
expenditure so that large variations in the BE,RE and AE could be avoided. 
Action Taken 
1.7 The recommendations of the Committee has be en noted for compliance.  The actual 
expenditure during 2014 -15 was Rs. 5645.37 crores against RE of Rs. 6772.18 crore. The 

shortfall in expenditure is mainly attributed to non -receipt of UCs from the grantee bodies 
resulting in release of lesser grants.  The expenditure position is regularly monitored in the 
Senior Officers‟ meeting taken by Secretary on weekly basis. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 1.30) 
1.8 The Committee takes note of the submission that a number of schemes/programmes 
were merged in certain pools for optimum utilization of budgetary assumptions‟ and feels 
that there is a need to carry out an appraisal of the efficacy of the new measures initiated 
and formulate remedial measures based on the findings for better financial performance. 
The Committee would like to be kept apprised of the efficacy of the new measures initiated 
for better utilization of budgetary provisions.  
 
Action Taken 
1.9 The Observation of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  However,   as 
schemes have been merged in certain pools for the first time, the efficacy of new measures 
so  initiated, would be reviewed/assessed after the close of the current financial year 2015 -
16. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 1.33) 
1.10 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that the main reason for 
under-utilization of funds under Health Sector has been non -settlement of Utilization 
Certificates (UCs). Though some measures have been taken to liquidate pending UCs, 
given the fact that a substantial amount to  the tune of Rs 2,196.95 crore is still involved in 
pending UCs and the pending UCs date as far back as year 1993, it is obvious that a lot still 
remains to be done. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should put in 
place a dedicated mec hanism in this regard to ensure that all pending UCs are liquidated 
within a period of six months. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the action 
taken and the outcomes thereof within a period of three months from the date of 
presentation of this Report. 
 
Action Taken 
1.11 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  However, 
in this regard it may be pertinent to mention here that State Governments are reminded 
during various review meetings to furnish pending UCs for settl ement within the fixed time 
frame. Letters and reminders to State Government are sent regularly to furnish pending 

UCs.  Special drives are being launched to reconcile and settle UCs with State 
Governments. 
 
II SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL & VARDHMAN MAHAVIR MEDICA L     
COLLEGE (SJH & VMMC), NEW DELHI 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 2.3) 
1.12 The Committee observes that in the year 2014-15, the BE of Rs. 330.00 crore for the 
Safdarjung Hospital was increased to Rs. 580.90 crore at RE stage but the actual 
expenditure is Rs. 310.22 crore as on  5th March, 2015 and is likely to be around the BE, 
given the trend of expenditure witnessed so far. The Committee would, therefore, like to be 
apprised of all the factors warranting increase in budgetary provisions at RE sta ge and the 
reasons for not utilizing the enhanced allocations. 
Action Taken 
1.13 The total budget provision of Rs. 330 crore was enhanced to Rs. 580.90 crore at RE 
stage in view of the requirement of redevelopment plan, likely joining of new employees, 
etc. This was revised at FE stage to Rs. 562.71 crore, out of which Rs. 562.12 crore was 
utilised by the Hospital by 31.3.2015. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 2.5) 
1.14 The Committee would like to be informed of (i) the total expenditure incurred on 
the Re-development of the Hospital vis-à-vis the total approved outlay for the project in the 
Twelfth Plan; (ii) the total surrenders of the budgeted plan funds under this head; (iii) 
whether all the required approvals for the Project had been obtained; (iv) t he original cost 
of the Project and the revised cost, if any, and (v) the original time -line for completion of 
the project. 
Action Taken 
1.15 The information is given below: 
(i)       Government has approved a redevelopment plan of Safdarjung Hospital with a 
total estimated cost of Rs. 1333 crore. Out of Rs. 1333 crore, Rs. 349.94 crore 
has been released so far.  
(ii)       No fund meant for the redevelopment has been surrendered.  
(iii)  The construction work of Redevelopment Plan is already going on after 
obtaining approval of the competent authority. 
(iv) The original estimates approved for redevelopment work phase I of Safdarjung 
Hospital is Rs. 1333 crore. Presently, there is no case of revised cost.  

 
1.16 The original time-line for completion of the project is March, 2017. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 2.6) 
1.17 The Committee is unable to comprehend as to why there was non -availability of 
funds when the RE of Rs. 580.90 crore was steeply higher than the actuals of Rs. 310.22 
crore. The Committee would like the Ministry to clarify the position in unambiguous terms.   
Action Taken 
1.18 The total budget provision of Rs. 330 crore was enhanced to Rs. 580.90 crore at RE 
stage in view of the requirement of redevelopment plan, joining of new employees, etc. 
The budget provision for major works was Rs. 100 crore for the year 2014 -15. M/s HSCC, 
the project Management Consultant, raised demand for additional amount of Rs. 215.00 
crore for redevelopment plan.  Approval for Rs.215.00 Cr. for redevelopment plan was 
received after 05/03/2015. Accordingly, Rs.150.00 crore and Rs. 65 crore was released to 
M/s. HSCC on 18/3/2015 and on 27/3/2015 respectively and Hospital was able to utilise 
Rs. 562.12 crore by 31.3.2015 against Rs. 562.71 revised at FE stage. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 2.13) 
1.19 The Committee takes note of the measures taken/being taken by the Department to 
fill up the vacant posts. Taking into account the fact that there is huge mismatch between 
requirement and availability of doctors, the Committee recommend s that it would require 
more measures than merely modifying Recruitment Rules to attract more doctors to 
Safdarjung Hospital. The Committee, therefore, directs the Department to pay adequate 
attention for making the pay packages being offered and service c onditions to doctors more 
attractive.   
Action Taken 
1.20 Several measures have been taken by the Government to attract and retain doctors in 
Central Government. Following the recommendation of the 5th CPC, the promotion of 
doctors was made time -bound upto  NFSG level without linkage to vacancies under the 
Dynamic Assured Career Progression Scheme (DACP). As per the recommendation of the 
6th Pay Commission, the DACP Scheme has been extended upto Senior Administrative 
Grade w.e.f. 29.10.2008. Several other measures viz. enhancement of study leave from 2 to 
3 years for post -graduation, sizeable increase in NPA, etc. have also been taken to retain 
the talent.  
 

1.21 The Government has now set -up 7th CPC for revising salaries of Central 
Government employees. The concerned Division has already submitted its comments on 
the demand of doctors service association related to enhancement/ revision of pay 
packages. Further action in the matter may be taken only after receipt of recommendations 
of 7th CPC. 
V        ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS), NEW DELHI 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 5.10) 
1.22 The Committee would also like to be apprised whether Recruitment Rules for 
faculty posts and doctors have been codified and if not, the reasons therefor. 
Action Taken 
1.23 The recruitment rules in respect of faculty positions have been framed. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 5.13) 
1.24 The Committee takes note of the fact that the selection of Resident Doctors had 
already been done and joining is in progr ess. The Committee desires that instead of 
keeping vacancies, they should be filled from the waitlist when feasible. 
 
Action Taken 
1.25 In this context, it is confirmed that, vacancies of Senior/ Junior Residents are filled 
by selection twice every year fo r January and July Sessions for tenure Residents position 
(Non-Academic) which are Senior Residents (3 years duration) and Junior Residents (Non -
Academic) (6th months duration). It is a continuous process.  
 
1.26 As desired by the Committee, it is confirme d that Academic Section is already 
making efforts to fill various posts which are lying vacant from the waitlist candidates 
wherever feasible.   
Recommendation/Observation (para no 5.15) 
1.27 The Committee notes from the information made available that a m ajor 
development work in the form of expansion of OPD Block at AIIMS had been planned 
with the estimated cost of Rs. 573.00 crore out of which Rs. 4.02 crore had been spent. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the time -frame within which this Projec t is 
targeted to be completed. 
Action Taken 

1.28 OPD Project civil works have been awarded on 11th May 2015. The civil 
construction work will be completed by 30th May 2017. 
VII   NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND NEUROSCIENCES 
(NIMHANS), BENGALURU 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 7.4) 
1.29 The Committee is glad to note that there has been optimal utilization of funds during 
last three years which indicates target oriented approach of the Institute in carrying out the 
activities as planned.   
Action Taken 
1.30 Matter of record 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 7.6) 
1.31 The Committee notes with concern that the budgetary support provided to 
NIMHANS in 2015-16 is not adequate and may delay the developmental activities. Though 
the Committee lends its  support for making higher provisions for NIMHANS in RE 2015 -
16, it simultaneously impresses upon the Institute to economise on expenditure and deploy 
the available resources in a more efficient manner.  
 
Action Taken 
1.32 The recommendations of the Committee have been duly noted for further action. 
 
VIII   NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF 
HEALTH AND MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG 
Recommendation/Observation (para nos 8.3 & 8.4) 
1.33 The Committee is constrained to note that the proj ects (i) Establishment of 
Undergraduate College and (ii) Establishment of Regional Cancer Institute are still hanging 
fire. An early decision should be taken in this regard. The Committee would also like to be 
informed of the on -going projects of North Eas tern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of 
Health and Medical Sciences and whether implementation of the projects is on schedule or 
they have witnessed any time and cost overruns.   
1.34 The Committee notes that under the broad head -strengthening of Institut ions for 
Medical Education, Training and Research, which  inter-alia covers NEIGRIHMS, an 
allocation of Rs. 490.00 crore has been made in BE 2015 -16 on the Plan side. The 
Committee desires that there should not be any shortfall in expenditure and physical a nd 
financial targets should be achieved. 

Action Taken 
1.35 The Government have approved the proposal for establishment of Under -graduate 
College and establishment of Regional Cancer Institute at NEIGRIHMS with an estimated 
cost of Rs. 474.24 crore and deci sion has been conveyed to the Institute on 8 th April 2015. 
As advised by the Committee, a high powered Committee consisting the officials from 
Ministry of Health & Family welfare, Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation, NEIGRIHMS and consultan t HSCC would be constituted to monitor the 
project from time to time. Director NEIGRIHMS will act as the Nodal Officer for 
monitoring the project. The fund requirement of the project shall be met from the annual 
budget and it is expected that there shall n ot be any shortfall in both the physical and 
financial targets. 
 
1.36 Further it is clarified that in addition to the above, there is no other project under 
construction/implementation in NEIGRIHMS as of now. 
IX       DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 9.4) 
1.37 The Committee observes that with the changeover from Society route of funds to 
Treasury route of funds in 2014 -15, release of funds should no longer be hamstrung by 
pending UCs. However, the Committee would impress u pon the Department not to slacken 
its efforts for liquidation of old UCs which are still pending. 
Action Taken 
1.38 Noted 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 9.9) 
1.39 The Committee views with serious concern the inadequacy of the allocated funds 
and is ap prehensive that this would certainly lead to undermining the national health 
objective because effective delivery of healthcare services is not possible without 
addressing the imbalances in the ratio of doctors to nurses and ensuring availability of 
adequate manpower mix. The Committee, therefore, lends its support for enhancing the 
allocations at RE stage. The Committee, however, desires that the shortfall in expenditure 
should be avoided. 
Action Taken 
1.40 Noted for compliance 
X CENTRAL DRUGS STANDARD CONTROL ORGANISATION (CDSCO) 

Recommendation/Observation (para no 10.5) 
1.41 The Committee observes that the actual utilization of funds has been persistently 
and significantly less than the allotted funds over the last three years. This trend of 
underutilization of funds is indicative of inadequate budgetary planning and projection of 
funds in a ritualistic manner without any correlation with their deployment. Since CDSCO 
is mandated to play a critical role in ensuring that the drugs being supplied to the publ ic are 
safe, efficacious and conform to prescribed quality standards, such financial under 
performance year after year is deplorable. The Department owes an explanation to the 
Committee on the reasons for persistent and significant suboptimal utilization o f allotted 
funds year after year and that too when the Committee has been repeatedly recommending 
for strengthening of the CDSCO. The Committee recommends that to improve financial 
performance of CDSCO, quarterly expenditure targets may be fixed and expend iture 
monitored on a regular basis. 
 
Action Taken 
1.42 The Department has taken note of the concerns expressed by the Committee and has 
made elaborate action plan for avoiding recurrence of this nature. The lower expenditure 
was mainly on account of the following:  
(i.) the expenditure under the Heads „Salaries‟, „Office Expenses‟, „Travel Expenses‟, 
„Material & Supplies‟, etc. was lower due to non -filling up of vacant posts in various 
categories. 
(ii.) the amount of Rs.20.00 crore allocated under the Head „Machinery & Equipment‟ 
could not be used fully as the proposed purchase of equipment for various 
Laboratories could not materialise and equipment worth Rs.1.00 crore only could be 
purchased. 
(iii.) an amount of Rs.5.00 crore was allocated in B.E. 2014 -15 for Major Works 
(construction of buildings, etc.) out of which, a sum of Rs.2.03 crore was transferred 
to the CPWD for construction of building at CDSCO, Sub -Zone, Hyderabad. The 
remaining amount had to be surrendered at the R.E. stage as the CPWD could not 
expedite the work. 
(iv.) an amount of Rs.3.20 crore was allocated for „Other Administrative Expenses‟ in 
B.E. 2014 -15. The amount was kept for in -house training, on -site training of staff 
members of CDSCO and various programmes for State Drug Regulatory Authorities, 

out of whic h, an amount of Rs.133 lakh only could be incurred. The lesser 
expenditure was due to postponement of the training programmes owing to other 
pressing commitments. 
1.43 The Department also wishes to inform the Committee that a series of measures have 
been i nitiated by the Department to transform the regulatory structures. These include 
strengthening of enforcement wing and laboratories by recruiting additional manpower, the 
processes for which have either been completed or are at an advanced stage of complet ion, 
broad-basing the training programmes that will be common for both the Central and Stage 
Regulators and Labs. C -DAC has been entrusted with organization wide e -Governance 
project and a software is being developed for processing cases of clinical trials . Necessary 
equipment and machinery is proposed to be made available to all the drug testing 
laboratories in a time -bound manner. The Department will take all steps to ensure that the 
funds made available to CDSCO, are gainfully utilised within the given time-frame. 
 
XI  MANUFACTURE OF SERA AND VACCINE AND PUBLIC HEALTH 
LABORATORIES (BCG VACCINE LABORATORY, GUINDY, PASTEUR 
INSTITUTE OF INDIA, CONOOR AND CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, 
KASAULI) 
 
Recommendation/Observation (para nos 11.10 &11.11) 
1.44 The Committee takes note of the submission that "the requirement of DPT, TTand 
BCG Vaccines under the UIP is much more than the production of these in PSUs." The 
Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department to the following observation 
made by the Javid Chowdhury Committee on the three PSUs:-  
"Para 5.1. To insulate the UIP from the price and supply shock a cardinal 
principle of public health requires the sourcing of vaccines from public sector 
manufacturing units to a substantial extent."  
1.45 The pu rpose of quoting from the Javid Chowdhury Committee Report is only to 
impress upon the Department the imperative need for streamlining the monitoring of the 
on-going work of cGMP compliant structures and expediting the completion thereof. 
Action Taken 
1.46 The observation of the Committee has been noted and the on -going work is being 
monitored regularly including by a local monitoring committee comprising experts in the 
relevant fields. 

XIII   CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY (CIP), RANCHI 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 13.4) 
1.47 The Committee observes that there is persistent under utilization of funds by the 
Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi during the last three years consecutively. While 
there were a number of ongoing activities at the Institu te viz. Construction work, 
procurement of equipments, and recruitment process for 2014 -15, the expenditure incurred 
is approximately 37% of the allotted funds. The Committee fails to understand the reasons 
for this mismanagement of funds and feels that in the present scenario of resource crunch, 
it would expect the Department to deploy the available resources in a more efficient 
manner and ensure proper correlation between their availability and utilization. 
Action Taken 
1.48 During the last three financial  years, the Institute has been able to fully utilize the 
funds allocated under Plan (Revenue). However, there has been a shortfall in utilization of 
funds allocated under Plan (Capital) for purchase of fMRI equipment at the Institute which 
has now been app roved and the purchase contract agreement had already been issued on 
24.03.2015. 
 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 13.6) 
1.49 The Committee would expect the Ministry to formulate an action plan and 
streamline the monitoring mechanism for expeditious exe cution of the on -going activities 
of the Institute within the approved cost and specified timeframe. There should not be any 
shortfall in achieving physical and financial targets. 
 
Action Taken 
1.50 The Ministry will streamline the monitoring mechanism for  expeditious execution 
of the on-going activities within the approved cost and specified time frame. The necessary 
approvals for the various ongoing and planned activities are being provided expeditiously 
to prevent shortfalls in achieving physical and financial targets. 
 
XIV    PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHAYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY) 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 14.15) 
1.51 The Committee observes that total 70 medical colleges have been selected for 
upgradation while the updated number of AIIMS like institu tion is 16. The Committee 

would like to be informed whether total estimated cost of all these projects have been 
worked out. 
 
Action Taken 
1.52 Total estimated cost of all these projects have been worked out as under: 
             
 
 
(Rs. in Crore)                                                                       
 Phase 
I 
Phase 
II 
Phase 
III 
Phase 
IV/V 
Setting up of 
AIIMS like  
Institutions 
6 1 - 10 
Estimated 
Cost/outlay 
(amount in Rs. 
Crore) 
5040 1427 - 
Estimate for 3 AIIMS, in 
Maharashtra, West Bengal  
and Andhra Pradesh has 
been made and presented 
before EFC. The estimated 
cost as per this has come out 
to be approximately Rs. 
4900 crore for three AIIMS 
Upgradation of 
medical colleges 
13 6 39 12 
Estimated 
Cost/outlay for 
upgradation 
(amount in Rs. 
Crore)  
1606.98 890.27 5850 Costs are being worked out.  
 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 14.16) 
1.53 Given the fact that Government spending on health is nowhere close to the targeted 
level of 2.5 per cent of GDP during the 12 th Plan Period and health b udget for the financial 
2015-16 is grossly inadequate, the Committee would like to know whether the Government 

has the fiscal strength to make huge investments on PMSSY and how the financial 
resources will be mobilized to implement this ambitious project. 
Action Taken 
1.54 An amount of Rs.12,000 crore has been earmarked during the 12 th Five Year Plan 
period 2012-2017 for PMSSY. The Government has provided an amount of Rs. 2,206 crore 
in BE 2015-16 (Plan) for this ambitious project. 
XV    CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS) 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 15.5) 
1.55 The Committee also observes that despite raised allocation of funds at RE 2014 -15 
stage for capital work and payment towards contractual doctors and staff, the actual 
utilization of funds is less as compared to funds allotted at BE stage, implying deficiencies 
in projection of funds at RE stage. The Committee would like the Department to exercise 
greater fiscal discipline while making fund projection in future.   
Action Taken 
1.56 The expen diture trend and other aspects of allocation of funds and projection of  
Revised Estimates for financial year 2015 -16 and  Budget Estimates for the financial year 
2016-17 will be analyzed and due care and consultations with state units will be undertaken 
before projecting the same, so that realistic projections are submitted. 
 
XVI       REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (RIMS), IMPHAL 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 16.6) 
1.57 The Committee notes with concern that despite good track record of fund utilization 
by the RIMS, Imphal during the years 2012 -13, 2013-14 and 2014-15, the grants-in-aid of 
Rs.250.00 crore earmarked for the Institute for 2015 -16 is even less than the RE 2014 -15 
figure of Rs. 280.00 crore. The Committee observes that RIMS caters  to the healthcare 
needs of North EASTERN Region including providing medical education. Given the fact 
that North Eastern Region have weak public health indicators and weak health 
infrastructure, strengthening and capacity building of RIMS assumes added si gnificance. 
The Committee, therefore, lends its full support to any higher fund projection for RIMS 
and recommends that enhanced grants-in-aid may be provided to the Institute.   
Action Taken 
1.58 Government would assess and consider for the  availability o f more funds for the 
project requirement, if any, at the appropriate time. 

XVIII       HEALTH SECTOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 18.4) 
1.59 The Committee takes serious view of the cursory replies given by the Department, 
which lack totality and are not precise. The Committee would like the Department to 
indicate concrete reasons for drastic reduction of funds at RE 2014 -15, under-utilization of 
funds during 2014 -15 and proposals/ activities which are planned to be implemented f or 
strengthening of the Disaster Preparedness and emergency medical relief for man -made 
and natural disasters in the country. The Committee strongly recommends that the financial 
indiscipline should be avoided. Projections should be made after all formalit ies are 
completed instead of making projection and allocations and then start out on clearances etc. 
Action Taken 
1.60 It is submitted that though the projections were made after undertaking considerable 
pre-project activities for Machinery & Equipments an d Major Works for creating 
Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) medical management 
infrastructure.  The provisional Standing Finance Committee Memorandum could not got 
its approval in time.  Hence the amount was surrendered  in BE 2014 -15.  However, the 
recommendations of the Committee have been taken note of and would be followed 
strictly. 

 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VEIW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES  
I   BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 1.17) 
2.1 The Committee also takes note of the Health Secretary's admission that despite the 
hike of the State share in the Central Taxes and the resultant freeing up of funds to the tune 
of Rs. 180,000.00 crore for transfe r to the States, most of the States are complaining that 
"they are actually not getting even as much as they were getting in the last year". The 
Committee is not aware of the reasons behind such an impression of the States. The 
Committee would, therefore, like the Government to spell out its policy stance in this 
matter in greater detail and with more clarity and come out with a narrative explanation of 
how the additional resources of Rs. 1,80,000.00 crore will flow into the States' kitty. 
Action Taken 
2.2 As per the  recommendation of 14 th Finance Commission, Union Government has 
decided to devolve a much higher of 42% of Union‟s net tax receipts to the States. In 
comparison to 2014 -15, this will be a significant enhancement of 10%, over the 32% 
during the award period of the 13th Finance Commission. As against a total devolution of 
Rs. 3.48 lakh crore approximately in 2014 -15, the total devolution to the states in 2015 -16 
will be Rs. 5.26 lakh crore approximately. A year on year increase of Rs. 1.78 lakh cro re 
approximately. The higher tax devolution will allow states greater autonomy in financing 
and designing of schemes as per their needs and requirements to use the extra fiscal space 
available to them. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 1.25) 
2.3 The Comm ittee notes from the Outcome Budget 2015 -16 that as against the RE 
allocation of Rs. 6772.18 crore for 2014 -15, only Rs. 3457.49 crore could be spent till 
December, 2014. It means that the remaining expenditure would have to be squeezed in the 
last quarter of 2014-15. Since as per the norms stipulated by the Ministry of Finance, there 
is ceiling of 33% on expenditure in the last quarter, the Committee would like the 
Department to explain its apparent disregard of the financial norms and lack of fiscal 
discipline on the part of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. 
Action Taken 

2.4 The actual expenditure during 2014 -15 was Rs.5645.37.Crore. as against FE 2014 -
15 of Rs.5865.83.Crore.  It may be mentioned here that the slow pace of expenditure is 
mainly attr ibuted to non/late submission of UCs by the grantee bodies hindering further 
releases.  Efforts are being made to closely monitor the UCs to ensure release of funds as 
per ceiling fixed by Ministry of Finance. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 1.28) 
2.5 From a perusal of Table No. 4, the Committee notes with serious concern that a 
significant proportion, i.e. 39.09% and 28.09 % of allocated funds amounting to Rs. 
3192.32 crore and Rs. 2453.23 crore has been surrendered in the years 2013 -14 and 2014-
15, respectively. The Committee also notes that these unspent budgetary provisions were 
kept till the close of the respective financial years despite reduction in the budgetary 
provisions at RE stage and surrendered on 31st March in both the years. The Committee  
observes that had the Department exercised rigorous monitoring of the progress of 
expenditure on a periodic basis it would have been able to foresee the quantum of unspent 
budgetary provisions timely and surrendered the same much before without waiting fo r the 
fiscal end. The Committee further observes that a resource constrained country like India 
cannot afford to keep a vast chunk of its financial resources locked up and surrendered 
towards the end of financial year and recommends that the provisions of General Financial 
Rules be adhered to scrupulously and unspent budgetary provisions may be surrendered 
timely for their gainful utilization for other fund-starved projects/schemes. 
Action Taken 
2.6 There is  a regular monitoring of expenditure in the Minis try at Secretary level in 
Senior Officers‟ Meeting.   Further, the savings are attributed to various other issues 
relating to land, tendering issues, procurement related procedural issues, non -receipt of 
Utilisation Certificates from the grantee bodies.   
 
2.7 In addition to these, the savings under North East, SC, ST and Capital head could 
not be utilised as per instructions.  As far as surrender of amount in last week of March is 
concerned, the surrender could be made only after receipt of final batch of Supplementary.   
II SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL & VARDHMAN MAHAVIR MEDICAL COLLEGE 
(SJH & VMMC), NEW DELHI 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 2.7) 

2.8 Keeping in view the slow pace of Redevelopment work of Safdarjung Hospital, the 
Committee strongly recommends to  the Department to streamline its monitoring 
mechanism and ensure that set targets are accomplished within the designated timeline and 
there are no cost overruns.   
Action Taken 
2.9 The time lines for implementation of the project are being followed strict ly. 
Construction of the new buildings is in advanced stage and it is likely to be completed 
before the end of this year. 
 
2.10 The technical specification of medical equipment is being finalized and Notice 
Inviting Tender (NIT) of departmental equipment of  anesthesia/ Labs/ Radiology etc. has 
already been floated. 
 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 2.14) 
2.11 The Committee is astonished to note that out of sanctioned strength of 54 in Group 
A (Non-Doctors) only 8 are in position and as many as 46 posts ar e vacant. Similarly, there 
exists huge number of vacant posts in group B, C & D in various categories. The 
Committee feels that the efficiency of any hospital does not only depend on the doctors but 
also the supporting staff of the hospital who have a vita l role to play. The Committee can 
well appreciate the shortage of doctors in the Hospital, but the vacancies in non -medical 
category are beyond its comprehension. The Committee therefore, recommends that efforts 
be made for early filling up of the vacancies. 
Action Taken 
2.12 Recruitment for 11 posts of Group B & C has already been initiated. 150 posts of 
Group C and Group D have already been filled through outsourcing basis till the regular 
appointment is made. 31 posts of Group B, etc. are being outsource d with the approval of 
the competent authority. 
III     Dr. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL (RML),NEW DELHI 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 3.5) 
2.13 The Committee notes that the New Emergency Care Building (NECB) and 
Dharmshala have been completed but are yet to be operationalized fully. In its earlier 
Reports, the Committee had commented upon the slow pace of the progress in executing 
the above projects. The Committee is, therefore, pleased that the construction of the NECB 

and Dharmashala has been complet ed. The Committee would like the Department to 
proactively pursue the pending clearances with the authorities concerned enabling full 
operationalization of the above projects. The Committee would like to be kept informed of 
full operationalization of both the projects. 
 
Action Taken 
2.14 The new Emergency Care Building has become partially functional w.e.f. 17 th 
February, 2015.  
 
2.15 The fire clearance for Dharamshala after making consolidated efforts with the 
concerned agencies has now been obtained and e fforts are being made to obtain the 
completion certificate. This is also expected to be received shortly. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 3.10) 
2.16 The Committee in its earlier Reports had been impressing upon the Department to 
take necessary steps to  fill the gaps in manpower shortage. The Committee regrets to 
observe that no tangible progress has been made towards addressing the shortage of 
manpower in Dr. RML Hospital. The Committee, therefore, recommends even at the cost 
of repetition, that the Dep artment should explore the possibility of offering better financial 
incentives so that the manpower shortage in Dr. RML Hospital could be overcome. 
Action Taken 
2.17 The employee and the Doctors working in Dr. RML Hospital are recruited through 
the laid down procedure with the prescribed Pay-scale. The pay Scale and other allowances 
including incentive is decided by the Pay Commission after taking into account the service 
condition of the employee including the hospital employees. Accordingly they are grant ed 
scale of pay and other benefit like Nursing Allowances, HPCA, etc. Efforts are being taken 
to fill up the vacancies and engage services of vacant manpower on outsource basis. 
 
 
V      ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS), NEW DELHI 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 5.6) 
2.18 The Committee observes that there is huge mismatch between the AIIMS's projected 
demand of Rs. 2325.00 crore and allocation of Rs. 550.00 crore. The Committee observes 
that the funds allocated for 2015 -16 is the same as it was in RE 2013 -14. The Committee 

notes from the information made available to it that a large number of developmental 
activities are currently underway at AIIMS and inadequacy of Plan funds may prove to be 
big factor in limiting the progress in executin g important initiatives like National Cancer 
Institute, Jhajjar new OPD Block at Masjid Moth etc. The Committee, therefore, lends its 
full support for enhanced budgetary support to AIIMS at RE stage. 
Action Taken 
2.19 The Ministry of Health & Family Welfar e is grateful to the Hon‟ble Committee for 
its support. 
Recommendation/Observation (para nos 5.8 & 5.9) 
2.20 The Department has informed that 234 vacant posts in different categories have 
arisen due to creation of new faculty posts/ retirements/ resignatio ns. The Department has 
further informed that out of 115 advertised posts in 2011 -12, 99 were filled up; out of 148 
advertised posts in 2012 -13, 116 were filled in 2014 -15, 96 posts are advertised and filling 
up process is in action. 
2.21 The Committee note s that a large number of faculty posts are still vacant. Even the 
advertised posts could not be filled up completely since 2011. The Committee is 
disappointed to note the persistent shortage of manpower especially in the faculty 
positions. The Committee, i n its earlier Reports, had urged the Department to accord due 
priority to filling up of the vacant faculty posts but satisfactory progress has not been 
achieved in this direction. The Committee once again recommends with all the power at its 
command that t he Department should play its role of facilitator in filling up the vacancies 
in faculty position in a more effective way and help fill up the vacant faculty and other 
category posts. 
Action Taken 
2.22 Filling up vacancies is a continuous process. Some pos ts remain unfilled due to lack 
of suitable candidates. 
   
2.23 Out of the 234 vacancies, the selection process to fill up 96 advertised posts of 
Assistant Professor have already been concluded.  The meetings of the Standing Selection 
Committee to fill up a bove 96 vacant faculty positions were held in phased manner i.e. 
from 5 -7th December, 2014 (1st Phase),  12 -14th December, 2014 (2nd phase), 10 -11th 
January, 2015 (3rd phase), 17 -18th January, 2014 (4th phase) & 6 -8th February, 2015 (5th 
phase).   

 
2.24 Further, selection process to fill up 37 advertised posts of Professor could not be 
initiated due to pendency of a writ petition filed by faculty members in the Hon‟ble High 
Court of Delhi on the issue of fixation of seniority of direct recruited Professor v is-à-vis 
Professors promoted under Assessment Promotion Scheme.     
 
2.25 The action to fill up remaining vacancies will be initiated shortly. It may be noted 
that between 2012-2015 as many as 311 posts of Asstt Prof. have been filled up. 
 
VI    POST -GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND 
RESEARCH (PGIMER), CHANDIGARH 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 6.4) 
2.26 The Committee notes that the action has been initiated to fill up the vacant posts at 
PGIMER, Chandigarh. The Committee also notes that out o f 208 vacancies in faculty 
posts, only 117 have been advertised for selection. The Committee would like to know the 
reasons for not advertising the remaining faculty posts. 
Action Taken 
2.27 The status of vacant faculty posts was inadvertently mentioned as  117 whereas out 
of 208 vacancies, 179 posts have already been advertised by the Institute for selection and 
the remaining are under process for advertisement.  
 
VII  NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND NEUROSCIENCES 
(NIMHANS), BENGALURU 
 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 7.7) 
2.28 The Committee further notes that 185 posts of Faculty Senior Residents and Junior 
Residents have been created and the process of filling up of the posts is underway. Early 
action should be taken for filling up posts without any delay. 
Action Taken 
2.29 All the 185 newly created posts have been advertised by the Institute. The process of 
recruitment will be completed at the earliest. 
IX  DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 9.7) 
2.30 The Committ ee observes that very important initiatives are proposed under 
Development of Nursing Services during the 12 th Plan Period. Keeping in view the fact that 

there are imbalances in ratio of doctors to nurses, the Committee welcomes the above 
initiatives and desires them to be taken forward.  
Action Taken 
2.31 Noted 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 9.13) 
2.32 The Committee expresses its displeasure at the tenor of the reply furnished by the 
Department. The reply is of generic nature and contains no substanti ve information like 
availability of residential accommodation vis -à-vis demand and transportation facilities for 
nurses. The Committee notes that this issue had figured in its 39 th Report and 54 th Report 
presented to Parliament on 28 th April, 2010 and 26 th April, 2012, respectively. The 
Department in its Action Taken Note on the 39th Report had given the same reply as it has 
given now. This shows that nothing concrete has been done in this regard so far despite 
Committee's repeated recommendations. The Comm ittee deprecates such a casual and 
desultory approach of the Department. The Committee feels that Nursing Personnel is a 
very vital workforce in the healthcare delivery system and provision of accommodation 
and transportation is certain to act as multiplie r to the professional competence and moral 
boosting of nurses. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Department accord utmost 
priority to providing accommodation and Transportation facilities to all nurses within a 
specified timeframe. The Committee wi shes to be kept apprised of the action taken by the 
Department in this regard. 
Action Taken 
2.33 It may please be noted that despite constraint of resource to provide housing 
facilities to the Nursing personnel, efforts have been made by the government and  
dedicated complex for the nursing personnel working in Central Government Hospitals 
have been provided at Nursing Hostel, Sriniwaspuri in addition to the General Pool 
Residential Accommodation (GPRA) for which they are entitled. A proposal has also been 
submitted by Safdarjung Hospital to NDMC for construction of 100 Type -III and 40 Type-
IV dwelling units at Dwarka. Further, the dedicated transport facility has been provided to 
Nursing Personnel by Central Government Hospitals for picking and dropping from  
Nursing Residential Complex, Sriniwaspuri to the Hospitals concerned (both ways). The 
others who are not availing the transport facility are getting transport allowance as per 
Govt. rules. Nurses, who are not availing the Government residential accommodat ion, are 
eligible to get House Rent Allowance as per the extant Rules.. 

Recommendation/Observation (para no 9.15) 
2.34 The Committee takes serious note of the fact that instead of formulating a 
substantive reply delineating the number of vacancies and the efforts made to fill them up, 
the Department has furnished a casual reply which does not address the query posed. The 
Committee deprecates the casual approach of the Department in this regard. The 
Committee also desires to be apprised of the sanctioned, in -position and vacant posts of 
nurses in Central Government Hospitals and the steps taken to clear the vacancies and 
success achieved therein. 
Action Taken 
2.35 The Recruitment Rules for filling up the post of Staff Nurse in all Central 
Government hospitals  located in Delhi was notified on 12th Aug, 2014 (Regd. No. 
D.L.33004/99). Accordingly, Dte.GHS took an initiative to fill up these posts through 
AIIMS, New Delhi in fair, transparent and efficient manner. However, the Nursing Union 
has vehemently proteste d and threatened to go on strike at the ground of age and 
experience and thus the recruitment process was stalled.  
 
2.36 Thereafter, another initiative has been contemplated by the Ministry to fill up these 
vacant posts on outsourced basis to meet the gro wing demands of Staff Nurse for the better 
patient care, which has again been dropped on protest by the Nursing Union. In view of the 
foregoing, it is apparent that the Ministry has taken sincere efforts from time to time to fill 
up the vacant posts, howev er, the due to the reason as explained above these, posts could 
not be filled up. Now the amendment of Recruitment Rules is under process in consultation 
with DoPT. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 9.17) 
2.37 The Committee is extremely distressed to n ote the grim picture emerging from the 
article of Dr. Devi Shetty. The Committee observes that lack of career progression of 
nurses and the resultant dwindling population of nurses have very grave implications for 
the healthcare delivery system and therefo re, requires urgent attention. The Committee, 
accordingly, impresses upon the Department to take prompt cognizance of the dwindling 
population of nurses and its causative factors and formulate a fair career progression policy 
for nurses so that this trend of decreasing workforce of nurses can be checked, existing 

workforce is kept motivated and more and more people are attracted towards this stream of 
health profession. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Department in this re gard within a period of three month from the date of presentation of 
this Report.   
Action Taken 
2.38 Indian Nursing Council and the Ministry from time to time considered requirement 
of nurses in the country and are taking necessary steps in this direction . During the last 10 
years, the total number of nursing institutions (Auxiliary Nursing and Midwifery plus 
General Nursing and Midwifery plus BSc in Nursing) has increased from 1720 in 2005 to 
6569 in 2014. During the same period, the total number of Nursi ng Personnel in these two 
categories registered with the Indian Nursing Council increased from 13.89 lakhs to 25.52 
lakhs. The present annual admission capacity of Nursing Institutions in the country is 
around 2.9 lakhs and with the present growth, India w ould meet WHO standards of Nurse -
Population ration by the year 2022. 
 
2.39 Every care is being attempted to make nursing profession more lucrative.  Health is 
being State subject, instructions were issued by Govt. of India to all the States 
Governments to formulate legislation on good working service conditions and minimum 
wages to nursing personnel. 
XI    MANUFACTURE OF SERA AND VACCINE AND PUBLIC HEALTH 
LABORATORIES (BCG VACCINE LABORATORY, GUINDY, PASTEUR 
INSTITUTE OF INDIA, CONOOR AND CENTRAL RESEARCH I NSTITUTE, 
KASAULI) 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 11.8) 
2.40 The Committee is concerned to note that there is huge financial underperformance 
in the years 2013 -14 and 2014 -15 which is not acceptable and expects the Department to 
explain the reasons be hind the conspicuous mismatch in BE and AE of 2013 -14 and 2014-
15. 
Action Taken 
2.41 The concerns of the Committee have been noted and it will be ensured that all 
Government vaccine manufacturing units function efficiently. The mismatch in Budget 
Estimates and Actual Estimates of the years 2013 -14 and 2014-15 was mainly due to delay 
in completion of a few activities and consequential delay in the project. 
 

Name of the 
Institute 
Reasons of mismatch in expenditure 
PII, Coonoor  The construction work of new f acility was started from June, 2013 
and due to delay in obtaining clearances from local bodies the fund 
could not be utilized. The delay in civil construction also impacted 
fund utilization for FY 2014-15. 
CRI, Kasauli Subsequent to completion of cGMP com pliant DPT facility the 
new facility could be operationalised partially due to shortage of 
manpower, difficulties in purchase of raw material, spares and 
consumables. Thus the fund could not be utilized fully during the 
FY 2013-14 and 2014-15. 
BCG, VL Guindy As some part of old facility was taken for construction of new 
facility it resulted in space constraint for vaccine production 
activity and also dust/ vibration was generated. There was 
breakdown of HVAC system in the existing old facility due to 
which required quantity of vaccine could not be produced. Due to 
these constraints funds could not be utilized fully in FY 2013 -14 
and 2014-15. 
 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 11.12) 
2.42 The Committee gathers from the information made available to it tha t the quantity 
of BCG Vaccine produced by BCGVL was nil in 2014 -15. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the reasons therefor and its impact on the prices of BCG Vaccine as also on 
exchequer. 
Action Taken 
2.43 The BCG vaccine production activities at  BCG VL, Guindy were stopped in FY 14 -
15 due to a major fault in the old facility. BCG Vaccines for UIP were procured from the 
private parties at L1 rates of Rs. 3.00, Rs. 2.80, Rs. 2.85 per dose for the year 2012 -13, 
2013-14 and 2014 -15 respectively. The non-production of BCG Vaccine by BCG VL, 
Guindy does not appear to have impacted the prices of vaccine. 
 
XIV      PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHAYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY) 

Recommendation/Observation (para no 14.12) 
2.44 The Committee notes that PMSSY was launched i n March 2006 with the primary 
objective of correcting the imbalances in availability of affordable tertiary healthcare 
facilities in the country as also to augment facilities for quality medical education in the 
under-served areas of the country. But inord inate delay in full operationalization of six 
AIIMS-like Institutions announced in 2006, has not only resulted in massive cost -
escalation but also blunted the objective of correcting the mismatch between demand for 
and supply of equitable, accessible and g ood quality tertiary healthcare infrastructure and 
services. As per the feedback received by the Committee, all the six AIIMS like Institutes 
are facing shortage of infrastructure, accommodation and qualified/ trained manpower. The 
Committee also takes note of the Health Secretary's submission that the Department did not 
have the requisite experience of having that kind of structure constructed and procurements 
made, but after 2010, the expenditure has picked up, civil constructions have happened and 
equipments have been procured and a strong mechanism has been put in place and in the 
coming years things will witness better performance. The Committee sincerely hopes and 
trusts that the full operationalization of AIIMS like institutions will gather momentum. The 
Committee would like to be kept apprised of the progress made towards full 
operationalization of six AIIMS-like Institutions on a bi-monthly basis. 
Action Taken 
2.45 In respect of six new AIIMS already approved under PMSSY Phase -I, the delay in 
operationalization is mainly due to site specific issues such as delays in supply of drawings 
by Design DPR Consultants, obtaining of local body approvals and finalization of revised 
cost estimates, inadequate bid responses in some cases etc. There is no massive cost 
overrun in construction activities undertaken at all the six AIIMS. 
 
2.46 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare will provide updated status to the 
Committee on the operationalization of AIIMS periodically.   
Recommendation/Observation (para no 14.13) 
2.47 The Committee also notes that upgradations of several existing medical institutions 
are envisaged under PMSSY and in Phase I, 13 Medical Colleges are targeted to be 
upgraded. The Committee would like to know the original estimated cost of upgradat ion 
per Medical College in Phase I, escalation therein, if any, and designated timeline for 
completion of the upgradation. 

 
Action Taken 
2.48 The total outlay which inter-alia includes Central Share and State Share as approved 
cost of upgradation of 13 Medical Colleges under PMSSY and Phase-I is given as under: 
Sl. Name of Medical 
College/Institution 
Outlay approved 
Status 
Central Share State Share 
1. Trivandrum Medical College 
(Kerala) 98.13 20.00 Completed 
2 
Government Mohan 
Kumaramangalam Medical College 
Salem (Tamil Nadu) 
99.995 20.00 Completed 
3 Rajendra Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Ranchi (Jharkhand) 100.00 20.00 Completed 
4 Bangalore Medical College 
(Karnataka) 99.69 26.69 Completed 
5 SGPGIMS, Lucknow (Uttar 
Pradesh) 100.00 20.00 Completed 
6. IMS,BHU, Varanasi 
MoHFW-99.63 
MoHRD-20.00 
UGC-27.00 
- Civil work 
completed 
7. NIMS, Hyderabad (Telengana) 100.00 72.59 Completed 
8 SVIMS, Tirupati (Andhra Pradesh) 60.00 60.00 
Expected to 
be 
completed 
by June, 
2015 
9 Kolkata Medical College 99.99 54.00 
OPD & 
Academic 
Block-
Completed. 
However, 
tender for 
construction 
of SSB 
work is 
under 
finalization 
10 Jammu Medical College (J&K) 115.00 20.00 Completed 
11 Srinagar Medical College (J&K) 115.00 20.00 
Expected to 
be 
completed 
by June 
2015 

 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 14.14) 
2.49 The Committee would also like t o be apprised whether normative requirements in 
respect of upgradation of all 39 medical colleges included in Phase III have been fulfilled. 
Action Taken 
2.50 Based on Phase -I and Phase -II Implementation, HSCC/HLL/CPWD has been 
selected as Project Manageme nt and Supervision Consultants for civil work at 39 medical 
colleges. Gap Analysis Committee (s) has been constituted to conduct gap analysis/assess 
requirement of these medical colleges. In addition, Standard Tender Document for civil 
work and Standard Co ntract Agreement for Project Management and Supervision 
Consultancy services, recommended by respective Committees constituted for the purposes 
have now been finalized in consultation with Integrated Finance Wing of this Ministry and 
sent to Project Management and Supervision Consultants selected for undertaking the work 
at the Medical Colleges. Gap Analysis has been carried out at all 39 Medical Colleges 
under Phase III upgradation by Gap Analysis Committee(s) constituted for the purpose. 
Thirty Three (33)  Detailed Project Reports have been received from respective State 
Governments out of which 18 DPRs have been approved and rest  are under 
examination/review by Technical Committee /Ministry. 
XV CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS) 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 15.8) 
2.51 The Committee would like to observe that given the resource constraints due to the 
moderation in the growth of the economy it may not be possible to mobilise the required 
funds for CGHS. In such a scenario, it is imperative on the  part of the Department to 
economise on expenditure and deploy the available resources in a more efficient manner. 
The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to prioritize the activities to be 
12 B.J. Medical College, Ahmadabad 100.00 20.00 
Expected to 
be 
completed 
by -June 
2015 
13 Grant Medical College, Mumbai 
(Maharashtra) 99.95 20.00 
Expected to 
be 
completed 
by -June 
2015 

undertaken by the Department under CGHS and ask for en hanced funds at RE stage on the 
basis of qualitative improvement in expenditure. 
Action Taken 
2.52 The allocation under Non -Plan is less than the projected amount especially under 
head M&S. Medicines bills pertaining to the serving employees are booked und er this 
head. Short fall under this head is likely to affect the supply of medicines and settlement of 
bills pertaining to the supply of medicines is likely to get delayed, particularly in the last 
quarter of the Financial year. 
 
2.53 CGHS is largely a wel fare scheme and medical facilities to CGHS beneficiaries 
cannot be denied. Therefore priority will be given for uninterrupted supply of medicines to 
CGHS beneficiaries and hospital facilities for Pensioners .  
 
2.54 However, every effort will be made to pr ioritize and economize the expenditure by 
postponing new projects and initiatives. 
 
 
XVI    REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (RIMS), IMPHAL 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 16.7) 
2.55 The Committee notes that a project for upgradation of the Insti tute for bringing it at 
par with AIIMS, New Delhi is under estimation. The Committee desires that early action 
and final decision be taken in this regard at the earliest. 
Action Taken 
2.56 As regards upgradation of Institute it is informed that the Institu te is in a nascent 
stage of its existence as a teaching Institute. The functioning of the Institute at this stage 
needs to be monitored by Medical Council of India (MCI) as per stipulated norms. The 
Institute, as of now, needs improvement to excel in medic al education patient care services 
and research activities. The Institute has been advised to make further efforts for improving 
its performance in medical education, generation of health manpower in speciality/ super 
speciality and in patient care service s, and, thereafter, send a well -structured proposal for 
granting autonomous status to the organization. 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
I   BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 1.15) 
3.1 The Committee views with serious concern the sharp reductions in allocations of 
funds for Health and NHM in the Central Plan in 2015 -16 and feels that huge assumption 
has been made that 42 per cent transfer of Central Taxes to the States in the form of untied 
funds would compensate for the shortfall in Central funds for Health and if this assumption 
is not validated, then there will be a very severe shortfall of health expenditure in several 
backward States which fare poorly in terms of various health indicators and are, therefore, 
required to increase their health expenditure, but are unable to do so due to various reasons. 
The past experience shows that if the spending is left to the States, contractor -intensive 
sectors takes priority over non -contractor intensive sectors and Health, not being a 
contractor intensive sector, will take a backseat in such circumstances. The increase in 
education expenditure that took place from the mid 80s, in many ways, forced the States to 
make an increase in their expenditure commensurately and one of the objectives of the 
National Rural Health Mission which has now become the National Health Mission is to 
spur the States to spend more on health. The Committee also takes note of the fact that a a 
number of States have already presented their Budgets for the financial year 2015 -16 and 
no budgetary provisions have been made therein for meeting the shortfall in expenditure on 
key health  schemes. Also, given the precarious state of  States' finances, expecting the 
States to allocate adequate financial resources for health for the financial year 2015 -16 is 
unrealistic. Keeping all these factors in view, the Committee apprehends that in the 
financial year 2015 -16, targeted health outco mes would be seriously jeopardized if the 
Central Government does not move quickly towards shouldering a bigger share in overall 
public spending on health. The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of 
depending on the States for additional resources for health, in the year 2015-16, the Central 
Government should enumerate a fiscal roadmap for generating and allocating more 
financial resources for health so that the vision of moving towards universalization of 
affordable healthcare is translated into reality. The Committee also recommends that the 
Ministry institute a regular system of review with states so that an up -to-date assessment is 

always available on whether states are indeed allocating resources to health as the Central 
government is hoping. The Committee would like to be kept informed about such 
assessments on a regular basis. 
Action Taken 
3.2 The Central Governments budgetary allocation for the health sector for the year 
2015-16 is Rs. 24549.00 crore as against Rs.24400.00 crore in 2014 -15 ( RE). The 
relevance of efficiency in public spending   for optimum utilisation of available resources 
for maximum outcome is brought to focus, in the endeavour of the Central Government to 
supplement the resources of the state for health spending. 
 
3.3 Presently the share of Centre to State in the total public spending on health is 
approximately in the ratio of 31:69. In this backdrop, the recommendation of the 
Fourteenth Finance Commission would allow states greater autonomy in financing and 
designing of schemes as per their needs. The change in devolution pattern to states in 2015 -
16 is expected to result in a year on year increase of Rs 1.78 lakh crores approximately. 
This fiscal space can be used by states for increased spending in the health sector.  The  
Ministry of Finance has been addressed to provide additional funds through Supplementary 
Demands for Grants (2015-16). 
 
3.4 The NHM framework provides guidance to states in planning financing and 
executing, programmes/ schemes for district and below healt h care interventions. 
Financing and support to states under NHM to strengthen public health systems and health 
care delivery is based on the State‟s Programme Implementation Plan(PIP) which provides 
states the flexibility  to plan and implement state speci fic action plans within the broad 
national parameters and priorities. The MOUs signed with States, the outcomes expected 
from financial investments and the institutional reforms to strengthen State health systems 
would be the guiding factor towards achievement of targeted outcomes.   
 
3.5 The NHM framework provides for monitoring and evaluation as a continuous 
process. Regular monitoring visits from National Programme Management Units to States 
and districts/cities, community monitoring of facilities suppor ted by NGOs, along with a 
system of periodic concurrent audit and an annual audit are envisaged to strengthen 
accountability.  

 
Further Recommendation 
3.6 While making the recommendation in para 1.15 of Part A of its 82 nd Report , 
the Committee had emphasi zed that the Centre should not abdicate its responsibility 
of paying for a critical sector like Health entirely to the States as Health being a non -
contractor sector, remains at the fringe of budgetary priorities and therefore, fails to 
get adequate alloca tions. The Committee had also stressed the fact that none of the 
States had budgeted for the increase in allocation for health for the financial year 
2015-16 despite a 10% increase in the States share post new tax devolution formula,  
putting the targeted health outcomes in serious jeopardy.  The Committee is 
constrained to observe that instead of vigorously pursuing with Ministry of Finance to 
address the concerns of the Committee with regard to inadequate health financing for 
the Financial Year 2015 -16 and formulating its reply accordingly, the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare has chosen to harp on the "relevance of efficiency in 
public spending" and "the change in devolution pattern to states (by way of increase 
in transfer of taxes to States from 32% to 42%) and the resultant flexibility to the 
States to decide on increased spending in the health sector". The Committee observes 
that despite the  new  Centre -State tax sharing model, several of the States are 
complaining that they are worse off in th e new dispensation as they see a reduction in 
their share of central funds -under the new devolution formula. The Committee 
observes that health is pivotal to development. As per the draft National Health Policy 
put out in January 2015, over 63 million peop le in India face the threat of poverty 
each year due to unaffordable health care expenditure. The Committee therefore 
apprehends that the drastic slashing of Central budgetary support to States for health 
sector will further accentuate the problem and have  catastrophic consequences. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends with all the power at its command that the 
Department should once again impress upon the Ministry of Finance the imperative 
of providing additional financial resources for health for the fina ncial year 2015 -16 
through Supplementary Demand for Grants. The Committee would like the 
Department to report to it the progress made in the matter within a period of one 
month from the presentation of this Report. 
3.7 Furthermore, the Committee notes with dismay that on its recommendation for 
instituting a regular review system with states for assessing whether they are indeed 

allocating additional resources for health, post the 10% increase in devolution of 
central tax share to States, the Department has replied in a generic manner. The 
Committee while deprecating the Department for showing such casual approach 
recommends that an assessment be made urgently and communicated to the 
Committee as to what extent the 10% rise in States revenue is reflected in t he 
allocation of additional resources for health by them. 
3.8 The Committee also recommends that in order to optimally utilize the available 
financial resources, the Department of Health and Family Welfare in co -ordination 
with States should develop a para digm of technical process so as to track and report 
the flow of funds from Centre and States to health sector. 
 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 1.19) 
3.9 The Committee observes from the information furnished that as per the Twelfth 
Five Year Plan docum ent, the total public funding by the Centre and the States, both Plan 
and Non-Plan, on core health issues is envisaged to increase to 1.87 per cent of the GDP by 
the end of the Twelfth Plan, but for the BE 2014 -15, this figure is 1.2 per cent of the GDP. 
The budget allocation for the fourth year of the Twelfth Plan, i.e. 2015 -16, is also almost 
1.2 per cent of GDP. Three years of the 12th Five Year Plan has already elapsed and only 
two years are left. This implies that the target of government spending of 1 .87 per cent of 
GDP on core health will not be achieved. The Committee observes that the existing per 
capita public spending on health is low which raises serious doubts on achieving the goals 
of raising the total Government expenditure on the broader Heal th Sector to 2.5% of GDP 
by the end of the 12th Plan. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government 
should chalk out a solid fiscal roadmap for generating and allocating additional financial 
resources for health so that the States are provided a muc h larger resource envelope for 
health and the urgency of raising government spending on health to 2 -3 % of GDP is also 
not lost sight of. 
Action Taken 
3.10 The Department of Health and Family Welfare has sought for additional financial 
resources as supplem entary grants from the Ministry of Finance. Health being a State 
subject, the Central Government supplements the efforts of the State Governments through 
financial and technical assistance. The Central allocation of funds for health sector is based 
inter-alia on the availability of resources and competing claims on these resources.. 

Further Recommendation 
3.11 The Committee, observes that for the delivery of high quality health care, 
public health spending on primary, secondary and tertiary health care will  need to 
rise substantially as compared to what it is today. With public spending on health 
being just 1.2% of GDP in India, our country lags behind China (2.9%) and Brazil 
(4.1%). With the current economic growth of the country pegged in the range of 7 to  
7.5 %, it is abundantly clear that our public spending on health is not commensurate 
with our economic progress.  As per media reports, India lags behind countries like 
Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and even Nepal in health indicators like infant mortality rate, 
child immunization rate and  total life expectancy. The Committee is of the 
considered view that if unmet health care needs are to be addressed,  Health sector 
cannot be placed at the fringe of budgetary planning in the name of " availability of 
resources and competing claims on these resources". The Committee, therefore, lends 
its full parliamentary support to the Department of Health and Family Welfare in its 
request for additional financial resources through supplementary grants. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 1.24) 
3.12 The Committee is dismayed to note that huge savings have been registered in the 
Capital Account during the last two years. Such gross under -utilization of funds under 
Capital Section of the Demands for Grants points to the fact that development oriented 
activities have been seriously impaired. The Committee, therefore, observes that the 
occurrence of huge savings on the Capital Account warrants special attention and proactive 
steps by the Ministry so that this pernicious trend could be tackled in an effective manner. 
Action Taken 
3.13 The savings under Capital Section is mainly due to slow progress in Capital works  
and procurement of equipments under the schemes viz. Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha 
Yojana, (including New AIIMS) (Rs. 979.02 Cr., and Institutions of Higher Learning as 
per Oversight Committee. (Rs. 83.13 Cr.).   
 
Further Recommendation 
3.14 While making the recommendation in para 1.24 of Part A of its 82 nd report, the 
Committee had expected the Department of Health and F amily Welfare to take 
appropriate measures to ensure that the budgeted funds do not remain locked up by 
way of huge savings, that too on the Capital Account. The Committee, therefore, 

regrets to note that the Department has merely chosen to attribute the o ccurrence of 
savings on the Capital Account to the slow progress in Capital works and delay in 
procurement of equipments under the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana. 
The Committee is of the view that had the Department shown even a modicum of 
seriousness in coordinating with the concerned officials dealing with capital works 
and procurement of equipments and taken timely measures to overcome the 
shortcomings noticed, the budgeted funds would not have been surrendered  later on. 
The Committee, therefor e, once again urges the Department to take effective steps to 
squarely  address the recurring problem of delays and cost/time overruns in 
implementation of projects including PMSSY. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 1.26) 
3.15 Another disquieting matter which has engaged the Committee‟s attention is that 
certain schemes for which substantial allocations had been made at the BE or RE stage, 
suffered at the take -off stage itself. As is evident from a scrutiny of Annexure 1 , despite 
substantial budgetary pr ovisions made in the years 2013 -14 and 2014 -15 for the schemes 
like “Integrated Vaccine Complex, Chengalpattu & Medi Park”, “Strengthening of Existing 
Branches and Establishment of 27 Existing Branches of NCDC”, “Health Insurance 
(CGEIPS)”, "Procurement of  Supplies & Materials”, “National Mental Health 
Programme”, “Health Care for the Elderly”, “ Strengthening/ Creation of Paramedical 
Institutions(NIPS/RIPS)”, “ Strengthening of Government Medical Colleges -UG seats”, “ 
Establishing New Medical Colleges”, ”S trengthening of State Drug Regulatory System”, 
nothing could be spent. The Committee deprecates the Ministry for earmarking such huge 
amounts for the aforesaid schemes which could not be taken up during 2013 -14 and 2014-
15. The Committee notes that the thr ee years of the 12th Five Year Plan have already 
elapsed and wonders as to how the Ministry would be able to achieve the envisaged 
objectives of these schemes in the remaining two years. The Committee would expect an 
explanation from the Ministry in this r egard. The Committee would also recommend even 
at the cost of repetition, that the Ministry should at least now, take urgent and tangible 
action to ensure that the 12th Plan approved outlays for the above said schemes do not 
remain idly parked. The Committ ee would like to be apprised of the measures taken in this 
direction. 
Action Taken 

3.16 The statement of funds/expenditure for setting up of AIIMS Institutes and 
Upgradation of State Govt. Hospitals during 2014 – 15 is as under 
 
 
B.E. R.E. 
Amount 
Spent 
Capital 906.00 361.00 307.22 
Revenu
e 
550.00 530.00 505.17 
 1456.00 891.00 812.39 
 
3.17 The Department of Health and Family Welfare is pursuing the matter relating to 
Scheme for strengthening of States‟ Drug Regulatory System during the 12 th Five Year 
Plan and as soon as the Scheme is approved, the Grants -in-Aid will be released to States 
after following the necessary procedural requirements. In the absence of approval, it has 
not been possible to spend the money. 
 
3.18 In so far as National Programme for H ealth Care of the Elderly (NPHCE) is 
concerned, it is submitted that States/UTs have been reminded time and again to ensure 
maximum utilization of funds released to them under the Programme.  Health is a State 
subject and it is the basic responsibility of the State Government to ensure optimal 
utilization of funds, while implementing the scheme in the districts.  It is also submitted 
that NPHCE is now a part of National Health Mission under its NCD Flexible Pool.   
NPHCE is also being monitored by the National Health Mission Division of the Ministry.    
 
3.19 An amount of Rs. 50.83 crores had been allocated in BE 2014 -15.  Subsequently, 
the amount was reduced to Rs. 25.50 crores at RE stage 2014 -15.  A total amount of Rs. 
23.84 crores had been utilized out o f the total amount allocated during 2014 -15.  The 
optimal utilization of allocated funds could not happen due to non -submission of 
Utilization Certificates by the States/UTs, in time, However, the Programme has been 
extended to cover 4 new districts of 3 S tates/UTs i.e. Mizoram, Lakshadweep and Daman 
& Diu in addition to 100 existing districts.  So far, 104 districts of 24 States/UTs have been 

covered under the Programme.  It is proposed to cover 325 districts by the end of 12th Five 
Year Plan. 
 
3.20   Regarding different schemes including “Procurement of Supplies and Material”, it is 
stated that Budget Head “Procurement of Supplies and Material” was shifted from NHM 
side to health side. The approved outlay under this Head was Rs. 50.00 crores which was 
reduced to Rs. 20.22 crores at R.E. stage. The reason for reduction in budgetary 
requirement was due to decentralized procurement strategy under RCH Programme and 
provisioning funds for procurement in the respective State PIPs. Against the R.E. of Rs. 
20.22 crores, the expenditure was Rs. 18.94 crores. 
Further Recommendation 
3.21 The Committee observes that while India has become the global pharmacy for 
generic drugs, the States drug regulatory mechanisms, which play a dominant role in 
regulating the quality of  drugs in the country, are far from robust and there is a 
crying need for their strengthening.  Despite this, the "scheme of States Drug 
Regulatory System" could not be rolled out for lack of approvals due to which the 
allocations made for the Scheme at th e BE stage could not be utilized and had to be 
surrendered. Similar is the case with other projects as mentioned in para 1.26 of Part 
A of the 82 nd Report. Though the Department has identified the problems faced by it 
in optional utilization of funds, it h as not indicated any roadmap for overcoming the 
shortcomings in budgetary planning. The Committee urges the Department to  
realistically assess the fund requirements so that the scarce resources do not remain 
blocked and instead are utilized productively f or some other fund -starved 
projects/schemes. 
II  SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL & VARDHMAN MAHAVIR MEDICAL   
COLLEGE (SJH & VMMC), NEW DELHI 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 2.10) 
3.22 It may be worthwhile to mention that the delay in setting up of In Vitro Fertil ization 
(IVF) clinic had found mention in the Committee's  39 th and 54 thReports presented to 
Parliament on 28 th April, 2010 and 26 th April, 2012 respectively. Considerable time has 
passed since then but this project is still hanging fire. The Committee exp resses its 
unhappiness at the continuing delay in implementation of this Project and impresses upon 
the Department to proactively pursue the matter of setting up of IVF Lab at Safdarjung 

Hospital and obtain all necessary clearances expeditiously so that th is project is 
implemented in the year 2015-16 and is not delayed any further. 
Action Taken 
3.23 Civil work is completed. Work for Modular OT is being awarded, which is likely to 
be completed in two months‟ time. Approval for creation of various posts for s etting up 
IVF Centre at Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Safdarjung Hospital has been 
issued vide letter No. Z.28015/28/2014 -MH-I dated 14/07/2015. The IVF clinic is likely to 
be made operational during this financial year. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.24 The Committee would like to be kept apprised of the progress made towards 
making the IVF clinic operational.  
III        Dr. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL (RML),NEW DELHI 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 3.8) 
3.25 The Committee is perturbed to note th e persistent existence of vacancies in various 
categories. Keeping in mind the patient load at RML Hospital, the Committee feels that the 
vacancies to such extent will certainly result in undue strain on the existing manpower and 
impair delivery of quality healthcare services.   
Action Taken 
3.26 Adequate attention is now being paid to address the issue of shortage of manpower 
by the hospital. For this purpose, outsourcing of 197 manpower in the various categories, is 
being done to manage the patients care in hospital. Further, hospital could also get 57 
nomination from SSC for filing up the posts of MTS. Out of 57 candidates, 43 candidates 
have joined. The vacancy position in the Dr. RML Hospital is being regularly monitored 
and the process for filling up the post,  would be notified soon. 
Further Recommendation 
3.27 The Committee  recommends  that the issue of vacancies in different Grades 
should be squarely addressed without further delay so that the essential activities of 
Dr. RML Hospital are not impacte d. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of 
the updated status in this regard. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 3.12) 
3.28 During examination of Demands for Grants 2013 -14, the Committee had been 
apprised by the Department that keeping in view the i ncreased patient load and outdated 

infrastructure in the existing building of the Dr. RML Hospital, Government had prepared 
an EFC proposal regarding redevelopment of plan for construction of Super Speciality and 
Paid Ward at Dr. RML Hospital. In the first  phase, it had been planned in consultation with 
M/s. HSCC (the Project Consultant) that a Super Speciality Block and Paid Ward in the 
vacant land at G Point would be developed at the estimated cost of more than Rs.700 crore. 
This new block would add the b ed strength of 447. The draft EFC of the proposal was 
circulated to all the Departments/Ministry concerned for seeking their comments. The 
comments received so far have been under compilation. The Committee is surprised to note 
that in 2013, an EFC proposa l had been prepared for redevelopment of Dr. RML Hospital 
and construction of Super -Speciality and Paid Ward in the vacant land at G point at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 700.00 crore and the draft EFC had also been circulated to all the 
Ministries/ Departments concerned. Now, after almost two years, Department has informed 
that out of 3.99 acres of land at G -point 1.79 acres belong to the President's Estate. The 
Committee is constrained to observe that the Department has been lackadaisical in its 
approach in t he matter and not done due diligence, resulting in delay in conceptualization 
and finalization of this Project. Now that the Government has accorded its "in -principle" 
approval to the Re -development Plan of Dr. RML Hospital, the Committee would expect 
the Department to quickly complete all approval -related formalities and take concrete steps 
towards translating the vision of Redevelopment into reality. The Committee desires to be 
kept apprised of the developments in this regard. 
Action Taken 
3.29 The original plan drawn earlier envisaged construction of Super Speciality Block at 
an area of land measuring 3.99 acres at G -point. However, on re -survey of the land, which 
was conducted by DDA, L&DO and CPWD, it came to notice that out of 3.99 acres of land 
at G-point, 1.74 acres of land belongs to the President‟s Estate. Therefore, revised plan for 
construction of the Super speciality Block in the remaining 2.2 acres in G -point has been 
drawn up.  
 
3.30 The construction of Super Speciality Block has been entrusted  to M/s HSCC, which 
has now submitted revised Detailed Project Report (DPR). In the meanwhile change in 
land use as required has been obtained. Similarly, height clearance from M/o Civil 
Aviation has been obtained. For amalgamation of land and clearances, matter is being 
pursued with the concerned authority.  

 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.31 The Committee is happy to note that some forward movement has been 
reported in the construction of Super Specialty Block at Dr. RML Hospital. However, 
there is still a long way to go before this project will reach its logical culmination. The 
Committee would like the Department to put in place a focused monitoring 
mechanism to ensure that this long -pending project is speeded up. The Committee 
also recommends that the Depar tment proactively pursue obtaining of all necessary 
clearances to avoid further delay in implementation of the Project. 
IV LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE (LHMC) & SMT. S.K. HOSPITAL, 
NEW DELHI  
 
Recommendation/Observation (para nos 4.3 & 4.4) 
3.32 The Committee is dismayed to note that despite the fact that the construction work 
by M/s Unity Infraprojects has been "at a standstill" for more than a year, the desired 
priority was not accorded to implementation of the Redevelopment Plan of LHMC and 
Associated Ho spitals and monitoring mechanism is slack. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should gear up its monitoring mechanism and periodically 
review the progress of construction work at the highest level. 
3.33 The Committee notes that the whol e project was targeted to be completed by May/ 
June 2014. Almost a year has elapsed since then but its completion is still a far cry. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the new target date for completion of the Project. 
The Committee would also lik e to know as to what decision has been taken on M/s Unity 
Infraprojects Ltd's request to withdraw the show -cause notice and extend the project 
completion period. 
Action Taken 
3.34 HSCC(I) Ltd., the Project Consultant has informed that the construction work  by the 
contractor, M/s Unity Infra Projects is at standstill for more than a year due to financial 
crunch and the contractor, M/s Unity Infra Projects has stopped the work at the site. The 
Ministry has been regularly monitoring the work of redevelopment a nd also exploring 
other ways and means or alternates to get the redevelopment work expedited. A meeting 

was convened in the M/o Health and Family Welfare on 18.02.2015, to review the progress 
of works which was attended by senior officers of HSCC(I) Ltd (P roject consultant), 
Representatives of M/s Unity Infraprojects Ltd (Contractor) and LHMC. M/s Unity 
Infraprojects Ltd accepted the delay because of their financial crunch. Further, various 
commitments were made by M/s Unity Infraproject in the meeting.  
 
3.35 A meeting was again convened in the M/o Health and Family Welfare on 
10.03.2015 to review the progress of works wherein, it was observed that M/s Unity 
Infraprojects Ltd has not fulfilled any of its commitments made by them during the 
meeting held on 1 8.02.2015. In this meeting, M/s Unity Infraprojects Ltd again requested 
for 15 days‟ time period and committed that they shall take up the works in all fronts and 
shall fulfil all commitment made by them during the meeting dated 18.02.2015, by 25 th 
March, 2015. It was also assured that UG hostel shall be completed and handed over to 
LHMC by 15 th March, 2015. However, M/s Unity Infraprojects Ltd failed to fulfil any 
commitment.  
 
3.36 Accordingly, proposal for termination of contract for subject works as sti pulated in 
the General conditions of contract of the agreement with M/s Unity Infra projects Ltd by 
issuance of termination notice is under consideration. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 4.5) 
3.37 The Committee would also like to be informed of the fin ancial implications of 
potential termination of contract awarded to M/s Unity Infraprojects Ltd., for the delay in 
completion of the Redevelopment Plan including the cost escalation involved. 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
3.38 As Project Consultant, HSCC (I) Ltd has inf ormed that, the tender for subject works 
was called in February, 2011 based on estimate prepared on DSR 2007 with cost index of 
136%. The current cost index over DSR 2007 is 178%. The increase in cost index to the 
tune of 30.88% would be on balance works a mounting to Rs. 393.98 Cr.(tendered) - Rs. 
127.00 Cr. (executed) = Rs. 266.98 Crore. However, actual cost implication would only be 
known after invitation of tenders for balance works which would be initiated subsequent to 

the termination of contract. Furth er, as per term of contract upon determination, the 
security deposit (Retention money) already recovered in the form of Retention money 
Bank guarantee amounting to Rs. 7,25,84,000/ - and Performance Guarantee amounting to 
Rs. 19,69,90,943/- under the contract shall be liable to be forfeited and shall be absolutely 
at the disposal of LHMC. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.39    The Committee is constrained to observe that this is a typical case of 
procrastination. Despite the fact that the construction work regardin g the 
Redevelopment Plan of LMHC and Associated Hospitals has been "at a standstill" 
for more than a year and the contractor M/s Unity Infra Projects has failed to honour 
the commitments made by it on multiple occasions earlier, the Department has not 
been able to take any decisive penal action against the Contractor and "issuance of 
termination letter is under consideration." The Committee is seriously concerned that 
so much time has already elapsed but the Redevelopment Project is unlikely to be 
executed within the designated timeline and the delay is also likely to entail cost 
overrun. While taking a serious view in the matter, the Committee recommends that 
stringent measures be taken against the Contractor M/s Unity Infra Projects, which 
could inter alia  include,  stiff penalty for violation of terms of the contract and 
blacklisting of the contractor. The Committee also recommends that prompt action be 
taken to award the contract to a reputed contractor who is capable of handling the 
construction work and  speeding up execution of the Redevelopment Plan within the 
approved cost.  
V        ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS), NEW DELHI 
 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 5.3) 
3.40 The Committee notes the assertion of the Department that the enti re grant of Rs. 
343.00 crore was likely to be spent by the end of the financial year 2014 -15, as against the 
allocation of Rs. 343.00 crore in RE 2014 -15 for creation of capital assets, the expenditure 
incurred till February was only Rs. 108.70 crore (31.6 %) and Rs. 243.30 crore (i.e. 68.4%) 
was left unspent. Given the fact that as per the norms stipulated by the Ministry of Finance, 
not more than 15% can be spent in the last month of the financial year, the Committee 
wonders as to how the Department would be able to achieve the feat of spending Rs. 
243.30 crore (68.4%) in the last month without violating the provisions of General 

Financial Rules. The Committee would like the Department to explain the dichotomy in 
this regard. 
Action Taken 
3.41 Total expenditure of Rs 191.69 crore was incurred under Plan during the month of 
March on procurement of machinery and equipments and execution of capital projects.  
The broad reasons for substantial expenditures in the month of March, 2015 are as under: 
 
(i) The requirement of Machinery & Equipments of each Centre/Department in AIIMS 
is assessed by a multimember Assessment Committee in the beginning of the financial year 
and funds allocation is made accordingly.   
 
(ii) This is followed by finalisation of technical spe cifications. As in most of the cases 
technical specifications of the highly sophisticated and specialized in nature. These are 
finalized by the month of August. For the equipments costing above Rs 30 lakh, external 
experts are also associated in preparation of technical specifications. 
 
(iii) All expenditure proposals including procurement and construction proposals costing 
Rs.5.00 Crore and above require approval of the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) 
Chaired by the Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare before finalizing the 
process. Convening meeting of SFC  also takes time. 
 
(iv) The institute floats tenders for different equipments.  Wide publicity of tenders is 
given and tender submission and analysis of bids takes time. Technical evaluation 
including demonstration of the equipments, wherever required, also takes time.  Then, the 
Store Purchase Committee meetings, Price Bid Opening meetings, Negotiations Meetings 
are held and also concurrence of Finance Division and approval of Competent Author ity is 
obtained before award of contracts, which is again a time consuming process but is 
essentially required in light of the provisions of GFR and CVC guidelines to ensure 
fairness and transparency in the procurement process.   
 
(v) In some cases,  re -tender has to be done due to single bid or inadequate competition 
with a view to generate more competition for which specifications are also sometimes  re -

visited and made  more broad based. Thus, majority of contracts reach their final stages 
only by the last quarter of the Financial Year. 
 
(vi) In case of indigenous equipments or imported equipments offered in Indian Rupees, 
generally a lead time of 1 -2 months is given to suppliers to supply the stores and 
accordingly the supplies are received in the months  of February-March. After the receipt of 
supplies and issuance of Inspection Notes, the payments are released.  
 
(vii) In case of imported equipments in foreign currency, the letters of credit are 
established through the State Bank of India, Foreign Exchan ge Division and they also 
require some processing time. Majority of the letters of credit are opened in the month of 
March only, which inflates the expenditure figures in the last month of the financial year.  
 
(viii) Expenditure on capital works is genera lly made on circumstantial need in line with 
the project/ work status. Payments are made against works already completed and for 
works which are taken up at the end of financial year.   
Further Recommendation 
3.42 The Committee takes note of the elaborate procedures laid down for the 
procurement of machinery and equipments, The Committee feels that given the 
protracted and procrastinated process of procurement of equipments, there is a need 
to carry out an appraisal of the extant procedures and take remedia l measures for 
simplification of the procedures so that the procurement process is not hamstrung. 
Steps should also be taken to minimize the possibility of fiscal slippage which is 
distinct in the current fiscal, and achieve the desired outcomes without co mpromising 
the quality of expenditures. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 5.16) 
3.43 The Committee would also like to know whether any of the 12 completed projects 
of AIIMS witnessed time overrun and cost escalation. The Committee further wishes to be 
apprised of the Projects which have been shelved and also the reasons therefor. 
Action Taken 
3.44 Out of the 22 projects stated to be completed in the XI Plan, the updated position of 
the status of the projects vis-à-vis completion are as below:-  

 
Total Projects   
 
- 
 
22 
Completed - 12 
In progress - 01 
Tendering/Award Stage - 04 
Shelved - 02 
Held up on account of low priority - 01 
Held up on account of non-clearance of statutory 
bodies 
- 01 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.45 It is a matter of anguish that o ut of the 12 Development Projects of AIIMS 
which were targeted to be completed during the 11th Plan period,  as many as ten have 
witnessed time overrun. The Committee feels that such instances betray absence of a 
sound monitoring and weak accountability. E vidently, more serious efforts need to be 
made to resolve the issues related to their implementation. Since the Development 
Projects have been conceived with the aim of addressing the imbalances in availability 
of affordable and reliable health care facili ties including tertiary level healthcare, the 
Committee desires the Department to urgently address the pending issues pertaining 
to implementation of the Development Projects and ensure that there are no further 
time and cost overruns in their implementation. 
Recommendation/Observation (para nos 5.17 & 5.18) 
3.46 On a query regarding progress made towards starting a Burns Unit at JPNATC, the 
Department has informed that the matter was placed before the Standing Finance 
Committee‟s meeting held on 05.03.2015  for their consideration and approval. Minutes of 
the said meeting are awaited. 
 
3.47 The Committee desires that after its approval by SFC, early action be taken to start 
the Burns Unit. 
Action Taken 

3.48 In so far as, Recruitment Cell is concerned, a prop osal for starting a Burns Unit at 
Jai Prakash Narayan Apex Trauma Centre (JPNATC) was placed before the SFC in its 206 
meeting held on 5th March.2015 and the decision of SFC is as under:- 
 (i)  A Burn and Plastic Surgery Unit may be set up at JPNATC, AIIMS  utilizing the 
common facilities at Trauma Centre and may be physically connected with Trauma 
Centre.  
(ii)  The institute‟s proposal of 60 bed Burns and Plastic Surgery Unit for a cost of Rs. 
185.11 crores was approved (non -recurring cost of Rs 142.38 cro res and running cost 
of Rs. 42.73 crores annually). 
(iii) Further 30 percent of the bed capacity of the ward may be  reserved for ICU beds.  
(iv) A future expansion of the Burns and Plastic Surgery Unit with 40 additional beds may 
be planned and costs of the proposal submitted separately.  
3.49 As regards creation of posts for the above department SFC decided that a Sub -
Committee may be constituted to assess the manpower requirement of AIIMS for all 
departments. 
 
3.50 The   sub-committee has already submitt ed its report for creation of posts (Faculty 
and Non -faculty posts) and the same will be placed before the standing Finance 
Committee in its upcoming meeting. 
 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.51 The Committee has been pursuing the matter of starting a Burns uni t at 
AIIMS since long. The Committee is happy to note that the Standing Finance 
Committee has finally given its nod, for starting the Burns Unit at AIIMS.  The 
Committee now recommends that the Department should play a proactive role in 
moving the AIIMS ad ministration towards quickly conceptualizing the project, 

completing all pre-project formalities in a time -bound manner and implementing the 
project within a given time-frame. 
VI POST -GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND 
RESEARCH (PGIMER), CHANDIGARH 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 6.5) 
3.52 The Committee notes from the Outcome Budget 2014 -15 that a number of Projects 
are currently under implementation and a number of new schemes have also been approved 
but work is yet to be started. Some of thes e important schemes/ Projects are (i) Advanced 
Eye Centre Phase II, (ii) Advanced Cardiac Centre Phase II (iii) Modernisation of Research 
A & B Block (iv) Modernisation of Nehru Hospital (v) Construction of Satellite Centre at 
Sangrur (vi) Remodelling of E mergency Medical OPD Hall, Nehru Hospital (vii) SITC of 
HVAC system in the new OPD block etc. The Committee would like to be informed 
whether any timeline has been set for execution of the above projects and whether any of 
the above projects have witnessed  time and cost overruns. The Committee would also like 
to be informed of the total approved outlay for each of the above projects and the 
expenditure incurred thereon. 
Action Taken 
3.53 The details of the project outlay and time line fixed for execution of  work projected 
in the outcome budget 2014 -15 and the status of expenditure along with time and cost 
overrun desired in the report of the Parliamentary committee are given below: 
FINANCIAL AND IMPLEMENTATION STATUS OF VARIOUS PROJECTS 
COMPLETED OR IN PROGRESS IN PGI FOR INFORMATION OF PARLIAMENTARY 
COMMITTEE 
                                                                                                                                                  
(Figures in Crores ) 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
Work 
Project 
outlay / 
Estimated 
cost 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
and date 
of 
approval  
Time 
Line for 
executio
n of 
work. 
Expenditu
re upto 
March 
2015 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
Time over 
run if any 
as on date  
Cost over 
run, if any, 
as on date  
Remarks 
1 2 3 4 5 5 7 8 
1. Advance
d Eye 
centre 
Rs. 4.63 
18.06.2010  
(MoH&FW
Work 
was to 
be 
Rs. 3.88 38 months  Nil  Work completed  

Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
Work 
Project 
outlay / 
Estimated 
cost 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
and date 
of 
approval  
Time 
Line for 
executio
n of 
work. 
Expenditu
re upto 
March 
2015 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
Time over 
run if any 
as on date  
Cost over 
run, if any, 
as on date  
Remarks 
(Phase-
II) 
) complet
ed in 
11th Five 
Year 
Plan  
2. Advance
d 
Cardiac 
Centre 
(Phase-
II) 
13.67 
18.06.2010 
(MoH&FW
) 
 
Work 
was to 
be 
complet
ed in 
11th Five 
Year 
Plan 
Rs. 2.40 38 months  Nil  Civil, Electrical, 
Fire Alarm and 
Air Conditioning 
work have been 
completed 
 Furniture and 
lifts are being 
provided as per 
the requirement 
of the user 
Department. 
 Decision 
regarding 
construction of 
200 seater 
seminar room 
has not been 
finalized (2cr). 
 Work of piped 
medical gas 
system can be 
executed only 
when the vacant 
hospital areas 
are available 
(1.5 cr.). 
3. Modernis
ation of 
Research 
A and B 
Block 
48.33 
18.06.2010 
(MoH&FW
) 
 
Work 
was to 
be 
complet
ed in 
11th Five 
Year 
4.83 38 months   
 
 
 
 
Not 
ascertained  
 Initially 
the work was 
awarded to 
CPWD but 
CPWD did not 
execute it on the 
plea that they 
need complete 

Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
Work 
Project 
outlay / 
Estimated 
cost 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
and date 
of 
approval  
Time 
Line for 
executio
n of 
work. 
Expenditu
re upto 
March 
2015 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
Time over 
run if any 
as on date  
Cost over 
run, if any, 
as on date  
Remarks 
Plan vacant block for 
work which was 
not feasible. 
Then, the work 
was withdrawn 
and given to 
NBCC as 
decided by 
Standing 
Finance 
Committee 
(SFC) 
 Agreement 
was signed with 
NBCC on 
26.03.2013. 
Preliminary 
revised estimate 
submitted by  
NBCC for 
Rs.6.43 cr. was 
placed before 
the 114 th SFC 
held on 
07.03.2014. SFC 
directed the 
Internal 
committee of the 
Institute to 
submit the 
feasibility report 
in view of likely 
allotment of land 
adjacent to the 
Institute.  
 The 
internal 
committee 
recommended 
that it is not 
feasible for the 
4. Moderni
zation of 
Nehru 
Hospital 
87.82 
18.06.2010 
(MoH&FW
) 
 
Work 
was to 
be 
complet
ed in 
11th Five 
Year 
Plan 
8.78 38 months  

Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
Work 
Project 
outlay / 
Estimated 
cost 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
and date 
of 
approval  
Time 
Line for 
executio
n of 
work. 
Expenditu
re upto 
March 
2015 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
Time over 
run if any 
as on date  
Cost over 
run, if any, 
as on date  
Remarks 
institute to 
vacate vertical 
blocks 
specifically 
where Nuclear 
Medicine and 
Radio Diagnosis 
departments are 
located.  The 
ICU ar eas 
always had 
100% occupancy 
and it was not 
feasible to shift 
them.   
 In view of 
the above 
constraints, it 
was decided that 
only upgradation 
of external 
engineering 
services viz 
substation, 
HVAC system, 
Fire Fighting 
system, Pipe 
Medical Gas 
System etc. m ay 
be taken up to 
the building 
thereafter 
renovation of 
smaller modules 
can be taken up 
as per 
availability of 
vacant spaces.  
 M/s NBCC 
was asked to 
upgrade only 

Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
Work 
Project 
outlay / 
Estimated 
cost 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
and date 
of 
approval  
Time 
Line for 
executio
n of 
work. 
Expenditu
re upto 
March 
2015 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
Time over 
run if any 
as on date  
Cost over 
run, if any, 
as on date  
Remarks 
external 
engineering 
services within 
the sanctioned 
amount. 
Thereafter, matter 
was placed befo re 
the 115 th SFC 
meeting held on 
08.06.2015. 
Minutes of the 
meeting are 
awaited. 
5. Construc
tion of 
Satellite 
Centre at 
Sangrur 
449.00 
 
February 
2014 
(approved 
by CCEA) 
Within 
34 
months 
i.e. by 
31st 
Decemb
er, 2016. 
A start 
up OPD 
facility 
was to 
be 
started 
before 
commiss
ioning 
of 
Satellite 
Centre. 
28.20 Nil  N/A  The present 
status of the 
work is as under: 
-  
Phase I 
Temporary 
OPD  
Steel structure 
and Boundary 
wall brick and 
plastering 
completed. 
External 
sewerage, 
internal electrical 
conducting and 
internal plumbing 
in progress. 
For Guest 
house: 
Brick in 
superstructure 
completed. RCC 
slab in 3 rd floor 
completed  
The 
construction of 
Boundary wall is 

Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
Work 
Project 
outlay / 
Estimated 
cost 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
and date 
of 
approval  
Time 
Line for 
executio
n of 
work. 
Expenditu
re upto 
March 
2015 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
Time over 
run if any 
as on date  
Cost over 
run, if any, 
as on date  
Remarks 
almost completed 
except front side 
where activity 
shall be started 
after approval 
from NHAI for 
freezing the 
boundary line. 
Phase II 
Construction of 
Hospital and 
Administration 
Block, OPD 
Block & 
Residential block.    
Price bid have 
been opened by 
HSCC on 
03.06.2015 and 
work shall be 
awarded after 
approval of 
competent 
authority. Further 
following 
initiative have 
been taken:    
 Applicatio
n of EIA 
clearance has 
been submitted 
to the approving 
Authority. 
 Master 
plan, proposed 
building plan s 
and application 
duly submitted 
to PUDA for 
approval and is 
under process. 

Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
Work 
Project 
outlay / 
Estimated 
cost 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
and date 
of 
approval  
Time 
Line for 
executio
n of 
work. 
Expenditu
re upto 
March 
2015 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
Time over 
run if any 
as on date  
Cost over 
run, if any, 
as on date  
Remarks 
 Applicatio
n for approval 
of access to the 
adjacent 
national 
highway has 
been submitted 
to 
Administrator 
National 
Highway, 
Patiala approval 
awaited. 
 Request 
letter to DG 
(Roads), Un ion 
Ministry of 
Road & 
Transport, New 
Delhi sent for 
providing 
required 
infrastructure at 
adjacent 
national 
highway 64 for 
satellite Centre.  
6. Remodel
ling of 
Emergen
cy 
Medical 
OPD 
Hall, 
Nehru 
Hospital 
0.21 
 
- - - N/A Work could not be 
started as the 
Doctor in -charge 
Emergency area 
could not 
handover the area 
for renovation due 
to heavy rush of 
patient in 
Emergency. 
7. SITC of 
HVAC 
33.00 
 
- -  N/A The consultancy 
work for various 

Sr. 
No. 
Name of 
Work 
Project 
outlay / 
Estimated 
cost 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
and date 
of 
approval  
Time 
Line for 
executio
n of 
work. 
Expenditu
re upto 
March 
2015 
(Rupees in 
crores) 
Time over 
run if any 
as on date  
Cost over 
run, if any, 
as on date  
Remarks 
System 
in New 
OPD 
work.   
20.06.2014 
(SFC) 
Engineering 
services has been 
awarded vide 
letter dated 
25.05.2015 
amounting to 
Rs.60.00 lacs. The 
consultant has 
started site 
preparatory work.   
 
Further Recommendation 
3.54 The Committee is constrained to note from the information given above that of 
the six on -going projects, three projects namely, Advanced Cardiac Centre, (ii) 
Modernization of Research 'A' and 'B' Block and (iii) Modernization of Nehru 
Hospital at PGIMER have witnessed time overrun of 38 months each, which is 
indicative of deficiencies in the monitoring on the part of the Department. The 
Committee is also astonished to note that two projects, namely "  Modernization of 
Research 'A' and 'B' Block and Modernization of Nehru Hospital which had been 
approved way back in 2010, have not reached even the take -off stage due to certain 
issues which should have been addressed at the project conceptualization and 
approval stage itself. All this leads the Committee to conclude that the oversight 
mechanism of project implementation in PGIMER, Chandigarh is slack. The 
Committee, th erefore, recommends that the Department should devise better 
systematic ways of monitoring project implementation at PGIMER  and ensure that 
the projects under reference  are taken up for implementation without any  further 
delay. 
 

 
IX         DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 9.11) 
3.55 The Committee is dismayed to observe the persistent slow pace of the upgradation 
of Rajkumari Amrit Kaur College of Nursing despite Committee's repeated 
recommendations in this regard. If t his is the state of affairs at the preparatory stage, it is 
hard to imagine the time by when this Centre of Excellence would see the light of day. The 
Committee would like the Department to proactively pursue the formality for obtaining 
permissions from ci vic bodies. The Committee is satisfied with the allocation of adequate 
funds for the Project, but is pained to observe that this project has been languishing since 
long with the budgeted allocations surrendered year after year. The Committee wishes to 
be updated on the progress made towards starting the Project. 
Action Taken 
3.56 Noted for compliance 
 
3.57 The final layout plans, prepared by the HSCC Ltd., a Consultant Agency for 
construction of proposed buildings of R.A.K. College of Nursing have been appr oved by 
most of the concerned government agencies.   However, some objections have been raised 
by the Delhi Urban Arts Commission, which will be rectified by the Consulting Agency 
very soon. 
Further Recommendation 
3.58 The Committee desires to be kept appri sed of the progress made towards 
implementation of this Project of up-gradation of R.A.K. College of Nursing. 
X     CENTRAL DRUGS STANDARD CONTROL ORGANIZATION (CDSCO) 
 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 10.7) 
3.59 The Committee is deeply concerned to not e that CDSCO is reeling under shortage 
of manpower. The Committee is of the firm view that without the required manpower, the 
strengthening of CDSCO will be seriously jeopardized and its functioning will get crippled. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends t hat the Department proactively pursue filling up 
of the vacant posts with UPSC and simultaneously explore innovative ways of filling up 
the vacancies so that the objective of uniform and effective implementation of the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act 1940 and Rules framed thereunder is not compromised.   
Action Taken 

3.60 The Department has taken note of the concerns of the Committee and has, with a 
view to overcome the shortage of human resources, proposed to introduce Human 
Resources Management System in the stru cture. Accordingly, the manpower will not only 
be increased substantially, but their skill sets will be improved. As indicated in the Action 
Taken Note on paragraph 10.5 above, additional manpower is being provided to the 
organization. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.61 The Committee would like to be apprised whether the additional manpower 
being provided to the CDSCO is being outsourced and if so, whether the core 
activities of CDSCO have also been entrusted to the outsourced manpower. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 10.11) 
3.62 The Committee notes that the Ministry had accepted above Recommendations of the 
Committee on strengthening of the States' drug regulatory system. More than two years 
have elapsed since then but finalization, leave alone implementatio n, of the Scheme is still 
a far cry. The provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act are implemented by both the 
Centre and States. The quality control of drugs falls largely in the domain of the State Drug 
Licensing Authorities who are mandated to draw samples of drugs for analysis, prosecution 
etc. Given the grossly inadequate infrastructure and manpower of States and lack of 
resources with them, it was imperative on the Central Government to quickly move 
towards addressing the pending issues pertaining to approval of the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme for the State Drug Testing Laboratories. The Committee, therefore, deprecates the 
Department for lagging behind in addressing the inadequacies of the State Drug Regulatory 
System.  The Committee observes that the quality of drugs is of critical importance, not 
only for the well -being of the people of the country but also for our economy as it earns a 
substantial amount in foreign exchange through export of drugs. The tardy pace of progress 
in the matter is, therefo re, of serious concern and has serious implications for the 
healthcare system as well as economy as a whole.  The Committee, therefore, recommends 
the Department to vigorously pursue the approval and finalization of Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme for Strengthening of Drug Testing Labs with the Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs and ensure that the same is launched in the financial year 2015 -16 without fail. The 

Committee would also like to be apprised of the exact contours of the proposed Scheme as 
soon as the necessary permissions/approvals in this regard, are obtained by the Department. 
Action Taken 
3.63 The Scheme for strengthening of States‟ Drug Regulatory System during the 12th 
Five Year Plan could not be executed as it is yet to be approved by the Comp etent 
Authority. The Department is pursuing the proposal. 
Further Recommendation 
3.64 The reply is of routine nature and devoid of details of efforts made by the 
Department and therefore, not acceptable to the Committee. Strengthening of the 
States Drug Re gulatory System being of vital importance, the Committee once again 
recommends with all the power at its command that the Department should take 
tangible steps towards conceptualizing and operationalizing the Scheme during the 
12th Plan Period.  
 
XI  MANUFACTURE OF SERA AND VACCINE AND PUBLIC HEALTH 
LABORATORIES (BCG VACCINE LABORATORY, GUINDY, PASTEUR 
INSTITUTE OF INDIA, CONOOR AND CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, 
KASAULI) 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 11.6) 
3.65 The Committee observes that considerable t ime has passed since the project of 
making the three vaccine producing PSUs cGMP complaint was undertaken but completion 
of cGMP complaint structures at two of the above PSUs, namely, BCG Vaccine 
Laboratory, Guindy, Chennai and Pasteur Institute of India i s yet to be accomplished. It 
escapes the Committee's comprehension as to why the completion of cGMP complaint 
structure has been delayed inordinately despite adequate funds being made available for the 
project. This explains total negligence and apathy of the Department towards this. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends with all the power at its command to expedite 
completion of work regarding cGMP compliance and enable the vaccine manufacturing 
PSUs to contribute their mite to the Universal Immunization Pr ogramme (UIP). The 
Committee also suggests to the Department to insulate the UIP from price and supply 
uncertainty. The Committee would like to be updated on the progress made towards 
completion of the works concerning cGMP compliance and full operationali zation of the 
three PSUs on a quarterly basis. 
Action Taken 

Pasteur Institute  of India (PII), Coonoor:  
 
i) Since this is a Green Field Project, statutory approvals from various State regulatory 
authorities were required before commencing construction act ivities. Due to delay of 
about 11 months in obtaining necessary statutory approvals from local bodies, the 
construction work could start only in June 2013. Further, during the course of 
construction in January 2014, the work also got delayed due to time re quired for disposal 
of surplus excavated soil.  
 
ii) The basic infrastructure of Diphtheria and Pertussis blocks has been completed. Work 
ranging from 40 to 95% of the various other blocks such as formulation block, Sterility 
and Microbiology block and ani mal experiment block has been completed. The new DPT 
facility is to be completed and made GMP compliant in April, 2016. The trial batches of 
DPT vaccine would be initiated in December 2016. The Consistency/Commercial batches 
of DPT vaccine are expected to initiated by June, 2017. 
 
BCG Vaccine laboratory (BCGVL), Guindy:  
 
i) The delay in this case is primarily on account of the time required for obtaining the 
necessary statutory approvals from various local bodies.  
 
ii) The work of upgradation of BCG Vacci ne manufacturing facility has since been 
completed upto 90%. The installation qualification and operational qualifications of the 
installed equipment is presently under process. The staff engaged in the production units 
is being trained in batches to opera te the newly installed machinery and equipment. The 
R&D batches of BCG vaccine have been initiated in June, 2015. The 

Consistency/Commercial batches of BCG vaccine are expected to be initiated by 
December, 2015. 
 
Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli:  
 
3.66 The new DPT facility has already been completed and made GMP compliant in 
January, 2014. The installation qualification and operational qualifications of DPT blocks 
have been successfully completed. The staff engaged in the production units has been  
trained to operate the newly installed machinery and equipment. The bulk for 
Consistency/Commercial batches of TT has been successfully produced. The 
Consistency/Commercial batches of Diphtheria and Petussis batches are under process. 
As would be clear from the above, the delay in these projects has been mainly on account 
of time required for obtaining statutory approvals. The progress in respect of each of these 
units is being monitored regularly to ensure that any bottleneck encountered is removed 
immediately. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.67 The Committee is not satisfied with the progress of these projects. It is indeed 
saddening to note that almost more than nine years have passed since the Committee 
first examined this matter in its 34 th Report presented to Parliament on the 18 th 
February 2009, but the three vaccine producing PSUs which had been the mainstay of 
production and supply of vaccines for the Universal Immunization Programme in the 
country are yet to be made GMP compliant and fully operational. T he Committee 
deplores the frequent misses of the roll -out deadlines of the Projects and recommends 
that a web-based monitoring system be developed to review the physical performance 
of the projects.  
XII    ASSISTANCE FOR CAPACITY BUILDING FOR TRAUMA CARE 
FACILITIES IN GOVERNMENT HOSPITALS ON NATIONAL HIGHWAY 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 12.6) 

3.68 The Committee is constrained to observe that there was underutilization of more 
than Rs. 20.62 crore (as compared to RE 2014 -15) as per the trend of utili zation of outlay 
as on 5 th March, 2015 and conveys its disapproval of such suboptimal utilization of 
budgeted funds. What is equally disturbing for the Committee is that no funds have been 
earmarked for the Scheme for 2015 -16. The Committee observes that a ccidental trauma is 
one of the leading causes of mortality and morbidity in India and lack of budgetary 
provisions will seriously jeopardize the envisaged objective of this vital scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should raise  demand for adequate 
funds for this Scheme in the Supplementary Grants 2015-16. 
Action Taken 
3.69 It is pertinent to mention that out of Rs. 40 crores allotted under RE, funds to the 
tune of Rs. 35.7854 crores have been released under the programme till en d of March, 
2015. As per direction given by Parliament Standing Committee, the Ministry has 
submitted supplementary demand for grants under trauma care scheme for current financial 
year 2015-16. 
Further Recommendation 
3.70 The Committee observes that again st the RE allocation of Rs. 40.00 crore for 
the financial year 2014 -15, the actual expenditure during the said fiscal was only to 
the tune of Rs. 35.7854 crore.  The shortfall in actual utilization of the budgeted funds 
is certain to impact the Ministry's demand for more funds through Supplementary 
demands. The Ministry has also not offered any elaboration on the reasons for this 
shortfall.  The Committee therefore desires to be apprised of the factual details in this 
regard.  The Committee would also like the Ministry to ensure close monitoring of the 
progress of expenditure so as to avoid surrendering of funds allocated under this 
head.   
XV           CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS) 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 15.4) 
3.71 The Committee notes  that during the last three years, i.e. 2012 -13, 2013 -14 and 
2014-15, the allocations made for CGHS at BE stage was revised upwards at RE stage but 
the actuals were less than the BEs and REs in all the three years. The Committee observes 
that this is yet another case of inefficient utilization of funds on the part of the Department. 
The Department has miserably failed in expansion of facilities under CGHS and the 
precious funds allocated for the purpose were surrendered. 

Action Taken 
3.72 Savings under Plan  Head from 2012 -15 are largely due to savings under Capital 
heads:  
                                                         (in Crore Rupees )  
      Capital Head                 BE                Actual exp. 
      2012-13                         25.00                9.09 
      2013-14                         27.45              10.19 
 
3.73 Savings are mainly due to delay in obtaining requisite approvals and the inability on 
the part of CPWD for utilizing the funds in the financial year. 
 
3.74 In 2014 -15 th e updated actual expenditure under plan Head is Rs. 115.72  Crore,  
which is more than the BE of Rs.101.20 
 
3.75 During 2014 -15 the actual expenditure under Capital works was Rs. 18.4 Cr. as 
against BE allocation of Rs.27.45 Cr.  and RE allocation of Rs.35  Cr. This was due to 
delay in obtaining requisite approvals and the inability on the part of CPWD for utilizing 
the funds in the financial year. 
3.76 Under PPSS head Rs. 7 crore could not be utilized due to delay in filling up of 
contractual doctors and other contractual staff.  
 
Further Recommendation 
3.77 Though the Department has cited various reasons for the under -utilization of 
budgeted allocations, it has not indicated any roadmap for arresting this trend of 
under-utilization. The Committee recommends that the utilization of funds in 2015-16 
under this head may be subjected to periodic review so that timely action for 
reversing the trend is taken in consonance with established principles of financial 
propriety.  
XVI      NATIONAL CENTER FOR DISEASE CONTROL (NCDC), NEW DELHI 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 17.5) 
3.78 The Committee notes that out of 103 newly created scientific and technical posts, 
only 14 posts could be filled by the NCDC, New Delhi. The Committee recommends that 
the steps may be expedited to fill up the remaining posts. 

Action Taken 
3.79 Out of 103 newly created scientific and technical posts, 54 have been filled. Efforts 
to fill the remaining posts are underway. 
Further Recommendation 
3.80 The Committee desires to be apprised of the  specific measures being taken / 
proposed to be taken to fill up the vacancies in the NCDC, New Delhi and the time -
frame within which all posts are likely to be filled up. 
Recommendation/Observation (para no 17.6) 
3.81 The Committee would also like to be a pprised of the timeline fixed for completion 
of upgradation of the Centre. 
Action Taken 
3.82 As per agreement with NBCC, the duration of the project is 24 months. But the 
NCDC could provide only 60% vacant land under Phase I for construction activities. Si nce 
the labs for testing of H1N1, Ebola and other diseases cannot be closed in national interest, 
the Lab. Block -III housing these labs will be handed over to NBCC on completion and 
shifting of these labs to one of the newly constructed Lab Block -1. Dte of  NVBDCP 
handed over the building for demolition only in November, 2014 after getting space for 
shifting. So balance land is still required to be handed over to NBCC in Phase I. Under 
these circumstances delay in construction activities occurred. 
Further Recommendation 
3.83 The Committee is constrained to observe that though the Department has dwelt 
on the problems being faced in the implementation of the project of up -gradation of 
NCDC, it has not outlined any roadmap for sorting out the issue of availabili ty of 
balance land. Efforts may be made in this direction. 

CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
I   BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendation/Observation (para nos 1.20 & 1.21) 
4.1 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Health Secretary that the funding 
pattern of Centrally Sponsored Schemes is proposed to be revised and States' contribution 
in the Centrally Sponsored Schemes is proposed to be raised, which is likely to spare 
additional resources to the order of about Rs. 12000.00 crore which would be transferred to 
various heads of account like Medical Education, Tertiary Care Initiative etc. Once this 
proposal is approved and implemented the Central Government‟s contribution in N HM and 
NACO will reduce. The Committee observes that the success on this front depends on the 
States sparing a substantial amount of money and withdrawal of Central contribution out of 
NHM and NACO and redistribution of the same amongst the various health schemes which 
"would mean a little bit of uncertainty till the first Supplementary Budget of the Central 
Government and also of the State Governments are passed", as admitted by the Health 
Secretary himself. The Committee has serious doubts over the effica cy of this arrangement. 
The Committee would, however, recommend that the policy issues concerning this 
arrangement may be sorted out expeditiously. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the developments in this regard. 
4.2 The Committee has learnt tha t there is a proposal in the Government to do away 
with the distinction between Special Category & Non -special Category States and if this 
proposal is finalized and implemented, the 11 Special Category States, who depend heavily 
on Central Sector funds for  their Plan schemes, will be hit hard as they will end up paying 
much more than 10% and face huge shortfall in their expenditure for Health. The 
Committee would like to be kept updated in this regard. 
 
 
Action Taken 
4.3 A Working Group comprising Chief Min isters of certain States has been constituted 
by the Government of India to look into the sharing pattern of Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes.  A decision of the Working Group is awaited. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT 
 
PART B-NHM SECTOR 
 
 The Report of the Committee deals with the Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in  the Eighty-second Report  of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(Demand No. 48) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2015-16. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the 82nd Report.  They have been categorized as follows: 
 
  (i)   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Gove rnment have been 
accepted by the Committee:  2.9, 3.8, 3.10, 3.13, 3.16, 3.20, 3.23, 6.4, 6.6, 6.16, 6.19 
                                                                                          Total   –   11           (Chapter I)                                                          
 
 (ii)   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government‟s replies:  2.8, 2.10, 2.11, 2.14, 3.2, 3.6, 3.12, 3.15, 3.26, 3.30, 5.3, 5.6, 5.7, 5.14, 
5.16, 5.18, 6.3, 6.11, 7.1 
                                                                                       Total   – 19   (Chapter II)                                                                                                                                                                            
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee:  2.7, 2.16, 3.18, 3.27, 3.28, 4.4, 5.2, 5.8, 5.9, 5.22, 6.9, 
6.14   
                                                                                         Total –  12          (Chapter III)                   
                                                                                                                                                                                  
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited:  2.13, 5.10                               Total -  2                    (Chapter-IV) 
 
 
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
PART B (NHM) 
CHAPTER – I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
II. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 
Recommendation/Observation (para 2.9) 
1.1 The Committee is extremely concerned to note the submission of the Ministry that due to 
the overall reduction in NHM budget for 2015 -16, there will be proportional reduction in 
allocation for tribal sub plan, which will adversely impact the pro posed interventions in tribal 
areas. The Committee observes that the whole idea of NHM is to focus on the areas which are 
challenged from the point of view of infrastructure and health indicators. The tribal areas in the 
country have the worst health indic ators. The Committee also takes note of the written 
submission of the Ministry that "all tribal districts whose composite health index is below the 
States' average are classified as High Priority Districts and these are supposed to get 1.3 times 
higher allocation per capita in comparison to non -High Priority Districts of the States". Given 
the stark inequities in the health system in tribal areas, the Committee recommends with all the 
power at its command that the Department must work out a formula to ensur e that the tribal 
sub-plan is protected from budgetary cuts.   
Action Taken 
1.2 To minimize the effect of budgetary cuts on tribal sub plan, it is informed that against the 
desired contribution of 8.2% of the total outlay for Scheduled Tribe Sub Plan (STSP ), in the 
F.Y. 2015-16, Rs. 2013.02 crore of the total outlay of Rs.18,295.00 crore has been earmarked 
for STSP i.e. 11%.  
III.  NRHM-RCH Flexible Pool 
RCH Flexible Pool 
Recommendation/Observation (para 3.8) 
1.3 The Committee finds that these figures alone  tell the story on the difficulties which 
would be faced in the actual implementation of the Indradhanush Mission on the ground as the 
current penetration of DPT vaccination outside this Mission is less than 60 % in BIMARU 
States and Assam where more than 50% of the children reside. The Committee fails to 
understand that with this low penetration of DPT vaccine, how objectives of the Mission would 
be achieved. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department needs to scale up its 

operations in the vaccine producing Public Sector Units at Guindy, Coonoor and Kasauli so that 
the Mission objectives are integrated in a seamless chain with these Public Sector Units to 
ensure regular and continuous production of these vaccines.  
Action Taken 
1.4 The observ ations of the Committee pertaining to the programme division noted for 
compliance. 
1.5 DPT coverage in Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Assam is 81.6%, 
76.3%, 79.6%, 63.2% and 77.6% respectively as per the AHS, 2012-13 data available. 
1.6 Mission Indradhanush has been launched to cover partially vaccinated/unvaccinated 
children as nationwide programme with special focus on 201 districts across the 28 states. These 
districts account for the 50% of partially vaccinated and unvaccinated chil dren. Mission 
Indradhanush is also covering the BIMARU states and other states like Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh 
and Assam. 
Recommendation/Observation (para 3.10) 
1.7 The Committee hopes that the States/UTs will be able to manage the operationalization 
of the M ission with funds allocated under Part „C‟ of the Programme Implementation Plans 
(PIP). The Committee recommends that the Department should closely monitor the 
implementation of the Mission and ensure that funds are made available whenever needed by 
the States for smooth implementation of the Mission.     
 
Action Taken 
1.8 The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
Recommendation/Observation (para 3.13) 
1.9 With regard to Population Control Methods being adopted by the States, the Com mittee 
is of the view that the present budgetary allocations primarily focus on female sterilization and 
there is no emphasis on the budgets for Information, Education and Communication (IEC) or 
spacing methods or training providers to do counselling, inst ead, spending is only on terminal 
methods of family planning. As per figures from Budget estimates of 2011 -12, the amount spent 
on female sterilization was Rs. 317.80 crore and Rs. 17.70 crore on male sterilization, which has 
a clear indicator that focus i s on female sterilization only. The Committee also notes that there 
are no budgetary allocations for quality assurance and monitoring. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department should focus on providing budget for quality services, family 
planning clinics and quality monitoring.   

Action Taken 
1.10 As per the GoI‟s strategy there is an increased focus on spacing methods. The major 
share of budget is for Human Resource (staff expenses) and also for infrastructure, Quality 
assurance, service delivery and procurement of FP Commodity.  Training constitutes 2% of the 
total budget i.e Rs. 32.33 Crore. Family Planning Commodities and Equipments also form a 
substantial share of 16.8% (Rs. 275.9 Crore).  
1.11 There is also a budget provision for RMNCH+ Counsellors for counselling the eligible 
couples for various Family Planning options in high delivery load facilities. 
1.12 Government of India has introduced the new spacing device (Cu IUCD 375) and a new 
method of IUCD insertion namely PPIUCD. The budget s are being approved for the same. 
Nearly 9 lakh ASHAs are distributing Condoms, OCP and ECP in the community and the same 
is being made available through the budget for the commodities. A new scheme for ensuring 
healthy spacing between births is operation al in 18 high fertility states. The budget is being 
sanctioned each year for ASHA incentives to promote spacing services in the community. 
1.13 Government is providing budgets for hospital strengthening and new construction. There 
are also separate budget for Quality assurance. Under Family Planning Program there are 
Quality Assurance Committee at both state and district level. The same is being monitored at 
central level. 
Mission Flexible Pool 
Recommendation/Observation (para 3.16) 
 
1.14 The Committee note s that some members of Parliament have given Mobile Medical 
Units (MMUs) from their MPLADS Scheme.  However, it has come to the notice that most of 
these units are lying unutilised.  The Committee feels that in view of shortage of budgetary 
funds available  with the Department, integration of these with the NRHM, would help the 
Department to tide over the shortage of funds though to a small extent. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Department should take immediate steps to integrate these 
MMUs within the NRHM.  
Action Taken 
1.15 The suggestion has been noted and action would be taken accordingly, subject to states 
including such proposals in their annual PIPs. 
Routine Immunization Programme  
Recommendation/Observation  (para 3.20) 

1.16 The Committee observes the fact that the Department is taking steps to bring new 
vaccines in the Routine Immunization Programme. The Committee feels that even though 
new interventions in the Routine Immunization Programme are laudable but as the 
Committee has observe d above the final utilization figures in the existing immunization 
programme leaves much to be desired. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its 
recommendation that a birds eye view on maintenance of fiscal discipline is a sine -qua-non 
and the Department w hile launching new vaccination programmes should ensure that the 
funds allocated are utilized efficiently.  
 
Action Taken 
1.17 Accepted.  The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
Pulse Polio Immunisation     
 
Recommendation/Observation (para 3.23) 
1.18 The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of review being done by 
the India Expert Advisory Group (IEAG) twice a year and also the status of 
implementation of its recommendations being carried out to ensure that the count ry 
remains polio -free. The Committee also recommends that the success of the polio 
immunization should be replicated in other health programmes also.  
Action Taken 
1.19 Outcomes of review being done by the India Expert Advisory Group (IEAG) are:- 
-Maintaining population immunity through high quality of National and Sub National polio 
rounds as per IEAG recommendations. 
-In order to mitigate the risk of an importation, continuous cross border vaccination are on -
going at 102 vaccination posts along the border ing areas of Pakistan, Nepal, Bhutan, 
Myanmar and Bangladesh through special booths set up at international borders (both Rail 
and Road routes)  
-Travel advisory is issued for Polio vaccination of international travellers travelling 
between India and eight polio infected countries i.e. Pakistan, Afghanistan, Nigeria, Kenya, 
Ethiopia, Somalia, Syria and Cameroon. 
-Acute Flaccid Paralysis (AFP) Surveillance across the country continues to function and 
Environmental Surveillance established at Mumbai, Delhi, P atna, Kolkata and Punjab and 
Gujarat which acts as surrogate indicator for polio virus transmission. 

-An Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan (EPRP) are put in place under which 
Rapid Response Teams (RRT) are setup in every State/UTs for timely action in case of any 
occurrence of a polio case in the country. These plans are being reviewed annually.  
-As a risk mitigation factor, India is planning to introduce Inactivated Polio Vaccine (IPV) 
as an additional dose along with 3rd dose of DPT in the entire country in the last quarter of 
2015 as a part of polio endgame strategy and a switch from trivalent Oral Polio Vaccine to 
bivalent Oral Polio Vaccine both under routine immunization and polio campaigns in a 
globally synchronized manner is planned. 
- In add ition, the lessons learnt from polio programme is being implemented for 
strengthening of routine immunization by carrying out Immunization weeks in 400,000 
high risk areas identified under polio programme and now  “Mission Indradhanush” has 
been launched t o cover partially vaccinated/unvaccianted children across 201 identified 
districts.                                  
VI. Flexible Pool for Non-Communicable Diseases, Injury & Trauma 
Recommendation/Observation (para 6.4) 
1.20 The Committee would like to be apprised of the action being initiated by it to check 
the instance of loss of sight due to cataract surgeries in camps organized by NGO's and 
other organizations. Also, the Committee through media reports came to know that only a 
small percentage of eyes d onated could be used for restoration of vision. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends to the Department to take adequate measures to ensure that eyes 
donated could be used for the benefit of large number of blind persons and not go waste.  
Action Taken 
1.21 Guidelines on “pre -operative, operative and post operative precautions for  Eye 
surgery” formulated under the National Programme for Control of Blindness (NPCB) have 
been circulated to all States for strict compliance to avoid eye mishaps.  Referring the  
provision of guidelines issued under NPCB, an advisory has also been issued to all 
States/UTs regarding precaution to be followed on Ophthalmic Surgeries to avoid cases of 
loss of vision. This advisory states, inter alia, that eye operations are to be don e only in 
fixed operation theatres exclusive for eye surgeries. Camps are permitted only for 
screening of patients and bringing them to the base hospital for eye surgeries. All Non -
Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and voluntary organizations approved unde r NPCB 
need to sign a MOU with the district authority concerned as per the guidelines issued under 
NPCB.  The advisory also states that all other NGOs operating but not registered under 

NPCB are required to obtain necessary permission from the State Health  authorities for 
approval of the hospital for OPD work and the operation theatres for conducting eye 
surgeries. The State authorities need to develop their own guidelines/mechanism for this 
purpose. In case of any negligence on the part of NGOs and volunta ry organizations, 
appropriate penal action should be taken by the State authorities against them.  
1.22 Further, with regard to promote eye donation and ensure maximum utilization of 
donated eyes, the following measures have been taken under NPCB: 
Educating people about early donation so that eye tissue can be harvested within 4 -6 hours 
of death of donor and also follow other general precautions like covering eyes, switching 
off the fans etc.; Supply of MK Medium to Eye banks for preservation of donated eye s; 
Support to Eye Banks for transport facility for quick and timely removable of donated 
eyes; Publishing of appeal and suggestions for eye donation in all leading newspapers and 
magazines during Eye Donation Fortnight; 
Continuation of dedicated phone line 1919 automatically linked with the area Eye Banks in 
metro cities for eye donation; Honouring donor families in the annual functions organized 
by major eye banks during Eye Donation Fortnight. 
Recommendation/Observation (para 6.6) 
1.23 The Committee notes that an amount of Rs. 68.28 crore was allocated for BE 2014 -
15 for the National Mental Health Programme which was reduced to Rs. 62.00 crore at RE 
stage and the expenditure of Rs. 58.24 crore has been incurred. The Committee, though 
appreciative of the utilisation figures, is of the view that the utilisation figures vis -à-vis the 
funds allocated at BE stage leave much to be desired.  
The Committee is of the view that Mental Health is an area of critical importance as with 
the change in lifestyles and incre ase in stress the incidences of depression are on the rise. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should ensure optimum 
utilization of funds to prevent cuts at RE stage so that the actual implementation does not 
suffer due to paucity of funds.  
Action Taken 
1.24 The recommendations of the Committee have been duly noted for further action. 
ASSISTANCE TO STATES FOR CAPACITY BUILDING 
Recommendation/Observation (para 6.16) 
 
1.25 The Committee finds that an amount of Rs.4.17 crore was allocate d in the 2014 -15 

at BE stage, but the same was reduced to nil allocation at RE stage. The Committee fails to 
understand how the Department is proposing to implement the scheme when no allocation 
has been made at RE stage. What is more appalling is the non -receipt of the utilization 
figures by the Department. The Committee hopes that the Department would be able to 
complete the targets set for the 12 th Plan period and also recommends the Department to be 
more circumspect in ensuring utilization of funds more  so in view of the fact that an 
allocation of Rs. 20.00 crore has been made in 2015-16.  
Action Taken 
1.26 The National Programme for prevention & Management of Burn Injuries (NPPMBI) 
has two components i.e.  
(i) District Hospitals (under EPC) with a total budgetary outlay of Rs. 50 crore.   
(ii) Medical Colleges (tertiary care) (under EFC) with a total budgetary outlay of Rs. 
450 crore.   
 
1.27 The District Hospital  component is being implemented under NHM for 
establishment of burn wards in 19 new district hospital s during the 12 th FYP and 
completing the reaming works of 6 district hospitals of 11th FYP. 
 
1.28 During the financial year 2014-15, an amount of Rs. 4.17 crores was allocated under 
NHM. However, the Programme Division did not receive any proposal in PIP f ormat 
hence, no funds could be utilized under the district hospitals component.  
1.29 However, 8 District Hospitals have been approved for establishing burn wards under 
12th FYP. In addition, it is relevant to mention that an amount of Rs. 13.48 crores hav e 
been utilized during financial year 2014 -15 under the Medical College component of 
NPPMBI.  
1.30 The allocation of Rs. 20 crore made in 2015 -16 is only for the District Hospital 
component of NPPMBI . 8 District Hospitals have been approved by the Screenin g 
Committee and subsequently by HFM for establishing burn wards under 12 th FYP. The 
funds will also be utilized for the committed liabilities of the 6 District Hospitals identified 
during the 11 th FYP. Hence, it may be seen that the allotted budget will be  utilized in the 
current financial year 2015-16.   
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF CANCER, 
DIABETES, CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES AND STROKE 

 
 
Recommendation/Observation (para 6.19) 
1.31 The Committee notes that an amount of Rs. 292.55 crore wa s allocated in 2014-15 at BE 
stage which was reduced to Rs. 235.00 crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure is 
Rs.190.34 crore.  The Committee observes that the country has been witnessing a rapid increase 
in the cases of cancer, diabetes, cardiovascul ar diseases and stroke which are affecting people 
from all strata of the society. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to take more 
intensive and dispersed initiatives to ensure preventing the incidence of these cases. The 
Committee also notes that the utilisation figures, when compared to the BE and RE allocations, 
do not do justice to the Programme and recommends that the Department should ensure that the 
scheme is prioritised as 'essential' on which no compromise can be allowed and the Com mittee 
feels that nil allocation to the Programme in 2015 -16 is not digestible and the Department 
should approach the Ministry of Finance for allocation of funds at RE Stage.  
Action Taken 
1.32 The Department has already taken up the matter with the Minist ry of Finance at 
appropriate level for allocating resources for Tertiary Care Cancer Centre(TCCC) scheme under 
NPCDCS for 2015-16. 
1. It is pertinent to point out that during 2014 -15 the Final Estimation for NPCDCS was Rs. 
217.80 Cr. While Rs. 352.38 Cr. were  released to 7 different State Governments to 
establish/ set up State Cancer Institute/ Tertiary Care Cancer Centres to strengthen the 
tertiary care facilities for Cancer treatment. 
2. In current year, allocation of Rs. 235 Cr is indicated for NPCDCS under NHM. However an 
NCD flexi-pool has been created under NHM which gives flexibility to States for allocation 
of resources as per their needs. Total allocation for NCD flex-pool is Rs 554.50 cr. 
3. The Department is sensitive towards increasing trends of NCDs whil e communicable 
diseases still pose a challenge to the Health System. NPCDCS programme this year is 
poised to take initiatives towards capacity building, awareness generation, early diagnosis, 
treatment and referral services. 
4. Considering that effective stra tegy for prevention and control of NCDs would entail the 
involvement of different stakeholders, a Multi -Sectoral Action Plan is being prepared to 
underline important roles of different stakeholders. 

6. To estimate the burden of diseases & prevalence of maj or risk factors of NCDs, a 
nationwide survey is planned to be done by Indian Council of Medical Research(ICMR). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER- II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF  THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
II. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 
Recommendation/Observation (para 2.8) 
2.1 The Committee is aware that the stipulations of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget 
Management Act 2004, (FRBM Act) warrant the Government to bring down the le vels of fiscal 
deficit. Keeping in view the need to maintain the sanctity of the FRBM Act, the Committee 
recommends that as regards the “Desirable activities”, the Ministry should work with the States 
to put in more money and persuade them to supplement th e Central expenditure on the activities 
like strengthening of Health facilities to IPHS standards, implementation of interventions related 
to Non -Communicable Diseases (NCDs), Universal Health Coverage (UHC) Pilots, etc. The 
Committee also recommends that when the growth momentum of the economy is revived and 
the additional resources become available as a result of revenue buoyancy, the Central 
allocation for the "Desirable activities" should be increased accordingly.  
Action Taken 
2.2 In order to ensure ad ditional resources under NHM, the MOUs entered with the States 
during the 12th Plan provide that the States must increase their State budget each year by at 
least 10%. In addition, the Centre -State funding pattern is also under review and state share is 
expected to go up. Further, states that provide higher budget increase for health sector receive 
an incentive over and above their resource envelope. 
Recommendation/Observation (para 2.10) 
 
2.3 The Committee has learnt that a new disease -sickle cell anaemia,  a serious type of 
anaemia, is spreading very fast amongst the Tribals of Maharashtra and Gujarat and experts fear 
that it may also spread to other Tribal areas of the country which require immediate attention so 
that this dreaded disease is contained.                
Action Taken 
2.4 Public Health is a state subject. However under National Health Mission, Government of 
India provides financial support to the states to strengthen their health care systems including to 
address blood related disorders (Thalass emia, haemophilia, Sickle cell etc.) based on the 

proposals submitted by the State/UT Governments. Sickle cell control interventions are 
successfully running in the state of Odisha, Maharashtra and Gujarat. 
Recommendation/Observation (para 2.11) 
 
2.5 The Committee is not comfortable with the huge structure of the National Health Mission 
in which 75 percent activities of Ministry has been converted into a Mission.  The Committee is 
of the opinion that the basic idea of a Mission is to achieve something focus ed with a specific 
performance target, specific time target and specific cost target. But converting almost entire 
healthcare delivery system into a Mission by adding more and more schemes into the National 
Health Mission is making it unwieldy as well as p utting a question mark on its operational 
efficiency.  The Committee feels that there is a need to seriously review the scope of the 
National Health Mission and to make the Mission precise, more focused and manageable. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the structure of National Health Mission may be 
reviewed in order to make it more focused and precise. The Committee also recommends that a 
matrix may be provided on the uses of funds released and success made in achieving the health 
goals under NHM s o that the NHM framework facilitates in judging the extent of the health 
outcomes obtained due to NHM (and not due to any other health programmes).  
Action Taken 
2.6 The National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) was launched in the year 2005 to 
supplement the e fforts of the States in addressing the health care needs of underserved rural 
population by providing accessible, affordable and quality health care to them. The Mission 
adopted a health systems approach rather than vertical programmes to strengthen primar y health 
care including referrals upto District Hospital level. NRHM covered the key elements of health 
system reform namely, financing, infrastructure and equipment, improved service delivery, HR, 
governance, and community participation. The NRHM has thus  been addressing a gap which 
has been highly variable in the states. 
2.7 Before the launch of NRHM, there were vertical programmes like RCH, UIP, TB Control 
programmes, Malaria Control Programme, Blindness Control Programme etc. with specified 
targets. However it was realised and broadly acknowledged globally that vertical programmes 
cannot progress beyond a point unless backed by health systems strengthening. The health 
systems approach was also needed to address overall healthcare needs of the population.  It was 
thus decided to launch NRHM with a view to strengthen primary health care including referrals 

upto district Hospital level using health systems approach with focus on RCH and certain 
communicable diseases like TB and Malaria. 
2.8 With the approval of NHM with National Urban Health Mission and existing NRHM as 
its two Sub-Missions, the NHM has continued a health systems approach to strengthen primary 
care, including referral to District Hospitals, on the basis of global evidence that investments in 
primary health care can improve health & development outcomes at much lower cost. The 12 th 
plan aims to move towards Universal Health Coverage (UHC), which essentially requires a 
health system approach rather than vertical programmatic approach. This is als o borne out of 
global evidence from all the countries that have provided significant Universal Health 
Coverage. 
Recommendation/Observation (para 2.14) 
 
2.9 The Committee finds from the information furnished by the Department that for the 
previous years the re have been 282 UCs pending amounting to Rs. 5984.31 crores. The 
Committee finds this trend disturbing and recommends that the Department ought to ensure 
liquidation of all pending UCs within a period of six months from the date of presentation of 
this Report.  
Action Taken 
2.10 As per GFR Rules 2005, in respect of recurring grants, Ministry or Department 
concerned should release any amount sanctioned for the subsequent financial year only after 
Utilization Certificate on provisional basis in respect of gr ants of the preceding financial year is 
submitted. In view of this, the mentioned amount of pending UCs of Rs.5984.31 crore obviously 
gets settled by the provisional UCs for the F.Y.2014 -15 submitted by the States before 
considering the release proposal in  2015-16.  Till date, 16 States/UTs have submitted their 
provisional UCs as per the requirements of GFR and availed release of the first instalment of 
Central allocation for 2015 -16.  Efforts are being made with the remaining States as per the 
recommendation of the Committee and further releases will be contingent on submission of 
UCs. 
III.  NRHM-RCH Flexible Pool 
Recommendation/Observation (para 3.2) 
 
2.11 The Committee notes that in the year 2013 -14 the actual expenditure for RCH was Rs. 
4652.17 crore aga inst the plan outlay of Rs. 5347.01 crore. Similarly in the year 2014 -15 the 

actual expenditure for RCH is Rs. 4159.08 crore (as on 19.02.2015) against the plan outlay of R. 
5700.00 crore. The Committee notes that the actual expenditure incurred in 2013 -14 and 2014-
15 was way behind the approved outlay. The Committee recommends that the Department 
needs to strengthen its fiscal discipline so that the funds provided are utilized in a time bound 
and judicious manner to ensure that in the coming year the funds   allocated are not reduced at 
RE due to under utilization in the previous year. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
measures taken or proposed to be taken to arrest this trend.  
 
Action Taken 
2.12 It may be noted that the cuts in 2013 -14 and 20 14-15 were not on account of poor 
utilization.  In fact, against the BE allocation, 52.21% and 49.70% of the funds were utilised in 
the F.Y. 2013 -14 and 2014 -15 respectively by September against the Ministry of Finance 
stipulation of 47% utilization by Sep tember 2014-15. Thus, there was no let up in utilisation 
against the allocated resources in either 2013-14 or 2014-15. 
  2.13 Apart from above, during the F.Y. 2014 -15, against an approved RE of Rs.17,627.82 
crore, funds to the tune of Rs.18,037.99 crore w ere utilized which was 102.33% of the 
approved outlay.  Similarly, during the F.Y. 2013 -14, against the approved outlay of 
Rs.18,100 crore funds to the tune of Rs.18,215.44 crore were utilized.  This additional 
utilization was possible due to savings in He alth Sector Budget under the Dept. of Health & 
Family Welfare. 
Recommendation/Observation (para 3.6) 
2.14 With regard to ASHA scheme, the Committee notes that there is a need to bring a change 
in the scheme of incentivisation given to ASHAs in respect of i mmunization.  The Committee 
observes that presently they have a fixed remuneration irrespective of the number of children 
brought for immunization, i.e., the incentive remains the same whether they bring two children 
or three hundred.  The Committee recomm ends that incentives should be given according to the 
number of children an ASHA brings for immunization. The effect of such a scheme of 
incentivisation at the actual ground level would boost the immunization drive to a great extent.   
Action Taken 
2.15 An  amount of Rs. 200/ - is given to an ASHA for Mobilising and attending Village 
Health and Nutrition Day (VHNDS) and is hence not linked to the number of children brought 
for immunisation. The activity of Mobilising includes keeping a due list of all childr en requiring 
immunisation, of mothers needing ANC/PNC, mobilising these groups to attend the VHND, 

conducting a meeting of adolescent girls etc. Thus, the incentive covers a multitude of tasks 
beyond immunisation.  
However, ASHA incentives approved at the National level are reviewed from time to time. 
Recommendation/Observation (para 3.12) 
 
2.16 The Committee appreciates the steps being taken to reduce IMR, MMR and TFR. The 
Committee, however, finds that the family planning methods being taken up by the Dep artment 
of Health and Family Welfare  have not been able to bring any noticeable difference in 
controlling population growth nor have been able to reduce the skewed growth  which is in 
favour of male population. The Committee recommends that the Department  needs to have  
'best practices approach' in which States having  a healthy male -female ratio share their 
experiences either by way of a quarterly seminar or by use of information technology interface 
on the methods or steps taken by them which had helped to ensure a healthy male -female 
population ratio. The Committee recommends that innovative approaches on the lines 
mentioned above can go a long way in ensuring that the targets for health set by way of 
Millennium Development Goals are not only achieved but are achieved equitably                  
Action Taken 
2.17 With regards to population growth, the percentage decadal growth during 2001 -2011 has 
registered the sharpest decline since independence. It declined from 21.54 percent for the period 
2001-2011 to 17.64 percent during 2001-11, a further decrease of 3.90 percentage points.  
2.18 2001-2011 is the first decade (with the exception of 1911 -1921) which has actually 
added lesser population compared to the previous decade. 18.14 crore was added from 2001 t o 
2011 as compared to 18.24 crore from 1991 to 2001. This is a result of the combination of 
population momentum and somewhat impeded fertility. Although India continues to grow in 
size, its pace of net addition is on the decrease.  
2.19 The Crude Birth rate is showing a constant decline every year. The CBR has declined by 
17% from 25.8 in 2000 to 21.4 in 2013. 
2.20 Southern states of India mostly have a healthy sex ratio which is a result of women 
literacy, women empowerment and socio economic development.  During reviews of National 
Family Planning Program at the national, regional and state level the states are sensitized on all 
the aspects. These workshops also act as a platform for cross learning for the states. 
Mission Flexible Pool 
Recommendation/Observation (para 3.15) 

 
2.21 The Committee notes with concern that the Department was not able to fully utilise the 
funds provided at RE stage. The expenditure pattern in 2014 -15 is way below the expenditure 
pattern in 2013-14. The Committee also takes note of  the fact that even though approved outlay 
at BE stage has been increased in 2014 -15, it was significantly reduced at RE stage. The 
Committee hopes that the cuts have been made at RE stage due to uniform budgetary cuts across 
the Board and not due to under utilization of allocated funds.  
 
Action Taken 
2.22 The response given in Para 3.2 may be referred. There was no under utilisation. Rather, it 
was more than the stipulated amount. Thus the reduction in budget was due to the mandatory 
reduction of budget imposed by the Ministry of Finance.  
National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme(NIDDCP) 
Recommendation/Observation (para 3.26) 
 
2.23 The Committee notes that the goals of NIDDCP are to bring the prevalence of IDD to 
below 5 % in the country by 2 017 and to ensure 100% consumption of adequately iodated salt 
(15ppm) at the household level. However, the Committee finds that the Department's allocation 
had been reduced at RE stage  to Rs. 35.25 crore from Rs. 49.00 crore at BE Stage and the 
actual amount spent was  Rs. 27.49 crore. The Committee is of the view that the Department on 
the one hand has planned to bring the prevalence of IDD to below 5 % in the country by 2017 
and ensure 100% consumption of adequately iodated salt (15ppm) at the household level and on 
the other hand is not able to utilize even the allocated funds properly. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that in order to meet its targets, the Department needs to ensure that the machinery 
to implement the plan funds is robust and is abl e to optimally utilize the allocated funds so that 
its objectives are met in letter and spirit.  
Action Taken 
2.24 Under the Budget Estimates of NIDDCP large amount (more than 50%) is Grant in Aid 
to States/UTs which includes significant fund for procureme nt of Salt Testing Kits (by 
States/UTs) and Payment of incentive to ASHA for conducting salt testing at household 
/community level for creating awareness about IDD, monitor the presence of iodine in iodated 
salt and promote consumption of adequately iodate d salt in IDD endemic districts and other 
programme activities.   

 
2.25 The States/UTs have been reporting less expenditure against the allocations as a result 
the overall fund utilization was less under the programme in the year 2014 -15.  The expenditure 
under the programme at the end of financial year 2014 -15 (31 st March, 2015) was Rs. 31.93 
lakhs as against RE Rs. 35.25 lakhs.  
2.26 In order to sustain the progress made in control of IDD as well as to achieve the targets 
as proposed under the programme, in the year 2014 -15 four Zonal level review meetings were 
conducted with primary objective to review the progress of implementation of programme in 
each State/UT as well as sensitize all the State Programme Officers and other officials who are 
involved in the implementation of NIDDCP at State/UT level and also to strengthen the overall 
implementation of NIDDCP activities.  A part from the above a four day training programme on 
„management of laboratory monitoring of iodine content of iodated salt and urinar y iodine 
excretion‟ for the State/UT level IDD Lab Technicians/Lab Assistants under National Iodine 
Deficiency Disorders Control Programme (NIDDCP) was also organized in the year 2014-15. 
Providing free generic medicines in all PH institutions in the country 
Recommendation/Observation (para 3.30) 
 
2.27 The Committee fails to understand that a scheme of such immense importance is being 
consistently allocated notional funds over the last three years of 12 th Plan. This trend of 
allocation indicates that scheme  is yet to take off with intended pace, and also puts a question 
mark on the ability of the Department to objectively project its requirements. The Committee is 
unable to understand as to why a huge sum of Rs. 16000 crore was earmarked for the scheme 
when the Department was not prepared to implement the Scheme. The Committee impresses 
upon the Department to act now with vigor and energy and see that the schemes take off at least 
this year.  
Action Taken 
2.28 As far as scheme for Free genetic Medicines in pu blic health facilities is concerned, 
while a budgetary provision of Rs. 100 Crore was made for the first year of the plan in 2012 -13, 
in the 2013 -14 the budgetary provision for such a scheme was a mere Rs. 1 Crore. This was 
because no central scheme was no t approved and implemented. Instead, free drugs initiative has 
been supported under NHM. 
2.29 Public Health being a State subject, under NHM, States are being supported and 
incentivized under NHM for provision of free generic medicines in all public health facilities. 

2.30 Under the NHM, financial assistance is provided to the States/UTs based on the 
requirements raised by them in their PIPs for provision of free generic/essential drugs to those 
who access public health facilities. Further an incentive of a dditional funds upto 5% of resource 
allocation is provided to states that notify policy of provision of free generic/essential medicines 
in public health facilities. In 2013, NHM -Free Drug service Initiative was approved wherein 
substantial funding is made  available to States within their annual allocation under the Mission 
for provision of free drugs to those who access public health facilities subject to States/UTs 
setting up or agreeing to set up robust systems of procurement, quality assurance, logistic  & IT 
infrastructure for improved supply chain management besides having facility level wise 
Essential Drug List (EDL), Standard Treatment Guidelines (STGs) and systems of prescription 
audit to ensure rational drug use and notifying policy of providing fre e essential drugs to all 
patients coming to public health facilities. 
2.31 On account of these efforts, about 29 States/UTs are presently having a free drugs policy. 
Further, the amount of support and number of States seeking NHM funding for free drugs hav e 
been continuously increasing. 
2.32 Rs. 3023.74 crore (including cash and kind grants) was provided in 2013 -14 and Rs. 
3309.20 (including cash and kind grants) was provided in 2014 -15 for provision of free drugs in 
public health facilities. 
V. FLEXIBLE POOL FOR COMMUNICABLE DISEASES 
Recommendation/Observation (para 5.3) 
 
2.33 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that dengue is claiming quite a 
number of lives in the country and now the victims are losing their eye sight also due to dengue. 
What is more worrisome is that dengue causing virus is mutating which is a very dangerous 
signal. The Committee views this with serious concern and recommends that the matter should 
be looked into seriously and urgent measures should be initiated to arrest t he spread and 
incidence of dengue and also to overcome the problem of mutation of dengue virus.  
Action Taken 
2.34 Dengue can affect various organs in the body including liver, kidney, eye etc. As per 
reports received from the State of Maharashtra, blindne ss has been observed in some cases of 
dengue; however, there is no evidence base so far for the cause effect relationship of mutation 
of dengue virus and blindness in these cases. 

2.35 Considering the public health concern of dengue in the country a new Na tional Guideline 
for Dengue Case Management has been developed involving national and international subject 
experts. The Guidelines elaborately emphasizes management of the Expanded Dengue 
Syndrome due to involvement of various organs including eye.  
2.36 To arrest the spread and incidence of Dengue a Mid Term Plan for prevention and 
control of dengue has been approved by Committee of Secretaries on 26.05.11. The main 
components of the Mid Term Plan strategies are as follows:  
i.Surveillance - Disease and Entomological Surveillance. 
ii.Case Management - Laboratory diagnosis and Clinical Management. 
iii. Vector Management - Environmental management for Source Reduction,  Chemical control, 
Personal protection and Legislation. 
iv. Outbreak response - Epidemic preparedness and Media Management. 
v. Capacity building- Training, strengthening human resource and operational research 
vi. Behavior Change Communication - Social mobilization and Information  Education and 
Communication (IEC)  
vii. Inter-sectoral coordina tion - Health, Urban Development, Rural Development, Panchayati 
Raj, Surface Transport, Education and Water & Sanitation. 
viii. Monitoring and Supervision- Analysis of reports, review, field visit and feedback. 
2.37 These strategies are implemented under the National Programme. 
 
 
National Tuberculosis (T.B)  Control  Programme 
Recommendation/Observation (para 5.6) 
 
2.38 On being asked on the action taken so far on the States to ensure timely liquidation of 
pending UC‟s under Revised National TB Control Prog ramme (RNTCP) and the updated status 
of pending UCs and the amount involved therein, the Department has informed that necessary 
steps are being taken in this regard for receiving UCs in time. The Quarterly Statement of 
Expenditure (SOEs) and UCs scanned co pies are being received through emails. The States are 
also being contacted for timely submission of UCs by using information technology. In 
addition, regular communications are being sent to States/UTs in this regard. This has resulted 
in better coordinat ion with States and timely receipt of UCs. Further, all UCs have been 
received for the year 2012 -13 and for 2013 -14, UCs from 32 States/Uts have been received. In 

the remaining 3 States, UCs pendency is for an amount of Rs. 36.19 crore only. The Committee 
recommends that a mechanism may be devised by which no State falters in submitting UCs.   
Action Taken 
2.39 The mechanism is already in place. The States know it clearly that funds will not be 
released if UCs are not submitted. Regular communication are se nt to the States for timely 
submission of their UCs and also followed up with the States for the same. Necessary steps are 
being taken in this regard for receiving UCs in time. UCs for the year 2013 -14 has been 
received from all the States/UTs except for Chhattisgarh for an amount of Rs. 7.88 crore.  
Recommendation/Observation (para 5.7) 
 
2.40 On being asked about the updated figures regarding quantum of unspent balance lying 
with the States and whether any innovative measures have been taken to tackle the problem of 
unspent balances, the Department has informed that the unspent balance amounting to Rs. 74.97 
crore only is lying with the States/UTs as on 01.01.2015. Regular monitoring is being done to 
ensure that grants -in-aid released to State Health Societ ies/NGOs is utilized judiciously and 
scrupulously. In addition, regular review of activities with the States/UTs at national and 
regional level is being held. The Committee finds that the amount of unspent balances 
amounting to Rs.74.97 crore as on 01.01.2 015 does not bode well for implementation of a 
programme of huge scale keeping in view the vulnerability of the population affected by this 
disease which has a draining effect on not only the physical well being of the individual but also 
on his financial well being. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should 
ensure that the Centre should encourage the States to ensure optimum utilisation of funds by 
means of sharing of best practices among States.  
Action Taken 
2.41 The unspent balance  as on 31.03.2015 lying with the States/UTs is Rs. 5.90 crore only 
which are the minimum balance lying with the States. SOEs of 25 States for the quarter ending 
March 2015 are pending which would mean that unspent balance with the States would be 
further reduced after receipt of SOEs. 
Recommendation/Observation (para 5.14) 
2.42 The Committee finds that there has been substantial reductions in fund allocation at RE 
stage and what is more worrisome is that the Department is not even able to utilize the reduce d 
amount at RE stage optimally as can be seen from the utilization figures. The Committee notes 
that approval has been accorded to carry out the activities in 1453 blocks in 214 districts of 19 

States/UTs. The Committee while appreciating the expansion of activities would simultaneously 
suggests to the Department that the expansion of the programme should not be made to suffer 
due to any under -funding. Also a close monitoring of the expenditure being incurred on the 
scheme is must to ensure desired results.  
Action Taken 
2.43 Funds are approved based on Annual Plan Proposed by the States/ UTs after detailed 
discussion. 
Recommendation/Observation (para 5.16) 
 
2.44 The Committee takes note of the findings of the National Sample Survey wherein it has 
been concl uded that projected new cases may occur between 250,000 to 350,000 / year. The 
survey has further stated that more efforts are needed for IEC, POD and DPMR activities to 
reduce the deformities and to prevent progression of deformities from grade I to grade  II. The 
Committee is of the view that the volume of the projected new cases is a cause of serious 
concern and constrained to note that inspite of adequate funds being provided at BE stage, the 
Department was not able to utilize the funds for its present a ctivities. This puts a question mark 
on the smooth implementation of programme. The Committee recommends that the Department 
needs to act on the findings of the Survey which reveals that more efforts are needed on the 
ground for IEC, POD and DPMR activitie s to reduce the deformities; to prevent progression of 
deformities from grade I to grade II and also keep the Committee posted of the action 
taken/being taken in this regard. If required, more funds may be provided to ensure timely 
treatment and prevention.          
Action Taken 
2.45 
i)        209 high endemic districts in 16 States/UTs identified for special activities, 
which was carried out in 2012 -13, 2013-14 & 2014 -15. Due to house to house 
surveys conducted new cases increased to 1.34 Lakh in 2012 -13. This has come 
down to 1.25 Lakh (Provisional) in 2014-15. 
ii)      IEC/ BCC has been made more focused in a campaign approach carried out for 1 
month from 30th January to 28th February 2015. This campaign approach in the 
Leprosy month as above to continue every year. 

2.46 Prevention of progression of deformity has been given more emphasis, through early 
diagnosis and regular follow up from PHC level. Proper counselling, MCR footwear and self -
care kits are also provided from the Programme, for the purpose. 
National Leprosy Control Programme 
Recommendation/Observation (para 5.18) 
2.47 The Committee would like the Government to set the target of 100% Leprosy 
eradication and prepare action plan in this regard.    
 
Action Taken 
2.48 100% Eradication of Leprosy is not feasible at present  due to:  
i) Leprosy caused by M. Leprae which is a very slow growing bacillus. 
Incubation period (duration from time of entry of the organism in the body to 
appearance of 1st clinical sign) is variable from few weeks to even 20 years. 
Average incubation period is said to be 5-7 years. 
ii) There is no tool to confirm if a person is suffering from the disease sub -
clinically during the incubation period. 
 
2.49 Therefore, the WHO‟s enhanced Global Strategy (2010 -15) has only focused on 
further reducing the disease burden due to Leprosy. 
VI. FLEXIBLE POOL FOR NON -COMMUNICABLE DISEASES, INJURY & 
TRAUMA 
Recommendation/Observation (para 6.3) 
2.50 The Committee notes that utilization status of funds in the year 2014 -15 is quite 
satisfactory as compared to  that of the year 2013 -14. The Committee is of the view that 
effective fund utilization is an exercise in continuum and near utilization in one year and 
unsatisfactory utilization in the previous year would not do justice to the programme and the 
Ministry should ensure effective fund utilization every year, so as to preclude the Ministry of 
Finance from cutting funds for the next year on the basis of the previous performance. The 
Committee hopes that the Department would be able to implement the new initiat ives 
introduced during the 12 th Plan considering that this is the fourth year of the 12 th Plan. The 
Committee also noticed that in both 2013 -14 and 2014 -15 allocations were reduced. In fact in 
2013-14, it was made almost 50% of the BE. Such drastic reducti ons derail the programmes and 
should be avoided.    

Action Taken 
2.51 The primary reason for reduction in allocations during 2013-14 and 2014-15 was delay in 
submission of Utilization Certificates by some of the States resulting in less release and 
utilization of funds in the early part of the financial year and thereafter reduction in the budget 
in revised estimates (RE) stage.  
2.52 However, with the view to accelerate timely utilization of allocated funds, the 
programme is being reviewed on region basis for affective implementation.  
Recommendation/Observation (para 6.11) 
2.53 The Committee notes that the Department was allocated Rs. 40.00 crore in BE -2014-15 
which has been reduced to Rs. 20.00 crore at RE stage. However the Department has been able 
to spend only Rs.1.40 crore. The Committee is surprised at this state of affairs. On the one hand, 
as per information of the Department, an estimated one million Indians die annually from 
tobacco-related diseases, and on the other hand the Department has only b een able to spend a 
meagre amount of funds. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such a lackadaisical 
attitude cannot be condoned and such meagre utilization of funds reflects on the inefficiency of 
the officials manning the programme and the Departme nt should fix the accountability to ensure 
that such a situation is not allowed to recur in future.  
Action Taken 
2.54 The Programme Division is taking steps to expedite the process of examination of the 
Programme Implementations Plans (PIPs) received from the States. 
 
2.55 National Tobacco Control Programme (NTCP) was allocated Rs. 40.00 crore in BE -
2014-15 under the Flexi -pool for Non Communicable Diseases (NCDs) for setting up District 
Tobacco Control Cells and Tobacco Cessation Centres at District Hospi tals. The same was 
reduced to Rs. 20.22 crore at RE stage. The final expenditure upto March, 2015 was Rs. 18.57 
crore. The delay in release of funds to states was due to the delay in approval of the Programme 
Implementations Plans (PIPs) received from the States and subsequent administrative approvals 
of Record of Proceedings (RoPs). 
VII.         MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES 
PROVISION OF HEARING AIDS, SPECTACLES, DENTURES, ETC. TO THE 
SENIOR CITIZENS IN RURAL AREAS UNDER NRHM  
Recommendation/Observation (para 7.1) 

2.56 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the National Rural Health 
Mission in the country which is mandated to provide health care in rural India focuses mainly 
on treatment of diseases. There is no provision to provide spectacles, dent ures and hearing aids 
etc. particularly to senior citizens in the rural areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Department should look at the feasibility of the proposal for providing the aids and 
appliances mentioned above to the senior citiz ens in the rural areas under NRHM and, 
accordingly allocate adequate funds for the purpose.  
Action Taken 
2.57 During 11th FYP hearing-aids were provided under the programme, however, in the 12th 
FYP there is no provision for providing hearing -aid under NP PCD programme, however, 
hearing-aid may be provided as per Synergy between Assistance to Disabled Persons (ADIP) 
Scheme of Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment (MSJE) and National Programme for 
Prevention and Control of Deafness (NPPCD) of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
(MOHFW). 
2.58 Dentures is not part of approved activity under National Oral Health 
Programme(NOHP). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPETER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
II. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 
Recommendation/Observation (para 2.7) 
3.1 The Committee notes that as compared to Rs. 21912.00 crore provided in BE 2014 -15, 
the allocation of Rs. 18,295.00 crore in BE 2015 -16 is steeply lower and is onl y marginally 
higher than the RE 2014 -15 allocation of Rs. 17627.82 crore. This small increase of Rs. 667.18 
crore in BE 2015 -16 over RE of 2014 -15 is grossly inadequate as it will be eaten up by 
inflation. The country has a huge burden of communicable and non-communicable diseases and 
studies have shown that a long and expensive illness can drive not only the non -poor into 
poverty but creates immense stress even among those who are financially secure. As is evident 
from the information furnished by the Mini stry, there is 20 percent shortfall in Sub -Centers, 23 
per cent in PHCs and 32 percent in CHCs against the norms set by Indian Public Health 
Standards (IPHS) and additional resources are required to meet this shortfall in health facilities. 
The Committee also takes note of the submissions that except for some of the advanced States, 
most of the States including the North East States are not able to augment their spending on 
health.  Keeping in view all the above facts, the Committee is extremely disappointe d with the 
low level of budgetary allocation for NHM for the financial year 2015 -16.  At the behest of the 
Committee, the Ministry has furnished two lists of activities i.e. (i) Essential activities which 
must be protected from budgetary cuts and (ii) Desi rable activities where the increase in funds 
can be made if resources are available.  The Ministry has also indicated that in order to 
undertake the essential activities, the minimum increase in allocation would be Rs. 10,500.00 
crore and thus the total BE  for 2015-16 should be Rs. 28,295.00 crore.   Keeping in view the 
fact that the Central Government has a dominance in the domain of public resource mobilization 
by way of collection of tax revenue and several States including North Eastern States will be i n 
severe handicap because of the manner in which these budgetary cuts have taken place, the 
Committee lends its full support to the demand for additional funds to the tune of Rs. 10,500. 00 
crore for undertaking the “essential activities” viz. (i) Free Dru gs and Diagnostics (ii) 
Strengthening of District Hospitals particularly in High Priority Districts and (iii) Strengthening 
of Sub Health Centres as “first port of call” to provide primary care and recommends that above 

essential activities must be protect ed from the budgetary cuts. The Committee would like the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare to immediately bring the above recommendation to 
the notice of Ministry of Finance and also intimate it of their response.  
Action Taken 
3.2 The Ministry of Finance has been apprised of the recommendation of the Committee 
Further Recommendation 
3.3 The Committee notes that though the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
has taken up the issue of allocation of additional funds to the tune of Rs. 10,500/ - crore 
with the Ministry of Finance, it is not aware whether the Ministry of Finance has 
responded favourably to the Committee's recommendation. The Committee, therefore, 
feels it imperative on the part of the Department to vigorously pursue the matter and 
apprise it of the action taken by Ministry of Finance.  
Recommendation/Observation (para 2.16) 
3.4 The Committee is of the view that adequate financial resources for health should be 
made available so that the efforts made by the State Governments are supplemen ted and 
complemented. Given the precarious state of finances in the States, it would be a wishful 
thinking to expect the States to allocate a major chunk of their budget for health. It is too 
obvious to labour a statement that provision of  affordable "Hea lth For All"  will remain a far 
cry if adequate budgetary  provisions are not made in a timely manner as health is a vital 
parameter on which the success and progress of the society and the country depends. The 
Government, therefore, needs to take expediti ous decision on the enhanced fund allocations for 
health sector.  
 
Action Taken 
3.5 The Department is regularly following up with the Ministry of Finance for enhanced 
allocation for health sector. 
Further Recommendation 
3.6 Keeping in view the fact that ad equate and timely budgetary provision is sine -qua-
non for improving the poor health indicators and infrastructure in the country and given 
the fact that the low -income states have limited capacity for generating and allocating 
additional resources for heal th, the Committee is of the firm view that the Central 
Government will have to bear a substantial proportion of the public health cost. The 

Committee would therefore like to be apprised of the stand of Ministry of Finance on 
enhancing the budgetary allocations for health sector. 
III. NRHM-RCH Flexible Pool 
Routine Immunization Programme (para 3.18) 
3.7 The Committee on a bare perusal of the data given above, finds that the amount of funds 
provided at the RE stage has been halved from those at BE stage in 20 14-15. The Committee is 
of the opinion that the Department either lacks the proper machinery to implement the scheme 
as is reflected from the expenditure figures enumerated above or there are other constraints 
which are coming into its way in achieving the desired objectives. The Committee finds that this 
trend of expenditure does not strengthen the Department‟s demand for more funds from the 
Ministry of Finance. The Committee impresses upon the Department that it should ensure that 
the funds available are spent judiciously and in a time bound manner to derive the desired 
outcomes and for that all necessary processes should be put in place.  
Action Taken 
3.8 The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  
Remarks: During 2014-15 a sum of R s. 818.10 crore (Rs. 718.10 crore under Externally aided 
component (EAC) and Rs. 100.00 cr. under Domestic  Budget source (DBS) was allotted. 
However, during RE 2014 -15, against the projected RE for Rs.1168.10 crore (Rs.718.10 cr. 
EAC and Rs. 450.00 DBS) a sum of Rs. 490.00 crore  was only approved which included EAC 
and DBS both. Accordingly the above budget allocation was distributed to Rs. 139.43 crore  
EAC and 350.57 crore DBS. as per immediate requirement for the cost adjustment of vaccines 
and logistics. During FE  2014-15, the budget provision  was enhanced to Rs.508.33 crore only.  
The expenditure was, therefore, restricted to the approved FE 2014 -15.  To support introduction 
of  four new lifesaving  vaccines which are going to play a key role in redu cing the childhood 
and infant mortality morbidity in the country, additional funds will be required. At present 
pentavalent vaccine is provided as commodity assistance under Gavi support.   
Further Recommendation 
3.9 The Committee strongly recommends that keeping in view the importance of the 
introduction of four new life saving vaccines, the Department should approach the 
Ministry of Finance to approve more funds for these four vaccines. 
Strengthening of District Hospitals for providing advanced secondary care   
Recommendation/Observation (para 3.27 &  3.28) 
 

3.10 As per information furnished by the Department, for the 12 th Five Year Plan an 
allocation of Rs. 11714.09 crore was made under this head. However the Committee finds that 
in 2012-13, no allocation was made; in the year 2013 -14,  an allocation of mere 1.00 crore was 
made  and in 2014-15 and in 2015-16 no allocations have been made.  
 
3.11 The Committee is dismayed to find that even after three years of the initiation of the 12th 
Plan, allocation of a mere Rs. 1.00 crore has been made for this scheme but the status of its 
utilization has not been reflected. The Committee takes serious exception to the lackadaisical 
approach of the Department and recommends that the Department should take corrective st eps 
to ensure that the scheme takes off during remaining years of the 12 th Plan.  
 
Action Taken 
3.12 No such scheme was approved. However, the NHM Framework for Implementation that 
was approved by the Union Cabinet in December 2013 provides for strengtheni ng of District 
Hospitals as District Hospitals and Knowledge Centre, to be taken up under the NHM. 
Accordingly, the States were requested to seek funding for strengthening of District Hospitals 
under NHM and the States are being supported for this activity  based on the proposals 
submitted by them in their Programme Implementation of Plans (PIPs). 
Further Recommendation 
3.13 The Committee observes that strengthening of District Hospitals is of critical 
importance for building a strong foundation of secondary  healthcare in the country. 
District Hospitals, if strengthened adequately, would substantially help the people to avail 
quality healthcare conditions at the district level and also reduce the load on tertiary care 
institutions. The Committee would, theref ore, like the Department to sensitize the States/ 
UTs about the importance of this scheme so that they are encouraged to include 
appropriate proposals in their Programme Implementation Plans (PIPs) in this regard. 
The Committee also feels it imperative on the part of the Department to provide financial 
and technological support to States/ UTs for strengthening of District Hospitals on a 
bigger scale. 
IV. NATIONAL URBAN HEALTH MISSION (NUHM)-FLEXIBLE POOL 
Recommendation/Observation (para 4.4) 
3.14 The Committee has been given to understand that  under NUHM recruitment has been 
made for 807 Medical Officers, 1203 Staff Nurses, 856 Pharmacists, 841 Lab Technicians, 6056 

ANM against sanctioned strength of 2353, 7209, 2978, 3231 and 17584 posts, respectively. The 
Committee finds that there is a wide gap between the sanctioned and the recruited manpower. 
The Committee hopes that the persons recruited would actually join their respective postings. 
Steps may be taken to increase allocations to the scheme and fill up all posts.  
Action Taken 
 
3.15 The observations of Committee are noted for compliance.  
3.16 It is submitted that National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) was approved as a Sub -
Mission of the National Health Mission (NHM) and was launched on 1 st May, 2013. 
Secretary (HFM) had taken a meeting with all States Health Secretaries on 30.12.2014 to review 
the progress of NUHM. All States & UTs were requested in the meeting to expedite recruitment 
or sanctioned HR and take up various approved activities, like establishmen t of new PHCs, 
outreach and community process activities. Another meeting/video conference would be held 
shortly with the States/UTs. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.17 The Committee is not satisfied with the snail's pace of progress made in the matter 
of recruitment of manpower for National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) and taking up 
of various approved activities. NUHM was launched as a sub -mission of the National 
Health Mission way back in May, 2013 and if despite the passage of more than two years, 
a whopping n umber of vacancies still exist across different cadres then it is a matter of 
serious concern as it is certain to impact the operations of NUHM adversely. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to urgently take up the issue with the 
States' Health Societies and ensure that shortage of manpower is not allowed to become a 
stumbling block in the effective operation of NUHM. 
V. FLEXIBLE POOL FOR COMMUNICABLE DISEASES 
National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme 
Recommendation/Observation  (para 5.2) 
 
3.18 On a perusal of the progress made in respect of the National Vector Borne Disease 
Control Programme (NVBDCP), the Committee finds that for combating JE/AES, out of 181 
endemic districts, 155 districts have been covered under JE vaccination inclu ding all 60 high 
priority districts of five States. The Committee is, however, of the opinion that the Department 

by leaving out the remaining districts is making the fight against the diseases difficult as it is 
susceptible to spread to other areas of the  country. The Committee recommends that the 
Department should put in place a multipronged strategy to target all identified districts at the 
same time to ensure complete elimination of the disease.  The Committee also recommends that 
the Department should ensure vigorous efforts by means of Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) to educate the public about the precautions e.g. to have clean drinking 
water, etc. in order to prevent themselves from being affected by AES.  
Action Taken 
3.19 As of now, 166 districts have already been brought under JE vaccination campaign.  
3.20 AES is caused by a wide variety of organisms including virus, bacteria, protozoa etc. 
most of which are still not known. JE contributes 10 -14% of the total AES cases. Proportion o f 
Entero-virus in causation of AES has been found to be at the most 22% in a study conducted by 
NIV field station at Gorakhpur. In view of this, a multipronged strategy for prevention and 
control of AES has been considered. 
3.21 As presence of large number  of extra-human reservoirs in Japanese Encephalitis stands 
in the way of complete elimination of the disease, prevention and control with JE vaccination 
and other public health measures have been included under the national programme.   
3.22 IEC is conside red as one of the important components for prevention and control of 
JE/AES to educate people about the precaution i.e., to have safe drinking water etc in order to 
prevent themselves from being affected by AES. 
Further Recommendation 
3.23 The Committee notes that the action taken reply is silent on the recommendation of 
the Committee in regard to starting coverage of all endemic districts at the same time. The 
Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the measures taken to ensure coverage 
of combating JE/AFS in all identified districts. 
 
National Tuberculosis (T.B)  Control  Programme 
Recommendation/Observation (para 5.8 & 5.9) 
3.24 The financial achievement under the programme during 2014 -15 (upto 05 th March 
2013) is as under: 
(Rs. in crores) 
Name of the Scheme  B. E. 2014- R. E. 2014- Utilization 2014-15  

15  
 
15  
 
(till 05.03.2015) 
National T.B. Control 
Programme  
710.15  
 
640.00  
 
554.36 
 
Action Taken 
3.25 The Funds utilization given in para 5.8 is updated till 31.03.2015 as under: 
(Rs. in crores) 
Name of the 
Scheme  
B. E. 2014-15  
 
R. E. 2014-
15  
 
Utilization 2014-15  
(till 31.03.2015) 
National T.B. 
Control 
Programme  
 
710.15  
 
640.00  
 
639.95 
 
 
3.26 The Committee notes that there has been a sizeable reduction in funds allocated at RE 
stage an d the expenditure figures as on 5 th March, 2015 leave much to be desired. The 
Committee finds this extremely palpable in view of the fact that underutilization of funds can 
have a vital bearing on the elimination of pathogen causing the disease. The Commit tee, 
therefore, recommends that the Department should keep a tight control on effective utilization 
of funds to ensure that the targeted goals are not derailed by underutilization of funds.  
Action Taken 
3.27 The financial achievement (can be seen under para 5.8) is almost 100% during 2014-15.  
Further Recommendation 
3.28 The Committee notes that even though the utilization is almost 100% in respect of 
allocations made at RE stage yet it falls short of allocation made at BE stage. The 
Committee recommends that the Department should ensure that the funds requirement at 
BE stage in respect of National TB Control Programme is realistically assessed so that 
there is no wide variation  in BE, RE and Actuals and the norms of budget discipline are 
not violated.  

Intregrated Disease Surveillance Project 
Recommendation/Observation  (para 5.22) 
3.29     The Committee notes that World Bank provided funds for Central Surveillance Unit 
(CSU) in 9 States (Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu, Uttarakhand and West Bengal) and domestic funding was made available for other 
States. An allocation of Rs. 63.00 crore made in BE -2014-15 was increased to Rs.64.35 crore at 
RE stage. However the expenditure figures as on 5 th March, 2015 was only Rs. 48.59 crore. The 
Committee is surprised that even after the allocation had been increased at RE Stage, the actual 
expenditure is woefully short of even the funds allocated at BE stage. The Committee is of the 
opinion that even in schemes/ programmes  where the funds allocation has been increased at RE 
stage, the Department had miserably failed in utilizing the allocated funds and there is no 
justification for increased allocation in next financial year with the trend of underutilization in 
the previou s years. The Committee observes that with all the where -withal of technology 
available at its disposal, the Department should have made optimum utilization of funds and 
resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should prioritize 
activities under the Scheme which are strictly non -negotiable and for which funds must be 
disbursed on priority basis in order to ensure that the scarce budgetary resources are utilized 
efficiently.  
Action Taken 
3.30 IDSP was funded through World Bank from  2004-2010 for expenditure incurred in 
programme implementation at all the states and Central Surveillance Unit (CSU). 
3.31 Subsequently, from 2010 -12 World Bank funding was available for 9 States (Andhra 
Pradesh, Gujrat, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, Ra jasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand and 
West Bengal) and CSU. 
3.32 From April, 2012 IDSP programme is totally funded through domestic funding, under 
National Health Mission (NHM). 
Fund allocation and expenditure in financial year 2014-15: 
(Rs. in crores) 
BE RE FE Expenditure Percent  
(Expenditure/BE)*10*100 
63 64.35 56.27 56.02 88.92 
 

3.33 IDSP is a decentralized state -based disease surveillance programme with the objective to 
monitor disease trends and detect and respond to disease outbreaks due to epidemic -prone 
diseases at the earliest through trained Rapid Response Teams. 
3.34 The total funds allocated for IDSP in 2014 -15 was 63 Crore (50 Crores [79.36%] for 
States and UTs and 13 Crores for expenditure at central level [20.63%] 
3.35 Under IDSP the funds a re released to the States by Central Surveillance Unit for 
programme implementation i.e. for laboratory strengthening, outbreak investigations, human 
resources, maintenance of ICT network etc. 
3.36 The transfer of funds to States through treasury route und er NHM. There was a delay of 
an average of 3-6 months in transfer of funds from Centre to States through treasury route. Due 
to the delay in receipt of funding there was less expenditure reported by the States, as estimated 
during the budgetary process. 
3.37 The programme was utilized in 2014 -15 to respond to Influenza A (H1N1), threat for 
Ebola Virus Disease, Public health surveillance following Jammu & Kashmir floods, Cyclone 
Hud-Hud in Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Telenghana along with reporting and respondin g to 1562 
disease outbreaks in the country. Further IDSP was utilised for enhanced human surveillance 
following Avian Influenza outbreak in Kerala, Chandigarh, Manipur, Telenghana. Therefore 
IDSP funding should be considered as priority area of funding under NHM. 
Further Recommendation 
3.38 The Committee is concerned to note the revelation that the transfer of funds to 
States through treasury route has led to delay of 3 to 6 months in funds transfer. The 
Committee observes that disease surveillance and resp onse is a core public health activity 
and delay in transfer of funds would put the targeted outcome in serious jeopardy. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department in coordination with States 
should put in place a robust mechanism to ensure t hat delay in transfer of funds from 
Centre to States through treasury route is eliminated. The Committee also desires to know 
the number of district public health labs targeted to be set up during the 12 th Plan to 
improve the quality of data and outbreak investigations and the achievement made.  
VI. FLEXIBLE POOL FOR NON -COMMUNICABLE DISEASES, INJURY & 
TRAUMA 
C. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR THE HEALTH CARE OF ELDERLY   
Recommendation/Observation (para 6.9) 

3.39 The Committee is of the view that with the continuou s increase in life expectancy, the 
country is going to have a large Geriatric population in the near future. The Committee finds 
that out of Rs. 50.83 crore allocated in BE 2014 -15, the amount has been drastically reduced to 
Rs. 25.50 crore at RE stage. Ho wever, what compounds the misery, is the utilization figure 
which amounts to Rs.21.47 crore. The Committee finds that the Department has been too slow 
in ensuring optimum utilization of funds which would adversely affect the actual 
implementation of the ac tivities not to mention the cost overruns. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department needs to ensure that justice is done to the funds allocated by 
Finance Ministry so that in future the Department should not face any cuts in allocation due to 
tardy utilization record.  
Action Taken 
3.40 In so far as Para C 6.9 relating to National Programme for Health care of the Elderly 
(NPHCE) is concerned, it is submitted that States/UTs have been reminded time and again to 
ensure maximum utilization of f unds released to them under the Programme. Health is a State 
subject and it is the basic responsibility of the State Government to ensure optimal utilization of 
funds, while implementing the scheme in the districts. It is also submitted that NPHCE is now a  
part of National Health Mission under its NCD Flexible Pool. NPHCE is also being monitored 
by the National Health Mission Division of the Ministry. 
3.41 An amount of Rs. 50.83 crores had been allocated in BE 2014 -15. Subsequently, the 
amount was reduced t o Rs. 25.50 crores at RE stage 2014 -15. A total amount of Rs. 23.84 
crores had been utilized out of the total amount allocated during 2014 -15. The optimal 
utilization of allocated funds could not happen due to non -submission of Utilization Certificates 
by the States/UTs, in time, which resulted in non -approval of IFD, to our proposal for release of 
funds. However, the Programme has been extended to cover 4 new districts of 3 States/UTs i.e. 
Mizoram, Lakshadweep and Daman & Diu in addition to 100 existing di stricts. So far, 104 
districts of 24 States/UTs have been covered under the Programme. It is proposed to cover 325 
districts by the end of 12th Five Year Plan. 
Further Recommendation 
3.42 The Committee recommends that the Department of Health and Family We lfare 
needs to find ways and means to ensure that utilization certificates are submitted by 
States/ UTs in time, as non -submission of utilization certificates ultimately results in non -
release of further funds and thereafter cuts in funds allocation, which  in turn affects the 
timely and effective implementation of the scheme. The Committee also observes that 

effective from September, 2014, the mode of transfer of funds has been changed from 
society route to treasury route and furnishing of utilisation certi ficate is no longer an 
absolute conditionality for the release of funds. The Committee, therefore, desires to be 
apprised whether the utilisation of allotted funds has registered any appreciable 
improvement post the operation of new mode of transfer of funds. 
E. National Oral Health Programme (NOHP)   
Recommendation/Observation (para 6.14) 
3.43 The Committee finds that in the year 2012 -13, no allocation was made; in 2013 -14, an 
allocation of Rs. 10 crore was made at BE stage which was reduced to nil at RE s tage and in 
2014-15 an allocation of Rs. 2.66 crore was made at BE stage which was reduced to Rs 2.00 
crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure was to the tune of Rs 1.68 crore. Further a mere 
allocation of Rs. 2.00 crore has been made in 2015 -16. The Committee is dismayed to find that 
even after  three years of the inception of the programme the allocation and utilization figures 
leave much to be desired keeping in view that a plan outlay of Rs. 100 crore was made for the 
entire Plan period. The Committee feels that keeping in view that only 2 more years of 12 th Plan 
are left, it would be a herculean task  to ensure achieving the target set for the 12 th Plan. The 
Committee points out that the Department had not been able to initiate the programme in the 
11th Plan and the progress in the 12 th Plan is not satisfactory at all. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department should prioritise the schemes on which it can ensure 
deliverables instead of stretching itself thin on introducing schemes and then being not able to 
deliver the same, of which this programme is a classic case.  
 
Action Taken 
 
3.44 One of the major strategies of NOHP is to strength the oral health care delivery system in 
the public health facilities up to the district level by pro viding support to obtain the necessary 
manpower, equipmentetc which are broadly as mentioned below : 
 Manpower support [Dentist, Dental Hygienist, Dental Assistant] 
 Equipments including dental Chair 
 Consumables for dental procedures 
 
Financial Progress FY 2014-15 : (RE-2.00 Crore) 

3.45 As on 31st March 2015, funds to the tune of Rs. 1.73 Crore have been released to 9 States 
[Himanchal Pradesh, Mizoram, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Sikkim, 
Gujrat, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh] to strengthen oral  health care delivery in the health 
facilities at district or sub district level. 
3.46 The majority of the fund surrendered was from major head 2210 amounting to Rs. 0.24 
crore due to following reasons: 
1. State Nodal Officers meeting could not be convened as per planning for which a tentative 
budget to the tune of Rs. 0.12 Crore was estimated. 
2. Release to the UTs for strengthening the oral health care delivery could not be done as 
the amount available (Rs 0.5 crore) was meagre to meet the requirement to suppor t even 
one dental unit (Rs 0.2 Crore). 
Action Taken in the FY 2015-16 : 
3.47 To streamline the program management and efficient utilization of funds in the current 
financial year following action have been taken so far: 
1. To facilitate better financial manag ement for the programs under NHM, smaller 
programs like National Oral Health Program are being covered under Health system 
strengthening, along with other smaller vertical programs. 
2. The process of PIP approval has been accelerated and as on 15 th May 2015 grants to the 
tune of Rs. 3.6 crores have been recommended for approval of competent authority to 
support 16 states/UTs. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.48 The Committee would like to be apprised of the actual impact of integration of 
National Oral Health Pro gramme on ensuring better financial management under Health 
System Strengthening. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
II. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 
Recommendation/Observation (para 2.13) 
 
4.1 The Committee notes that there have been significant delays in transfer of funds from 
Treasury of the State Governments to the State Health Societies which is not condonable. 
However, keeping in view the fact that different States cannot  be judged by the same yardstick, 
the Committee recommends that the Department should make continuous, vigorous and 
dedicated efforts to sensitise the State Governments especially those who have contributed to 
significant delays on the need to transfer fun ds to the State Health Societies as soon as possible 
to ensure proper and timely utilization of funds. The Committee desires that the request of the 
States to follow earlier mode of fund transfer may also be considered.    
Action Taken 
4.2 The Department i s continuously reviewing the fund transfer position and following up 
with States to ensure timely transfer of fund from State Treasury to State Health Society. In this 
regard, letters from Minister of Health & Family Welfare, Secretary (H&FW) and AS&MD 
(NHM) have been sent to appropriate levels in the State Government. Request has also been 
sent to Ministry of Finance for consideration of reverting back to earlier mode of transfer of 
funds.  
Further Recommendation 
4.3 The Committee would like to be apprised  of the response of the Ministry of Finance 
on reverting to the earlier mode of transfer of funds (i.e. Society mode). 
V. Flexible Pool for Communicable Diseases 
Recommendation/Observation (para 5.10) 
4.4 The Committee also notes that the Department is lik ely to drop the DOTs 
programme for treatment of TB envisaging to introduce a new therapy, i.e., Daily Therapy.  

The Committee is of the view that in case the same is affirmative, the Department needs to 
have a serious introspection on the reasons behind fa ilure of DOTs and whether the new 
system of Daily Therapy would be practicably  applicable in a country of the size of India.  
The Committee recommends that the Department needs to take a serious review of the 
DOTs programme and also the parameters on whic h the Daily Therapy Programme would 
run keeping in view that a change in programme would also require huge Information, 
Education and Communication (IEC) efforts on the part of the Department.  
Action Taken 
4.5 An expert Committee under the chairmanship of  Secretary & DG, Deptt. of Health 
Research, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) recommended for piloting the 
feasibility of implementation of daily therapy. The Department neither intends to drop 
DOTs nor wants to introduce a new therapy. The expert Committee recommended to 
change over the administration of the same drugs in daily dosages in place of intermittent 
(thrice weekly) dosages. The implementation of daily regimen in likely to reduce the 
relapse and failure rates amongst the patients on first  line treatment and also expected to 
prevent acquired drugs resistance. The daily dosages would also be given under DOTs 
(Directly Observed Treatment Shortcourse). The mechanism for implementation of daily 
DOTs would be worked out after application of due diligence and wide consultation with 
experts and Civil Society. This would also include usage of Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) efforts.  
4.6 The recommendations of the Expert Committee are yet to be approved by the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. 
 
------------ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT 
PART C-NACO 
 The Report of the Committee deals with the Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in  the Eighty-second Report  of the Committee  on Demands for Grants 
(Demand No. 50) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2015-16. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the 82nd Report.  They have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i)    Recommenda tions/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have been 
accepted by the Committee:  1.4, 6.3, 8.3  
                                                                                                    Total    –  3                (Chapter I)                                                          
 
(ii)   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government‟s replies:  7.3, 9.3, 10.2,  
                                                                                                     Total    – 3   (Chapter II)                                                                                                                                                                            
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee:    3.5,  4.3, 5.3,  
                                                                                                    Total –       3             (Chapter III)                   
                                                                                                                                                                                  
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are 
still  awaited:     Nil                                                     Total -      Nil             (Chapter-IV) 
 
 
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
I. National Aids Control Organisation 
Recommendation/Observation (Para 1.4) 
1.1 The Committee notes that there is a declining trend of peo ple living with 
HIV/AIDS in the country according to HIV Sentinel Surveillance (HSS). The 
Committee though appreciates the efforts made by NACO  for bringing a steady 
decline in HIV prevalence in the country but would also like to know whether the 
mechanism  put in a place to count the people living with HIV/AIDS  is robust  and 
reflects the exact count.  
Action Taken 
1.2 NACO does HIV burden estimation through tools and methods recommended 
by Global reference group on HIV Estimations adapted and customized in context of 
Indian epidemic. HIV estimations 2012 made use of most comprehensive set of 
epidemiological tools and demographic data inputs available through the latest round 
of HIV Sentinel Surveillance, India Census 2011 and other data sets like that of  
National Family Health Survey. The results are assessed for validity and 
acceptability by a technical resource group of experts including representatives from 
WHO, UNAIDS etc. The mechanism put in place to estimate the HIV burden in 
country is robust and gives a reliable estimate. 
VI. Metro Blood Banks 
Recommendation/Observation (Para 6.3) 
1.3 The Committee notes that the proposal for setting up of Metro Blood Banks is 
one of the approved activities under NACP-III and has been continued in NACP-IV.  
But it s implementation is still a far cry.  Budgetary allocations to the tune of Rs. 
83.00 crore was made in BE 2014 -15 but was surrendered in toto due to pending 
approval of Expenditure Finance Committee. The Committee disapproves of 
providing as much as Rs. 83.00 crore in BE 2014-15 although  necessary approval of 
EFC remained to be obtained for implementing the project and exhorts that 

maximum possible care be taken while formulating  Budget Estimates under this 
head in future so that realistic projection of f unds requirements is ensured. Now that 
the project has been approved, the Committee recommends the Department to ensure 
that this important project is taken up for implementation without further delay.  The 
Committee would like to be updated on the progres s made towards implementation 
of this project and targeted time line for its completion.  
Action Taken  
1.4 EFC for the Metro Blood Bank Centre of Excellence project. Approval for 
initially setting up two such centres in Delhi and Chennai has been recently  granted 
by Hon‟ble HFM for an outlay of Rs 404 Crores.  
The project is to be implemented over 7 years, with the first eighteen months for 
setting up and five years of operations. The estimated start date is 1st July 2015. 
 
VIII. Antiretoviral Therapy (ART) Centre  
Recommendation/Observation (Para 8.3) 
1.5 The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in respect of 
setting up of 134 ART centres which are proposed to be made functional by March, 
2017, within a period of six months from the date of presentation of this Report.  
Action Taken 
1.6 The progress made in respect of setting ART centers and plan for setting 
remaining ART centers by March, 17 is as follows:- 
 Total 475 ART Centers are functional as on March 2015. 
 For remaining 125 Centers plan till March, 17 is:- 
Time line Dec, 
15 
March, 
16 
Dec, 16 March, 17 
Proposed new 
establishment 
25 50 25 25 
Expected Cumulative 
Achievement 
500 550 575 600 

 
This is however, subject to availability of funds. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER- II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES 
VII. Setting up of new District level Blood Banks 
Recommendation/Observation (Para 7.3) 
2.1 The Committee notes that the NACP -III was to be implemented during 2007 -
2012. The Committee finds that out of the 39 new District Level Blood Banks to be 
set up during NACP-III, 8 DLLB are still to be implemented even though three years 
have elapsed since NACP -III concluded.  The Committee notes that most of the 
reasons cited for the delay are non -availability of necessary infrastructure, 
manpower and delay in issuance of license. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
the Department to play a pro -active role by taking up the matter with the concern ed 
State Governments as well as its agencies at an appropriate level to iron out the 
procedural hindrances and help achieve the targets set.  The Committee also gathers 
that equipment for the Centres were procured and supplied during NACP -II. The 
Committee is perturbed to find such a national waste in a resource constrainted 
country like ours.  
Action Taken 
2.2 Public Health being a state subject, setting up and licensing of blood banks 
comes under purview of the respective state governments.  The Department is taking 
steps through the state governments and support of National Health Mission to set 
up atleast one blood bank in every district. There are at present 76 districts in the 
country, many of which are carved out of existing districts where there are no blood 
banks. Government is setting up blood storage centres in such districts, wherein 
existing equipments are being made use of and also providing linkage to existing 
blood banks in neighbouring districts till such time as blood banks become 
functional. The matter is being reviewed periodically at both state and national level.   
 
IX. Setting up of Plasma Fractionation Centre (PFC)  
Recommendation/Observation (Para 9.3) 

2.3 The Committee desires that the project should take off at the earliest.  All 
necessary steps may be taken in this direction.  
 
Action  Taken 
2.4 As an immediate measure for arrangements for plasma fractionation, the 
department is finalizing an exchange value for plasma to be provided to indigenous 
fractionators of India, while paralle lly deliberating a strategy for Public Private 
partnership through a special purpose vehicle. It is also pertinent to mention here 
that for the fractionation centre to be viable, it requires a surplus of 1.5 lakh litres of 
plasma, which is presently not be ing separated across blood banks in the country. 
Efforts are also being focused by the department for improving the separation of 
components and generation of adequate volume of plasma. 
 
X. Setting up of District AIDS Prevention and Control Units (DAPCUs)  
Recommendation/Observation (Para 10.2) 
2.5 The Committee appreciates the efforts of NACO to set up 189 DAPCUs in the 
country. The Committee notes that further expansion of DAPCUs would be 
undertaken, if required, after finalization of district re-categorization which is still in 
process. The Committee recommends that the district re-categorization should be 
completed at the earliest.  
  
Action Taken 
2.6 The district re -categorization process had been initiated as a follow up to the exercise of 
„District Epidemiological Profiling Using Data Triangulation‟ during 2012 -13.  So, after review of 
draft report of district re -categorization process in NACO, it has been decided to update the 
framework for re -categorization of districts with latest HIV Sentinel Surve illance (HSS 2014 -15) 
reports data and National Integrated Bio -Behavioral Surveillance (IBBS) reports data. These 
reports are expected in few months. 
2.7 Based on the updated data, district re-categorization process implementation 
plan would be worked out after finalisation of the same. 
 

 
 
CHAPTER - III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE 
II. Budgetary Allocation 
Recommendation/Observation (Para 3.5) 
3.1 The Committee notes that as compared to the funds allotted in REs 2012 -13, 
2013-14 and 2014 -15, the level of utilization of funds by NACO has been 
satisfactory, though it is less than the allocations made in BEs of the respective 
years.  A perusal of the information made available  to the Committee, revealed that 
according to HIV Sentinel Surveillance 2012 -13, which is mandated to assess the 
burden and trends of HIV in different States of the country, the overall HIV 
prevalence among the general population continues to be low at 0.3 5% in the 
country, with an overall declining trend at the national level.  The estimated number 
of People Living with HIV/AIDS has also maintained a steady declining trend from 
23.2 lakh in 2006 to 20.9 lakh in 2011.  The Committee feels that this is due t o the 
impact of the various interventions of NACP and scaled up prevention strategies.  
But what is worrisome is that some low prevalence States like Assam, Chandigarh, 
Delhi, Jharkhand etc. have shown increase in the number of new infections. In this 
context the Committee is concerned about the reduced allocation for NACO for 
2015-16.  The Committee feels that the allocation of Rs.1397.00 crore in BE 2015 -
16  which is only marginally higher than the RE 2014 -15 allocation of Rs.1300.00 
crore may have an adv erse impact on the key priorities of National AIDS Control 
Programme IV and hinder scale-up  of interventions in hitherto untouched areas. The 
Committee sincerely hopes that subsequent to the increase of State share in the 
Central Taxes from 32 per cent to  42 per cent, the State Governments, who are 
currently not contributing any money to National AIDS Control Programme 
(NACP), would be able to fund a proportion of the fund requirement from their State 
Health Budgets. The Committee, simultaneously, observes  that India is a resource -
constrained country and in order to obtain the best possible health outcomes, it is 

imperative that allocation of resources is prioritized across competing ends and the 
available funds are deployed in a more efficient manner.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that concrete steps should be initiated to economize on expenditure and 
improve its efficiency so that the intended objectives of NACP IV are not adversely 
impacted.   
 
Action Taken 
3.2      Views of the Committee over the decline in HIV prevalence in country, 
number of Peoples living with HIV/AIDS (PLIHV) and satisfactory use of allotted 
funds by NACO are acknowledged with gratitude. The concern of the Committee 
over the increase in the number of new infections in some low prevalence States and 
apprehension of suffering of the programme due to allocation of Rs. 1397.00 crore 
only in BE 2015-16, a little higher than RE 2014-15 of Rs. 1300.00 crore cannot also 
be ruled out. To have sufficient funds for the programme the matter  for contribution 
from States has already been taken up at different levels. The need of strict 
prioritization and effective, efficient and economical use of resources are also 
reminded to all concerned from time to time to have best use of the resources o f the 
country. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.3 While making its recommendation in para 3.5  of Part C of its 82 nd 
Report, the Committee had hoped that with the increase of State share in 
Central taxes from 32% to 42%, the States would be able  to fund a propor tion 
of the fund requirement for AIDS Control Programmes from their State Health 
Budgets.  The Committee, however, notes with concern that instead of making 
any empirical study  to determine the impact of the new Centre -State  tax 
sharing model on States' expenditures on the AIDS Control Programmes, the 
NACO  has given a generic and routine reply, stating that "  To have sufficient 
funds for the programme the matter for contribution from States has already 
been taken up at different levels".  The Committee, therefore, recommends that 

the NACO  should conduct an evaluatory  study in the right earnest on whether 
all the States have the additional fiscal space for allocating resources for the 
AIDS Control programmes and whether the States have budgeted any funds  
for the AIDS Control Programmes in their Budgets for the financial year 2015 -
16. 
IV Unspent Cash Balances with State AIDS Control Society (SACS)  
Recommendation/Observation (Para 4.3) 
3.4 The Committee notes that in spite of interventions of NACO, availab ility of 
unspent balances with some SACS are still quite high. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the NACO to introduce stricter monitoring mechanism and plan viable 
strategy to clear the unspent balances so that funds do not get accumulated and 
locked but are utilized in a more productive manner.  The Committee also reiterates 
its earlier recommendation made in its 70 th Report on Demands for Grants 2013 -14 
of the erstwhile Department of AIDS Control that in order to ensure timely and 
effective utilization of unspent balances, NACO should insist on quarterly feedback 
from all the SACS. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the number and 
dates of review meetings taken in 2014 -15 to expedite liquidation of the unspent 
cash balances with SACS.   
 
Action Taken 
3.5  The views of the Committee w.r.t. need of adopting further strict  measures to 
minimize the unspent balance in respect of some SACS are welcome and remedial 
measures, interalia the quarterly monitoring of the unspent cash balance, will be 
taken.   During the year 2014 -15, review meetings were taken in the month of July, 
2014, January 2015 and March 2015. There are constant efforts to liquidate the 
unspent balance to minimum, but certain balances say up to 15 -20 % of release are 
genuinely required to carry on affairs during the time gap of the recommendation of 
the release and actual transfer of the funds to the SACS by the treasury. 

3.6 It may not be out of place to mention that the instances of the delay in transfer 
of money to SACS by the treasuries have been noticed and are being addressed at 
different levels. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.7   The Committee feels concerned to note that the treasury route of transfer 
of funds has led to delay  in transfer of money to SACS.  The Committee feels 
that if this trend is allowed to persist, it will certainly drag down the level of 
utilisation of budgeted funds, thereby impacting the intended outcomes on the 
one hand and resulting in surrender of the scarce resources on the other.   In 
this context, the C ommittee would suggest that the issue of mode of transfer of 
funds should be taken up with the Ministry of Finance on an urgent basis so 
that the time lag in release of funds to the State AIDS Control Societies is 
reduced.  The Committee is certain that in  this age of information technology, 
this would not be an insurmountable task.   
V. Role  of NGOs 
Recommendation/Observation (Para 5.3) 
3.8 The Committee welcomes the action initiated by NACO to deal with the 
issues - like recovery of unspent balances with  discontinued NGOs and steps taken 
for monitoring and control of programmatic and financial activities etc. The 
Committee would, however, like the Department to make an assessment of the 
impact of actions initiated for a recovery of unspent balances with d efaulting 
NGO‟s.  
Action Taken 
3.9 National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO) has initiated number of 
mechanisms against defaulting NGOs implementing Targeted Intervention 
Programme and the impact seen by NACO of the actions initiated for a recovery of 
unspent balances with defaulting NGOs is that the outstanding amount against the 
defaulting NGOS to be recovered has declined from Rs 352.17 lakhs to 73.33 lakhs 
and a follow-up plan is developed to monitor the recovery of unspent balances with 

defaulting NGOs with States AIDS Control Society (SACS) on a monthly basis. If 
the amount is not recovered even after legal notices, SACS have started 
communicating to Planning and Coordination Department, for blacklisting the 
NGOs and involving District Collectors to recover the balance amount.  
 
Further Recommendation 
3.10 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department with 
regard to the defaulting NGOs due to which the outstanding amount has 
declined from Rs.352.00 lakhs to 73.33 lakhs. The Committee note s that States 
AIDS Control Societies (SACS) have started communicating to Planning and 
Coordination Department and District Collectors to recover the balance 
amount from blacklisted NGOs. The Committee would like to be informed of 
the efficacy of the measu res taken on the recovery of balances from defaulting 
NGOs.  
 
 
 