PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
ONE HUNDRED TENTH REPORT
The Functioning of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  9 th August, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  9 th August, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2018/Sravana, 1940 (Saka)
110
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
ONE HUNDRED TENTH REPORT
The Functioning of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  9 th August, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  9 th August, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2018/Sravana, 1940 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(vi)
2. I NTORDUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v ii)-(viii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ ( ix)-(xi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-87
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................................. 88-117
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 1 19-138
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 139-162

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
*2. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia
^3. Dr. Santanu Sen
4. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
5. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
6. Shri Jairam Ramesh
7. Shri Ashok Siddharth
8. Shri K. Somaprasad
9. Dr. C. P. Thakur
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
11. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey
LOK SABHA
12. Shri Thangso Baite
13. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chouhan (Nandu Bhaiya)
14. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
15. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
16. Dr. K. Kamaraj
17. Shri Arjunlal Meena
18. Shri Anoop Mishra
19. Advocate Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
20. Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri C. R. Patil
23. Shri M.K. Raghavan
24. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
* Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f 23rd June, 2018
^ Nominated to be member of the Committee w.e.f 23rd June, 2018

(ii)
25. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
26. Shri Gyan Singh
27. Shri Bharat Singh
28. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
29. Shrimati Rita Tarai
30. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
31. Shri Manohar Utawal
32. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
5. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
6. Shri Jairam Ramesh
7. Shri Ashok Siddharth
8. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
9. Shri K. Somaprasad
10. Dr. C. P. Thakur
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Thangso Baite
$12. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
13. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
14. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
15. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
16. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
17. Dr. K. Kamaraj
18. Shri Arjunlal Meena
19. Shri Anoop Mishra
20. Advocate Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri C. R. Patil
23. Shri M.K. Raghavan
24. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
$ Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f 20th October, 2016.
(iii)

25. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
26. Shri R.K. Singh (Arrah)
27. Shri Bharat Singh
28. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
29. Shrimati Rita Tarai
30. Shri Manohar Utawal
31. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Director
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
(iv)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-16)
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde
5. Shrimati B. Jayashree
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
7. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
8. Shri Ambeth Rajan
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh
10. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Thangso Baite
12. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre
13. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
14. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
15. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
16. Shri Devendra alias Bhole Singh
17. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
19. Dr. K. Kamaraj
20. Shri Arjunlal Meena
21. Advocate Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
22. Shri Chirag Paswan
23. Shri C. R. Patil
(v)

24. Shri M.K. Raghavan
25. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
26. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
27. Shri R.K. Singh
28. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
29. Shrimati Rita Tarai
30. Shri Manohar Utawal
31. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
(vi)

(vii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family
Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf present this One-
Hundred Tenth on the Functioning of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI).
2. The previous Committee had identified the subject functioning of Food Safety and Standards
Authority of India (FSSAI)' at its meeting held on *23rd September, 2015 and **29th September, 2016.
However, it could not conclude its examination of the subject. The present Committee also took up the
subject for detailed examination at its meeting held on ***25th October, 2017.
3. The Committee issued a Press Release on 23rd January, 2018 to elicit the views of various
stakeholders on the subject. In response, a large number of memoranda have been received.
4. The Committee examined the subject, in its sittings held on 16th February, 2016, 24th May, 2016,
10th November, 2016, 18th May, 2018, 4th June, 2018 and 7th August, 2018. During the course of the
examination it took oral evidences of representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and
experts on the subject. The Committee also received written submissions from experts.
5. The Committee also benefited from discussions with certain stakeholders and representatives of
the State Governments during its study visit to: (i) Bengaluru, Mumbai and Goa from 20th to 26th
October, 2016 and (ii) Jodhpur, Rishikesh and Bhopal from 1st to 8th July, 2018.
6. During the finalisation of its Report, the Committee relied upon the following documents/ papers:-
(i) Background Note on Functioning of FSSAI received from Department of Health and Family
Welfare;
(ii) Oral Evidences tendered by Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare alongwith
the CEO of FSSAI;
(iii) Oral Evidence tendered by Experts/ Stakeholders;
(iv) W ritten submissions made by Experts/ stakeholders;
(v) Replies to the questionnaires received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare;
(vi) W ebsites of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and FSSAI;
(vii) Articles published in various fora; and
(viii) Other relevant documents.
* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.54584, dated 28th September, 2015.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.55908, dated 21st October, 2016.
*** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.57018, dated 13th November, 2017.

7. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 7th
August, 2018.
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report and also reproduced at the end of the Report
in 'Observations/Recommendations–at a Glance'.
NEW D ELHI; PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV
7 August 2018 Chairman,
Sravana 16, 1940 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Health and Family Welfare,
Rajya Sabha.
(viii)

ACRONYMS
ADD : Acute diarrhoeal disease
AIIHPH : All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health
AO : Authorised Officers
ASCI : Advertising Standards Council of India
BTT : Bellier Turbidity Temperature Test
BIS : Bureau of Indian Standards
CEO : Chief Executive Officer
CAC : Central Advisory Committee
CBEC : Central Board of Excise and Customs
CAG : Controller and Auditor General
CFL : Central Food Laboratory
C.T.O. : Chief Technical Officer
CSS : Central Sector Scheme
CFTRI : Central Food Technological Research Institute
CSCs : Common Service Centres
DRDO : Defence Food Research Laboratory
DOs : Designated Officers
DEHP : Diethylhexyl Phthalate
DGFT : Directorate General of Foreign Trade
EC : Empowered Committee
EMA T : Electronic Milk Adulteration Tester
ECI : Export Council of India
FSSAI : Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
FLRS : Food Licensing and Registration System
FSOs : Food Safety Officers
FBO : Food Business Operators
FSMS : Food Safety Management System
(ix)

FoSCoRIS : Food Safety Compliance through Regular Inspection and
Sampling
FSDBs : Food Safety Display Boards
FSIS : Food Safety and Inspection Service
FOSTAC : Food Safety Training and Certification
FRSL : Food Standardization and Research Laboratory
FSW : Food Safety on Wheels
FDA : Food and Drug Administration
FICS : Food Import Clearance System
GFLP : Good Food Laboratory Practices
GM : Genetically Modified
GEOs : Genetically Engineered Organisms
GEAC : Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee
GE : Genetically Engineered
IDSP : Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme
INFoLNET : India Food Laboratory Network
IICT : Indian Institute of Chemical Technology
ICDS : Integrated Child Development Scheme
IIT : Indian Institute of Technology
SNF : Safe and Nutritious Food
IEC : Information, Education, Communication
KEFTA : Kerala Food Technologists Association
KAPL : Karnataka Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
LIMS : Laboratory Information Management System
LoQ : Level of Quantification
LMOs : Living Modified Organisms
MSG : Monosodium Glutamate
MSME : Ministry of Small and Medium Enterprises
NABL : National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration
Laboratories
NVCC : Nag Vidarbha Chamber of Commerce
(x)

NOC : No Objection Certificate
NRL : National Reference Laboratory
NTH : National Test House
NIN : National Institute of Nutrition
NPOP : National Programme for Organic Production
NASVI : National Association of Street Vendors of India
NIFTEM : National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and
Managemen;
NCR : Non Conformance Report
PFNDAI : Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Association of
India
PDS : Public Distribution System
PGS : Participatory Guarantee System-India
RMS : Risk Management System
RDA : Recommended Dietary Allowance
SOP : Standard Operating Procedures
SLSC : State Level Steering Committee
SAC : State Advisory Committee
SWIFT : Single Window Clearance Interface to Facilitate Trade
UNEP : United Nations Environment Programme
(xi)

CHAPTER 1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Food safety is vital for the economic growth and progress of a country. With an increasing
population, rising economy and rapid urbanisation India faces many challenges in its quest for food
safety. Use of excessive pesticides, growth hormones, exposure to toxic waste etc. result in food
contamination at the farm level. Additives, contaminants, chemicals, environmental pollutants, adulterants,
toxic colourants or preservatives etc render the food unsafe for consumption. At any stage of food
production, right from the primary production to processing, packaging and supplying, the quality of the
food can be compromised. Every step, thus, poses a challenge for enforcement of food safety regulations.
1.2 Food adulteration has been reported widely in the country. In the present scenario, when food
adulteration is so common, one cannot be sure of the quality of food he/she eats. Several manufacturing
units have been accused of not adhering to the food safety norms and many more are still indulging in
unfair practices and resort to supply of sub-standard quality food to the consumers. Our country has
a large unorganized food sector that provides inexpensive food to the economically weaker sections. The
street food is popular for its rich aroma and complex flavours but the hygiene and sanitary practices are
a matter of grave concern. One of the most common adulterated foods is milk and milk products.
1.3 According to WHO, more than 200 diseases are spread through contaminated food ranging from
diarrhoea to cancers. South East Asia has the second highest burden of foodborne diseases after Africa.
It is estimated that two million deaths occur every year from contaminated food or drinking water.
According to media reports, the recent data put out by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare's
Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) has indicated that food poisoning is one of the
commonest outbreaks reported in 2017 apart from Acute Diarrhoeal Disease (ADD). The data suggest
that 312 of the 1649 outbreaks reported till the third week of December, 2017 were due to ADD and
242 were due to food poisoning. The IDSP has interpreted that the incidence of ADD and food poisoning
is high in places where food is cooked in bulk such as canteens, hotels and wedding venues.
1.4 In a Power Point Presentation before the Committee, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare inter-
alia submitted that food-borne illnesses are a greater health burden comparable to malaria, HIV/AIDS or
tuberculosis.
1.5 In a two day round table meeting chaired by Union Health and Family Welfare Minister in January,
2018, the health ministers of different states adopted a joint resolution with seven point charter. It was
recognized that the developing world has always been at a higher risk of food borne diseases. The root
cause of these diseases and deaths is unsafe, contaminated food and water. Preventive health care is the
first of the seven pillars of the New Health Policy and these deaths and diseases are easily preventable.
It was agreed that improved convergence between NHM and Safe and Nutritious food campaigns
initiated by FSSAI was essential. The need of the hour was innovative food safety solutions and an
effective regulatory mechanism so that the country's large population is provided with safe and nutritious
food.

2
1.6 For a country that has to feed nearly 1.3 billion people, strict monitoring of the food supply chain
can be an uphill task but not impossible. Sadly the present food safety scenario in India speaks volumes
of how we have failed as a State in providing safe and wholesome Food to its population. The Supreme
Court in its 2013 judgment had ruled that right to life also includes right to pure food, beverages. The
Court was of the view that:
"Enjoyment of life and its attainment, including right to life and human dignity encompasses within
its ambit availability of articles of food, without insecticides or pesticides residues, veterinary drugs
residues, antibiotic residues, solvent residues, etc.,"
"We may emphasize that any food article which is hazardous or injurious to public health is a
potential danger to the fundamental right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of
India. A paramount duty is cast on the States and its authorities to achieve an appropriate level of
protection to human life and health...,"
1.7 The Committee is of the view that India as a welfare State has primary responsibility to
take a key role in establishing a robust food safety mechanism for the welfare of its citizens but
time and again the State has failed to address the same. The policies and the existing food laws
are inadequate and are weakly enforced. This poor implementation of the Food Law has resulted
in rampant food adulteration and various food scandals. Substandard quality food has been
reaching the market and causing irreparable damage to public health. The fundamental right to
pure food has been compromised and long since forgotten. Food Safety, nutrition and food
security are intricately interlinked. Poor food safety infrastructure inadvertently poses a threat
to public health as nutritious and safe food is fundamental to good health.
BACKGROUND
1.8 The Food Safety and Standards Act was passed in 2006 to create a single reference point for all
matters relating to Food Safety and Standards, and regulations. FSS Act also led to the formation of the
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) as an apex authority responsible for formulating
science based standards for food in the country and regulating the manufacture, storage, distribution,
sale and import of food to ensure consumer safety.
1.9 Previous to the Food Safety and Standards Act 2006, there were a number of Food legislations.
The erstwhile laws, rules and regulations like the (i)Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of
1954); (ii)The Fruit Products Order, 1955; (iii) The Meat Food Products Order, 1973; (iv)The Vegetable
Oil Products (Control) Order, 1947; (v)The Edible Oils packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998; (vi) The
Solvent Extracted Oil, Deoiled Meal, and Edible Flour (Control) Order, 1967; (vii)The Milk and Milk
Products Order, 1992 were consolidated in a homogenous whole in the FSS Act. Food Safety and
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) was established in 2008 as envisaged under Section 4 of the FSS
Act, 2006. It is the regulatory body for all matters relating to food safety and food standards and
represents a shift from multi level, multi departmental control to a single line of command. It also
indicated three paradigm shifts from a fragmented approach to a single food law, from combating
adulteration in food product to food safety across food chain, from prosecution to prevention and
capacity building to build a culture of self-compliance. One of the major responsibilities of the FSSAI
is the development of science based food standards by harmonising the same with codex standards,
whenever possible. The Food Safety and Standards Act became operational with effect from 5.8.2011.

3
The food regulatory framework has now moved from limited 'prevention of food adulteration' regime to
'safe and wholesome' food regime.
1.10 Since FSSAI is mandated to play a pivotal role in regulating the food sector and responsible for
ensuring safe and wholesome food in the country, the Committee decided to holistically examine its role
and functioning with the ultimate aim of suggesting veritable solutions to the inadequacies that are
currently plaguing the food safety and food quality surveillance mechanism in the country.
1.11 The Committee issued a Press Release on 23rd January, 2018 to illicit views of the stakeholders
as well as general public on the subject. The Committee received a number of memoranda and also heard
the views of following stakeholders:
(i) Association of Food Scientists and Technologists (India);
(ii) Confederation of All India Traders;
(iii) Defence Food Research Laboratory, DRDO, Mysuru;
(iv) National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal;
(v) ICMR- National Institute of Nutrition, Food Analysts Association (India);
(vi) Food Safety Officer Cadre Association Uttar Pradesh;
(viii) The Solvent Extractors/ Association of India; and
(ix) Shri Pradip Chakraborty, Former Director, FSSAI.
Complete list of stakeholders heard by the Committee is at Annexure I.
1.12 The Committee also heard the views of Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare and
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Food Safety Standards Authority of India on the subject.
1.13 The Committee on Health and Family Welfare/ its Sub-Committee also undertook study visits in
connection with examination of the functioning of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)
to: (i) Bengaluru, Mumbai and Goa from 20th to 26th October, 2016; (ii) Imphal, Shillong and Guwahati
from 15th to 22nd January,2018; and (iii) Jodhpur, Rishikesh and Bhopal from 1st to 8th July, 2018. The
Committee visited food testing laboratories and held discussion with their representatives, the representatives
of food processing industries and state government on the implementation of Food Safety and Standards
Act, 2006 and rules and regulations made there under and the functioning of Food Safety and Standards
Authority of India (FSSAI). During its visit to Rishikesh in July, 2018, the Committee also visited a mega
food park viz. Patanjali Food and Herbal Park(P) Ltd at Haridwar.
SALIENT  FEATURES  OF  THE  FSS  ACT,  2006
1.14 The salient features of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 are as follows:-
(a) movement from multi-level and multi-departmental control to integrated line of command;
(b) integrated response to strategic issues like novel/genetically modified foods, international trade;

4
(c) licensing for manufacture of food products, which is presently granted by the Central Agencies
under various Acts and Orders, would stand decentralised to the Commissioner of Food Safety
and his officer;
(d) single reference point for all matters relating to Food Safety and Standards, regulations and
enforcement;
(e) shift from mere regulatory regime to self-compliance through Food Safety Management Systems;
(f) responsibility on food business operators to ensure that food processed, manufactured, imported
or distributed is in compliance with the domestic food laws; and
(g) provision for graded penalties depending on the gravity of offence and accordingly, civil
penalties for minor offences and punishment for serious violations.
MANDATE OF FSSAI
1.15 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in its power point presentation submitted the following
mandate of FSSAI:-
(i) Food Standards and Safe Practices
(ii) F ood Testing
(iii) Food Safety Compliance
(iv) Training and capacity building
1.16 The Committee learnt about the following activities of FSSAI in respect of its mandate:-
(i) Food Standards and safe practices
• Horizontal standards for residues of toxins and chemicals such as pesticides and antibiotics
and micro-biological
• Vertical standards for food products (>500)
• Health supplements and nutraceuticals
• Organic food and GM food regulations(In the process of notification)
• Packaging, labelling and claims regulations(In the process of notification)
• 20 Scientific Panels (3 new panels) involving over 250 scientists and experts (Harmonization
with Codex (global)
• 8 Standards Review Groups
• Schedule 4-Sanitation & hygiene Standards (FSMS/HACCP)
• 9 Technical Panels-Guidance Documents/Code of practices & Inspection Metrics
1.17 The Committee has also been informed that FSSAI has an Integrated Food Standards -Quick Access
for being a single platform for all vertical and horizontal food standards as one point source for easy

5
and quick access and elimination of ambiguity and integration with lab management system. FSSAI also
has Food Safety Knowledge Assimilation Network of experts/scientists to develop science-based standards.
(i) Food testing- following are the features available:-
• There are total 249 Food Labs which include 72 State food labs including 13 NABL
accredited +59 in transition, 18 FSSAI notified Referral Labs, 159 FSSAI notified labs.
• Support for State Food Labs
• Capacity Building including overseas training
• New Testing Methods
• Simplified Self Tests for Combating Adulteration
• IT Platform (Indian Food Laboratory Network)
• Surveillance of Milk, edible oil, anti-biotic residues, packaging material
• Increased availability of Food Analysts
• 14 manuals for method of analysis
• FoTeST- Food Testing Staff's Training
FSSAI also has Food Safety Wheels which are Mobile Testing Labs.
(ii) Food Safety Compliance parameters comprise of:-
(a) Domestic Food Control
• Rapid increase in licensing and registrations (18,632 Central, 4,43,399 State licenses and
36,60,138 registrations)
• Driving smart and digital compliance (FoSCoRIS)
• Compliance through risk-based inspections
• Manufacturing/processing of food for exports to meet standards of importing country
• Simplified forms & processes, upgrading online systems, thorough review of licensing
and registration regulations
• Regulation for food recalls
(b) Food Import Control
• FSSAI's presence at 20 Points of Entry (PoEs), 396 PoEs with Custom Authorities
• Risk-based inspections, sampling and testing
• Rectification of labelling defects
• Provisional NOC for perishables and packaged food items

6
• Single Window Clearance for Imports to facilitate 'Ease of doing business'
• Testing done in food labs in neighbourhood of PoEs
• Food labs in Bhutan, Bangladesh recognised
• Review and appeal in respect of rejected consignments
• Surveillance of imported food in the market
(iii) Training and Capacity building provides for:-
• Competency-based training courses (16 finalised so far)
• Technology-enabled portal to manage the process
• Market based and participatory (with funding coming from food businesses, CSR or as
fees from participants)
• 100+ Training Partners
• Resource persons and master trainers
• Over 25,000 persons trained across the country in first year
• One trained/certified persons for every 25 food handlers at all food premises being
mandated
• Structured training of regulatory staff and food lab staff.
COMPOSITION OF FSSAI
1.18 As per Section 5 of the FSS Act, the Food Authority shall consist of (a) Chairperson and twenty
two members including seven members, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of
India, to be appointed by the Central Government, to represent the following Ministry or Departments
of the Central Government dealing with-
(i) Agriculture,
(ii) Commerce,
(iii) Consumer Affairs,
(iv) Food Processing,
(v) Health,
(vi) Legislative Affairs,
(vii) Small Scale industries, who shall be ex-officio members.
(b) Two representatives from the food industry of which one shall be from small scale industries;
(c) Two representatives from consumer organizations;

7
(d) Three eminent food technologists or scientists;
(e) Five members to be appointed every three years, on rotation one each in seriatim from the
Zones as specified in the First Schedule to represent the States and the Union territories;
(f) Two persons to represent farmers' organisations and
(g) One person to represent retailers' organisations.
1.19 The Chairperson and Chief Executive officer of FSSAI are appointed by the Central Government.
The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) is the legal representative of the Food Authority and also the member
secretary of the Food Authority. The following diagram depicts the organisational structure of FSSAI:-


8
1.20 It has been given to understand that FSSAI is presently operating with staff from state
apparatus. The Committee opines that FSSAI cannot function to its optimum level without
employing technical persons as permanent staff. The Committee recommends that FSSAI should
be restructured and persons with domain knowledge and expertise in the food sector should be
employed to run the organization.
1.21 An expert during the course of his deposition submitted that since FSSAI is a science based
organisation, CEO should be a senior food technologist having experience in food industry and not a
bureaucrat. Only Food Science professionals should be appointed in technical posts and not bureaucrats.
The Committee was informed that the 150th Joint Parliamentary Standing Committee had recommended
to depute subject specialist only for international meetings/ Training programs. Instead, officials with no
food science background have been deputed to foreign training/ Codex Alimentarious Commission meetings.
It was suggested that the Food Authority may reconstitute the scientific panels every three years to
maintain transparency. The Members should have industrial experience also. Since there is no dearth of
Food Scientists in the country, best available talents with industrial experience should be in the scientific
panel. Concerns have been expressed by some stakeholders that the present system of pick and choose
method for selection of scientific panel members should be stopped. Attempt is being made right from
the beginning to accommodate the manpower from own known sources other than science background
and the process of recruitment is going on either deputation basis or on contractual terms.
1.22 The Committee notes that FSSAI is the apex regulatory body for food safety in the country
and the Preamble to FSS Act inter-alia seeks to lay down science based standards for articles of
food and ensure availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption. Food safety is
thus a specialised job and FSSAI being a science based organization should be equipped with
proper tools and capabilities and headed by someone with the requisite technical acumen and
appropriate expertise to address the challenging task of food regulation for a country like India.
Engaging man-power with technical skill and competence, therefore, becomes imperative for
effective rendering of important mandate given to FSSAI. The Committee is of the opinion that
the regulatory body should be run by experts/ scientists in the food sector with bureaucratic
support. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the qualifications and procedures of selection
and appointment of Chairman and CEO of FSSAI be reviewed so that the best professionals with
domain expertise are selected for this onerous regulatory responsibility. While reviewing and
modifying the process of selection and appointment of Chairman and CEO, the Government may
take a cue from similar regulatory mechanisms functioning in some of the developed countries
like USA, UK, Australia etc.
COMPOSITION OF CENTRAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
1.23 Section II of the FSS Act, 2006 provides for establishment of the Central Advisory Committee.
Section 11 of the FSS Act, 2006 provides for establishment of the Central Advisory Committee (CAC)
and Section 12 delineates the functions of the CAC. The Central Advisory Committee ensures close
coordination between the Food Authority and the Enforcement Agencies and Organizations operating in
the field of food. The primary mandate of the Committee is to advise the Authority on the work
programme, prioritization of work, identifying potential risks and pooling of knowledge. The Central
Advisory Committee consists of two members each to represent the interests of food industry, agriculture,
consumers, relevant research bodies and food laboratories. In addition, all the Commissioners of Food

9
Safety and the Chairperson of the Scientific Committee are ex-officio members. The Chief Executive
Officer is the ex-officio Chairperson of the Central Advisory Committee.
1.24 The representatives of the Ministries Departments of the Central Government in Agriculture, Animal
Husbandry and Dairying, Bio- technology, Commerce and Industry, Consumer Affairs, Environment and
Forests, Food Processing Industries, Health, Panchayati Raj, Small Scale Industries and Food and Public
Distribution or government institutes or organizations and government recognised farmers' are invitees
to the deliberations of the Central Advisory Committee.
1.25 The Committee notes that as per the information available on the website of FSSAI, out
of its 9 members of Central Advisory Committee (CAC) representing the interests of food
industry, agriculture, consumers, relevant research bodies and food laboratories, 5 are from
Delhi as in Annexure II. The ex-officio Chairman of CAC is also Delhi based which makes this
number six. Given the fact that there are 24 chapters under trade laws dealing with food and
scope of FSSAI and there is a vast pool of expertise available country-wide, this Delhi centric
composition of CAC hardly represents various interest groups. The Committee feels that this
factor is certainly depriving FSSAI of the sage advice and expertise of the immense talent
present in the food sector in the country. This also leads the Committee to the conclusion that
there is no transparent procedure for selection of members of CAC.
1.26 The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be written guidelines on the
selection process of members of CAC and the whole selection criteria should be made transparent.
Bio data of selected candidates and their areas of competency/proven track record should be
displayed on the website of FSSAI. It also recommends that the composition of CAC be broad
based so that the pool of expertise in the food sector spread across the country could be tapped.
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE AND SCIENTIFIC PANELS
1.27 FSSAI also has Advisory and Scientific Committees/panels. The development of standards in Food
Authority is undertaken by a Scientific Committee and 17 Scientific Panels comprising of more than 190
subject experts/Scientists. The Scientific Committee comprises of the Chairpersons of 17 Scientific
Panels and six independent scientific experts not belonging to the any of the Scientific Panels. This
committee is responsible for providing scientific opinion to the Food Authority, general coordination
necessary to ensure consistency of scientific opinion and harmonization of working methods of the
Scientific Panels. The Scientific Committee also deals on multi sectorial issues falling within the competence
of more than one Scientific Panels and sets up working groups on issues which does not fall under
mandate of any Scientific Panels.
1.28 The Committee recommends that proper guidelines for selection of members in the Scientific
Committee must be made and strictly adhered to. The Scientific Panel should also have some
members with industrial experience so that the diverse views from other sectors are also
accommodated.
GENERAL FUNCTIONING OF FSSAI
1.29 Apart from the main Act governing the functioning of FSSAI, the Rules and Regulations which help
in the implementation of the said Act have been notified. The FSSAI has notified the following regulations

10
in the Gazette of India which came into force from 5th August, 2011:-
(i) Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011
(ii) Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labelling) Regulations, 2011
(iii) Food safety and Standards (Food product Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011
(iv) Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restriction on Sales) Regulations, 2011
(v) Food Safety and Standards (Contaminants, Toxins and Residues) Regulations, 2011
(vi) Food Safety and Standards (Laboratory and sampling analysis) Regulations, 2011
1.30 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has informed that the exercise for review of existing
Food Standards and their harmonization with Codex and other international best practices has been
initiated and the Scientific framework put in place with the establishment of Scientific Panels and the
Scientific Committee as the risk assessment bodies.
1.31 As regards the enforcement of food safety in States/UTs, the structure in the States include
Designated Officer at the District level and Food Safety Officers at Sub-District level. The Food Safety
Commissioner is the head of this machinery at the State level. Most of the State Governments have
appointed the Food Safety Commissioner and also have in place the structure for the enforcement of the
Act.
1.32 The Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration) Regulations, 2011 defines the procedures
and conditions of Licensing and registration. While Schedule I of these Regulations provides the list of
business under the purview of the Central Licensing Authority Act other business categories fall under
the domain of State Licensing and Registration. The Central Licensing Authorities are Designated Officers
appointed under Section 36(3)(i) of the FSS Act by the Chief Executive Officer of the FSSAI. The State
Licensing Authorities and Registering Authorities are notified by the respective Commissioner of Food
Safety of State/UT. Central Licensing is carried out at 5 regional offices located at Chennai, Delhi,
Kolkata, Mumbai and Guwahati respectively. According to the Ministry, 18,632 & 4,43,399 Central and
State Licences respectively have been issued.
1.33 The Committee understands that the State authorities have been requested to bring maximum
number of FBOs under the ambit of FSSAI through licensing/registrations in the following ways:
(a) Special drives for identification of FBOs may be carried out by State Authorities in terms of
Sub-Clause 2.1.3(4)(iii)(f) of FSS Rules which requires FSO to maintain a database of all food
business within the area assigned to him.
(b) The data available with State agencies like local bodies and State departments, Ministry of
Small and Medium Enterprises(MSME), Central Board of Excise and Customs(CBEC),Ministry
of Corporate Affairs etc. may be utilised for the purpose of identification of FBOs which can
thereafter be checked with Food Licensing and Registration System(FLRS) to identify unlicensed/
unregistered FBOs.
1.34 The Progress of the enforcement activities w.r .t. implementation of FSS Act in States/UTs is as
under:-
(i) 21 Central Advisory Committee meetings have been conducted till date
(ii) 25 States/UTs have established Appellate Tribunals in their respective States/UTs

11
(iii) 32 States/UTs have established Steering Committee in their respective States/UTs.
(iv) 35 States/UTs have adopted online for Licensing/Registration (FLRS).
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR FSSAI
1.35 The approved Budget of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) under Central
Sector Scheme for Strengthening of FSSAI was ` 72.00 crore each during the Financial Years
2015-16 and 2016-17. The funds utilized towards Salary, Professional Services, Office Expenses, Travelling
Expenses, Rent Rates and Taxes, IEC, Motor Vehicle and Maintenance etc. against the available funds
of ` 78.30 Crore ( ` 54.61 Crore + ` 23.69 Crore unspent balance of previous year) is ` 76.16 Crore
in the F.Y . 2016-17 leaving thereby an unspent balance of ` 2.14 Crore.
1.36 The budgetary allocations of FSSAI during last four financial year has been as follows:
Y ear Projected Outlay (in Crores) Allocations (in Crores )
2015-16 - 69.20
2016-17 131.75 78.30
2017-18 324.75 185.58
2018-19 342.45 141.50
1.37 The Min istry has submitted that there is huge gap in the projected outlay and the allocations for
the years 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 which is mainly because of a Central Sector Scheme, approved
with an outlay of ` 482 Crores for strengthening of laboratories.
1.38 Comparing India with other countries in terms of manpower and financial resources, India is well
below international benchmarks, both in overall and per capita terms. India has a population base of over
1252 million compared to base of approx. 324 million, 36 million, 64 million and 4.75 million vis-a-vis
other major countries like USA, Canada, United Kingdom and Ireland respectively. However, the annual
budget allocated to Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (Principal organization for administering
Food Standards) is merely. $8.2 million approximately which is quite low compared to annual budget of
$ 1.5 billion, $ 650 million, $106 million and $ 16.7 million of counterpart organisations in USA, Canada,
UK and Ireland respectively.
1.39 A study by 'Food for All' partnership of the World Bank Group and the Netherlands Government
revealed that food borne diseases cost India almost 28 billion dollars ( ` 178,100 crores) annually i.e.
around 0.5% of the country's gross domestic product. It was also found that the number of food borne
diseases is expected to rise from 100 million in 2011 to 150-177 million in 2030. The cost of Food borne
diseases reach between 7-8.4 billion dollars in 2030 which represents a significant increase from 3 billion
dollars estimated in 2011. To reduce the economic burden, India needs to invest in ensuring food safety
for the masses. Indians are moving from simple staples to more nutritious food. The study highlights
that despite growing recognition of the importance of food safety, India's public funding priorities do not
reflect the substantive investments to standardise the food safety system. It was also emphasized that
efforts needed to be made to improve the country's food safety policy through coordination across the
value chain, develop key infrastructure such as cold chains, storage facilities, better testing capacity crop

12
protection and animal health to improve food safety. Further, India needed to strengthen training and
education across all levels of the value chain, ensure "faster collaboration'' amongst state governments,
producers and consumers and embed food safety in nutrition programmes.
1.40 The Committee notes that FSSAI has cited financial constraint as one of the main reasons
in its failure to upgrade the food safety mechanism in the country. The annual budget allocated
to FSSAI is extremely low when compared to annual budgets of counterpart organizations in
different countries. This highlights the inadequate attention being given to matters related to
food safety. The Committee would like to emphasize that food safety not only ensures good
health but is also vital for economic growth and progress. The food processing industry has
tremendous potential to generate employment, boost exports of agro-products and provide
remunerative prices to farmers for their produce. However, tapping such opportunities is possible
only if our food safety apparatus is brought at par with international standards.
1.41 The Committee underlines the need for an effective allocation of financial resources to
FSSAI coupled with an effective State Food Regulatory Mechanism to strengthen the food safety
infrastructure in the country. The Committee, accordingly, recommends a quantum jump in the
budgetary allocation for FSSAI. The States should also enhance outlay for food safety to ensure
safe and wholesome food for the citizens.
1.42 The Committee observes that the responsibility for surveillance and enforcement of food
laws lies squarely on the State/UT Governments. But given the resource crunch in the States,
it would be unrealistic to expect that the States would be in a position to improve the infrastructure
and increase the manpower without central assistance for overhauling their food regulatory
system. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
should work out a fully Centrally Sponsored Scheme for upgradation of manpower, strengthening
of food safety infrastructure including food testing laboratories and setting up a robust surveillance
system at State level.
CHALLENGES  BEFORE  FSSAI
1.43 On a specific query about the challenges/obstacles faced by FSSAI in ensuring a robust safety food
mechanism in the country, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare shared the constraints in the
implementation of the Act on account of legacy issues, weak enforcement in several States and the
problems carried forward from primary production. The Food Safety and Standards (FSS) Act was
enacted in 2006 by consolidating all existing food safety legislations spread across numerous Ministries
and Departments. The FSS Act expanded its focus from merely preventing adulteration to a more holistic
approach of ensuring safe and wholesome food. It was submitted that ideally, implementation of this
entirely new philosophy should have been built on a fresh foundation, with resources aligned to the new
policy. In reality, the existing employees and institutional structures were cobbled together under the new
system, resulting in legacy issues like severe shortage of manpower at Central level, each state having
its own individual structure (often spread across different departments and Ministries), employees from
the old regime being essentially enforcement/inspection oriented etc. The result has been fragmented and
weak systems and structures in many State Food Authorities, problems in staffing (both in terms of
capacity and numbers), and budget constraints. Consequently, FSSAI is not able to monitor even
centrally licensed FBOs directly losing thereby adequate oversight and supervisory control over State
Commissioners of Food Safety, who in turn are also grossly understaffed.

13
1.44 FSSAI has a total of 356 posts against a requirement of 960 posts for its various offices. The
proposal to sanction additional posts is under consideration of the Department of Expenditure. The
Recruitment Regulations have also been formulated and are pending approval of the Legislative Department,
Ministry of Law.
1.45 There is shortage of regulatory staff with the States/UT Governments to implement the FSS Act.
As against a modest requirement of 4850 Food Safety Officers (FSOs), there are only 3130 FSOs in
the country at present. There is also shortage of other functionaries in regulatory compliance of States/
UTs so much so that as against requirement of 835 Designated Officers, there are at present only 651.
Besides, most of Designated Officers as well as Commissioners of Food Safety in States/UTs have
additional charge, thus leaving very little time and resource to devote to food safety.
1.46 Further, there is need to simplify the procedure for registration, licensing etc. and also the requirement
of making penalties more stringent wherever there are wilful illegal activities of adulteration endangering
public health and safety.
1.47 Another challenge faced is that the officers in the field are not fully conversant with relevant law
which leads to different interpretations. This is being addressed by imparting structured capacity building
modules to regulatory staff through comprehensive material. Recently, an updated Manual for FSOs has
been prepared and circulated among all concerned and has also been uploaded on the FSSAI's website.
1.48 Another constraint is that the Food Testing Laboratories in most of the States are not adequately
equipped with manpower as well as equipment. As against 62 functional public labs in States, only 13
are NABL accredited and notified by FSSAI. The remaining labs are functioning under transitory provisions
as provided under Section 98 of FSS Act, 2006. There is need to develop a National Reference Lab
System as well as IT platform to improve credibility and proficiency of testing.
1.49 The Committee learnt that FSSAI is addressing these issues through several initiatives within their
limited means. A proposal to increase the staff strength of FSSAI has been taken up with the Government.
At the State level, the Food Safety Commissioner is the head of the enforcement machinery. Food Safety
Officers (FSOs) and Designated Officers (DOs) are frontline officials to ensure compliance and enforcement
of the food safety laws in the country. The Central Advisory Committee at its meeting held on 1st August,
2014, recommended that all States/UTs should have 1 DO for every District and 1 FSO for each
Development Block in rural areas and 1 FSO for every 1000 Food Business Operators (FBO) in urban
areas. (The Administrative Structure in States/UTs is at Annexure-III). FSSAI has been coordinating with
States/UTs through letters, video-conferences and CAC meetings. The issues have also been raised at the
highest levels in the Conference of State Health Ministers and Secretaries held in January, 2018. As a
result of these efforts, the proposal for creation of posts in FSSAI is at an advanced stage of consideration
by the Government. The total number of FSOs in the country has also increased from 2324 to 3130
in last three years. Significant increase has been noticed in Uttar Pradesh (200%), Karnataka (191%),
Delhi (100%), Kerala (97%) and Gujarat (25%). However, there are some States like Punjab (43%),
Rajasthan (25%) and Madhya Pradesh (13%).where there has been a decline in No. of FSOs
1.50 Apart from the challenges/obstacles faced by FSSAI the following issues/problem areas in the arena
of food safety and standards need to be looked into:
(i) Absence of database on food business
(ii) Overuse of pesticides and its residue in food chain

14
(iii) Increased incidences of food-borne diseases and toxins
(iv) Regulation of farmer/fisherman/farming operations/crops/livestock/aquaculture
(v) Irregularities in monitoring/cancellation of Licenses
(vi) Insufficient number of laboratories and inadequate testing infrastructure in States/UTs
(vii) Lack of accreditation of food testing laboratories in the country
(viii) Shortage of regular staff and technical expertise in the field of food safety
(ix) Ambiguous and multiple food safety standards in the country
(x) Non-harmonization of domestic food safety standards with CODEX/Global standards
(xi) Lack of information and clarity on compliance to food safety regulations.
(xii) Lack of ability of food business operators to track procedural, compliance and regulatory
changes
(xiii) Ineffective enforcement of food safety norms and standards
(xiv) Non-Compliance with International trade agreements and regulatory coherence
(xv) Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) challenge
(xvi) Inadequate regulatory framework on novel foods, genetically modified crops, organic food etc.
(xvii) Inefficient grievance redressal systems
(xviii) Regulation of unorganized food sector
(xix) Lack of raining of food handlers and vendors
(xx) Absence of guidelines for the tolerances of macro and micro nutrients based on the category
of food like general foods, Food Supplements, Food for special medical Purpose etc.
(xxi) Absence of a regulatory body at ports
(xxii) No documented policies and procedures on Risk analysis/assessment/communication and
management
CAG Report No 37 of 2017- Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and
Standards Act, 2006.
1.51 The performance audit on food safety was taken up by the CAG in 2017 in ten selected States.
The important findings of the performance audit on some crucial areas have been highlighted in succeeding
paras:
(i) Regulatory and Administrative Framework:
• Even after more than a decade of the enactment of the Act, the Ministry and Food
Authority are yet to frame regulations governing various procedures, guidelines and
mechanisms enunciated in different sections of the Act.

15
• Food Authority failed to devise action plans to identify areas on which standards are to
be formulated/revised within specified time-frames and the manner of selection of food
products for formulation of standards. FSSAI has, for some food categories, entrusted
the task of suggesting revision of standards to representatives of the Food Business
Operators (FBO), whose opinions cannot be considered unbiased. FSSAI notified
regulations and standards without considering the comments of stakeholders. Primarily
because of the absence of policy guidelines and Standard Operating Procedures (SOP),
Food Authority took between one year and three years to notify amendments.
• Possibility that unsafe/declared unsafe food articles continued to be manufactured and
sold is not ruled out due to failure of the Authority to monitor and cancel licenses issued
under the product approval system declared unlawful by the Supreme Court.
• FSSAI continues to issue directions without following the procedure of previous approval
of the Central Government, previous publication and notification (as contained in section
92 of the Act), the placing of such regulations and rules before Parliament (as contained
in section 93 of the Act), despite the Supreme Court declaring such procedure as
mandatory. Audit noticed many instances where FSSAI issued directions and notified
regulations without the requisite approval of Food Authority and the Ministry.
• Despite recommendation of the Central Advisory Committee (CAC) that at least 75 per
cent of the food license fee collections should be used for Information, Education and
Communication (IEC) activities, most states had not allocated any budgets for these
activities.
(ii) Licensing, Registration, Inspection and Sampling
• FSSAI and state food safety authorities did not conduct survey for enforcement and
administration of the Act and of the FBOs under their jurisdiction, though required to do
so under the Act.
• Licenses were issued on the basis of incomplete documents in more than 50 per cent
of cases test checked in Audit.
• Neither FSSAI nor the state food authorities have documented policies and procedures
on risk based inspections, and the FSSAI does not have any database on food business.
• FSSAI has failed to ensure that the Customs authorities follow up the Non-Conformance
Reports issued by the FSSAI, and take appropriate action to ensure that unsafe foods do
not enter the country.
(iii) Analysis of Food and Prosecution
• 65 out of the 72 State food laboratories to which FSSAI and state food safety authorities
sent food samples for testing do not possess National Accreditation Board for Testing and
Calibration Laboratories (NABL) accreditation. Consequently, the quality of testing by
these laboratories cannot be assured.

16
• Though the Act stipulates gazette notification of empanelled food laboratories, FSSAI
empanelled, between September 2011 and March 2014, 67 food laboratories through
office orders.
• FSSAI has no data on public analysts declared eligible under the erstwhile Prevention of
Food Adulteration Act who continue to function under the FSS Act. FSSAI also has no
data on whether all the notified empanelled food laboratories have qualified food analysts.
Audit test check found that 15 out of the 16 test checked food laboratories did not have
qualified food analysts.
• Shortage of qualified manpower and functional food testing equipment in state food
laboratories and referral laboratories resulted in deficient testing of food samples.
• There were significant delays in finalization of cases by Adjudicating Officers. Further,
a significant portion of the penalty imposed remained uncollected.
(iv) Human R esources
• Failure of the Ministry and the FSSAI to frame the recruitment regulations even after a
decade of the enactment of the Act, resulted in acute shortages of regular staff at various
levels.
• Acute shortage of licensing and enforcement officers (Designated Officers and Food
Safety Officers) in the states severely affected food safety measures in the states.
1.52 Based on the audit findings, some of the recommendations of the CAG are given below:
(i) Ministry/FSSAI may expedite the notification of regulations on areas that have been specified
in the Act, but are yet uncovered.
(ii) FSSAI may frame standard operating procedures on the formulation and review of standards,
and ensure that these are adhered to.
(iii) FSSAI may ensure that all licenses issued under the erstwhile system of product approvals
are reviewed, and licenses cancelled and reissued as warranted under the present procedure.
(iv) FSSAI may review all directions issued under section 16(5) of the Act in the light of directions
of the Hon'ble Bombay High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court.
(v) FSSAI and state food authorities may conduct surveys of food business activity under their
jurisdiction to ensure a comprehensive and reliable database of FBOs and to ensure better
enforcement and administration of the FSS Act.
(vi) FSSAI may frame and notify policy guidelines and procedures on risk based inspections,
including the periodicity of inspections. All states may be persuaded to specify the periodicity
of inspections and ensure that the periodicity is adhered to. Ministry is required to ensure
accreditation of all state food laboratories, and ensure that state food laboratories and referral
laboratories are fully equipped and functional.
(vii) The Ministry/FSSAI may take steps to expeditiously notify the recruitment regulations and fill
up vacancies.

17
1.53 The Committee notes the shortcomings pointed out by CAG report about the administration
of food safety laws. The Committee opines that there is a need to restructure or revamp the
FSSAI so as to enable it to meet the multiple challenges in the arena of food safety and
regulation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that only technically competent officers with
expertise in subject of food science should be appointed/selected in FSSAI so that they are most
suitable for the task assigned to them by FSS Act 2006.
1.54 The Committee would like the Ministry to launch a national level awareness programme to
sensitize all the sections of the society on the food safety subject aiming to infuse a national
commitment towards reduction of food contamination from all the stages of food chain. This sort
of a mission mode project will assure that the stakeholders take full ownership and responsibility
and ensure self compliance to the FSS Act, 2006. Also, a comprehensive food policy must be
devised and the shortcomings of the present Act need to be rectified.

18
CHAPTER 2
EFFICACY  OF  THE  REGULATORY  FRAMEWORK
2.1 Under the FSS Act the, FSSAI is tasked with the responsibility of improving the food safety status
of India. Effective implementation of the food regulatory policy is fundamental for ensuring a safe food
environment. The current FSS Act was formed after the integration of previous laws but there have been
inordinate delays in the framing of regulations and standards. Overlapping of standards by other regulatory
bodies still exists. Needless to say such ambiguous and multiple Standards create confusion among
various stakeholders and lead to non-conformance to FSS Act. FSSAI has failed to ensure the successful
execution of the already framed regulations. Risk based approach is missing from the food quality control
mechanism adopted by FSSAI. Lack of coordination and cooperation between the FSSAI and States/UT
Governments has led to food safety issues being neglected in India. FSSAI has yet to collect and collate
data regarding food businesses, contamination, risk based inspections etc. Awareness regarding healthy
eating is missing amongst the masses. Integration of the consumers to the food safety program is
essential. Also, the food safety machinery in the States Food Safety department is inefficient to tackle
the growing menace of food adulteration. FSSAI has to play a significant role in safeguarding the right
to healthy food for all the citizens and therefore it is incumbent upon the Authority to regularly review
the rules and regulations and suggest amendments in the Act to make it more enforceable.
REGULATORY  ANALYSIS
2.2 Indian Beverage Association through its written submission has pointed out the need of regulatory
Impact Assessment to monitor existing regulations of the FSS Act to understand if the intended objectives
are met or need modifications. Dr. Prathap Kumar Shetty, Professor and Head, Department of Food
Science and Technology, Pondicherry University has also suggested that a thorough review is required
to assess whether the systems, procedures, duties, and functions as mandated by the Act are in place
or proceeding in accordance with the Act.
2.3 The Committee notes that the first objective of FSSAI, is to lay down science based standards
for articles of food and regulate their manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import to
ensure availability of safe and wholesome food. However, the indicators of food safety show that
the objective of formation of FSSAI has not been fulfilled as the quality of food stuffs is
deteriorating and use of contaminants is increasing day by day. Milk and food which were safe
previously are no longer safe because adulteration and use of hazardous chemicals for artificial
ripening of fruits and vegetables have witnessed tremendous increase in the recent past. The
Committee observes that FSSAI has failed to assess the impact of the FSS Act on food safety
and therefore recommends that FSSAI should systematically evaluate the performance of the
FSS Act, its rules and regulations. Certain indicators need to be developed to measure the
outcomes of the food safety policy and institutions.
REGULATIONS  YET  TO  BE  FRAMED
2.4 Parliament enacted the FSS Act, 2006 by subsuming various legislations. In 2008, FSSAI was
established as an institutional framework responsible for safe and wholesome food. More than a decade
18

19
has passed since the enactment of FSS Act and FSSAI has not framed regulations under the Act as also
pointed out in CAG Report No. 37 of 2017 in the following areas.
(i) Accreditation of certification bodies engaged in certification of food safety management systems
for food businesses (Section 16 (2) (c));
(ii) Accreditation of laboratories and notification of the accredited laboratories (Section 16 (2) (e));
(iii) Conduct survey of enforcement and administration of the Act in the country (Section 16 (2)
(g));
(iv) Food labelling standards including claims on health, nutrition, special dietary uses and food
category systems for foods (Section 16 (2) (h));
(v) Risk analysis, risk assessment, risk communication and risk management shall be undertaken
(Section 16 (2)(i));
(vi) Making or amending regulations in view of urgency concerning food safety or public health
(Section 92 (2) (g));
(vii) The respective areas of which the Designated Officer shall be in-charge for food safety
administration (Section 92 (2) (p));
(viii) Financial regulations to be adopted by the Food Authority in drawing up its budget (Section
92 (2) (t));
(ix) Participation in Codex meeting and preparation of response to Codex matters (Section 92 (2)
(u)); and
(x) Genetically engineered or modified food (Section 22).
2.5 The Ministry informed that out of the 32 areas listed in the Act, regulations have already been
notified in 25 areas. Further, in three areas, regulations are in process of final notification and one
regulation is at the draft stage. While in respect of urgency regulation, the Ministry of Law has opined
that regulation is not required, in the area of risk analysis and risk assessment guidelines/orders have been
issued. Guidelines for risk assessment of GM food are being prepared and the same would be suitably
framed as regulations. Details of all these regulations are at A NNEXURE IV .
2.6 The Committee understands that the process of framing regulations involves extensive
consultations with various stakeholders including related ministries, agencies, NGOs, farmer
organizations, etc. However, failure to examine the requirement to frame regulations in respect
of remaining seven areas even after a decade of enactment of the Act is indicative of FSSAI's
lethargy and procrastinated decision making in the matter. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that FSSAI should frame and notify the remaining regulations within a period of one year from
the date of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.
INORDINATE DELAYS WHILE NOTIFYING AMENDMENTS
2.7 CAG in its Report No. 37 of 2017 has pointed out that the:

20
FSSAI has not formulated internal time-frames for the processing of standards that cause inordinate
delays which are primarily attributable to lack of policy guidelines and standard operating procedures
(SOP). Even after approval by the Scientific Panels, FSSAI took between 14 to 24 months to notify
six amendments, and between 28 to 39 months to notify five amendments.
2.8 The Ministry has clarified that as the meetings of Scientific Committee and Food Authority are
generally held once every quarter, the process of development of draft regulations/standards by a
Scientific Panel up to its approval by the Food Authority usually takes 3-6 months depending upon the
schedule of meetings. Further, the concerned Division also requires adequate time to incorporate the
recommendations of Scientific Committee/Food Authority in the draft regulation/standard originally
recommended by a Scientific Panel. The entire process till the final notification takes somewhere between
6 to 18 months depending on the complexity of food standards. The delays were mainly due to practical
difficulties and lack of frequent meetings of Scientific panels and committee. Remedial steps are however
being taken by FSSAI. The process of developing standards has substantially improved by conducting
frequent meetings of Scientific Panels and Scientific Committee. The number of the Panels has increased
from 8 to 17 as of now, and these are likely to go up to 20 in near future. Draft regulations are being
notified to WTO at pre-draft notification stage. For setting standards with timelines, SOP has been
developed so that delays do not occur.
2.9 The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Ministry to the recommendation of
the Lok Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislations which has stipulated (December 2011)
that the rules should be notified within six months of last date of receipt of comments from
stakeholders if a large number of such comments/ suggestions have been received and within
three months if nil or less comments are received. The CAG Audit observed that though only
one to two comments of minor nature were received on the draft notifications in four cases,
FSSAI took five to ten months for final notification. FSSAI while notifying rules should consider
the recommendations of the Lok Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation and work to
strengthen its scientific and administrative machinery so that further delays are avoided. Moreover,
the frequency of meetings of Scientific Committee and Panels and Food Authority should be
increased and a strict timeline should be set and adhered to.
PRODUCT  APPROVAL  SYSTEM
2.10 The Committee's attention has also been drawn to the Product Approval System followed by FSSAI
and discussed in the CAG Report No. 37 of 2017.
This system was quashed by the Hon'ble Bombay High Court on 1 August, 2014 and the Hon'ble
Supreme Court dismissed the appeal on 19 August, 2015 on the ground that the advisories issued
by FSSAI without following the procedure have no force of law. CAG Audit observed that though
the FSSAI discontinued the product approval system, it neither took steps to withdraw the licenses
issued under the now invalid system, nor ensured product recalls. Consequently, the possibility that
unsafe foods continued to be imported/produced/distributed/sold based on the now invalid licenses
cannot be ruled out."
2.11 The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that, FSSAI initiated the process of reviewing
all cases of NOCs granted prior to orders of Supreme Court. A notice was issued to all FBOs holding

21
NOCs on 1st January, 2018 through FSSAI Website. These FBOs were advised to ensure complete
compliance with the requirements of the various new regulations issued by the Authority in last 2-3 years.
In cases, where a product was still not covered under any of the new regulations, the FBOs were advised
to get their NOCs granted to them revalidated by submitting the necessary documents to the Authority
as per the requirements under the new Food Safety and Standards (Approval for Non-Specified Food
and Food Ingredients) Regulations, 2017. Till date, FSSAI has received response against 19 NOCs and
all except one FBO have confirmed that the products for which NOCs were granted to them are in
complete compliance with the existing regulations. While it can be assumed that other businesses which
have been granted NOCs are either covered under new regulation or do not hold license anymore,
however, as a matter of abundant precaution, before finally withdrawing the NOCs, FSSAI is issuing a
notice to the remaining 192 applicants to respond within a four weeks' time, to the Authority regarding
the status of the NOCs issued to the Product(s).
2.12 Considering all the facts, the Committee is constrained to observe that though the Supreme
Court struck down the Product Approval System based on the advisories issued by FSSAI in
August 2015, FSSAI took a very long time to review all the cases of NOCs granted under this
system. The status of 192 NOCs is still not clear as to whether these products are covered under
any new regulations or not. The Committee endorses the view of CAG that FSSAI failed to
ensure the cancellation of licenses issued under this suspended system. There is every likelihood
that FBOs with invalid licenses under this system are still producing and selling unsafe food to
the consumers. FSSAI should therefore expedite the whole process of withdrawal of such NOCs
and carry out, within six months, inspection of the FBOs that claim to comply with the new
regulations.
STATE  LEVEL  STEERING  COMMITTEE
2.13 The CAG highlights the absence of State Level Steering Committee (SLSC) or State Advisory
Committee (SAC) in some States. Audit test check in ten States revealed that SACs had not been
constituted in Odisha and West Bengal. In Delhi, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, the SACs
did not hold any meetings. In Assam, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, the SACs met only once during the entire
audit period while in Maharashtra it met twice. Most of the Districts in the States have not constituted
District Level Steering Committee (DLSC).
2.14 The Committee observes that the Central Advisory Committee (CAC) of FSSAI has emphasized on
regular meetings of State and District Level Steering Committees wherein States/UTs may also invite
representatives from FSSAI to attend the concerned meeting as special invitee. The Committee notes that
State Level Steering Committee (SLSC) have not been constituted in Odisha and Sikkim and Lakshadweep.
2.15 The Committee recommends that the State Level Advisory Committee should be constituted
in every State with the Food Safety Commissioner as the Chairperson and all the stakeholders
as its members. The guidelines for its constitution and role should be issued. The Committee
agrees with Central Advisory Committee (CAC) that the Director of the State Food Testing Lab,
officers of the Food Authority and representatives from the industry associations should also be
included as its members. The Committee feels that the presence of such a system at State and
District level will not only help in better handling of licensing/registration regulations but also
facilitate integration of local bodies with the Food Safety Administration. The Committee would
like the Authority to nudge the State Governments to expedite the formation of State and

22
District Level Advisory Committees. Monthly meetings should be conducted by these Committees
and appropriate actions taken to ensure robust food safety surveillance in the State. Section 70
of the FSS Act requires the State Government to establish one or more tribunals to be known
as the Food Safety Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals from the decisions of the Adjudicating
Officer under Section 68. The Committee observes that there is no Food Safety appellate tribunal
in Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Odisha, Sikkim and Tamil Nadu even after more than a decade of the FSS Act. The Committee
therefore recommends establishing of tribunal in each of these States so that the litigation
process can be fast tracked.
ABSENCE  OF  SEPARATE  FOOD  SAFETY  DEPARTMENT
2.16 The Committee observes that many States do not have a separate food safety Department in place.
As per information available with FSSAI, only a few States/UTs like Goa, Gujarat and Jharkhand have
full time Food Safety Commissioners. In some States like Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, food safety and drugs departments are being looked after
by the same officer as a dual charge. In most of the remaining States/UTs, officers in Health Department
are holding additional charge of food safety department. As per Food Safety and Standards Regulations,
all States/UTs are required to develop their own surveillance plans. The officers in-charge of food safety
department in States/UTs are required to keep surveillance on food products being traded/sold in the
market to the consumers. FSSAI also shares, model surveillance plan with the States from time-to-time,
especially during the festival seasons.
2.17 The implementation and enforcement of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 rests primarily
with the State/UT Governments, for which regular surveillance, monitoring and inspection are
required to be undertaken by them. The Committee however notes that many States do not have
a separate food safety Department. The Committee is of the view that food adulteration, lack
of quality checks, misleading labelling, sale of defective food products etc. that have become the
norm these days are primarily an offshoot of absence of a dedicated and robust food safety
apparatus at the State level. The Joint Committee of Parliament on the Prevention of Food
Adulteration (Amendment) Act, 1974 had recommended long back that for effective implementation
of the Act, a separate food safety department under the control of the Director of Health should
be established in all the States. Endorsing the same view, the Committee strongly recommends
establishment of a separate agency or Department of Food Safety in each State for enforcing a
robust food safety mechanism in the country. The Committee also recommends that the creation
of a dedicated food regulatory mechanism in each State be taken up by the Union Government
with the State Governments at the highest level.
2.18 In some States/UTs officers in Health Department are holding additional charge of food
safety department. Section 30 of the FSS Act states that the State Government shall appoint the
Commissioner of Food Safety for the State for efficient implementation of food safety and
standards and other requirements laid down under the Act. The Section spells out the functions
of the Commissioner of Food Safety in terms of (i) regulating manufacture, storage, distribution
or sale of any article of food in the interest of public health, (ii) carrying out survey of the
industrial units engaged in manufacture or processing of food, (iii) conducting or organising
training programmes for the personnel, (iv) generating awareness of food safety, (v) ensuring an

23
efficient and uniform implementation of the standards and (vi) sanctioning prosecution for
offences etc. The Committee understands that the Food Safety Commissioner has to perform a
wide range of functions. It, therefore, recommends that the officer should be conversant with
food science and technology and should be a whole time officer. Part-time arrangement for such
important functions in many States/UTs will not serve the interests of the Act.
AMENDMENTS REQUIRED IN FSS ACT
2.19 Section 2 of the Act stipulates that: It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest
that the Union should take under its control the food industry.
The UP Food Safety Cadre Association submitted before the Committee that the FSS Act is enforced
in the State according to the available resources which leads to different extent of effectiveness and
intensity of enforcement in different States. Such a casual attitude towards enforcement of food
safety regime forfeits the aim of the Act. They suggested that Section 2 of the Act should be
implemented in letter and spirit. Implementation of the Act as well as enforcement should be taken
under the control of the Central Government providing uniform rational framework of human
resources and infrastructure to the States.
2.20 The Committee notes that there is no uniformity in the food safety infrastructure across
the country. Some States do not even have a food safety department and a food safety appellate
tribunal. The food testing laboratories lack functional equipments as well as technical manpower.
This inadequate arrangement has failed to control food adulteration in the country. Therefore the
Committee recommends removal of this existing inconsistency and introduction of a uniform
structure across the country. The Central Government should work in cooperation with the State
Government to establish a uniform food safety regulatory regime in the country. It is also very
important for the food testing laboratories across States/UTs to follow uniform procedure/
methodology and guidelines so that consistent results are obtained.
2.21 Section 3(1)(j) defines "food" as follows:-
"Food" means any substance, whether processed, partially processed or unprocessed, which is
intended for human consumption and includes primary food to the extent defined in clause (zk),
genetically modified or engineered food or food containing such ingredients, infant food, packaged
drinking water, alcoholic drink, chewing gum, and any substance, including water used into the
food during its manufacture preparation or treatment but does not include any animal feed, live
animals unless they are prepared or processed for placing on the market for human consumption,
plants, prior to harvesting, drugs and medicinal products, cosmetics, narcotic or psychotropic
substances.
Provided that the Central Government may declare, by notification in the Official Gazette, any
other article as food for the purposes of this Act having regards to its use, nature, substance or
quality.
2.22 The UP Food Safety Officer Cadre Association pointed out that the Drinking/Potable water is not
included in the definition water due to which the food business operators are at liberty to provide water
of low quality as drinking water. The association has suggested that in the definition after packaged
drinking water, 'Drinking/Potable water' should also be added.

24
2.23 The Committee notes that packaged drinking water is already included in the definition of
food. The Committee recommends that the definition of drinking/potable water should also be
added to Section 3 (1) (j). The water that is served as drinking water in the eateries should also
come under the purview of the FSS Act. The water that is provided in the food business premises
such as eating outlets should also be timely inspected. All this should be done to ensure that the
FBOs provide clean drinking water in their eateries.
2.24 Section 3.1(zz) defines unsafe food as:-
"unsafe food" means an article of food whose nature, substance or quality is so affected as to
render it injurious to health:
(viii) by the presence of any colouring matter or preservatives other than that specified in respect
thereof;
2.25 The Office of the Commissioner of Food Safety, Kerala in its written submission mentioned that
at present the law is silent as to whether a food article is unsafe or substandard if the prescribed
colouring matter exceeds the limit permitted under regulation. In such situations some Food Analysts
report the food article as substandard and in certain cases as unsafe. To avoid such ambiguity, the law
should specify whether permitted colour which exceeds the prescribed limit should be included either
in the category substandard or unsafe. It also suggested that the provision may be included in the
category of substandard, as it is only a variation from the prescribed Standard. It has also proposed
following amendments in the Section.
Section 3.1(zz) "unsafe food" means an article of food whose nature, substance or quality is so
affected as to render it injurious to health:
(viii) by the presence of any colouring matter or preservatives other than that specified in respect
thereof or
if the amounts of the prescribed coloring matter which is present in the food article not within the
prescribed limits of variability.
2.26 The Committee notes that the use of food dyes has to be regulated because time and again,
the food dyes have been linked to health problems. Excessive use of colouring matter in food may
cause allergic reaction to some people or hyperactivity in sensitive children. The Food Authority
should ensure that the artificial coloring matter used in food meets the strict food safety
requirements. The uniform guidelines for food dyes will ensure that the food samples are
correctly analysed and labelled as substandard or unsafe as per the prescribed limit. The Committee
recommends that the provisions proposed by the office of Food Safety Commissioner, Kerala be
considered for addition to the Section after due legislative vetting. Use of coloring matter above
the prescribed limit or use of non-permitted coloring matter should both be punishable and
stringent action should be taken against FBOs involved in this practice.
2.27 The Committee gathers that a large number of food products are sold as health food, "rich
in...., contains added...., fortified with..., added with....., natural, herbal, organic" etc. As of now,
there are no definitions for these products under the FSS Act, 2006 and consumers are also not
aware of these terms and their health implications. Though large number of products is sold by
manufacturers under these claims, these terms are not clear to manufacturers either. Even the

25
food inspectors have their own interpretation due to which corrupt practices are prevailing. The
Committee is of the view that since these claims have health as well as financial implications
for the consumers, the matter should not be left to market forces and manufacturers. In fact
all terms and claims used on the label must be defined under the Act or the rules and no one
should be allowed to make claims without scientific evidence or data. Besides all these terms
must have verification criteria and reporting system under the law.
2.28 Section 18(3) provides the General principles to be followed in administration of the Act as under:-
"The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any farmer or fisherman or farming operations or
crops or livestock or aquaculture, and supplies used or produced in farming or products of crops
produced by a farmer at farm level or a fisherman in his operations".
2.29 The Committee has been given to understand that the exclusion of primary production from the
purview of FSSAI poses a major challenge in the path of food safety. While the Food Authority
prescribes maximum level of contaminants/antibiotic residues and maximum residue levels (MRLs), the
source of these contaminants is from primary production viz. agricultural farms, animal husbandry, dairy
produce etc. There was a suggestion before the Committee that FSSAI should be empowered to make
guidelines/code of practices and the Ministry of Agriculture may be asked to impose restrictions on
pesticides to address the issue.
2.30 The Committee notes with concern that many of the harmful components and contaminants
enter the food system at the time of primary production whereas such primary food production
is exempted from the coverage of the law. The Committee believes that this exclusion of farmer/
fisherman or farming operations including fisheries, livestock from FSS Act is a major challenge
and lacuna in the Act because unless the raw material is of good quality, the good quality of final
product cannot be ensured. The Committee agrees that it is important to ensure that the food
is safe right from the beginning of the food chain and for this, the Food Authority will have to
work closely with the primary producers. The major issues in primary production like overuse
of pesticides, use of growth harmones, drug use in livestock etc. pose health risks and a significant
threat to ensuring food safety. The Committee is convinced that without primary production
system coverage, food will never be safe. The Committee is aware that once hazardous
contaminants, excessive antibiotic residues and pesticide residues etc. enter the food system,
there is no technology by which they can be removed from the foods. The Committee, therefore,
expects the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to make guidelines/code of practices and the
Ministry of Agriculture to impose restrictions on pesticides and harmful components. The issue
of amendment to necessary guidelines/code of practices may be taken up with the highest
authorities concerned.
2.31 The Committee further recommends that all the laws including Agricultural Produce
Marketing Committee Act hurting safe food production should be reviewed and amended to
ensure food safety for citizens. The Committee desires to be apprised about the outcome in this
matter.
2.32 The Committee also recommends that there must be a nationwide campaign on Good
Agricultural Practices across all food sectors. Ministry of Agriculture must establish dedicated

26
website for this purpose in regional languages to communicate good practices. Agriculture
Universities of respective States be roped in to educate farmers about Good Agriculture and
Animal Production Practices and maintaining database on contamination. Additionally, FSSAI/
State Food Safety Authorities should conduct training and awareness program about the Act and
best agricultural practices for the primary producers. The focus of such training should be to
prevent food contamination at the primary level and evolve a proper monitoring mechanism.
2.33 Section 38 (1) provides that The Food Safety Officer may-
(a) take a sample-
(i) of any food, or any substance, which appears to him to be intended for sale, or to have
been sold for human consumption; or
(ii) of any article offood or substance which is found by him on or in any such premises;
Which he has reason to believe that it may be required as evidence in proceedings under
any of the provisions of this Act or of the regulations or orders made thereunder; or
(b) seize any article of food which appears to the Food Safety Officer to be in contravention of
this Act or the regulations made thereunder;
The Committee notes that Section 38 (1) (a) and (b) gives sole discretion to Food Inspectors to
pick up samples and is a major source of corruption under FSSAI. In reply to a query regarding
the number of food inspectors punished for corrupt practices, during the last five years, the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has informed that all Food Safety Officers work under the
administrative control of the State/UT Government concerned as per the conduct rules prescribed
by the respective State/UT Governments. As the FSOs are State Government employees, the details
regarding the number of food inspectors punished for corrupt practices are not available with
FSSAI.
2.34 The Committee has taken cognizance of certain sting operations conducted by some TV
Channels showing some food inspectors' readiness to approve sub-standard products against
payment of bribes or sometimes even manipulate food items if the supplier does not pay them
bribe. Lack of an effective accountability mechanism for malpractices and provision of absolute
discretion of food inspectors in the matter of picking up samples leaves the door wide open for
corruption. There appears a clear nexus between corrupt food inspectors and unethical Food
Business Operators. Once a food product is found to have violated food safety procedures by the
Food Regulator, there is no effective recourse available because the appeal procedure is entirely
internal and departmental and even a legal challenge is too slow to be effective. Taking into
consideration the above, the Committee recommends that an anti-corruption unit be created to
prevent food inspectors from engaging in bribery and extortion.
2.35 Section 47(4) deals with sampling and analysis. It provides that:
an article of food or adulterant seized, unless destroyed, shall be produced before the Designated
Officer as soon as possible and in any case not later than seven days after the receipt of the report
of the Food Analyst.

27
2.36 It has b een submitted before the Committee by stakeholders that there is a provision to seize food
article and adulterant but the procedure and manner of disposal of seizure is not provided in the Act.
The UP Food Safety Officer Cadre Association suggested that disposal of seizure under section 47(4),
should be under the jurisdiction of the court in which the case has been filed. If the court finds the
sample conforming to the standards, the Designated Officer may release the seized article.
2.37 The Committee underlines the need of suitable guidelines for the disposal of seized and
confiscated food items. The Food Safety Officer and the Designated Officers need to be trained
on the disposal of seized articles of food so that the seized articles do not pose any threat. The
Committee is in total agreement with the suggestion that the disposal of seized item/article be
within the jurisdiction of the court in which the case has been filed. The Committee, therefore
recommends, that Section 47 (4) be modified suitably to ensure a provision for prescribing
procedure and manner for disposal of seizure in the Act.
2.38 It has been pointed out that though the Section 38(1)(c) pertains to seizure of the article but the
Act is silent in case it is not possible to keep the seized article in safe custody of food business operator.
It was suggested that Act should be amended to take care of such eventuality.
2.39 The Committee recommends that some provisions fixing the responsibility for the custody
of the seized article should be introduced in the FSS Act. A provision should be added that in
cases where it is not possible for food business operator to keep the seized article, the Food
Safety Officer should maintain the seized article in his safe custody. A proper storage facility
should be provided to the FSO. Also, in case the seized article is in the custody of FBO, special
attention should be paid that the FBO does not attempt to sell the same articles in the market.
Proper record of the seized article should be maintained by the FSO.
2.40 It has also been pointed out that often the FBOs do not cooperate with the regulatory authority
particularly when contingency arises to use power.
“To break open any package in which any article of food may be contained or to break open the
door of any premises where any article of food may be kept for sale; Such power is provided for
in PFA Act, 1954”.
2.41 The Committee feels that such power to the Food Safety Officer may be misused by some
unscrupulous officers to harass the food business operator. But at the same time inspecting the
food packages is essential and fundamental duty of a Food Safety Officer. The Committee
recommends that FSO should be empowered to check any package and break open the door of
any premises where any article of food may be kept for sale but all this should be within the
prescribed guidelines and the same must be videographed for solid evidence. The FSO should
keep a record of packages inspected and the number of packages that were opened during
inspection. The Committee feels that the Food Authority should also ensure that the Food Safety
Officers are not bullied and harassed. The FBOs and the FSOs should both respect and support
each other. FSSAI should be committed to ensuring safe working environment for the FSOs as
well as the FBOs. Any kind of harassment, intimidation, bullying or discrimination from both
sides should be condemned. The Committee recommends that the above provision in Section 10
(5) of the PFA Act may be incorporated in this Act after due consideration in the Ministry and
vetting by Ministry of Law and Justice.

28
2.42 Sections 34, 59, 60, 61 and 63 of the FSS Act deal with the punishment but a minimum punishment
is not specified in the Act. A suggestion has been made that these sections should provide for a minimum
imprisonment for three months. The punishment sections in which imprisonment may be extended to
more than one year, a minimum imprisonment of six months to be inserted.
2.43 The Committee learnt that FSSAI has recently proposed amendments for stringent punishment
for adulteration to the FSS Act. The amendment proposes that any person who "adds an adulterant
to food so as to render it injurious for human consumption with an inherent potential to cause
his death or is likely to cause grievous hurt, irrespective of the fact whether it causes actual
injury or not, shall be punishable for a term which shall not be less than 7 years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life and also fine which shall not be less than ````` 10 lakh". The
Committee endorses the proposed amendments and recommends its inclusion in the FSS Act
subject to the condition that adequate provisions may also be made to prevent its misuse.
2.44 FSS Act carries provisions for prosecution and appeal. Section 42 deals with procedure for launching
prosecution. It provides that the Designated Officer after scrutiny of the report of Food Analyst shall
decide as to whether the contravention is punishable with imprisonment or fine only and in the case of
contravention punishable with imprisonment, he shall send his recommendations within fourteen days to
the Commissioner of Food Safety for sanctioning prosecution.
Section 46 provides that an appeal against the report of Food Analyst shall lie before the Designated
Officer who shall, if he so decides, refer the matter to the referral food laboratory as notified by
the Food Authority for opinion.
2.45 UP Food Safety Of ficer Cadre Association has submitted that Section 46(4) provides FBO an
opportunity to appeal against food analyst report before concerned designated officer for sending a part
of sample for referral to food laboratory. The time period available for the FBO to appeal is 30 days from
the receipt of the FA report which contravenes the time limit of 14 days as mentioned in section 42(3).
It has also suggested that the word 'scrutiny' of Section 42(3) should be defined by inserting a proviso
in the concerned section as below provided that the time of 14 days shall start after the completion of
the scrutiny by the designated of ficer. The scrutiny shall include the final disposal of objection/appeal
raised on food analyst report.
2.46 The Committee notes that this conflict in time period may lead to practical difficulties and
cause unnecessary confusion and delays. The Committee therefore recommends that a clause
must be added to Section 42(3) specifying that the time of 14 days shall start after the completion
of the scrutiny of the food analyst report by the designated Officer. The scrutiny shall include
the final disposal of objection/appeal raised on food analyst report. A different timeframe has to
be established for perishable items. Special attention should be paid that the perishable food
items with a short shelf life are tested before getting spoiled so that the test reports are
authentic.
2.47 Section 46 deals with the functions of the Food Analyst.
Section 46(3) states that The Food Analyst shall, within a period of fourteen days from the date
of receipt of any sample for analysis, send:
(i) where such sample is received under section 38 or section 47, to the Designated Officer, four
copies of the report indicating the method of sampling and analysis; and

29
(ii) where such sample is received under section 40 , a copy of the report indicating the method
of sampling and analysis to the person who had purchased such article of food with a copy
to the Designated Officer:
Provided that in case the sample cannot be analysed within fourteen days of its receipt,
the Food Analyst shall inform the Designated Officer and the Commissioner of Food
Safety giving reasons and specifying the time to be taken for analysis.
2.48 Stakeholders have submitted before the Committee that the stipulated time of 14 days for analysis
is too less to examine in the present circumstance. In PFA Act, the stipulated time period was within
forty days. It was also suggested that the section 46(3) be amended accordingly.
2.49 The Committee notes that the time of 14 days stipulated for analysis of samples of food
articles seems inadequate given the state of the present lab infrastructure in the country, but
the efforts should be made to decrease this time limit rather than increasing it. Reliable and
speedy food testing is important for determining the qualitative parameters of the food. The
Committee therefore, recommends that the food authority and the State/UT Governments should
ensure that the laboratories where the food is sent for analysis have adequate number of
technical staff and are technically equipped so that the time frame of fourteen days can become
a practical possibility.
2.50 Section 68 deals with Adjudication.
Providing that an officer not below the rank of Additional District Magistrate of the district shall
be notified by the State Government as the Adjudicating Officer for adjudication in the manner as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
2.51 The UP Food Safety Officer Cadre Association in its submission has stated that the Second proviso
of Rule 3.1.1.9 provides that the Adjudicating Officer shall pass the final order within 90 days from the
date of first hearing but in most of the States the application for adjudication is being decided in more
than 90 days. They added that Food safety related cases are technical in nature which is easy to
adjudicate for an officer having the science background and working experience of food safety. The
section 68 of the FSS Act, 2006 states that the Adjudicating officer should not be below the rank of
Additional District Magistrate. This clause has not been taken in the true spirit of the act and the
Additional District Magistrates by post are notified as Adjudicating Officers. Only a person with science
background and experience in implementation of the Food Safety and Standard Act, 2006 can adjudicate
the applications speedily and qualitatively. These officers do not necessarily possess the science background
as well as food safety experience. UP Food Safety Officer Cadre Association has therefore, suggested
that Section 68 be amended to provide the adjudicating authority with science background.
2.52 The Committee recommends that all the States should strictly adhere to the FSS regulations
and the final order should be passed within 90 days from the date of first hearing. The Adjudicating
Officer should be a full time officer. The practice of appointing Additional District Magistrates
as Adjudicating Officers should be reviewed. It becomes difficult for Officers working on additional
charge to do justice to their job. Also it is important for adjudicating officers to be knowledgeable
and experienced while dealing with cases involving food safety. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that only officers having experience and expertise in food safety should be appointed

30
as adjudicating officer. The Committee also recommends  that the adjudicating officer should set
a time-frame and actively monitor the progress of each case. Attempts should be made to
incorporate technology into the proceedings by digitizing all the records.
RULES
The Committee also had the occasion to deliberate on rules framed under FSS Act.
2.53 Rule 2.1.3 (4)(i): Without prejudice to the powers conferred on him under section 38 of the Act,
where the Food Safety Officer is of the opinion or he has reason(s) to be recorded in writing that in
the given situation it is not possible to comply with the provision of section 38 (1) (c) or the proviso
to section 38(1) for reasons like non availability of the Food Business Operator, the Food Safety Officer
may seize the adulterant or food which is unsafe or sub-standard or mis branded or containing extraneous
matter, may seal the premises for investigation after taking a sample of such adulterant or food for
analysis.
2.54 UP Food Safety Officer Cadre Association submitted that Rule 2.1.3 (4) (i) restricts the power of
sealing the premises of FBO only if the compliance with the provision of section 38(1) (c) is not possible.
There is another provision in the Act in section 31 according to which no person shall commence or
carry on any food business except under a license. But it is not given in the Act how to stop a person
running a food business without a license with immediate effect. It is therefore suggested that the
premises of such food business operator should be sealed after ensuring the same and for the above
provision rule 2.1.3(4)(i) should be amended.
2.55 The Committee recommends that provisions regarding sealing the premises of FBO that
operate without license and actions to be taken against such an FBO should be added in the Act.
The Food Safety Officer should stop the production of any food article and immediately send the
food sample for analysis. The food articles that have been supplied to the market should immediately
be recalled and information regarding the same should be intimated to the general public. Strict
actions have to be taken against such FBOs operating without licenses/registrations and heavy
penalty must be imposed.

31
CHAPTER 3
LICENSING , REGISTRATION, INSPECTION AND SAMPLING
3.1 As per Section 31 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 all food business operators are
required to take a license or get a registration for starting or carrying on any business. The Licensing/
Registration of the food business is regulated under Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration
of Food Businesses), Regulations, 2011.
3.2 As per the information submitted by FSSAI, The Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and
Registration) Regulations, 2011 defines the procedures and conditions of licensing and registration. The
salient features of the regulations include:
(i) Single Window for issuing Registration certificate, State and Central License with unified
procedure
(ii) Distinction between "Registration" and "Licensing".
(iii) Minimum documentation for Small FBOs so that they can easily register themselves.
(iv) Sectors with high Installed capacity are covered under Central License.
(v) More efforts on Safety, Sanitary and Hygiene requirements.
(vi) Encouraging Self-Compliance by FBOs.
3.3 As per data furnished by FSSAI, 18,632 Central and 4,43,399 State Licenses, respectively had been
issued. Besides there were 36, 60,138 registrations of FBOs as on 31.03.2018.
LICENSING AND REGISTRATIONS ISSUES
3.4 The Committee has been given to understand that under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006,
licensing and registration is an important activity through which the Food Authority and Commissioners
of Food Safety at the State/UT level exercise oversight over the working of food businesses in so far
as food safety related issues are concerned. For this purpose, the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing
and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011 were notified and brought into operation with
effect from 5th August, 2011. A centralized IT platform - Food Licensing and Registration System
(FLRS) was put in place for licensing and registration. Central Licensing is carried out at 5 regional
offices (Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai and Guwahati). The Central Licensing Authorities are Designated
Officers appointed under the section 36(3)(i) of the FSS Act by the Chief Executive Officer of the
FSSAI. The State Licensing Authorities and Registering Authorities are notified by the respective
Commissioner of Food Safety of State/UT.
3.5 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to many deficiencies in the license issuing and registration
process at the Central and State Level. The same has been pointed out by CAG in its Report. The CAG
audit test revealed the following-
• Neither the Ministry nor FSSAI had any information regarding the number of FBOs whose
licenses issued under the erstwhile Acts/Orders continued to be valid even after the enactment
of the Act. The directions of Ministry to frequently extend the date of conversion of licenses
31

32
resulted in a situation where even FBOs whose licenses had expired, continued with the food
business.
• In 49 cases pertaining to CLA, Kolkata and Guwahati, FBOs applied for renewal of licenses
(2011-14) issued under the erstwhile Acts/Orders after their expiry. Despite the fact that the
licenses had already expired at the time of application, and instead of issuing fresh licenses
as stipulated in clause 2.1.7 of the Regulations, CLAs renewed the licenses. In further violation
of the Regulations, CLAs renewed the licenses retrospectively even for the period when the
erstwhile Acts/Orders were in operation (the gap between the expiry of the licenses and their
irregular renewal ranged from one year to five and a half years in eight cases).
• In nine States and six central offices of FSSAI, Audit observed instances where licenses/
registrations issued under the Act had expired. Out of 7,056 licenses test checked in SLAs,
2,616 (37.07 per cent), and out of 2,863 licenses test checked in CLAs, 626 (21.87 per cent)
licenses were found to have expired. Out of 2,299 registrations test checked in States, 698
(30.36 per cent) registrations were found to have expired.
• Another test check at FSSAI Regional Office, Mumbai revealed that six FBOs continued with
their business even though they had not even applied for the renewal of their earlier licenses,
and conducted food business valued at ` 252.64 crore during the period without license.
• Test check by Audit of five SLAs and three CLAs, established that in 3,119 (52.73 per cent)
out of the 5,915 test checked cases; licenses had been issued to FBOs on the basis of
incomplete documents.
3.6 The Ministry in its reply informed that extensions were only given to FBOs having licenses issued
under the erstwhile Acts/Orders. The orders of extension were approved by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare in the stakeholders' interest. The number of cases wherein conversion and new licenses/
registrations were granted as per provisions of FSS Act, 2006 is as under:
Conversion New
Central Licences 386 16069
Offline State License 16968 459990
Offline Registration 90931 2101803
3.7 FBOs who were not given extension were supposed to get FSSAI License/Registration as per FSS
Act, 2006, Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Safety of these food products have been ensured by
erstwhile Acts/Orders under which these licenses were issued. Further, the details of expired licenses/
registrations are accessible to the Food Safety Commissioners (State level) and Designated Officers
(district level) on FLRS. During the Round Table Conference held on 08.01.2018 with the State Health
Secretaries, FSSAI advised the Commissioners of Food Safety and Designated Officers to monitor the
status of expired licenses on monthly basis. Using the details of expired licenses/registrations available
on FLRS portal, the food premises of such FBOs would be physically inspected by State/ UT Authorities
and appropriate action taken against the defaulting FBOs under the FSS Act, Rules and Regulations.
Further, a letter has also been addressed to the States/UTs on 16.03.2018 to take action so as to bring
systemic improvement to address this issue.

33
3.8 The Committee is constrained to observe that the unregistered FBOs and FBOs operating
with expired licenses pose a threat to public health. The Committee would like to emphasize that
the Food Licensing and Registration System (FLRS) should be updated regularly mentioning the
name of the FBOs whose licenses have expired or cancelled. The Committee also would like to
point out that granting of licenses without complete paperwork by State Licensing Authorities
(SLAs) or Central Licensing Authority (CLA) indicate a casual approach of the authorities since
granting of licenses and issuing registration certificate is vital to ensuring a stringent food safety
regime and such job should be done meticulously and seriously. A robust and reliable database
on FBOs needs to be prepared for effective monitoring of FBOs. The Ministry should also take
initiative towards encouraging the States/UTs to establish a system of inter-connected databanks
on FBOs, food licenses issued, cancelled, expired etc and a centralized databank may also be
created to which all State Food Regulatory Authorities should be linked.
3.9 On a specific query about details of FBOs/manufacturing companies identified for making unsafe
food by FSSAI, the Committee was informed that in order to check presence of unsafe food, regular
surveillance, monitoring, inspection and random sampling of food products were being done by the
officials of Food Safety Departments of States/UTs. In cases where the food samples were found to be
non conforming, recourse was taken to penal provisions under Chapter IX of the FSS Act. A list of
samples drawn, tested, found non conforming and penalty imposed in the years 2015-2016 and 2016-2017
is placed at Annexure V and VI respectively.
3.10 The Committee notes that out of total 72,499 samples analyzed in 2015-2016, 16,133 were
found to be adulterated and misbranded. 1450 criminal and 8529 civil cases were filed which
resulted in conviction in 540 cases. Similarly, in the year 2016-2017, out of 78,340 samples
analyzed, 18,325 were found to be adulterated and misbranded. 13,080 cases were filed which
resulted in conviction in 1605 cases. The Committee finds that there is a huge gap between the
total number of cases filed and total number of convictions as the rate of conviction seems to
be quite low. This indicates that the FBOs involved in supplying adulterated or misbranded food
products are not caught and get away easily without punishment. The Committee express its
anguish over the low conviction rates and desires the Ministry to undertake scrutiny as to
whether the low conviction rates are a result of shortage of trained manpower, lax enforcement
or the statute being riddled with inadequacies and take remedial measures accordingly. The
Committee would also like the Ministry to pursue the matter of low conviction rates with the
Ministry of Law and Justice to find a solution to the problem. The Committee believes that
regular monitoring, inspection and lifting of samples needs to be done by the Central / State
Authorities so as to save the people from consuming adulterated and misbranded food items.
3.11 The Committee would like the food authorities to take stringent actions against FBOs
working without licenses and impose fines and penalty against the errant. Such FBOs pose risk
to the lives of many and should be suitably punished /penalized as per the provisions of the Act.
The regular offenders should also be given wide publicity in newspapers and social media so that
the masses are aware of the wrong practices. The Committee emphasizes the optimum utilization
of the food testing labs by collection and analysis of more and more food samples. FSSAI may
prescribe a minimum number of samples to be collected by each Food Inspector. Online reporting
of all the samples tested by food analysts should be documented and close scrutiny of these

34
samples should be done on a daily basis. Persons involved in sampling and analysis should be
accountable for cases which fail in court due to wrong sampling and wrong analysis.
3.12 Several stakeholders have pointed out various practical difficulties in implementation of the licensing
and registration provisions of the FSS Act.
3.13 Representative of Rice Miller's Association, Gondia in his written submission has suggested that the
Condition of licence no. 4 requiring a technical person to supervise production be removed. He was also
not in favour of condition of license no. 12 relating to lab tests and condition of license no. 14 requiring
mandatory licensing of FBOs for buying and selling.
3.14 The Confederation of All India Traders CAIT stated that this provision of verifying License of
Vendor before selling him food and taking down details is impractical and causing harassment to sellers/
buyers. It should be the duty of the State and Food Safety Officer to inspect all FBOs and find out those
who have not bothered to obtain license and penalize them accordingly. It seems that instead of doing
this the sellers/buyers are being punished under the cover of arbitrary and unjust provision.
3.15 FSSAI in its reply clarified that Condition No. 4 of the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and
Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations is about the requirement of a technical person for ensuring
the technical processing steps involved in the manufacturing/processing of food products. It is an
essential condition for ensuring compliance of food safety. Therefore, it is not feasible to remove the
said condition. The condition No. 12 relates to lab tests which are essential to ensure food safety. The
condition No. 14 helps in ensuring that the buying and selling FBOs both are FSSAI Licensed and it also
helps in traceability of food products.
3.16 The Committee agrees with the reply of the FSSAI that Condition No 4, 12 and 14 are
fundamental to ensuring food safety. FSSAI should follow a mechanism to ensure that the Food
Business Operators follow and strictly adhere to these conditions. The Committee also notes that
the manufacturers/importers/distributors have to be heedful that they buy and sell food products
only from licensed/registered vendors. Also, the State Licensing Authorities and the Food Safety
Officer should ensure through timely inspections that these conditions are being followed by the
FBOs. A technical help in the food business premise will help in effective control and safety of
the production process. Hence, these conditions are essential to ensure that safe manufacturing
practices are being followed by the food business operators. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that the FBOs should strictly buy/sell only from vendors who hold a valid FSSAI
license. The Committee believes that FSSAI alone cannot enforce the FSS Act. It is the duty and
the responsibility of the FBOs, vendors, consumers to be vigilant about food safety issues and
help in effective implementation of the Act. Needless to mention, food safety can be ensured by
combined effort of the Government, the FBOs and the consumers as food safety is a shared
responsibility. Industry should also play a proactive role when it comes to manufacturing safe
food and complying with the food safety norms.
3.17 Representative of Centre for Public Health and Food Safety, New Delhi submitted that the Food
Safety Management System (FSMS) certificate and recall plan should be mandatory for every FSSAI
licensed premises as a part of FSS Act.

35
3.18 With regard to this query FSSAI submitted that a separate regulation is being notified as regards
recall plan. FSMS Plan/Certificate is already one of the documents to be furnished while applying for
State/Central License. But in the absence of the same, FBOs have to give a self declaration to the effect
that they will ensure to fulfill the requirements of FSS Act, 2006, its rules and regulations and their
facility shall comply with the general hygiene and sanitary requirements as mentioned in Schedule 5 of
FSS (Licensing and Registration of Food Business) Regulations, 2011.
3.19 The Committee observes that the purpose of licensing and registration is to ensure that
minimum safety standards are in place with food operators before they offer products to
consumers. However, certain unscrupulous Food Safety Officers/ Food Inspectors indulge in
unethical and illegal practices without concern for the health of common people, as a result of
which unhygienic factories are being given licences in gross violation of the quality norms
prescribed under the FSS Act 2006. With a view to curb such corrupt practices, the Committee
recommends that no factory visit or inspection should be done without photographic evidences
of the factory's hygienic conditions. All inspection reports must be accompanied by photographs
of all the sections of the factory.
3.20 The Committee also recommends that all sampling and inspections should be made on real
time basis and result(s) of samples should be reported online from the site itself with photographs
of the sample and the witnesses.
3.21 The Committee also desires to be informed of how many licences of FBOs were cancelled
during the three years for not meeting the quality norms prescribed under the FSS Act 2006.
3.22 The Committee takes note of the recent incident of the selective recall of Maggi Noodles in the
country. Such recall of a food product of a big brand is not common in India whereas, in other countries
food companies frequently recall their food products. The Maggi noodles label read "no added MSG
(monosodium glutamate)" whereas high amount of lead and MSG was found in the Maggi packets. The
Committee notes that till 2015 no Food recall System was implemented. Some States had banned Maggie
while in some other States; Maggi was still available in the market. The test results were also questioned
and non-accreditation of laboratories that conducted the tests was brought to light.
3.23 The Committee recommends that there has to be uniform structure across the country with
respect to the guidelines to be followed in case of exigencies warranting food recall. The Committee
notes that FSSAI had released guidelines for food recall and had directed the top 200 food
companies to submit their food recall plans. The Committee recommends examining of the Food
recall Plan of all the companies on the same lines. This should also include the procedure to be
followed at the time of an emergency food recall. FSSAI should ensure that every food business
irrespective of its size should have a food recall plan and ensure compliance with the recall
procedure. The Committee calls upon every FBO to mandatorily submit a Food Safety Management
System (FSMS) Plan during application for a new FSSAI License or renewal of FSSAI License.
FSSAI has to ensure that the food recall guidelines are implemented stringently.
3.24 The Committee notes that according to various reports, about 30% food supplied in India
is either adulterated or unsafe and recommends that no unsafe food products should be allowed
to be kept on the shelf as such products pose serious health issues. The Committee, therefore,

36
recommends that FSSAI should provide recall reports on its website on a fortnightly basis so that
consumer is aware of all adulterated or misbranded food products. The Committee is aware that
FSSAI has constituted a Risk Assessment Cell to carry out functions of risk assessment to
support risk management and risk communication. The Committee desires to be apprised of the
findings of the Risk Assessment Cell and the action taken thereon.
3.25 Indian Beverage Association submitted that currently, licenses for proprietary foods have mandatorily
to be obtained from the Central Licensing Office. Licensing criteria should be based on turnover/capacity
as in case of standardized food as it is not covered under Schedule 1 of licensing and registration
regulations. State Licensing Authority is well equipped to grant licenses for proprietary foods as per
current definition. The Association also submitted that the provision should be made for On-line payment
of fee for state licenses as well as abolition of the requirement for submission of physical copies.
Queries/concerns, if any, of licensing offices should be communicated in one go. Queries arising from
the response submitted by FBO should, however, be permitted. Licensing Officers should not take more
than 7 days time to issue licenses after submission of a complete response to queries.
3.26 FSSAI in its reply submitted that Proprietary food is an article of food that has not been standardized
under Schedule I of FSS (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011 as the
license for proprietary food fall under Central License category only. License for these products is
required to be obtained only from Central Licensing Authority irrespective of turnover/capacity. This
provision has also been made applicable to Importer and Exporter. FSSAI is already in the process to
make the payment system online for licensing and registration purpose. For this, FSSAI is in talk with
States/UTs to use PayGov India system and States/UTs were requested to register their Treasury/Bank
Accounts of Food Departments with PayGov India for the purpose of transferring License/Registration
Fee.
3.27 FSSAI also informed that the requirement of submission of physical papers has already been
discontinued. FSSAI is in the process to streamline the system of online licensing and registration.
Further, Central Licensing Authority has been communicated to do the scrutiny of application for license
and query may be raised, if any in one go only. It is the also the responsibility of FBOs to respond to
the query raised by Licensing Authority in a serious manner to remove the deficiency in the application.
3.28 As per Sub-Regulation 2.1.4 (1) of FSS (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations,
2011- a license shall, subject to the provisions of these Regulations, be issued by the concerned Licensing
Authority within a period of 60 days from the date of issue of an application ID number on the receipt
of a complete application including the additional information if asked for. However, a comprehensive
change in the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations,
2011 was considered in 22nd Central Advisory Committee meeting held on 15th May 2018. The same
has also been shared and discussed with stakeholders for their suggestions/comments.
3.29 The Committee takes note of the fact that the proprietary food has been defined in regulation
2.12 of Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulations,
2011 as food which has not been standardized under these regulations but does not include any
normal food, food for special dietary use, functional food, nutraceutical, health supplement etc.
They can be made from milk/ milk products, cereals, eggs or meat products, vegetables, fruits
or nuts etc like ready to cook cereals including instant poha, upma, chips, instant coffee tea,

37
masala mixes, mixes used for making items like cakes, sweets etc. In case of proprietary food,
there is always a possibility of innovation. However, there are many other concerns associated
with proprietary food like permitted ingredients including food additives that can be used in the
proprietary food and chances of combinatorial effect of ingredients. The Committee is of the view
that at a time when States are struggling to provide basic food safety infrastructure, an additional
responsibility of granting licenses to proprietary food can be a burden. Until and unless there is
a proper scientific panel and research team in each food safety department, keeping a check on
the quality and safety of proprietary food can be a big issue. At present, many States do not even
have a separate food safety department, let alone a scientific research team. Therefore granting
licenses for Proprietary Food should be the prerogative of the Central Licensing Authority.
3.30 The Committee recommends that the process to make the online payment system for
licensing/registration should be expedited and proper awareness should be spread in the States.
The FBOs should be timely informed to remove any deficiency in the application. The Committee
would like the FSSAI to ensure speedy issuance of licenses to FBOs once they have submitted
their responses to the queries. The Committee strongly recommends adopting a fast track single
window approval system for the new Licenses/registrations and renewals of Licenses which will
also accelerate the ease of doing business.
3.31 Khadhya Tel Vyapari Association, Maharashtra submitted that provision for heavy 'late fee' for
Renewal of License be amended. The FBOs are required to submit 8 to 10 scheduled annual returns to
different Departments in time or face heavy fines/penalties. Such irrational, impracticable provisions and
undue powers to Authorities encourage corrupt practices. The Association suggested that such provisions
should be hassle free and practicable for which necessary amendments need to be introduced. The
Association also submitted that the provision for renewal of license be removed and instead License be
issued for whole life of business entity with permanent FSSAI number. Any changes in address or
addition of place should be allowed in same license with nominal fee. Again instead of renewal, there
should be nominal annual fee without requirement of document and no form filling.
3.32 They further submitted that license fee be adjusted in cases of transfer of license/change of address.
FSSAI license is issued for 5 years and most FBOs are inclined to obtain it for 5 years but when he
is compelled to change the premises and requires transfer of license, he has to pay fees for fresh license,
even though he had paid advance fees for some more years. To address this difficulty, fees paid for
remaining period be adjusted while granting license for transferred premises.
3.33 FSSAI in its written reply submitted that the penal provisions are necessary to deal with the cases
of non compliance/defaults. However, to inform the FBOs well in time about the renewal/annual reports
due, a sms/email alert system is already in place. FSSAI also submitted that there is an annual fee for
issue or renewal of license. The FBOs have the flexibility to apply for a period ranging from one year
to five years. A life time license is not desirable as in this case the fee may be quite high and it would
be difficult to keep tab of active FBOs. With regard to modification of license, it may be pointed out
that certain changes in license are allowed without any fee. It is only in cases of changes requiring a
revised license that a fee is charged for modification.
3.34 The Committee agrees with FSSAI that some stringent measures are essential for ensuring
that the FBOs comply with the FSS Act. The Committee believes that life time licenses are not

38
at all feasible and desirable as the information regarding the food business has to be timely
updated and checked. Life time licenses can result in lax compliance with the food safety
standards whereas requirement of annual returns and renewal of licenses ensures checks and
balances for compliance with the food safety norms.
3.35 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to a suggestion by a Chief Food Safety Officer, UP
for separate licensing and enforcement authorities compared to a single control of licensing and enforcement
for better checks and balances. It was argued that, under the control of district collector, two separate
authorities, one for licensing and other official assignment and another for monitoring enforcement of
the Act in the field will improve the implementation of the FSS Act. As of now, almost all the work except
generating licenses and inspecting premises for license assigned to Designated Officer (DO) are done by
the Food Safety Officers (FSOs) due to lack of staff. Since DO is in charge of food safety administration
of a district and also controls enforcement activity of FSO, this hampers the actual work and duties given
to FSOs.
3.36 The Committee is in agreement with the justification behind separating the two lines of
activities in terms of licensing and enforcement through FSOs. Due to staff shortage, the FSO
is burdened with multiple assignments and is not able to do justice with the main duties/tasks
assigned to him for enforcement of the FSS Act. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to
the Ministry and Food authority to take into cognizance the ground realities and contemplate
solutions for the same apart from augmenting the manpower.
FOOD SAFETY SURVEY
3.37 FSS Act provides that a State Food Safety Commissioner should carry out survey of industrial units
engaged in the manufacture or processing of food in the State. FSSAI is also mandated to conduct
survey for enforcement and administration of the Act. FSS Regulations state that it is the duty of a Food
Safety Officer (FSO) to maintain a database of all the food business operations within the area assigned
to him. For proper enforcement of the FSS Act, sufficient number of FSO is essential at all levels.
3.38 However, FSSAI in its submission stated that it has not done any survey on food business operators
in the country. It is felt; such surveys are neither feasible nor desirable. FSSAI states as of now, due
to lack of adequate staff and related resources, no baseline survey has been conducted by FSSAI. States,
however, do undertake such survey of Food Business Operators as States/UTs have been asked to
undertake such surveys regularly to bring all FBOs under their respective jurisdiction as required for
FSSAI licensing / registration. The State Authorities are required to bring in maximum number of FBOs
under the ambit of FSSAI through Licensing/Registrations by taking following measures:
i. Special drives for identification of FBOs may be carried out by State Authorities.
ii. The data available with State agencies may be utilized for the purpose of identification of
FBOs, which can thereafter be checked with Food Licensing and Registration System (FLRS)
to identify unlicensed/unregistered FBOs.
3.39 The Committee observes that FSSAI has left the task of undertaking the surveys to the
States ignoring the fact that the State machinery is not equipped to take such surveys. This has
also been highlighted in the CAG Report. CAG Audit found that neither FSSAI nor the Food

39
Safety Commissioners of States have conducted any such survey. The very perception of FSSAI
that surveys are neither feasible nor desirable is not acceptable. The Committee feels that while
FSSAI is completely ignorant of the importance of surveys, the fact is that such surveys will not
only help in better insight of the food safety situation in the country but also make monitoring
and surveillance easy.
3.40 The Committee is of the view that the importance of surveys cannot be underestimated and
therefore, FSSAI should conduct timely surveys for the identification of food business operators.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that both FSSAI and State Food Authorities must focus
on conduct of surveys. The need of the hour is to augment the manpower who can conduct the
survey at the Central as well as State level. Till the time, the required manpower is arranged,
the FSSAI and the State Food Authorities can very well outsource the work of surveys to a third
party.
3.41 The Committee has been informed that changes in the regulation and the corresponding FLRS online
system were discussed in the 19th CAC meeting held on 17.05.2017. Thereafter, in the Authority meeting
held on 21st February, 2018 proposed changes were agreed in principle. The proposed changes in the
Food Safety (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011 and the corresponding
IT system were deliberated upon in the 22nd CAC Meeting held on 15-05-2018 as enumerated below:-
(i) In the proposed changed Regulations, annual inspection of FBOs are being made mandatory
either by Food Authority officials or through empanelled third party food safety auditors.
(ii) W ith a view to introduce uniformity and transparency in food safety inspections on pan India
basis an IT enabled system - Food Safety Compliance through Regular Inspection and Sampling
(FoSCoRIS) has been introduced.
(iii) A comprehensive review of the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of
Food Business) Amendment Regulations, 2017 was undertaken and the draft Food Safety and
Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Business) Amendment Regulations, 2017
are under the process of being made operational.
(iv) The amended regulations also provide for minimum sanitary and hygienic requirements for
establishing a small slaughter house coming under State license.
(v) Based on the requirements specified under these amended regulations and the classification of
food businesses as per the Food Licensing and Registration System (FLRS), sector-specific
inspection checklists have been developed to facilitate the regulatory staff in conducting
inspections of food establishments. These cover important areas/requirements to be captured
and observed by the regulatory staff inspecting the establishments to check for compliance
to the GHP/GMP requirements as specified under the regulations.
(vi) Sector specific Guidance Documents on Food Safety Management System (FSMS) have been
developed by FSSAI, with the aim of facilitating the FBOs (especially the small and medium
businesses)to implement the food safety and hygiene requirements specified under the regulations.
(vii) These documents will address the manufacturing process, pre requisite programmes, control
of operations, critical control points and sample HACCP plans with a clear segregation of

40
mandatory and recommended practices to guide the FBOs of the particular sector in
implementation of the said regulations in a simple and easily understandable manner.
(viii) Under the FSS regulations, there is a mandatory requirement of displaying FSSAI License
Number at food premises. Usually, the FSSAI license number is not visible to the consumer
clearly. To change the overall consumer perceptibility of consumers about FSSAI, Food Safety
Display Boards (FSDBs) have been introduced on a voluntarily basis at various food businesses
which deals directly with the consumers such as, retail stores, milk booths, vegetable and fruit
retail, meat shops, restaurants, street food vendors. FSDBs not only makes FSSAI registration/
license number visible but also informs the customer and the food handler about the important
food safety and hygiene practices required to keep food safe. Each of these practices have
been numbered for feedback purposes.
3.42 The Committee notes the changes proposed in the Food Safety (Licensing and Registration
of Food Business) Regulation 2011 and observes that until and unless the regulations are strictly
implemented, running food business without licenses will always pose a major challenge in
ensuring food safety. The FSS Act already empowers the Food Authority to conduct regular/
surprise inspections but the inspection system has proved to be very inefficient. The Committee
welcomes the mandatory annual inspection proposal by the Food Authority but only framing
regulation will not bring any change. The Committee recommends that FSSAI and the State Food
Authority should first ensure that the shortage of officers in the food safety regime is properly
addressed so that mandatory provision fetches the desired results. Needless to say, for this
officers with technical qualifications should be recruited and required posts should be created.
The Committee recommends a strict Food Safety compliance through regular inspection and
sampling system (FoSCoRIS) in all the States to bring transparency in food safety inspection and
sampling. Regular inspections and awareness among the FBOs is also necessary for implementation
of good hygienic and manufacturing practices. All the FBOs involved in processing, manufacturing,
packing, storing, catering and distribution need to be educated about self compliance. The
Committee recommends that the FBOs should clearly display the FSSAI License number at their
food premises and the practice of Food Safety Display Boards (FSDBs) should be encouraged
among all the FBOs. Until and unless the FBOs comply with the present regulatory standards,
new regulatory reforms will not succeed in developing a food safety culture in the country.
3.43 The Committee also notes that the rejection rate of the licenses for renewal is very low in
the country. The Committee recommends that licenses for FBOs should not be issued blindly and
a well established mechanism should be developed for scrutinizing such FBOs who apply for
renewal of the license. In developed countries like US, application of renewal licenses is taken
seriously and there is a high rate of rejections due to non-conforming of food standards. FSSAI
should also examine the FBO's previous track record with regards to compliance with the FSS
Act. Any previous non-compliance should be taken seriously. The Committee recommends
expediting the development of an e-portal that will create a compliance history of food business
which the Food Authority can refer while renewing licenses. The Food Authority should also
develop a detailed inspection plan for companies that apply for renewal of licenses and mandatorily
check the premises of the FBOs.

41
INSPECTIONS
3.44 Inspection are an important part of the mandate of food authorities. The Committee has been given
to understand that FSSAI has developed inspection checklist for facilitating FSOs to efficiently inspect
the FBOs. The checklist is used to identify the level of compliance with each requirement that is set out
in the regulations.
3.45 Representative of Centre for Public Health and Food Safety has also suggested that the provision
of inspection shall be made mandatory before issuance of any license or at the most the inspection be
mandatory post issuance of license /registration but within 3 months.
3.46 FSSAI has submitted that, a comprehensive change in the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing
and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011 in the light of Government's emphasis on ease
of doing business without compromising food safety was proposed and placed before Central Advisory
Committee at its meeting held on 15th May 2018. The same has been shared and discussed with all
stakeholders. After considering further comments changes would be notified.
3.47 The Committee is of the view that Inspections form the core of a food safety network and
therefore FSSAI or the State food authorities should conduct inspections before issuance of any
license or make inspections mandatory post issuance of license/registration. There should be a
provision wherein the FBO should submit a detailed plan to be adopted in case of an emergency
situation.
3.48 The CAG audit noted that though the FSS regulations provide for inspection of registered FBOs at
least once a year, no such periodicity is prescribed in respect of licensed FBOs. The periodicity of
inspection is left to the discretion of DOs. CAG reports further points out that neither FSSAI nor States
had any documented policy or procedures for risk based inspections (including sampling) of domestically
produced food.
3.49 The Committee feels that in a country like India that has a large unorganized food sector
with many small food businesses, it becomes more important to conduct inspections in a time
bound manner. The DOs and FSOs should inspect the premises of FBOs and guide the
manufacturers to maintain proper hygienic conditions. There should be surprise inspections.
Every effort must be made so that the FBOs do not evade the inspection process. In view of
various instances of corruption cases reported and to avoid nexus between the FBOs and lower
level employees of the Food Regulatory Authorities, the place of inspection should be decided by
the State Food Commissioners and the reports of the inspection should be directly submitted to
him. The Committee would like to point out that the United States has a separate agency called
Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) that conducts inspections and monitors food related
establishments. It is a separate authority handling the inspection system in the United States for
which their inspectors undergo a unique training program. The FSIS inspectors ensure that the
meat, poultry and egg products are safe and do not result in any food borne diseases. The
Committee would like FSSAI to introduce a specialized training programme for food inspections
on similar lines. This will ensure timely inspection and help in identification of the FBOs engaged
in the manufacture of adulterated or unsafe products. Further, the inspection process should be
streamlined to ensure that the same is used to regulate and monitor food safety and not harass
FBOs.

42
3.50 The Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Association of India (PFNDAI) in its written submission
inter alia, emphasized the importance of risk based inspections. The data obtained on food failures
through inspections at the marketplace or factories would provide results for the preventive system of
the Food control. This technical data can help in identifying food sectors/categories that contribute the
major failures at a region as well as national level. PFNDAI stated that Delhi's FDA(GNCT) has established
an electronic database of food failures and has made the data accessible to all since 2011,though it does
not summarize or provide a trend analysis for preventing or reducing the failures. PFNDAI further, states
that such a system will optimize inspection deployments, help trace the source of failures, trigger
issuance of improvement notices and monitor trends thereafter. Nevertheless, it is pertinent to note that
other State FDA's have not established such a system.
3.51 The Committee recommends that a risk based inspection program should be inducted. The
Inspectors should maintain a proper record of the inspections conducted. All the States/UTs
should establish an electronic database of food failures and testing reports. The Committee would
like to emphasize on creation of such an electronic database which will not only help in better
monitoring of the Food Business Operators but also shift the present system of random inspections
to focused surveillance.
3.52 Kerala Food Technologists Association (KEFTA) in its written submission to the Committee emphasized
on creation of a National Food Safety Database. Every country keeps a record of food safety related
issues and corrective actions that are taken thereafter. Monitoring of even the corrective actions is done
to ensure that recurrence is avoided in the best possible way. India still doesn't have any such data. Many
of the food and water borne issues are not even recognized in terms of food safety and are treated as
a normal medical condition.
3.53 The Committee is of the view that the importance of surveys and their outcomes can very
well be documented to help in creation of a national database relating to food safety. The
Committee, therefore, recommends creation of a National Food Safety Database so that India is
better prepared to tackle any outbreak of food borne diseases and other food safety related
issues. This database can be accessed by the consumers, food industry and other private and
public health organization at large. It will ensure efficient risk assessment and better preventive
actions can be taken.
LIFTING OF SAMPLES
3.54 CAG in its report has highlighted that samples lifted were not in commensurate with number of
licenses and registrations issued. In 53 selected districts of 10 selected States for the period 2011-16,
the food authorities lifted 51,972 samples of food articles for analysis out of 7,17,628 FBOs. The lifting
of samples was less than 10% of total licsensed and registered FBO in 29 (55%) of the 53 selected
districts and out of which, in 7 districts, the lifting of samples was below 1%. It was further noted that
5 of the 10 selected States did not fix any targets for lifting of samples. In the remaining 5 States, the
targets were fixed without risk assessment for different categories of FBOs which were not achieved
by most of the FSOs. The State authorities attributed the non-achievement of targets to shortage of staff
and paucity of funds.
3.55 Violations of procedure for lifting food samples were also reported by CAG. The FSOs informed
that they were not trained in the procedure of lifting, keeping and sending samples to the laboratory. The

43
DOs also failed to monitor the status of receipt of samples sent for analysis. Non-availability of adequate
infrastructure for sampling was also reported due to which the samples were spoiled, damaged or
deteriorated and were not fit for analysis. Lifting samples of perishable items was also not possible due
to absence of proper storage facilities.
3.56 As per FSSAI, it has introduced Food Safety Compliance through Regular Inspection and Sampling
System (FoSCoRIS), a web based real time inspection platform to verify food safety and hygiene
standards by food businesses as per regulatory norms. This will introduce uniformity and transparency
in food safety inspections.The basic objectives of the FoSCoRIS Application are:
(i) To create a district-wise and State-wise food safety compliance matrix of the country.
(ii) Create a Food safety compliance verification platform.
(iii) To reduce the time of Inspection process and action initiated.
(iv) To build a transparent system within the inspections framework.
(v) Create a platform to authenticate and validate the inspection reports.
(vi) To ensure that the inspections are actually done and without any deviations.
(vii) The process shall initiate Quick Response during Food Safety Emergencies.
3.57 So far, three States, namely, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Punjab have successfully implemented
FoSCoRIS and a total of 813 inspections have been conducted using FoSCoRIS.
3.58 The Committee feels that analysis of the sample in the food testing labs will be successful
only when the sample that is picked up by a FSO is properly stored and transported to the
laboratory. The guidelines on sampling have to be followed. The FSOs have to be trained,
qualified in the procedure of lifting, keeping and sending samples properly so that the samples
that are sent to the labs give accurate results. It is necessary to specify a time limit by which
a FSO should submit the samples to the Food Analyst for laboratory analysis.
3.59 The Committee appreciates the initiative of FSSAI in launching FoSCoRIS and recommends
that it should be implemented by all the States/UTs. This platform has features like geo-tagging,
time–stamping of inspections and real-time verification. This IT enabled system will introduce
uniformity and transparency in food safety inspections on pan India basis. The FSO should be
trained on handling the devices and they should conduct inspection through these devices which
have been provided by FSSAI. The information shared by FSO through this system should be
constantly checked by the Designated Officers and the State Food Safety Commissioners. Web
based FoSCoRIS System in all the States/UTs would ensure that existing discrepancy in food
inspection and subsequent lifting, storing and dispatching samples is eliminated and the Food
Safety Officers become more accountable, efficient in their tasks.
3.60 Several stakeholders including UP Food Safety Officers' Cadre Association have pointed out that no
rules are prescribed under Rules 2.3.2 (1) to take action for seizure of food and there are no procedure
for disposal of seized stock or time limit or no directions are given to the D.O. for disposal of seized
stock (As it was prescribed under section 11(5) of PFA Act).

44
3.61 FSSAI in its reply informed that presently, the Commissioners of Food Safety, States/UTs are taking
decisions on the disposal of seized articles of food. However, FSSAI is collecting the information from
States/UTs about the procedure being followed by them with regard to disposal of seized articles. Once
this information is available, a suitable procedure would be firmed up to be followed by all. Powers of
seizure are conferred on the Food Safety Officer under Section 38 (b) of FSS Act, 2006. The Commissioner
of Food Safety & Designated Officer shall exercise the same powers as are conferred on the Food Safety
Officer by following the same procedure specified in Section 29 (6) of the Act.
3.62 The Committee recommends that FSSAI should expedite the process of framing up suitable
guidelines for disposing off the seized articles. The Food Safety Officer and the Designated
Officers need to be trained on the disposal of seized articles of food so that the seized articles
do not pose any threat. This procedure should be followed by all the States and stringent actions
should be taken against erring food officials.
TRAINING OF FBOS
3.63 The Committee has been given to understand that there is a need to train FBOs to adhere to hygienic
and safety parameters for food safety and also to make them aware about food manufacturing or
processing practices.CAIT has suggested that training should also be provided at reasonable cost, to
employers and responsible employees at convenient locations and at times convenient for trainers and
trainees. Training offered by institutions such as National Agriculture and Food Analysis Research
Institute and MIT College of Food Technology are general in nature and not industry specific. They are
for long periods and would be time consuming for a person running business. Short term courses giving
"need to know" training for specific small industries are required. They should be available at number
of venues close to industry pockets.
3.64 Representative of Nag Vidarbha Chamber of Commerce (NVCC) submitted that FSSAI has made
Food Safety Training and Certification (FOSTAC) compulsory for all Food Business Operators through
their authorized trainers who are charging heavily for the same. Instead the training should be imparted
by FSSAI or the Food Department free of cost, as they are already charging fees for issuing Registration/
Licence under Food Safety and Standards Act. Charging additional fees for training would be harassment
and uneconomical. Moreover, the training should be imparted by senior and experienced officers of Food
and Drug Administration as they possess more practical and field experience to deal with the problems
of the local FBOs. This will help improve the confidence of FBOs to understand and follow the
provisions of the law.
3.65 A concerted effort has also been made to raise the bar for food safety through by way of training
of food handlers and their supervisors. All food business premises are required to have one trained food
safety supervisor. A Food Safety Training and Certification (FoSTaC) system for food businesses across
the food value chain has been created with 17 short duration programs for different kinds of food
businesses. More than 25000 personnel have been trained so far. Officers of the State/ UT Governments
and other agencies responsible for enforcement of the Act are also being trained continually and so far
11 training programmes have been conducted where 355 such personnel have been imparted training.
FSSAI also submitted that at present there are 122 Training Partners and their number is still increasing.
FBOs can negotiate regarding the fee. It is not possible to conduct such trainings only through officials
of FSSAI or State Food Department as adequate numbers of officers are not available for the purpose.

45
3.66 The Committee recommends development of specific training modules for the manufacturers,
importers, sellers, distributors and the FBOs. The training should be industry specific and for a
shorter period. Regular trainings should be conducted for FBOs and small industries to adequately
equip them to comply with the standards of the FSS Act. Training program can also act as a
mechanism to check the status of FBOs, the validity of their licenses and as a tool to keep them
updated of the changes in the food safety environment in the country. As regards training fees,
the Committee recommends that the training should be imparted free of cost for small food
businesses. The Committee is very well aware of the shortage of staff but every effort should
be made by FSSAI to conduct some training programme in a year for the FBOs. FSSAI/State
Food Safety Authorities should also ensure that the training partners who conduct training
programmes are experienced and skilled. A holistic training program dealing with compliance
with the FSS Act, good manufacturing practices, Safe food handling, practices, guidelines, hygiene
standards etc. should be conducted at regular time intervals.
SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER
3.67 The Committee observes that the shortage of staff in FSSAI as well as the State Food Authorities
is the biggest obstacle in achieving the mandate of FSSAI. The staff constraint has forced FSSAI to
delegate the enforcement powers in respect of central licenses to the States/UTs but States do not have
any system to manage the central licenses that are issued. This weak mechanism leads to unregistered
and unlicensed food business operators continuing their business and supplying potentially harmful food
to the general public.
3.68 CAG has also made the same observations and recommended the following in its report :
(i) The Ministry/FSSAI may take steps to expeditiously notify the recruitment regulations and fill
up vacancies.
(ii) The Ministry may also comprehensively review the engagement of all the contractual employees
appointed by FSSAI.
(iii) The Ministry and FSSAI may frame more effective measures to persuade the State food safety
authorities to fill up the large number of vacancies in the cadres of Designated Officers and
Food Safety Officers.
3.69 Kerala Food Technologists Association (KEFTA) has pleaded that the number of Food Safety
Officers should be increased in a State. In Kerala which has a population of around 3.45 crores , there
are 160 FSO i.e. 1 FSO per 2.5 lakh of the people whereas there may be around 10000 food processing
industries in the State. At this ratio, food safety can be ensured only in papers and not in practice.
Presently a FSO is there in every state assembly constituency whereas the area is vast and effective
administration of safety norms is not possible.
3.70 FSSAI regional offices issue Central Licenses as per provisions of FSS Act, 2006, Rules and
Regulations provide for close scrutiny of documents and inspection. Due to staff constraint, FSSAI has
delegated to the States / UTs the enforcement powers in respect of central licenses. A proposal for
sanctioning 960 posts has been submitted to the Government on 23.01.2018 for approval. The posts
include posts for the regional offices also. Once adequate staff is available, this matter would be reviewed

46
and responsibility of enforcement is respect of central licenses would be either fully or partially taken
over by FSSAI.
3.71 The Committee has been informed that in the 12th meeting of Central Advisory Committee held on
1st August, 2014, it was recommended that all States/UTs should have one Designated Officer(DO) for
every district and one Food Safety Officer(FSO)for each Development Block in rural areas and one FSO
for every 1000 FBOs in urban areas. States have been asked time and again to augment the enforcement
staff in their respective areas.
3.72 The Committee has learnt that the State Food Authorities are grossly understaffed and this
results in inadequate supervision of the FBOs. As per information given by FSSAI, the total
number of Food Safety Officers in the country has increased from 2324 to 3130 i.e. 34.7% in
last three years. States where the increase in no. of FSOs is significant are Uttar Pradesh
(200%), Karnataka (191%), Delhi (100%), Kerala (97%) and Gujarat (25%). However, there are
some States where there has been a decline in no. of FSOs e.g. Punjab (43%), Rajasthan (25%)
and Madhya Pradesh (13%) but this number is not sufficient. If the manpower requirements of
Food Regulatory Authorities do not correspond with their volume of work such shortage is bound
to strain their ability to discharge their mandated functions efficiently.
3.73 The Committee, therefore, desires the Ministry to draw an action plan in coordination with
State/UT Governments for overcoming the shortage of manpower of Food Regulatory Bodies. The
Committee also recommends that as a short-term measure, professionally qualified persons
should be engaged on short-term contract till adequate manpower is made available. Due to the
very sensitive nature of regulatory work, great care will need to be used to ensure that they do
not indulge in corrupt and illegal practices.
3.74 The Committee recommends that all States/UTs should have 1 DO for every District and 1
FSO for each Development Block in rural areas and 1 FSO for every 1000 FBOs in urban Areas.
FSSAI has informed that a proposal to increase the staff strength of FSSAI has been taken up
by the Government. The Committee is hopeful that the proposal for increasing the staff strength
of FSSAI to monitor the centrally licensed FBOs directly would be considered favorably by the
Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the issue of creation of posts may be
expedited. The recruitment regulations should be notified and vacancies for the post of Designated
Officers and Food Safety officers should be filled immediately.
3.75 The Committee has been informed by UP Food Safety Officer's Association and Maharashtra State
Food Inspector Association in their written submissions that as per the recent amendment in the FSS
Act, any person having degree in any field of education is eligible for the position of designated officer.
The appointment of non science background officer as Designated Officer may hamper the functioning
the work of food safety. The Designated Officer without such science background may not even have
basic knowledge about the technical issues. Many issues related to the implementation of the Act require
sound scientific knowledge while investigating complicated matters. Moreover, the actions of Designated
Officers are subject to scrutiny while the case is pending before Court of Law including Apex Court.
There may be cases where a Food Safety Officer is technically more qualified than his immediate
superior. This will definitely have huge negative impact on the implementation of the Act and fair disposal
of the matters related to Public Health.

47
3.76 It has also been pointed out that there is no dearth of science graduates in India and there should
not be any difficulty to recruit a Designated Officer, possessi ng a minimum degree in Science with
Chemistry as one of the subjects or at least one of the educational qualifications prescribed for Food
Safety Officer. Further, considering the duties and powers to be performed by the Designated Officer,
it will be appropriate to add at least 5 years experience of Food Safety Officer for the recruitment of
the Designated Officer as per previous advisory of FSSAI.
3.77 The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that before the amendment, minimum
qualification of bachelors' degree in Science with Chemistry as one subject and compulsory
training was required for a DO which has been done away with. The Committee fails to understand
the reason for diluting the qualification of DO from technical to non-technical. The Committee
recommends that the previous qualification requirement and necessary training for a DO should
be restored. Only full time officers should be appointed as DO so that better food safety
surveillance mechanism can be enforced. The Committee would like to emphasize that the
Designated Officer (DO) is a key post to ensure effective compliance and enforcement of the
food safety law in the country. At the State level, the Food Safety Commissioner is the head of
the enforcement machinery and the DO is responsible for the food safety administration of a
district. DO acts as the licensing authority and is authorized to issue or cancel licenses of FBOs
and gets the report and samples of article of foods from Food Safety Officer analyzed. DO can
prohibit the sale of any article which are not as per prescribed standards. The recent amendment
authorizes the Commissioner of Food Safety to appoint Sub-Divisional Officer of the area on
additional charge basis as the designated Officer and he/she is not required to undergo any
training.

48
CHAPTER 4
EFFICACY OF FOOD TESTING LABS
4.1 Food testing laboratories ensure an effective food safety mechanism in the country. The scientific
analysis in the food testing laboratories determines whether the food tested is fit for human consumption
and devoid of any form of contamination. To deal with the modern challenges of adulterated food,
strengthening of lab infrastructure is essential both in terms of capacity and capability building. Lack of
adequate lab infrastructure is one of the major challenges in achieving food safety.
4.2 The FSSAI Act provides for the establishment of food testing laboratories for analysis of food
samples. As per Sec 43 (1) of FSS Act, the Food Authority may notify food laboratories and research
institutions accredited by National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL)
or any other accreditation agency for the purpose of carrying out analysis of samples of Food analysts
under this act. As per sub-section (2) of section 43 of FSS Act, 2006, the Food Authority shall, establish
or recognise by notification, one or more referral food laboratory or laboratories to carry out the
functions entrusted to the referral food laboratory by this Act or any rules and regulations made
thereunder. Also, as per Section 16 (2) (e) read with Section 43 (1) and (2) of FSS Act, Food Authority
is mandated to notify food laboratories and research institutions to carry out analysis of samples and also
to recognize by notification, one or more referral laboratories to carry out the functions as provided by
the Act or any rules and regulations made there under. The Committee has been given to understand that
the FSSAI notifies laboratories which have attained NABL accreditation and apply for such recognition.
However, to clearly define all the procedural requirements, such as renewal, suspension, de-recognition,
audits etc. and to provide a legal base to the system already existing under the ambit of FSS Act 2006,
"Regulations for Recognition and Notification of Laboratories" have been provided.
4.3 As per the information submitted by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, FSSAI at present
has a network of 249 laboratories comprising 231 laboratories meant for primary testing laboratories
recognized and notified under section 43 (1) of FSS act, 2006 and 18 laboratories for appellate (referral)
testing recognized and notified under section 43 (2) of FSS act, 2006, as on 31st May 2018. The sector-
wise composition of all the laboratories recognized and notified by FSSAI are as below:-
(a) Primary testing laboratories (under section 43 (2) of FSS Act 2006)
State food laboratories 13
Central Government institutes/autonomous bodies 17
Private laboratories 142
Government laboratories under transition provision * 59
Total primary testing laboratories 231
(b) Referral food testing laboratories (under section 43 (2) of FSS Act 2006)
Central Government institutes/autonomous bodies 16
FSSAI's own laboratories 02
Total referral laboratories 18
(* brought from the PFA regime; recognized and notified under the transition provision under section 98 of FSS Act 2006)
48

49
4.4 Of the 18 referral laboratories, two namely (i) Food Standardization and Research Laboratory
(FRSL), Ghaziabad and (ii) Central Food Laboratory (CFL), Kolkata are under the direct control of
FSSAI. Both are being re-named as National Food Laboratory-Ghaziabad and National Food Laboratory-
Kolkata, respectively. FRSL-Ghaziabad is being developed as state of the art model food testing laboratory
under public-private-partnership mode and is likely to be ready by July, 2018. Likewise, CFL-Kolkata is
also being renovated and upgraded with sophisticated analytical instruments. Both the laboratories would
have end to end analytical capability to test any food samples for compliance as per FSS Act and Rules/
Regulations.
4.5 The Committee is happy to note that National Food Laboratory in Ghaziabad and Kolkata are being
upgraded with sophisticated instruments under public-private-partnership mode and would contribute
immensely in analytical and qualitative testing. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to set up two more
such labs with cutting edge technology and state-of-the-art facilities to cater to the needs of food testing
in all four regions of the country. Emphasis should also be given on research and development and
offering engagement of only the best of the talent in the country. These four labs would help in ensuring
a highly standardized analytical testing facility in the surrounding regions for sound food safety network.
4.6 Various stakeholders have voiced concerns about inadequate number of labs, poor lab infrastructure,
weak testing protocols, dubious accreditation standards, manpower crunch, poor functioning of State
food testing labs etc.
FOOD LABORATORIES AND THEIR INFRASTRUCTURE
4.7 Confederation of Indian Industry in its written submission have mentioned about lack of adequate
lab infrastructure in terms of capacity requirements to deal with modern challenges of international food
trade. They suggested that the Public laboratories are in urgent need of a major overhaul and upgradation
both in terms of equipment and manpower.
4.8 National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad has shared a general feeling among the stakeholders that
the number of labs available for testing of food samples is very low as compared to the demand.
According to them, there is a need to establish more accredited labs and/or strengthen the existing
laboratories.
4.9 Shri Umakant Dubey, President of Centre for Public Health and Food Safety, New Delhi advocated
that there should be adequate number of Food Testing labs to strengthen the food testing system. He
wanted the FSSAI to increase the number of Government Food Laboratory and qualified technical food
analyst for better implementation of food safety compliance. V oice Society have expressed that for
catering a big State like Uttar Pradesh, availability of only 3 State labs is too less. They added that all
Labs should be NABL accredited and the state laboratories should be treated as referral final laboratories
for sample testing. Dr. Cherukuri Sreenivasa Rao, Director (Pesticide management) National Institute of
Plant Health Management has suggested that it is essential to set up a District Food Testing Laboratories
in every district where the population exceeds 0.20 million.
4.10 Dr. (Mrs.) Ajit Dua, CEO, Punjab Biotechnology Incubator in her submission has suggested that
FSSAI should hasten the process of establishing the network of National Reference Laboratories in line
with similar global setups as regular method of validations is the need of the hour for authenticity of the
lab results.

50
4.11 Responding to the views put forward by stakeholders, FSSAI clarified that recognition and notification
of food testing labs is a continuous process. With respect to low number of labs in a state, it was
informed that setting up of food testing laboratories in a state was the prerogative of the concerned state.
In so far as Uttar Pradesh was concerned, there were 6 state food laboratories, of which 2 were NABL,
accredited as notified by FSSAI. FSSAI had also notified 7 other NABL accredited labs in Uttar Pradesh
for analysis of food samples.
4.12 The Committee takes note of the existing food testing infrastructure in the country and
observes that given the magnitude of the problem of food contamination and adulteration in the
country, availability of mere 266 laboratories in a country with 130 crore population are grossly
insufficient. The Committee is of the considered view that despite having a legal framework for
food regulation in place, India is struggling with enforcement of food safety norms and standards
because the number of food testing labs per million people in the country is far below than the
USA, China, Germany etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Centre should
provide financial assistance to strengthen the state food regulatory systems so that each State
has sufficient number of food testing laboratories proportionate to the population of the State.
The Committee desires to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to create new laboratories
and strengthen the existing laboratories as well.
TESTING PROTOCOLS AND PROCEDURES
4.13 It has been highlighted by many stakeholders that testing protocols and procedures need to be
uniform across all the labs in the country for accurate results.
4.14 Dr. (Mrs.) Ajit D ua, CEO, Punjab Bio-technology Incubator in her submission has suggested that
since microbiological testing is highly technical area, adequate training in microbiological testing should
be in place to strengthen the food safety ecosystem in the country.
4.15 Shri Umakant Dubey, President of Centre for Public Health and Food Safety, New Delhi has
suggested that every food lab should adhere to uniform procedure/methodology of testing. He wanted
a guidelines documents for tolerances of macro and micro nutrients based on the category of Food like
general foods, food supplements, food for special medical purposes etc. In case of variations from
declared value, all factors should be taken into consideration i.e. storage, shelf life, variability in analysis,
type of nutrients. FSSAI should develop monitoring system to ensure that every NABL lab analysis
samples within their scope granted by NABL.
4.16 Shri Kirti Rana, President Confederation of All India Traders , Maharashtra submitted that FBO has
right to make application for sending sample to Referral laboratory within 30 days of receipt of report
of Food Analyst. However, no time limit is fixed for Referral Laboratory for receiving the sample from
Designated officer or for giving its Report. Absence of time limit for Referral Lab creates problems as
the Referral Lab may end up testing the sample after its expiry date. He wanted such anomaly to be
corrected.
4.17 Shri Pradip Chakraborty informed the Committee that "for packaged drinking water, 51 parameters
have to be tested as per FSSAI Standards. A Water is treated as safe drinking water if all 51 parameters
are complied with. But, most labs, even laboratories accredited by the NABL, do not have facilities to
test more than 30 parameters. Our Central Food Laboratory, Kolkata, cannot test more than 32 parameters
and only on the basis of testing partial parameters, they give declaration that such product is safe or not."

51
4.18 CAG audit test check of 1,309 import cases had revealed that out of 303 samples referred to
laboratories by the regional offices of FSSAI in Chennai, Kolkata and Mumbai did not perform the checks
on all the prescribed parameters applicable to the specified food item, and still the concerned regional
offices issued No Objection Certificates (NOC) for the import of these items. The Ministry clarified that
the test are conducted on the most common and essential safety parameters so that the food items get
quick clearance. Interestingly according to CAG the FSSAI has not defined which of its parameters are
essential and which are not.
4.19 The Committee has been given to understand by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that
amendment seeking FSSAI manuals of food testing mandatory, for a food testing laboratory is under
process which would bring about uniformity in procedure/methodology. The Act provides for the upper
limit of micro nutrients in Foods upto the level of Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA) and anything
above it is not permitted. Further, before notifying laboratories, the FSSAI undertakes desktop audits on
the parameters for which the laboratory has NABL accreditation. FSSAI also closely interacts with NABL
to know the scope of accreditation of various test parameters of notified laboratories. Further, FSSAI's
IT based system called India Food Laboratory Network (INFoLNET) inter alia ensures that every NABL
lab analyses samples within their scope granted by NABL.
4.20 There are 18 referral food testing laboratories in the country. FSSAI is in the process of identifying
and setting up a national reference laboratory (NRL) to devise standards for routine procedures, reliable
testing methods, validation, development of new methods and ensuring proficiency in testing across the
food laboratories. Such network would enhance reliability of results and continuous adherence to international
laboratory practices which in turn would bring in uniformity in protocol and procedures, reduce litigations
among the stake holders/trade partners. FSSAI has identified 15 food testing laboratories provisionally
as National Reference Laboratories (NRLs) either on product or analyte basis.
4.21 The Committee is constrained to note that most food labs including those accredited by the
NABL do not have facilities to test articles of food on all parameters. For food safety, the samples
have to be checked for heavy metals contamination, pesticide residues, bacterial contamination,
toxic chemicals etc, therefore, it is important that the laboratories are functional, well equipped
and adequately staffed. The Committee treats microbiological analysis and testing as a specialized
field for a country like ours that has relatively high outbreak of food borne diseases. Specialized
training is required for the sampling procedure and the particular test method. There should be
a specialized technical officer for carrying out microbiological testing. The Food Safety Officer
should also be trained on the kinds of samples that have to be lifted for microbiological testing
and analysis. The Committee opines that all the food testing labs across the country should follow
a uniform procedure/methodology of testing so that accurate results are obtained. Further, a
guideline document for tolerances of macro and micro nutrients based on different categories of
food should be developed. There is also a need to have a Laboratory quality audit mechanism so
that all the samples are analysed qualitatively. There should be a fixed list of parameters for
testing a specific food item and such parameters should be uniform across the food testing labs
in the country. FSSAI should prepare a list of food safety parameters that should be mandatorily
checked. The Committee also recommends that the imported food should mandatorily be checked
for all the parameters. Manuals of food testing procedures must be brought out as early as
possible to ensure uniformity in testing and methodology.

52
4.22 The Committee recognises the importance of a network of National Referral Laboratories
whose very mandate is to set standards for testing, validation, development of new testing
methods etc. The Committee believes that these referral labs can play a pivotal role in bringing
about uniformity in food testing and prescription of parameters. The Committee recommends
that FSSAI needs to promote such labs which can help in enforcing and evolving new standards
in tune with best international practices. Such standards and methodology as furthered by these
referral labs would certainly impact the food testing labs across the country and make their
results credible and reliable. Further, specific time line must be specified for referral labs to give
their reports.
4.23 The media reports suggest that India is one of the top three countries to face rejections in
the monthly refusal list of food items by the Operational and Administrative System for Import
Support (OASIS) of the US FDA. The Committee understands that some private food testing
laboratories do not fail samples of their clients for fear of losing business. There have also been
instances when food samples tested in Indian food labs were found "of good quality" but failed
quality tests when they reached their foreign destinations. These rejections bring bad name to
the country. The Committee, considers this state of affairs as very serious and recommends that
an enquiry be conducted into such cases reported during the last three years so that the
responsibility is fixed and appropriate action is taken against the guilty.
4.24 The Committee also recommends that every laboratory recognised for food testing should
be required to submit daily report online to FSSAI about the number of samples tested and the
number of food articles found defective or unsafe.
NABL ACCREDITATION OF LABS
4.25 Para 2.2.1 (5) of the FSS (laboratory and sample analysis) Regulations, 2011 states that referral
laboratory shall maintain high standards of accuracy, reliability, credibility in the operations of laboratory
and achieving and maintaining required level of accreditation and reliability. NABL accredited laboratories
are expected to establish and prove their accuracy, reliability and credibility. As against 62 functional
public labs in States, only 13 are NABL accredited and notified by FSSAI. The remaining labs are
functioning under transitory provisions i.e. Section 98 of FSS Act, 2006.
4.26 CAG in its 37th Report has highlighted that FSSAI has not framed any Standard Operating Procedures
(SOP) for examination and approval of applications for empanelment, FSSAI also does not have any
mechanism to promptly update the status of NABL, accreditation of the empanelled laboratories.
4.27 CAG Audit has noted that food samples were sent to laboratories whose NABL accreditation had
expired. The audit test check of 1,803 import samples sent to empanelled food laboratories by the four
regional offices (Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata and Mumbai) between August 2011 and March 2016 revealed
that in 264 cases (14.64 per cent), the private laboratories did not have accreditation for the parameters
(e.g. ethyl alcohol, reducing sugar, esters as ethyl acetate, higher alcohol as amyl alcohol, aldehyde,
sulphur dioxide etc.) on which it conducted tests.
4.28 Apart from arranging NABL accreditation for laboratories, FSSAI is required to ensure that the
performance of empanelled laboratories remains consistently satisfactory. CAG report revealed that
FSSAI had no mechanism to ensure that the empanelled laboratories adhered to the conditions of

53
empanelment. In fact FSSAI is yet to formulate the procedure for surveillance audits, periodicity of
special/supervisory visits and suspension/ revocation of suspension, renewal, de-recognition, etc., of the
laboratories. As a result of this lacunae, there is no effective monitoring of the empanelled laboratories
by FSSAI.
4.29 Indian Beverage Association has suggested that all food laboratories especially those meant for
purpose of surveillance or enforcement must be accredited by NABL to assure robustness, accuracy,
reliability, fairness and credibility of testing. Kerala Food Technologists Association (KEFTA) in its written
submission before the Committee stated that there are only 3 NABL accredited analytical laboratories in
Kerala and they cannot cater to the testing needs of the State. Approval of laboratories should be purely
based on population, number of FBO license/registration, FSO circle and FSO field strength. Mini
laboratories for basic analysis can be setup at various areas as a cost effective and efficient mechanism.
Highly specific analysis of pesticides, antibiotics and heavy metals may be referred to the main analytical
laboratories at Kozhikode, Ernakulam and Thiruvananthapuram to test all kinds of food matrices for
surrounding districts. Smaller laboratories and sample collection points at various areas of surrounding
districts of these laboratories will cater the testing needs efficiently. This will distribute the workload and
evenly manage the quantum of samples throughout the state. There can be sample collection points at
various areas for ease of testing to food industries and general public.
4.30 The Committee observes that accredited competent food testing laboratories are fundamental
to ensuring a stringent food safety mechanism in the country. Today when food security is a
global concern, different methods are employed to increase the agricultural productivity and crop
production. Excessive use of pesticides and insecticides to increase agricultural production is not
an unknown phenomenon. Rampant use of pesticides and insecticides results in toxic chemical
entering the food chain. Similarly microbiological testing and chemical hazard analysis for foods,
drug residue testing etc. require a food testing laboratory fully equipped with modern technology.
The Committee is of the firm view that NABL accreditation of labs would certainly ensure high
standards of testing and enhance credibility and reliability. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that FSSAI must insist on NABL accreditation of all labs for efficient food quality
management system.
4.31 The Committee is constrained to note that absence of a mechanism to monitor NABL
empanelled labs is a matter of grave concern as the reliability and accuracy of results of testing
for various parameters remains questionable. The Committee feels that the very purpose of
accreditation of labs is defeated if they are not able to execute their mandate efficiently. The
Committee strongly recommends that the FSSAI should inspect, monitor and investigate these
labs at periodic intervals so that their efficacy in testing samples on the requisite parameters is
maintained.
STATUS OF MANPOWER IN LABS
4.32 One of the constraints in enforcing the mandate of testing food samples in labs is acute shortage
of technical manpower. Many stakeholders have suggested that FSSAI should increase numbers of Govt.
Food Laboratory and qualified technical food analyst for better implementation of food safety compliance.
4.33 CAG has observed that Food Analyst were not appointed in many food testing laboratories. FSSAI
has no data on eligible persons who were functioning as Public Analyst under the erstwhile Prevention

54
of Food Adulteration Act, and who continued to function in the posts of public analysts/food analysts
after the framing of FSS Rules. CAG has pointed out that amongst the test checked laboratories, there
is shortfall of technical staff ranged from 18 to 30% in 5 laboratories, 30-40% in 3 laboratories and more
than 40% in 10 laboratories. Even in Central Food Laboratory, Kolkata, there were only 29 technical staff
in position against the sanctioned strength of 53. Further, in response to an audit query on the availability
of qualified analyst in the empanelled notified food laboratories, FSSAI in December, 2016 admitted that
no such records were available. Test check in Audit revealed that out of the 16 notified food laboratories
to which the authorized officers in Delhi and Mumbai sent 49193 cases of imported food samples for
testing during 2015-16, 15 food laboratories did not have a food analyst qualified by FSSAI board.
Hence, tests conducted by State Food Laboratories and empanelled private laboratories that do not have
food analysts with the stipulated qualification were in violation of the rules.
4.34 Food Analysts Association had submitted that the proposal of technical manpower must be part of
regulation of FSS Act, 2006 and Regulation 2011 otherwise MoU made with State Government with
respect to manpower shall remain on paper. It was suggested that the FSSAI must have whole time
officers for implementing the Act. FSSAI being an autonomous institution under Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare has become more a place for part time and contract officers who want to come in Delhi
for personal reasons with the result that the tasks and strategies which were started by predecessors
remained unattended. FSSAI does not get officers recruited for key expertise posts through UPSC
recruitment and mostly these posts are filled by internet notice, E-mail and websites and without
advertisement in national newspapers. It has also been alleged that FSSAI never followed DoPT order
dated 4.11.2014 to identify posts which require experts and experienced officers and continued to appoint
non-experts, non relevant experience holders on key posts like Director/Advisor/Consultant. It has been
pointed out that the private food laboratories have neither any qualified analyst nor FSSAI have any
visiting officers to see working and reporting of most food laboratories. The Association has further
suggested that enforcement staff must be given place in constituting authority under section 5, 11 and
14 of FSS Act. As of now, food analyst, food safety officers, designated officers and Directors of
Referral Laboratories have not been included in composition of authority, scientific committee and panels
etc.
4.35 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in its submission informed that as on 28.3.2018, there
were 31 Public Analysts and 90 Food Analysts across the food laboratories in the country. As per the
information received from 143 such laboratories, it has been found that 58 food analysts were available
in these laboratories. Efforts were being made to ensure that all notified laboratories should have food
analysts as per the FSS Act.
4.36 The Committee has been given to understand that setting up of laboratories in States was the
prerogative of State Governments and they may increase the number of laboratories as per their requirement.
So far as status of food analyst in the country, FSSAI has been conducting Food Analyst Examination
regularly. At present, there are 277 qualified Food Analysts, besides 32 Public Analysts under erstwhile
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.
4.37 The Committee notes the acute shortage of manpower in the States/UTs as well as FSSAI.
Non-availability of the technical manpower is one of the primary reasons behind poor functioning
of these food testing laboratories. The number of food analyst is very low in the country considering
the magnitude of food adulteration prevalent in the country. Even if the State laboratories

55
receive the sophisticated instruments, they are not put to use because technical manpower to
handle such sophisticated instruments is absent. The Committee recommends that each State/
UT should frame its recruitment regulations according to its size and population and regular
exams should be conducted to recruit suitable persons in the food testing laboratories. A minimum
number of technical staff required for proper functioning of food testing laboratory should be
prescribed.
4.38 The Committee has been given to understand by stakeholders that around 250 colleges exist in the
country where food science, meat science and technology, dairy technology, microbiology is being taught
as an important technical or science based course and more than 8000 students are getting their degree
every year. There is a pool of talent waiting to be tapped.
4.39 The Committee observes that in our country availability of technical graduates is not a
problem but availability of employable graduates is. Collaboration between the Universities/
Educational Institutions and Industry is very important for skill development. The Committee
is of the view that the connect between the Industry and the Educational Institutions needs to
be fostered and encouraged. The graduates need to be given on ground practical training so that
they acquire adequate skills to be employed. There is a huge demand of technical manpower in
the food testing laboratories but this gap remains unfilled despite large pool of technical graduates
available in the country. The graduates in Food Science and Technology should be groomed to
undertake the technical responsibility in these labs. This can solve the twin problems of increasing
unemployment among the graduates and the shortage of manpower in labs. Further, the Committee
also recommends that every Central, State and Private food testing laboratory must have a
mandatory minimum number of staff specially Food Analysts in order to make it adequately
functional. FSSAI and the State Food Authorities should also ensure that only qualified graduates
with Science background are employed in the labs. The Food Analyst should work within a time
limit and submit his report within a prescribed period. The Laboratory Quality Audit should also
pay special attention to the fact that only skilled people with technical knowledge form part of
the staff.
4.40 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the deliberations of the Joint Committee of Parliament
on P.F.A. Amendment 1974 for recommending highly qualified staff and prescribing norms for functioning
of a laboratory based on the following factors:-
(i) one chemist to analyse about 400 assorted food sample per year,
(ii) one chemist to analyse about 1500 milk sample per year,
(iii) one chemist to handle about 2500 samples for toxic materials, preservatives or other food
additives per year, and
(iv) one analyst to analyse about 600 samples of oils and fat per year.
The norms further prescribed that (a) each analyst should be assisted by laboratory assistants and
laboratory attendants. The laboratory assistants can be deputed for routine determinations. (b) Different
sections may be established in a laboratory depending on its workload and convenience. (c) One
supervisor may be designated as Chief Technical Officer/Asstt. Public Analyst to supervise and guide the

56
chemists in different Sections. (d) A separate bacteriologist to be assisted by laboratory assistant and a
laboratory attendant for bacteriological work. (e) A separate officer with a helper will be required for
coding and de-coding of the samples. The coding and decoding section should be responsible for storage
of samples, for cross checking of the results under the overall charge of the rank of Chief Technical
Officer (C.T.O.). (f) An additional sub section should be established for cereals, pulses and other
miscellaneous products under the charge of C.T.O, this section may be provided with one Senior Analyst,
one Laboratory Technician and one Lab Attendent.
4.41 The Committee recommends norms desired for proper functioning of food testing lab with
adequate manpower may be strictly adhered to in accordance with the suggestions of the Joint
Committee of Parliament.
Strengthening of State Food Testing Laboratories (SFTLs)
4.42 The Committee has been given to understand that FSSAI is implementing a Central Sector Scheme
(CSS) for strengthening Food Testing System in the Country Including Provision of Mobile Food Testing
Labs with a total outlay of ` 481.95 crore with a time frame for implementation of the Scheme being
2016-17 to 2018-19. The scheme envisages different components such as (i) strengthening of 45 State
Food Testing Labs, (at least one in each State/UT and two in bigger States), (ii) 12 referral laboratories,
(iii) creation of 62 Mobile Food Labs, (iv) Capacity building of food testing personnel and (v) incentivising
States/UTs for utilizing the facilities available with FSSA's notified labs and School Food and Hygiene
Programme. For this, FSSAI is providing a non-recurring grant of around ` 10 crore towards upgradation
of each SFTL with 3 major equipments ( viz., ICP-MS, GC-MSMS and LC-MSMS) and setting up of
microbiology laboratory. In addition, a recurring grant of ` 35 lakh per year towards professional
services, consumables and contingencies is also provided to each of these upgraded SFTL. Further,
release of grants is subject to the condition that the upgraded laboratories will achieve NABL accreditation
within 2 years from the date of release of final instalment.
4.43 A total of ` 109.95 crore has so far been released under the scheme. As on date, 26 State Food
Safety Laboratories of 24 States/UTs (including setting up 4 microbiology laboratories in 3 States/UTs)
have been taken up for upgradation. State-wise status of implementation is as under -
States covered under the scheme
Andhra Pradesh Haryana Maharashtra Raiasthan (2)
Assam Himachal Pradesh Manipur T amil Nadu
Chhattisgarh Jammu and Kashmir* (2) Meghalaya T elangana
Delhi Karnataka Nagaland Uttar Pradesh
Goa* Kerala Odisha Uttarakhand
Bihar# Jharkhand# Puducherry# Tripura#
SFTLs where upgradation is not feasible
Andaman and Nicobar Islands Arunachal Pradesh
Mizoram Sikkim
* SFTLs where grant for microbiology facility is also provided.
# SFTLs under process for release of grants.

57
4.44 The Scheme for strengthening/upgradation of SFTLs proposes to:– (i) enable the States/UTs to
analyse the regulatory and surveillance samples drawn by the FSOs within the shortest possible time
frame; (ii) analyze the safety parameters in food samples such as Heavy metals, Pesticide residues,
Antibiotic and drug residues and Naturally occurring toxic substances along with Microbiological tests;
(iii) ensure compliance of FSSAI standards on food; (iv) enable the laboratory to achieve NABL accreditation
within 2 years from the date of release of final instalment; (v) make SFTL a resource point for training
and facility up-gradation for other existing Government Public Food testing laboratories in the State; and
(vi) introduce online laboratory data management system through Laboratory Information Management
System (LIMS). So far a grant of ` 81.20 crore has been sanctioned/released till March, 2018, for
upgradation of these laboratories and 10 State Food Laboratories have got NABL accreditation. Some of
laboratories have initiated the process of getting NABL which may take upto two years.
4.45 There is an Empowered Committee (EC) to guide and oversee implementation of the Scheme.
Following has been the status of implementation during 2017-18:—
(i) A grant of ` 1 crore each has been released to Jammu Laboratory and Srinagar Laboratory
for setting up of Microbiological Laboratory. Further, a grant of ` 50.0 lakh has been released
each to state of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Manipur, Nagaland, Odisha, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand
under the sub component of creation/renovation of Infrastructure and procurement of lab
equipments in State food laboratories. In addition, ` 4.0 crore each to Punjab and Assam labs,
` 4.75 crore each to Delhi and Goa labs, ` 5.50 crore each to Jammu and Srinagar labs,
6.5 Crore to Tamil Nadu lab and 9.0 Crore each to Karnataka, Kerala and West Bengal labs
have been released towards the sub component of creation/renovation of Infrastructure and
procurement of lab equipments. With this, upgradation of 23 Food Testing Laboratories of 22
States/UTs have been covered under the scheme;
(ii) A grant of ` 10.00 crore has been released against a total ` 12.50 crore sanctioned to five
referral labs viz. CFTRI, Mysuru, IICT, Hyderabad, CIFT, Kochi, IIFPT, Thanjavur and
CALF, NDDB, Anand towards procurement of high end equipment;
(iii) 19 Food Safety on Wheels (FSW), have been sanctioned to 17 States at an approximate cost
of ` 30 lakh (excluding GST). A set of booklets containing Scheme Guidelines, Operational
Manual and Manuals of Simple Methods for Testing of Common adulterants in Food is also
being provided in each FSW;
(iv) 24 training programs including Good Food Laboratory Practices (GFLP) programme, and
specialized Training of Trainers Programmes on analysis of mycotoxins/pesticide and veterinary
drug residues in food for laboratory personnel have been organized by FSSAI
(v) FSSAI is also working towards formulating a scheme wherein grant of ` 1 lakh and ` 3 lakh
is proposed for schools for establishing 'Health and Wellness Laboratories' in their premises;
and
(vi) FSSAI is also working towards formulation of a scheme to enable States/UTs to utilize the
testing facilities available with FSSAI notified laboratories.

58
All the States/UTs have been sanctioned funds for upgradation of two labs in each State one lakh
each except in the State of Rajasthan and Jammu and Kashmir.
4.46 CAG in its report pointed out severe deficiencies in the State Food and Referral Laboratories as per
the following audit findings:—
(i) A baseline survey conducted (between September, 2013 and January, 2014) by FSSAI found
that out of 72 State food labs, only 62 labs were functional as most laboratories did not have
testing facilities for pesticide residues, heavy metals, naturally occurring toxic substances and
microbiological parameters.
(ii) The labs lacked in technical manpower and important functional food testing equipment were
either not available or were non-functional resulting in failure to analyse food samples received
in these labs during 2011-2016 in respect of metal contaminants, crop contaminants, insecticides/
pesticides etc.
(iii) Rule 2.4.2 of FSS Rules, 2011 provides that the report of the food analyst shall be sent within
14 days of the receipt of the article of food for analysis. However, no such time limit has been
prescribed in respect of referral laboratories. Considerable delays were noted on sending the
analysis report by the food analysts.
(iv) Shortage of technical staff ranged from 18% to 30% in 5 labs, 30% to 40% in 3 labs and
more than 40% in 10 test checked labs.
(v) Absence of functional food testing equipment
4.47 State food testing laboratories are in urgent need of a major overhaul and upgrade both in
terms of shortage of analytical personnel and equipments to perform sophisticated analysis of
pathogens including chemicals, microbial toxins, heavy metals, residues of pesticides, etc. Food
is a matter of health encompassing crucial life and death issues and therefore according a high
priority to food safety is the need of the hour. Since the implementation and enforcement of Food
Safety and Standard Act, 2006 is primary the responsibility of the State/UT Food Regulatory
Authorities, equipping them with the high-end sophisticated equipments is therefore very essential.
In that direction, the Committee welcomes implementation of the Central Sector Scheme for
"Strengthening of Food Testing System" in the country. The Committee is, however, constrained
to note the tardy progress of the scheme which is evident from the fact that the Scheme with
a total outlay of ````` 481.95 crore and targeted to be implemented between 2016-17 and 2018-19 has
so far witnessed releases to the tune of ````` 109.95 crore only. Given the fact that only nine months
are left before the Financial Y ear 2018-19 concludes, the Scheme is certain to face massive
financial under performance. Apparently, there are serious shortcomings in the mechanisms of
Centre-State coordination in implementation of this scheme. The Committee therefore desires
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to address the pending issues pertaining to
implementation of the Scheme and make vigorous efforts to speed up the process of
implementation of the Scheme by taking up corrective measures with sustained monitoring. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the results of the efforts of the Ministry at the earliest.
4.48 The Committee has taken cognizance of the Governments' proposal for opening laboratories
equipped with most modern and sophisticated apparatus. Having laboratories with no proper

59
equipments will not achieve the objective. Here the Committee agrees with the observations of
the Joint Committee of Parliament on Prevention of Food Adulteration (Amendment) Act, 1974
that though a high tech food testing laboratory is desirable but for financial constraints and the
scarcity of trained analytical chemists, microbiologists, technicians and other food-scientists, it
may not be advisable to open many laboratories. Therefore, the Committee emphasises that it
would be more advisable to ensure that facilities available in existing laboratories are strengthened/
upgraded instead of setting up of new labs with inadequate infrastructure and manpower.
4.49 The Committee understands that due to the scarcity of food analysts, most State Drug
Testing Labs operate far below their desired capacity and in many cases, laboratories have had
to be shut down due to the unavailability of Food Analysts. As per a Times of India report
published in 2014, Rajasthan had closed down seven public health laboratories due to shortage
of food analyst. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to chalk out an action plan
for overcoming the shortage and expanding the pool of food analysts. The Committee also desires
to be apprised of the actual number of Food Analysts vis-a-vis their requirement.
FOOD SAFETY ON WHEELS (FSW)
4.50 The Committee has been informed that the Food Safety on Wheels Scheme would not only address
the issue of lack of food testing infrastructure in the remote areas but also cater to the basic analytical
needs of consumers. Primarily FSWs would help cater to (i) surveillance and creating awareness
regarding the food safety in remote areas in the State, large public congregations, schools and consumer
organisations; (ii) transporting samples picked from remotes areas to the nearest food testing laboratory;
(iii) Education of the consumers in various aspects of food safety laws and common hygiene practices;
(iv) on the spot test facilities for qualitative adulteration of common food items like ghee, milk, khoya,
sweets, edible oil, non-permitted food colours in various foods like namkeens, spices, prepared foods
etc.
4.51 Each FSW can test 54 qualitative parameters across 7 different food categories. In addition, each
FSW has a provision for performing simple microbiological tests if the States so desire. The FSW is
provided at a cost of ` 50 lakh each, including a recurring grant towards Petrol, Oil, Lubricants and
consumables. As on date, 31 FSWs have been sanctioned to 26 States/UTs of which 28 have been
delivered to 23 States/UTs.
State-wise status of implementation is as under:-
States for which FSWs is sanctioned/delivered
Arunachal Pradesh Haryana Meghalaya Rajasthan
Assam Himachal Pradesh (2) Nagaland Puducherry
Bihar* Jammu and Kashmir (2) Odisha Madhya Pradesh
Chhattisgarh (2) Jharkhand Punjab (2) Dadar and Nagar Haveli
Chandigarh Karnataka T amil Nadu West Bengal*

60
Goa Kerala T elangana
Gujarat (2) Manipur Uttarakhand
States which are not ready for receiving FSWs
Andhra Pradesh Delhi Mizoram Tripura
Andaman and Nicobar Maharashtra Sikkim Uttar Pradesh
Islands
4.52 Of the above 26 laboratories, 6 State Food Testing Laboratories have already obtained NABL
accreditation. Further, it is to mention that grants are provided under the Scheme with a condition that
the upgraded laboratories will achieve NABL accreditation within 2 years from the date of release of final
instalment.
4.53 Kerala Food Technologists Association (KEFTA) informed the Committee that mobile laboratories
have proved to be effective in testing during youth festivals and other public events where food stalls/
food served is on temporary setup. This in-fact is a credible achievement for food safety department
during such events. There had been many food safety issues reported previously mainly from contaminated
water source used in such temporary food catering venues. The mobile laboratory facility has been a
boon in such venues. Food analysis outreach to public is possible in an easier mode. These mobile
laboratories are very much needed in such large public events where food is manufactured/served in bulk
quantities. Such venues being temporary in nature highlights a serious issue in terms of food safety risk
assessment as the volume of food consumers particularly children, is generally high. This area of analysis
also requires more food technologists for better efficiency. A partnership testing protocol can be developed
with various NABL accredited private laboratories across the nation with a FSSAI approved Food Analyst
in them. This will make full capacity utilization in private sector for Government needs, thereby reducing
infrastructural cost to a great extent.
4.54 The Committee is of the view that mobile food testing labs hold immense potential to
improve the food safety situation in the country in general and in remote areas in particular.
The Committee feels that the Mobile Food Testing Labs should be used for creating awareness,
transporting samples, educating consumers and on spot test facilities as suggested by FSSAI.
These mobile labs can open new job opportunities for the unemployed youth of our country. India
has a large number of science and technical graduates but in the absence of job specific technical
vocational training, they are unskilled and deemed unsuitable for jobs. The Committee recommends
that the FSSAI should utilize the rich demographic dividend of the country and conduct extensive
training program for the youth. These young graduates should be trained in managing these
mobile labs in every block. The Committee opines that mini labs are a cost effective method for
basic analysis and smaller laboratories and sample collection points at various areas of surrounding
districts of main laboratories will cater to the testing need efficiently. This will distribute the
workload and evenly manage the samples throughout the State. The sample collection points
should be at an optimum distance from the food testing labs so that there is no delay in sending
the samples to the labs and results are declared quickly.
4.55 The Committee has been given to understand that each mobile lab would cover every 20
districts of the State. However, given the large size of our country and huge population, we need

61
far more Food Safety on Wheels (FSWs). The Committee, therefore, recommends that number
of FSWs should be sanctioned taking into consideration the size of population of a State so as
to ensure facilities of testing food within the reach of the general public. The Committee also
recommends that FSSAI should realistically assess the need of FSWs in the States and one FSW
in each district must be provided to increase its outreach among the common man.
4.56 With the rapid development of science, quality of food along with its nutritional attributes can easily
be known. In India, feeding a billion mouths is a challenge but our focus needs to shift from just
providing food to providing safe, nutritious food to its population. India has its own standards for
different categories of food. It has often been alleged that there is a lack of harmonisation of food
standard vis-a-vis global standards which results in rejection of our export consignments. The developed
countries have an elaborate and systematic food safety mechanism with stringent measures and parameters.
India, in comparison lags much behind in enforcing an effective food safety mechanism.
4.57 The Indian food safety regime is well below the international benchmarks in terms of
availability of desired lab infrastructure, food safety institutions, regulatory policies, manpower
(technical and non-technical) and financial resources. The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006
(FSS Act) is the primary law for the regulation of food items and its regulation. However, a
survey by CIFTI and FICCI has revealed that about one-third of the industry is unaware about
the FSS Act and its regulations. This lack of information among the food suppliers, sellers and
buyers is one of the major challenges in the present food safety regime. The Committee strongly
believes that it is the obligation and duty of the State to spread awareness on food safety and
quality and ensure that any food borne disease does not go unreported. A robust overhaul of the
current food safety regime is needed so that the food law is implemented both in letter and spirit.

62
CHAPTER 5
REGULATION OF FOOD ITEMS
5.1 Effective food regulation is paramount to ensuring food safety. FSSAI has been empowered to form
regulations and guidelines governing the safety of food items in the market. There is a high tendency
to adulterate food either to increase the quantity and make more profit or to use chemicals to preserve
the quality and freshness of the food. Cross contamination while handling and non adherence to good
manufacturing practices also result in adulteration of food. Therefore regulation of food item is fundamental
to ensuring food safety.
5.2 Cases of rampant adulteration in milk and edible oil have been reported in the country which pose
a grave threat to public health. Street Food and Food at restaurants is also under the scanner and there
is need of safe and hygienic practices while preparing food in these premises. The ever growing demand
and consumption pattern has led to availability of a wide range of food products in the market that
necessitates framing of regulations for each product. This growing food demand has also led to import
of food items for ensuring food security. The country cannot stay immune to imported food safety
challenges. Today with increase in income and urbanization, the demand for healthy organic food is also
increasing. The excessive use of pesticides and toxic chemicals in farming has opened new opportunities
for organic farming.
5.3 It, therefore, becomes imperative to examine the regulation of a variety of food items in the country
as safe, nutritious and wholesome food is rudimentary to individual growth and development and providing
healthy food to its citizens is the foremost responsibility of every Government.
MILK ADULTERATION
5.4 The Committee has been informed that FSSAI had conducted a national milk survey in 2011 to
ascertain the quality of milk and also to identify different types of adulteration in milk across the country.
The survey included assessment of quality parameters like fat, protein, solids not fat and adulterants like
hydrogen peroxide, sugar, starch, urea, detergent, formalin, vegetable oil etc. However, the survey
considered substances like sugar, starch, vegetable oil or skimmed milk powder as unsafe which affect
only the quality of milk and not the safety. A total of 1791 samples from across 33 States revealed that
more than 68% samples ( i.e., 1226) were found non-conforming to the standards set.
5.5 FSSAI conducted the second national milk quality survey in 2016-17. The survey considered the
population size and kind of milk sector (organized or unorganized) to arrive at sample size. In case of
this survey milk samples found with vegetable oil, sugar, glucose, maltodextrin, starch and cellulose were
considered as "non-standard but safe"; and, milk samples with adulterants like detergents, hydrogen
peroxide, formalin, urea, boric acid, ammonium sulphate, nitrates and neutralizers were considered as
"non-standard and unsafe". The survey covered 110 cities in 32 States/UTs and 1663 samples. This
survey revealed that only 16% (266 samples) were non-compliant. But close examination revealed that
only about 8% (135 samples) were "non-standard and unsafe". The survey clearly indicated that the
adulteration noticed in the survey of 2011 survey was an aberration. However, considering a wide
variation in results among the States, they were asked to validate the results reported; and, also conduct
a snap shot survey in the lean milk season which was conducted in July, 2017. In this survey, 12 States/
62

63
UTs reported that out of 659 only 27 samples (4%) were non-compliant and only 2 samples (0.3%) were
found to be unsafe.
5.6 On a review of surveys of 2011, 2016 and the subsequent snap shot survey, it was noticed that
the sampling procedure, analysis time and protocols followed were not uniform. Besides, all the surveys
were only qualitative in nature. Hence, FSSAI initiated a third party assisted survey in May, 2018. The
survey aimed at a uniform protocol for sample collection and analysis. Unlike previous surveys where
samples were sent to laboratory (which meant considerable time lost before the analysis), this survey
relies on on-the spot analysis of samples for qualitative parameters. The non-compliant samples were
being taken to laboratory for quantitative analysis of parameters like antibiotics, aflatoxins and pesticides
in the samples which was not covered in the previous surveys. The survey would cover 1100 towns
and 6000 samples. So far, the survey has covered 6 States, 146 towns and 814 samples. The survey
results would be shared once the analysis of data is complete.
5.7 FSSAI has provided 29 electronic milk adulteration tester (EMAT) machines to 29 States/UTs for
routine analysis of milk quality. Further, a more advanced milk testing machine called the milk- 'o'-screen
is also provided in each of the FSWs (31 of such FSWs are already in operation) which can be used
for effective surveillance of milk.
5.8 It has also been brought to the notice of the Committee that National Dairy Research Institute
(NDRI), Karnal, had developed a platform test kit that detects the presence of detergent in milk in less
than two minutes. Testing with such method helps in drawing a clear colour distinction between pure
and adulterated milk with detergent. This method costs merely ` 4 for analyzing one milk sample.
5.9 The Committee has been given to understand that FSSAI is aware of NDRI's milk testing kit as
well as many other kits developed by various national institutions as well as those available commercially.
Though FSSAI cannot provide test kits or machines to food businesses or consumers, information
regarding the available milk testing machines and rapid test kits would be made available on the FSSAI
website for the benefit of FBOs and consumers.
5.10 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the growing menace of adulteration of
milk and dairy products by unabated use of hazardous chemicals and substances like pesticides,
caustic soda, urea, detergents, antimicrobial residues, white paint etc. and also the sale of
synthetic milk in different parts of the country. It is indeed alarming that as per a national level
milk quality survey conducted by FSSAI in 2011, 68% of milk samples were found to be adulterated
and non-conforming to the stipulated quality standards. Consumption of adulterated and synthetic
milk is hazardous and poses grave risks to human health. The Government, therefore, needs to
bring forth necessary amendments to the FSS Act, 2006 and Indian Penal Code providing for
enhancement of punishment for adulteration of milk and milk products. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in consultation with State/UT
Governments must take expeditious action to bring in necessary amendments in the statute and
apprise the Committee in this regard.
5.11 The Committee understands that on a Writ Petition (Civil) No. 159 of 2012 before the
Hon'ble Supreme Court, it had directed the FSSAI and State Food Safety Authorities to check
the menace of milk adulteration. However, no concrete action has been taken by authorities to

64
combat milk and food adulteration. The Committee desires to be apprised of status of the action
taken thereon by the FSSAI and State Food Regulatory Authorities.
5.12 The Committee is not convinced with the sampling procedure, analysis time and protocols
followed in the national milk quality surveys conducted by FSSAI in 2011 and 2016 as they were
not uniform. The Committee observes that a precise and accurate conclusion out of survey(s) can
be drawn only with appropriate sample size. Sample size of 1791 and 1663 in the surveys of 2011
and 2016 were not adequate. Taking into account the size of population and the quantity of milk
produced in the country, the Committee would, therefore, exhort the Ministry to ensure that in
future the sample size of such surveys should be appropriate and truly representative. The
Ministry has to ensure that protocols followed for such surveys are uniform so that they lead
to valid conclusions. The Committee also desires to be kept apprised of the findings of the
national milk quality survey initiated in May, 2018.
5.13 The Committee understands that India is the largest producer and consumer of milk in the
world and most of the milk is consumed in its basic form. The collection and distribution of milk
especially in smaller towns and villages however remain largely unorganised as the same is done
by small scale livestock keepers in an unregulated manner which often results in poor quality
of milk. The Committee would, therefore, like that FSSAI/Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
in consultation with State/UT Governments should strive to put in place a regulatory mechanism
for spot testing of milk supplied by branded milk suppliers as well as small-scale milk distributors
in towns and villages through Milk Testing Labs at all stages right at the door step of
consumer.
EDIBLE OIL ADULTERATION
5.14 Edible Oil is a staple food item used in every household. Cases of adulteration in edible oil have been
reported across the country. The quality of oil deteriorates with time as oil has a shelf life. The use of
adulterated oil is a great health risk and leads to diseases. There has been outbreak of dropsy in India
due to adulterants in edible oil which led to many deaths. Therefore, sale of edible oil has to be closely
monitored.
5.15 The Solvent Extractors' Association of India submitted that Regulation 2.3.15(1) of the Food Safety
and Standards (Prohibitions and Restriction on Sales) Regulations, 2011 prohibits sale, storage, distribution,
dispatch and delivery of any edible oils, not conforming to standards of quality as prescribed under the
Food Safety and Standards Act and not packed in a container, marked and labelled in the manner as
specified in the said Regulations. This means sale of loose oil is not allowed in India as per FSSAI
Regulations. But in some States, the sale of loose oil is allowed and in other States the illegal sale of loose
oil is prevalent. This is a big consumer safety issue. Loose oil sale gives a free hand to unscrupulous
elements to indulge in adulteration which is detrimental to the health of the consumers. Even the
packaged edible oil has a shelf life after which it is not fit for consumption. Edible oil in loose form
deteriorates much faster as it is continuously in contact with air and moisture. A trader sells the
deteriorated loose edible oil to gullible consumers. The large poor section of the society who consume
such loose edible oil are ignorant about the quality of the loose edible oil. A large section of society suffers
with serious health problems. Sale of loose oil is banned as per FSSAI and calls strict action against the
offenders.

65
5.16 Contrary to statutory ban, Khadhya Tel Vyapari Association, Maharashtra submitted that the sale of
loose Edible Oils and re-use of Tins for Repacking Edible Oils should be permitted. They argued that
as poor people cannot afford to purchase large quantity available in packed condition, they purchase small
quantities for one-time meal. Restriction of selling edible oils in packed condition is impracticable considering
ground reality in the country and in interest of public.
5.17 The reuse of tin was justified for this practice is in force since long time and no statistics proves
reuse as harmful or it affects quality of food. Use of new tin every time will increase cost of food by
` 70-80 per tin. Tin plates for manufacturing tins are imported which entail national loss of foreign
currency. Oil Industry requires about 2,00,000+ Tin containers per year, a tin manufacturer can produce
50 to 55 thousand tins per year and they are few in numbers. Supply chain of edible oil will be disturbed,
resulting in scarcity of this essential commodity. Hence, use of re-used tins should be allowed.
5.18 FSSAI submitted that sale of loose edible oil is prohibited under Reg. 2.3.15 (1) of FSS (Prohibition
and Restriction on Sales) Regulations, 2011. However, State Governments may, in the public interest, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, in specific circumstances and for a specific period by a notification
in the Official Gazette, exempt any edible oil from the provisions of this Act. The issue regarding reuse
of tins for packing of edible oils was deliberated in the concerned Scientific Panel wherein Panel was
of the view that as there is no standardized scientific method available for reusing, maintaining the quality
and hygiene of tins, this will encourage adulteration and misuse of tins by unorganized sector.
5.19 The Committee observes that loose edible oils are prone to adulteration and even if edible
oil sellers comply with food safety regulations and standards at the first point of sale, there is
no guarantee that the oil would remain unadulterated as they pass through several hands. There
have been countless instances of sale of adulterated loose oils which have resulted in masses
being afflicted by dropsy. The Committee gathers that Delhi-based consumer organisation, namely,
Consumer Voice, had in the year, 2016 collected samples of loose edible oils of eight varieties,
namely, Mustard, Sesame, Groundnut and Cottonseed from 15 States and got them tested on
safety as well as quality parameters in a NABL accredited laboratory. The laboratory results
revealed that adulteration was found in loose oil samples collected from all 15 States and 85%
samples of coconut oil, 74.07% samples of cottonseed oil, 74% samples of mustard oil were found
adulterated. Adulterated edible oil is one of the main reasons behind several diseases like cardiac
arrest, cancer, epidemic dropsy, liver damage, paralysis etc. Without packaging, batch number
or FSSAI license number, it is very difficult to trace the source of the problem in the event of
health epidemic breaking out due to adulterated edible oils.
5.20 With a view to safeguard the interests of consumers, the Committee would like to recommend
to the Central Government to impress upon the State Governments to ensure that edible oils
are retailed in packaged form only.
5.21 The Committee simultaneously observes that there is another dimension to the sale of
edible oil in loose form which should not be lost sight of. Small consumers especially daily wage
labourers and the rural poor purchase loose edible oils out of their payment on daily basis. They
cannot afford to buy oil sold in pack of one litre or more and therefore buy loose edible oil in
small quantity. It is, therefore, absolutely essential for the FSSAI to push for smaller packages
of 100 ml and 200 ml of edible oil.

66
5.22 The Committee is aware that in our rural areas, people buy loose mustard oil extracted from
the local extraction machines. The Committee would like the FSSAI to impress upon the State
Governments to ensure that till such time a blanket ban is worked out on the sale of loose edible
oils, a system for testing of oil samples from the local extraction machines are put in place to
ensure that they are not contaminated with seeds of argemone or other toxic materials.
5.23 Another important issue raised was of fortification of Edible Oils on voluntary basis. Solvent
Extractors' Association of India welcomed the FSSAI initiative for V oluntary Fortification of Oils by
Vitamin A and D. However, due to inadequate testing method of Vitamin A and D, being unstable to heat
and light during prolonged storage period (9 months shelf life), in case of Vanaspati, thousands of PFA
cases are still pending in court due to samples drawn by authority, failing on vitamins added quantity.
There is an apprehension that fortification of edible oils could become another contentious issue at a later
date. It was therefore suggested that :
(i) Fortification should be kept at voluntarily as per current regulation and should not be made
compulsory.
(ii) Crude/Virgin/Raw oils should be kept out of the preview of fortification since these are either
for use for further processing or available with Natural Nutrients.
(iii) Studies should be conducted to check the bioavailability of the vitamins added from an Indian
context since relatively higher temperature cooking and frying are the major operations carried
out.
(iv) In-house data needs to be generated with assistance from National Institute of Nutrition (NIN),
Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT), Central Food Technological Research Institute
(CFTRI) to study the efficacy of vitamins pre and post usage before taking the decision of
implementing.
(v) Reproducibility/validation of Vitamin A and D quantification method must be done before going
for its implementation even on voluntary basis.
(vi) Local Vitamins Suppliers should be encouraged so cost of Vitamins will not affect since today
90% Vitamins are imported at huge cost to Exchequer.
5.24 The Committee appreciates the FSSAI initiative for fortification of oils given the large scale
micronutrient deficiency in the country. However, FSSAI needs to establish adequate infrastructure
for testing the fortified oil and for this assistance should be taken from the different National
Institutes working in the scientific field. Fortification of oil should be encouraged among the
manufacturers with a proper monitoring mechanism of the fortified oil testing. Regular and
timely inspections have to be conducted by the food authority . Moreover, there is need to conduct
more research to find out the efficacy of vitamins pre and post usage in fortification of oil.
5.25 Khadhya Tel Vyapari Association, Maharashtra in its written submission stated that Standards for
oil, ground nut oil, soya oil etc. were fixed around 1960s. Since then so many changes have taken place
in oil-seeds due to modified methods of producing crops scientifically, genetically and also in atmospheric
and soil conditions resulting in changes of quality and analytical standards of oil seeds and oils produced
from them. It has become necessary to take survey and revise the standards accordingly. So many

67
samples of oil fail in tests of BTT (bellier turbidity temperature test) for no fault of producers or
repackers which have not changed since 1960s. Therefore, there should be comprehensive survey under
rule 2.1.3.4(iii)(d) of samples of Edible Oils and new standards be fixed.
5.26 FSSAI in its reply submitted that the revision of standards of vegetable oil viz. Sunflower, Sesame,
Groundnut, Mustard and Soybean Oil is under process. Two laboratories have been requested to submit
the project proposal to FSSAI for analysis of samples of Oilseeds as well as oils of commercial varieties
of these vegetable oils. The samples of oilseeds will be provided by Industry Associations.
5.27 The Committee is surprised to note that the standards for oil have not been revised since
1960. The Committee would like the FSSAI to set a timeline on priority for expediting the whole
process of revision of standards conducive to the food processing industry as well as ensuring
food safety. All the stakeholders need to be consulted and involved in the whole process. While
establishing the Indian standards, international benchmarks such as CODEX standards for oil
should also be considered. The Committee hopes that new revision in standards would take into
account the nature of oil-seed, changes in atmosphere and soil conditions to ensure the availability
of safe edible oil to the consumer. The Committee desires to be kept updated in this regard.
5.28 The Committee further notes that FSSAI in its draft regulation has suggested changes to the Food
Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011. FSSAI has proposed to make it
mandatory for blended oils manufacturers to mention the exact blend in percentage terms on the front
of the pack along with other labeling modifications. Such oil packs should carry declaration "Blended
Edible Vegetable Oil" in a font size not less than 5mm and not less than 10 mm if the net quantity is
more than 1 litre.
5.29 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to a report Titled "The Future of India's Edible Oil
Industry: How Will India's Vegetable Oil Demand Shape Up by 2031" by Rabo Bank. The Report indicates
that India's Vegetable Oil Consumption is expected to grow by 3% annually to exceed 34 million tonnes
by 2030. FSSAI has also initiated discussions with the Indian Biodiesel Association for setting up an
ecosytem for collection of used cooking oil and its conversion into biodiesel.
5.30 Keeping in view the annual growth in edible oil consumption, the Committee underlines the
need for an ecosystem for collection of used cooking oil and its conversion into biodiesel keeping
in view the increase in non-communicable life style diseases that are increasing day-by-day.
FSSAI in coordination with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should also on a continuous
basis evolve standards for the Indian population in respect of edible oils in India to determine
as to what constitutes 'safe standards' for consumption of edible oils in order to minimize the
risks of non-communicable life style diseases.
REGULATION OF PRESERV ATIVES/CHEMICALS USED FOR STORAGE FOR FISHES,
ARTIFICIAL RIPENING OF FRUITS/VEGETABLES AND EDIBLE ICE.
5.31 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the practice of using some chemicals like formalin
for preserving fishes. Formalin is widely used as a preservative during transportation and storage of sea
food. Formalin is known to be a toxic and cancer causing agent. Recent cases in the coastal States where
formalin was found in the ice that was used for preserving fish are very disturbing. Use of harmful
chemicals such as calcium carbide for shining of vegetables and ripening of fruits is also a matter of
concern.

68
5.32 The practice of manufacturing ice from contaminated water is on a rise. Edible ice has also tested
positive for ammonia and deadly E. coli bacteria. While exposure to high concentration of ammonia can
cause health problems E.coli Bacteria causes diarrhea and other infections. Edible ice is widely used in
beverages in stalls and restaurants. Edible ice is considered as food and there are stringent provisions
regarding the quality of water for manufacturing of such ice but for the manufacturing of industrial ice
there are no strict quality parameters. There is always a possibility that industrial ice can be used in
beverages by the vendors as a cheaper alternative.
5.33 FSSAI in its reply submitted that the following regulations under Food Safety and Standards Act,
2006, address the post harvest adulteration in fruits and vegetables:
(i) Regulation 2.3.6 of Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restrictions on Sales) Regulations,
2011 prohibits the coating of waxes (except bees wax (white and yellow) or carnauba wax
or shellac wax at level not exceeding Good Manufacturing Practices), mineral oil and colours
on fresh fruits and vegetables.
(ii) Regulation 2.3.5 of Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restrictions on Sale) Regulations
2011, prohibits artificial ripening of fruits by use of acetylene gas commonly known as carbide
gas. It provides that fruits may be artificially ripened by use of Ethylene gas at a concentration
upto 100 ppm (100
μ/L) depending upon the crop, variety and maturity.
5.34 No periodicity of checking samples of fruits and vegetable has been prescribed under the FSS Act,
Rules and Regulations made thereunder. However, State Food Safety Officials are taking samples of food
on random basis and send them for analysis in the laboratory. FSSAI has also issued a circular to the
Principal Secretaries (Health) and Food Safety Commissioners of all States and UTs emphasising the need
of periodic inspections and monitoring in the context of the directions.
5.35 To check the use of Calcium Carbide in ripening of fruits, regular surveillance, monitoring, inspection
and random sampling of food products are being done by the Officials of Food Safety Departments of
the respective States/ UTs to ensure compliance of the standards laid down under Food Safety and
Standards Act, 2006, and the rules and regulations made thereunder.
5.36 In reply to a specific query about artificial ripening of fruits, FSSAI mentioned that it is working
to promote the use of ethylene as a ripening agent as it does not cause any harm. FSSAI has also sought
subsidy for selling of ethylene in small packets by the food processing industry.
5.37 The Committee expresses serious concern over rampant use of toxic chemical formalin for
preserving fish and calcium carbide for artificial ripening of fruits. This Sector being unorganized
and there being fewer food inspectors for quality checks are serious challenges of food safety.
However, an even bigger challenge is to raise consumer awareness about food safety standards
in the country. The Committee emphasizes that while ensuring stringent enforcement of food
safety laws, we need capacity building not just of the food professionals, but also of consumers.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that a National Consumer Awareness Campaign in
partnership with all stakeholders including the Central and State Agencies, Street vendors,
universities and colleges, NGOs, small and big food industry players need to be launched for
safety issues including use of hazardous chemicals in fruits and vegetables.

69
5.38 The Committee would urge upon FSSAI to issue advisories to State Food Regulatory Authorities
to monitor use of calcium carbide, formalin and other hazardous chemicals for artificial ripening
of fruits and take stringent action for violation of the regulatory provisions of the relevant Act/
rules. Farmers also need to be sensitized to understand the benefits of natural ripening of fruits
and vegetables. The Committee also notes that the Government has banned Oxytocin drug and
restricted its manufacture and sale to prevent its misuse. Oxytocin would now only be manufactured
by Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (KAPL) and rampant misuse of Oxytocin will
be checked. The Committee therefore recommends that on similar lines the manufacture of
toxic chemicals such as Calcium Carbide and Formalin etc should be restricted and only a few
companies should manufacture these chemicals for industrial use. Also the Committee recommends
FSSAI to promote safer alternatives to chemicals used as preserving and ripening agent.
5.39 The Committee would like to point out that the Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
Maharashtra has directed the manufacturers to use blue colour for industrial ice which helps in
differentiating it from the edible ice. Industrial ice manufacturers have already been directed to
use Indigo Carmine or Brilliant Blue FCF up to 10 parts per million (ppm). The Committee
recommends that this visual difference between industrial ice and edible ice should be replicated
in all the States and Union Territories. This will help in preventing the use of industrial ice in
place of edible ice and ensure that industrial/contaminated ice is not used in drinks. State Food
Regulatory Authorities should conduct regular inspections at ice manufacturing sites and strict
actions must be taken against manufacturing units and vendors who manufacture/use ice from
contaminated water. Timely inspections have to be conducted at the premises. The ice that is
manufactured for preservation and the ice for edible purposes should not be manufactured at the
same location.
PLASTIC IN FOOD ITEMS/WATER
5.40 Representative of Galaxy Trust in his written submission has informed that PET container / bottle
has been allowed as one of the packaging mediums in most of the 10 food product categories mentioned
in draft FSSAI regulation. Some adverse impact on plastic on health are as follows:
(i) The chemicals that go into the making of plastic are highly toxic. Some of the constituents
of plastic such as benzene and vinyl chloride are known to cause cancer.
(ii) Plastic has a tremendous leaching tendency and hence affects the edible items inside the
package. Out of all the edible contents, soft drinks, alcoholic beverages and pharmaceuticals
being acidic, cause higher leaching and therefore the health impact is more serious.
(iii) W ith continued storage of such food products and its exposure to plastic surface, some
carcinogenic compounds make their way into the stored food product.
(iv) Many chemical additives (pigments) that give plastic products desirable performance properties
have grave negative human health effects. These effects include :
(a) Direct toxicity, as in the case of antimony, lead, cadmium and mercury.
(b) Carcinogens, as in the case of diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) and (c) Endocrine
disruption, which can lead to cancers, birth defects, immune system suppression
and developmental problems in children.

70
(v) PET and other plastics like HDPE, LDPE and Polycarbonate have Bisphenol. This leaches into
food and beverages even at room temperatures especially when aerated.
International and National research reports on harmful effects of PET packaging is at
Annexure VII.
5.41 Some well-known products packaged in PET bottles/Tetra Pak sent to NTH (NATIONAL TEST
HOUSE) by AIIHPH (All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health) and IIT (Indian Institute of
Technology) - Madras for evaluation of leaching from plastic as per EU norms of accelerated testing at
40°C and 60°C and the results showed significant heavy metal and Phthalate (DEHP) leaching, well
above the acceptable limit. Details of various research and test reports indicating the harmful effect of
plastics on human life is at Annexure VIII and IX.
5.42  The analysis done by NTH and IIT concludes that users consuming compounds packaged in PET
bottles are exposed to dangerously high levels of contaminants. It is the social responsibility and moral
obligation of companies packing food to ensure that the primary packaging has not harmful impact on
human health.
5.43 As per UNEP 2015 Report the percentage of plastic of total Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) in India
was 12% in 2011, estimated to be 14% in 2014 and expected to go up to 20% by 2020 whereas the
same is 9% in lower-middle group of countries. Hence, Plastic waste is 150% higher in India compared
to other countries in same income group. There is lack of technical expertise to dispose off plastics and
Tetra Pak in India where dumping plastic waste in landfills and open incineration is very common.
5.44 A 2014 survey by Toxic Links, a New Delhi organisation, found that in Gangtok and other main
towns, plastic bags are now rarely used. Sikkim's story is being studied closely by other States. In
Mumbai, the commercial capital, drains clogged by bags have caused flooding in the streets during
monsoon season. Ban on use of plastic could be possible by not giving licenses/renewing licenses to
shopkeepers who used plastic bags coupled with provision of heavy fines and strict monitoring. Awareness
generation among the public and campaign in schools on damage of plastics also helped in the said cause.
5.45 The Committee is aware of the ill effects of plastic on the environment and human health.
Plastic is non-biodegradable and it cannot be recycled but only down-cycled. There is strong
evidence that the chemicals leached from plastic and PET containers cause harm to human
health but the ban on plastic and PET packaging of food article remains unaddressed by the
Government. Since the subject of human health and food safety falls under the domain of FSSAI,
the Committee would like the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to set up a high level
committee with members representing all entities to take a policy decision on banning the usage
of plastic and PET packaging food articles.
5.46 The Committee applauds the measures taken by Sikkim to dissuade the use of plastics by
not giving licences/licences not being renewed every year if shopkeepers were using plastic bags/
heavy fines being imposed/consumers being made aware/ campaigns being carried out in school
to educate children on the damage plastic can do. The Committee would like the FSSAI to study
the Sikkim model and encourage other States to strive to emulate the measures being taken by
the Government of Sikkim to curb the use of plastics to ensure that the next generation is able
to live in a plastic free environment.

71
REGULATION  OF  GENETICALLY  MODIFIED  (GM)  FOODS
5.47 As per Section 22 of FSS Act, 2006, no person shall manufacture, distribute, sell or import any
novel food, genetically modified articles of food, irradiated food, organic foods, foods for special dietary
uses, functional foods, neutraceuticals, health supplements, proprietary foods and such other articles of
food which the Central Government may notify in this behalf."
5.48 The Committee has been informed that GM Foods including GM soybean and canola oils are being
imported in India without the approval of FSSAI. Certain brands of imported food labelled as genetically
modified are being sold in the market without approval from either the Genetic Engineering Appraisal
Committee (GEAC) or FSSAI. FSSAI has not taken any action against these GM Foods. A Coalition for
a GM-free India has complained to the FSSAI with pictorial evidence pleading to remove such products
from the market and fix liability on those involved.
5.49 The Ministry has informed the Committee that Genetically Engineered Organisms (GEOs) or Living
Modified Organisms (LMOs) intended for direct use as food or for processing require approval from
GEAC(Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee) for environmental safety followed by approval from
FSSAI for food safety. Processed foods containing ingredients produced from but not containing LMOs
or GEOs are required to be approved by FSSAI. However, FSSAI is in the process of finalizing
"Guidelines for safety assessment of food derived by GM technology". So far, FSSAI has not approved
any GM food. The Chief Executive Officer of FSSAI, in an interview had stated that the authority could
not regulate or prohibit the sale of imported soya and canola oils because it is technologically incapable
of detecting the GM protein in them.
5.50 The Committee observes that in India, the GM food imports require approvals under the
Environment Protection Act of 1986 and the Food Safety and Standards Act of 2006. While the
former law covers the environmental impacts of the food products, the latter assesses the food's
impact on human health. Since no regulation has been finalized for GM products, it is still
banned in the country. Further, even after the Environment Ministry gives clearances for imports,
permission is also required under the food safety law but importers have got away without having
the mandatory approval under the Food Safety and Standards Act. A large number of products
are coming in India with GM ingredients but neither consumers nor authorities are aware of
what is inside because there is nothing mentioned on the label. Taking the above fact into
account, the Committee recommends formulation of regulations to the effect that those importing
foods must provide mandatory declaration on the label mentioning that "this food is from GM
free source". Countries like China, Australia and the European Union nations have strict regulations
about GM foods labelling so that the consumer makes informed choices.
5.51 The Committee observes that even after more than a decade of enactment of FSS Act, a
regulatory vacuum exists in the import of GM Food. FSSAI has neither put the regulations for
such approvals in place nor taken any measures to stop the imports. The Committee recommends
that the FSSAI should urgently finalise "Guidelines for safety assessment of food derived by GM
technology" and implement them within three months of presentation of the Report to the
Parliament. FSSAI should also work to upgrade the GM food testing infrastructure and make
use of the already present laboratories in the country and equip them with latest technology.

72
5.52 The Committee is perturbed to note that the action (or lack of it) in regulation of GM foods
by FSSAI has been painstakingly slow. Recently, FSSAI has decided to have the labelling norms
for genetically modified food products in order to give informed choice to the consumers. All food
products having total Genetically Engineered (GE) ingredients 5% or more shall be labelled. The
labelling shall be as — "Contains GMO/Ingredients derived from GMO". The absence of regulation
for a decade in respect of GM foods would have caused irreversible damage to the consumers,
who are the core constituency for whom FSSAI was set up. The Committee strongly censures
the FSSAI for this lackadaisical attitude and implores upon it to pull up its socks and ensure
that the regulation made in respect to GM foods be implemented within a time bound period and
also provide training to its personnel involved in regulation of GM foods. The Committee also
directs that FSSAI should also educate the citizens of the country as to what constitutes GM
foods as a vast majority of people are not aware of the concept of GM foods.
REGULATION OF IMPORTED FOOD ITEMS
5.53 The Committee has been given to understand that FSSAI has notified the Food Safety and Standards
(Import) Regulations and set different guidelines for mandatory compliance thereof. The new regulation
for import of food items lays down different procedures and provisions for clearance, storage, inspection,
sampling, laboratory analysis of samples, labeling etc. of imported food items. All the imported food items
should have a valid shelf life of not less than 60% at the time of import. Import License from the Central
Licensing Authority is mandatory for import of any food item.
5.54 The Committee desires the FSSAI to ensure that all the provisions laid down in the FSS
Regulations are being followed by all the importers and imported food products fulfill all the
required standards and international benchmarks. The Committee recommends that FSSAI
should frame specific guidelines for the food products that have been banned elsewhere in the
world. Special care should be taken to ensure that expired food items do not get clearance and
the country should not be a dumping ground for food items rejected elsewhere due to quality
issues.
5.55 The Committee also recommends close monitoring of imported food items once the food
item enters the market. Any quality issue that is reported across the country should be taken
seriously. In the eventuality of ban on the imported item entering the Indian market, the
information should be immediately shared with the industry as well as the consumers. There
should be a recall plan for immediate withdrawal of imported food items.
5.56 The Committee has been given to understand that presently it takes five to eight days to
get import clearance for a food consignment while there has been demand to reduce this time
for ease of doing business. The Committee recommends that steps should be taken to reduce the
import clearance time but not at the cost of quality and safety aspects. Especially with respect
to the perishable items, FSSAI should aim on reducing the import clearance time significantly
so that only fresh food items reach the consumers.
5.57 The Committee notes that to bring in clarity and transparency, the Food Safety and Standards
(Import) Regulations, 2017 were notified on 09.03.2017. For ease of doing business, FSSAI has integrated
its Food Import Clearance System (FICS) with ICEGATE system of Customs under Single Window

73
Clearance Interface to Facilitate Trade (SWIFT) at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Cochin and Tuticorin
covering 20 locations.
5.58 CAG Audit noted that out of the total 635 entry points in India, FSSAI had its presence at only 21
points in six ports, and for 135 points, FSSAI had appointed Customs officials by designation as
Authorised Officers (AO) under Section 47(5) of the Act. The appointment by designation is not in
compliance with the regulations, which otherwise requires AOs/FSOs to have a degree in any of the
prescribed disciplines from a recognized university.
5.59 FSSAI in its reply stated that, it is presently operating at six Major locations (Ports) viz. Chennai,
Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi, Kochi and Tuticorin covering 20 points of entry where major food imports are
taking place. For other food import locations, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India is notifying
nominated officers of Customs as Authorized Officers of the FSSAI for food import clearances. These
nominated officers of Customs are provided copies of all the rules and regulations, /operating procedures
and other guidelines/modifications in regard to rules and procedures for implementation. FSSAI also
notifies food test labs/referral labs authorized to carry out food testing as per the prescribed standards.
FSSAI conducts regular training/refresher courses of nominated Customs Officers at various locations
to ensure that all of them are kept updated in all respects. Recently , for monitoring the working of AOs,
Application Programming Interface/web services, a dedicated platform for sharing data of No Objection
Certificate(NOC)/Non Conformance Report (NCR) of imported food items including the consignments
cleared through Risk Management System (RMS) at Customs operated entry points, has also been
developed by FSSAI and is under consideration of Customs Department for final implementation.
5.60 The Committee is constrained to note that custom officials who have a different job profile
have been notified as Authorized Officers and appointed to act as Food Safety Officers in order
to check safety of imported food at 135 points of entry for importing food in the country. The
Committee is unable to reconcile itself with the fact that such appointments have been made in
contravention to the FSSAI's own regulations which mandate food safety officers to have technical
qualifications but the customs officials notified as Authorised Officers for food safety checks are
not checked against the mandated qualifications before the additional charge of food safety of
imported food is handed over to them. The Committee would, therefore, in the first instance,
like the FSSAI to explain this apparent violation of its own regulations.
5.61 In addition to above the Committee is of the considered view that the appointment of
customs officials for food safety checks amounts to compromised food safety in the country.
While the Committee is all for the case of doing business and cutting down delay in clearing
imported food consignments through the single window process, it firmly believes that the food
safety be given a top priority. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should
draw an action plan to appoint dedicated food safety officials across all food importing points in
the country.
5.62 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that the officers of the FSSAI
are present at six ports, namely, Chennai, Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi, Kochi and Tuticorin covering
21 points of entry. To assess the quantum of food products routed through these 21 points of
entry vis-a-vis 135 other custom locations, the Committee would like to be apprised of the total
volume and worth of food item imports routed through these 21 and 135 points of entry separately.

74
REGULATION OF ORGANIC FOOD
5.63 India is among the top five countries in the world in terms of agricultural production. According
to the World of Organic Agriculture Report 2018, India has the largest number of organic producers in
the world. With 835,000 certified organic producers, India is home to more than 30 per cent of total
number of organic producers (2.7 million) in the world. With the rise in income, rapid urbanization and
expensive health care, the awareness towards organic farming has been growing in India. However, a
need for monitoring and regulating the organic products has been felt to verify the authenticity of such
products.
5.64 Section 22 provides that no person shall manufacture, process or sell genetically modified articles
of food, irradiated food, organic foods, functional foods, neutraceuticals, health supplements, proprietary
foods and similar foods except in accordance with the provision contained in the Act and Rules and
regulations made thereunder. Accordingly, after consultations with various stakeholders, Food Safety and
Standards (Organic Food) Regulations, 2017 have been notified in the Gazette on 29.12.2017 and Food
Business Operator shall comply with all the provisions of these regulations by 1st July, 2018.
5.65 The Committee has been informed about the following key features of the Regulation on Food
Safety and Standards (Organic Foods) Regulations, 2017:-
(i) The organic foods to comply with provisions of any one of the following:
(a) National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP) notified by Directorate General of
Foreign Trade. (DGFT) under the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulations) Act,
1992.
(b) Participatory Guarantee System for India (PGS-India) adopted by Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmer's Welfare through National Centre of Organic Farming.
(ii) Organic Food to comply with the requirements of Labelling of FSSAI in addition to that of
NPOP or PGS-India.
(iii) Traceability to be established through one of the above mentioned systems.
(iv) Sales by small original producer or producer organisation to the end consumer will be exempted
from the need of verification of compliance to any of the above mentioned two systems.
(v) All Organic Food to comply with the requirements of product standards, as provided in the
Regulations and Food Safety and Standards (Contaminants, Toxins and Residues) Regulations,
2011 except for residues of insecticides for which the maximum limits shall be 5% of the
maximum limits prescribed or Level of Quantification (LoQ), whichever is higher.
(vi) Organic food imports under bilat eral or multilateral agreements on the basis of equivalence of
standards between NPOP and the organic standards of the respective exporting countries shall
not be required to be re-certified on import to India.
5.66 It is expected that the new Regulations will help in providing Organic Foods its credibility of
genuineness. The farmers will be able to get better prices as genuineness of Organic integrity will be
assured as the consumers will have trust in genuineness of the Organic Foods.

75
5.67 The Committee notes that FSSAI has recently framed regulations for organic food which
makes it mandatory for the domestic producers to certify their food as organic either from the
National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP) System or from the cheaper Participatory
Guarantee System-India (PGS), under which farmers form a collective and vouch for the others'
produce. The Committee also notes that earlier this certification was compulsory only for exports
and optional for domestic supply. The Committee appreciates this regulation of certifying organic
food as this will remove non-certified/fake products from the market. Further, the Committee
also recommends that a separate certification mechanism should be in place for small farmers
who cannot afford these two certification options at an additional cost.
REGULATION OF FORTIFIED FOOD
5.68 Under nutrition has been a big problem for India. The Global Nutrition Report 2017 has reported
that there is an urgent need for India to take effective steps if India hopes to meet its Sustainable
Development Goals 2030. The report states that in India, about 38 per cent of the children under five
are affected by stunting, 21 per cent of children under 5 have been defined as 'wasted' or 'severely
wasted' meaning that they do not weigh enough for their height, 51 per cent of the women of reproductive
age suffer from anemia. This grim statistics shows that the Indian population is suffering from lack of
proper nutrients and thus major efforts have to be taken to improve the nutritional status of the country.
The Global Nutrition Report 2017 states that improving nutrition will be a catalyst for achieving goals
throughout the SDGs and tackling underlying causes of malnutrition through the SDGs will help to end
malnutrition.
5.69 Amidst the grim statistics, Food Fortification can bridge the existing nutritional gap and help in
achieving nutrition targets. Food Fortification is the process of increasing the content of essential
micronutrients in a food so that the nutritional quality of food is improved. The substances that are added
to food to provide micronutrients are known as fortificants and the foods that have undergone the
process of fortification are known as fortified food.
5.70 To address large scale micronutrient deficiencies amongst the citizens in the country, FSSAI has
formulated standards for fortification of key food staples viz. edible oil, double fortified salt, milk, wheat
flour and rice and launched a logo to identify fortified foods. Voluntary fortification has begun for these
staples. FSSAI has established Food Fortification Resource Centre (FFRC) with the support of Tata
Trusts to promote food fortification. Safety net programs-both Mid-Day Meal (MDM) and Integrated
Child Development Scheme (ICDS) have mandated the use of fortified wheat flour, oil and doubled
fortified salt nationally, ensuring that the most vulnerable sections of society receive appropriate and
timely nutrition. Additionally, the Ministry of Food and Public Distribution has recommended distribution
of fortified wheat flour in States where flour is distributed instead of wheat grain, and has also recommended
the distribution of fortified edible oil under Public Distribution System (PDS). As on date, 49 fortified
products are available in the open market across all 5 commodities. 13 States have already implemented
fortification and 9 States have initiated action.
5.71 The Committee notes that safety net programs- both Mid-Day Meal (MDM) and Integrated
Child Development Scheme (ICDS) have mandated the use of fortified wheat flour, oil and
doubled fortified salt nationally, ensuring that the most vulnerable sections of society receive
appropriate and timely nutrition. The Committee is of the view that the above safety net

76
programs involve economies of scale and are not in the domain of Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare. However, in the present scheme of things, provision of even basic items under these
two programs is prone to massive pilferage/sub-standardization/leakages. Various media reports
have highlighted many cases of food poisoning involving contamination and adulteration of meals
under the MDM Scheme making several children severely ill. Even under ICDS, health of small
children and lactating mothers is at stake due to unsafe food items. How FSSAI would ensure
provision of fortified foods under these programs remains to be seen as conversion of intent into
actual realization is what counts the most. The Committee while not discounting the importance
of these schemes would like the FSSAI to embark upon a time-bound due diligence process on
the States which have an efficient distribution of resources under these two safety net programs
and introduce the fortified items in these States and replicate the success of these programs in
other States in a time bound manner.
5.72 The Committee further notes that the Ministry of Food and Public Distribution has
recommended distribution of fortified wheat flour in States in place of wheat grain, and the
distribution of fortified edible oil under Public Distribution System (PDS). As on date, 49 fortified
products are available in the open market across all 5 commodities. 13 States have already
implemented fortification across districts or the entire state and 9 States have initiated action.
The Committee recommends that FSSAI should ensure that the distribution of fortified wheat
flour and edible oil through PDS adheres to the standards set.
REGULATION OF FOOD IN EATERIES
5.73 There has been a considerable increase in chronic lifestyle diseases. Non Communicable diseases
such as diabetes, heart diseases, chronic respiratory diseases and cancer have been on a rise. WHO
report 2015 states that more than 200 diseases are spread through contaminated food. India is also faced
with the twin problem of under nutrition and obesity. The Global Nutrition Report 2017 also states that
in India more than 22 per cent of adult women are overweight. The percentage of overweight men in
the country is slightly lower and stands at 16 per cent of adult men.
5.74 Eating in the restaurants is very common today. In the United States, the restaurants are mandated
to display calories on the menus next to the name /price of the food or drink. Displaying calories leads
to consumer awareness and also the restaurants are encouraged to reformulate their foods to have fewer
calories. FSSAI has also asked the restaurants to voluntarily print calorie counts on the menu.
5.75 In the recent Food Safety and Standards (Licencing and Registration of Food Business) amendments,
FSSAI has proposed mandatory employment of at least one technical person or food safety supervisor
in the case of restaurants. Also, now the restaurants do not require to submit the blueprint/layout plan,
the name and list of equipment and machinery, the list of food category, the copy of certificate obtained
under Co-operative Act, the no-objection certificate (NOC) from the manufacturer and the recall plan
while applying for a Central or State license.
5.76 The Committee recommends that every eatery including hotels, fast food chains, restaurants
and e-commerce food sellers should provide all statutory information concerning packaging and
labelling of food item on menu cards, advertisement and display panels and also mandatorily
print calorie information on their menu so that the consumer makes informed choice and

77
healthy eating is promoted. The Committee also notes that restaurants do not have a fixed
quantity of the meal they serve. The Committee recommends that the eateries should also
specify the quantity of the portion in their menu. FSSAI has issued various guidelines for
restaurants but time and again cases of non adherence to the basic hygiene practices have been
reported. The Committee therefore recommends that once the eatery has been issued license,
timely inspection should be conducted. Also before giving license, the basic infrastructure of the
premises should be inspected and checked for its compliance with the FSSAI guidelines.
5.77 The Committee opines that food safety is also to be kept in mind while designing the site/
floor plan of a restaurant. The places of the equipment, the cooking area, the storage, sink and
drainage area, position of garbage containers, restrooms etc should be clearly demarcated so that
there is no cross contamination. The Committee understands that though the new provision does
not seek submission of such documents under the simplified registration/Licensing process yet
this should not be at the cost of ensuring food safety. The Committee recommends that the site
plan premises of the restaurant should be mandatorily checked by the food authority. Because
even if good quality food articles are used, a poor design may lead to cross contamination and
increased health issues.
REGULATION OF UNORGANIZED SECTOR
5.78 Street Food has been an important part of the Indian food culture. It serves as a reflection of the
local culture as well as provides cheap food to many people. But the quality of food available in the
streets pose health risks for being generally considered unsafe. Therefore, it is essential to integrate the
food vendors and street food in the food safety regime. The mandate of the Food Authority should be
to ensure only good quality food is prepared in street stalls and hygienic practices are followed. The
vendors should be trained in quality control, safe handling, waste management etc. Today when people
travel the world to taste different food, street food is also an ideal opportunity to promote food tourism.
Hence there is a great need to focus on promoting a cleaner healthier and safe street food culture in the
country.
5.79 FSSAI submitted that there are certain challenges to regulate the unorganised food sector. Most of
the Food Business Operators (FBOs) in unorganised food sector are petty FBOs such as hawkers, petty
retailers, small shopkeepers etc. They are unorganised, fragmented and scattered and as such there are
challenges to regulate them. They lack education and awareness towards hygiene and sanitation. There
is need to sensitised towards hygiene and sanitation through capacity building programs. The Food Safety
and Standards Act, 2006 provides for petty FBOs to register themselves with FSSAI instead of obtaining
FSSAI's license. There have been special campaigns conducted to bring them under the fold of FSSAI.
FSSAI has also tied up with Common Service Centers (CSCs) to facilitate FBOs in getting themselves
registered. As on 31.3.2018, there are 31,90,371 petty FBOs registered with FSSAI.
5.80 FSSAI has launched Project Clean Street Food to ensure health, hygiene and safety standard of
street food for all consumers. In March 2016, a pilot was launched in Delhi in association with Ministry
of Skill Development and National Association of Street Vendors of India(NASVI) wherein 23,000 street
food vendors were trained in food safety and hygiene. In October, 2016, project was also launched in
Goa wherein about 700 street food vendors were trained on food safety and hygiene. FSSAI has from
time to time requested other States/UTs to conduct such training drives for food vendors in their

78
respective States/UTs to prevent incidents of unhygienic practices being followed by street food vendors.
Further, to ensure food safety in the unorganised sector, the State Food Safety Authorities, wherever and
whenever necessary, undertake enforcement and surveillance activities including inspection of petty
FBOs. Various activities under IEC (Information, Education & Communication) are taken up to educate
and create awareness among the FBOs towards hygiene, sanitation and good practices to ensure food
safety.
5.81 The Committee is of the view that such initiatives on the lines of Project Clean Street Food
are laudable and worth emulating across the country. Such a measure would also help in getting
feedback in areas where the street vendors lack in hygiene issues and the data can be mapped
by FSSAI. Such data would form a base for ensuring certain food safety standards in the country.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that FSSAI in partnership with State Governments
should evolve a mechanism to train such registered street vendors and also collate data on
difficulties vendors face in food hygiene. FSSAI should formulate the standards to regulate street
food vendors within a period of one year from the date of presentation of this Report of the
Committee to the Parliament.
DUPLICITY OF STANDARDS/CERTIFICATION
5.82 The Committee has been informed that there are different agencies enforcing different standards in
the country. FSSAI prescribes its own standards under the FSS Act. The Directorate of Marketing and
Inspection enforces AGMARK Standards and Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) is the national Standards
Body of India under the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, Government of India.
BIS is voluntary in nature but the Government has enforced mandatory certification on various products
through various quality control orders under different acts. The AGMARK Certification Scheme is also
voluntary. For Blended Edible Vegetable Oils and Fat Spread certification under AGMARK is mandatory
as per provisions in the Food Safety and Standards Act and regulations, 2006. An overlapping of pre-
existing standards maintained by other regulatory bodies is observed which causes confusion among the
stakeholders and consumers.
5.83 Defence Food Research Laboratory in its deposition before the Committee has recommended the
merger of BIS and AGMARK standards with FSS Standards so that the food suppliers do not face
difficulty in following all the mandatory regulations and customers do not face difficulty to discern the
differences in food labelling.
5.84 Indian Beverage Association in its written submission has stated that a significant set of regulations
and standards for the food and beverage sector continues to be set by the Legal Metrology wing of the
Department of Consumer Affairs and by the Bureau of Indian Standards. These need to be harmonized
to bring them under one unified regime of FSSAI, so that seamless formulation and implementation of
all requisite provisions applicable to the food and beverage industry can be mandated effectively. This
will relieve industry to manage its resources and support consumer facing measures of the authorities
more proactively.
5.85 The Solvent Extractors' Association of India also submitted that FSSAI has repealed the 8 regulations
to bring one country-one law for transparent, science based regulations in the country; however for
Blended oils and Fat spread products, AGMARK certification is still compulsory along with FSSAI's

79
license. This is duplicity of licenses and against the one country one law objective. It has requested to
keep FSSAI regulations and remove mandatory AGMARK certification.
5.86 The Ministry in its reply stated that the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), is
mandated for laying down science based standards for articles of foods. These standards are mandatory
in nature. These are framed considering safety aspects and are minimum standards. While BIS standards
are voluntary in nature & are quality standards and AGMARK standards are grading based quality
standards.
5.87 The Committee agrees with the recommendations of the Defence Food Research Laboratory
and understands that there is a need to address the existing overlap between standards. BIS and
AGMARK Standards should be reviewed to explore the extent to which they can be merged into
the FSS Act Standards regulations. The focus should be on the simplification of standards without
compromising them. There should be a clear division of responsibility between FSSAI, BIS, and
the Directorate of Marketing and Inspection (DMI). The responsibility and mandate of each
authority has to be addressed. Mandatory and voluntary requirements lead to ambiguity that can
be avoided if there is one mandatory standard for each product. This will give relief to the food
suppliers and they will have to fulfill only one mandatory regulation/requirement for a particular
product. All the standards can base their criteria on the international standards of the Codex
Alimentarius Commission (FAO).
5.88 The Committee understands that multiplicity of Standards and certification from different
agencies is a cumbersome process for the industry. The main idea behind FSS Act has been the
consolidation of food laws but varied Standards under a law defeats this very idea. The Committee
recommends one certification procedure under the FSS Act. For Blended oils and Fat spread
products there should be one Standard that can be obtained by merging the AGMARK certification
and the FSS Standards.

80
CHAPTER 6
MISCELLANEOUS
PACKAGING LABELLING AND ADVERTISEMENTS OF FOOD PRODUCTS
6.1 Food packaging and labelling is an important aspect of food safety. The main idea behind packaging
of food is that it protects the food from any external contamination and preserves the food for a longer
period of time. Accurate and precise food labelling is essential for identifying the product. Labeling also
provides nutritional information and helps the consumer make an informed choice.
6.2 The packaging and labelling requirements for pre-packaged foods are specified under Food Safety
and Standards (Packaging and Labelling) Regulations, 2011. The said regulations deal with the packaging
of foods and prescribe the general requirements for containers used in the packaging and storing of food
and product specific packaging requirements. It also prescribes requirements for labelling of pre-packaged
foods. These regulations do not adequately cover several important aspects such as advertisements,
claims made by food business and various types of packaging materials currently used globally. In order
to address these issues in a focused manner, FSSAI has undertaken revision of these regulations and
decided to split them in three separate regulations as under:
1. Food Safety and Standards (Advertisement and Claims) Regulations.
2. Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations.
3. Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations.
6.3 Some of the important salient features of these upcoming regulations are as under:
ADVERTISEMENT AND CLAIMS REGULATIONS:
(i) Aimed at establishing fairness in claims and advertisements of food products and make food
businesses accountable for such claims/advertisements so as to protect consumer interests.
(ii) Defines general principles for claims and advertisements; criteria for nutrition claims, non-
addition claims, health claims, claims related to dietary guidelines or healthy diets, conditional
claims; claims that are specifically prohibited; corrective advertisements etc.
(iii) Restriction on advertisements in respect of a food product that undermines the importance of
healthy lifestyles or portrays the food product as a complete replacement of normal meal or
undermine the products of other businesses.
PACKAGING  REGULATIONS:
(i) Aimed at establishing requirements for packaging materials so as to ensure that they are safe
for use in food packaging.
(ii) Prescribes general and specific requirements with respect to packaging material such as
plastics, metals and metal alloys, paper and board materials, glass etc.
(iii) Prohibit the use of newspaper and other such materials for packing or wrapping of food
articles.
80

81
LABELLING  AND  DISPLAY  REGULATIONS:
(i) Aimed at establishing requirements for labelling of pre-packaged foods to provide simple, easy
to understand information to consumers and to facilitate them in making healthier food choices.
(ii) Defines general and specific labelling requirements such as name, ingredient list, nutrition
information, declaration for veg/non-veg foods, food additives etc.
(iii) Marking of "expiry date" instead of "Best before" as presently practiced.
(iv) Prescribes requirements for Front of pack labelling which includes labelling of energy, total
fat, trans fat, total sugar and salt along with their contribution to Recommended Dietary
Allowance (RDA).
(v) Mandatory declarations including statutory warnings, specific labelling of infant foods, milk &
milk products, edible oil and fat products, irradiated foods, fortified foods, organic foods, low
gluten and gluten free foods, genetically engineered or modified foods and Alcoholic Beverages
etc.
(vi) Labelling of Non-retail containers.
6.4 Draft regulations for Advertisement and Claims as well as Packaging have already been issued and
are at the advance stage of finalization. The draft Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display)
Regulation, 2018 has been released by FSSA in April, 2018.
PACKAGING
6.5 National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) submitted
before the Committee that Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labelling) Regulation, 2011 covers
the packaging and labeling requirements of food products for which a proper monitoring mechanism
needs to be in place for curbing down various false and misleading claims of the packaged foods. FSSAI
does not specify the toxicity levels of the food contact materials when they come in contact with the
food product under various environmental conditions.
6.6 Defence Food Research Laboratory submitted that there is urgent need to constitute a scientific
working group to study the impact of food packaging on health aspects, toxicological study on the use
of inks in printing of labels, migration of metal contaminants, use of recycled plastics etc. Bringing
standards/ specifications for food packaging materials meant for primary food packaging materials. The
information on the labels and their scientific correctness needs to be streamlined with a label approval
system.
6.7 The Committee underlines the need to establish a proper monitoring mechanism for checking
the claims of the packaged food. FSSAI should ensure that the food companies do not make any
false claims regarding the nutritional information. All the packaged food irrespective of the size
of the packet should include a list of ingredients, additives, nutritional information etc so that
the consumer makes a well informed choice.
6.8 The Committee understands that assessing the safety of food contact material is very
crucial as there is always a high possibility of chemicals leaking from the material down to the

82
food. This can change the composition of the food and make the food unsuitable for consumption.
Moreover, the food packaging material on reaction with food article can introduce toxicity.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that FSSAI should specify the toxicity levels of the food
contact materials under different conditions especially during storage, processing and transportation
where the food package can be exposed to different environmental conditions. The Committee
also recommends constitution of a scientific working group to study the impact of food packaging
on health aspects. FSSAI needs to bring standards and specifications for food packaging materials
so that any unwanted toxic contamination by use of sub standard packaging material is avoided.
LABELLING
6.9 Indian Beverage Association submitted that the piece-meal, un-coordinated adoption of the labelling
regulatory requirements is leading to major chaos, confusion and national wastage as a result of destruction
of the excess inventory at hand. Globally, a reasonable and practicable period of time is allowed for the
food businesses for change-over. This ranges between 3 to 5 years in the developed countries. Such
length of time is required as a series of labelling changes put a disproportionate burden on the businesses.
Different Regulators need to keep a track of competing and overlapping labelling changes. A pilot study
should be taken up to understand the gaps/infrastructure and introduce capability ahead of notifying the
regulations.
6.10 National Institute of Nutrition (NIN) in its written submission mentioned that the food labeling
regulation is constantly being upgraded. However, in our country where there is a large segment of
illiterate population, text based information especially the ones related to nutrient information, ingredients
etc is not likely to be very effective. New forms of labeling especially symbol based ones can be more
useful.
6.11 The Committee recommends that any changes in the Packaging and Labelling regulations
should be timely disclosed to the FBOs so that they get enough time to conform to the changed
standards. The regulations should be implemented in a phased manner rather than haphazardly.
Proper training to the FBOs is essential for enforcement of the labelling norms.
6.12 The Committee understands that the illiterate section of the country may find it difficult
to read the labels and gauge the nutritional information on the food packages. The Committee
notes that National Institute of Nutrition has recommended new forms of labelling especially
symbol based as it is more effective for a country like India. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that FSSAI should collaborate with such institutes and work on labelling based on
colors and symbols. The Committee also recommends the traffic light labelling system as practised
in other countries for packaged food items in India. This labelling will enable people to have a
better idea of the nutritional content of the packaged foods. Food with high salt, sugar and fat
content will be marked red which is a sign for unhealthy food, amber for moderate, and green
for low (healthy).
ADVERTISING:
6.13 National Institute of Plant Health Management has suggested that all the commercial advertisements
with respect to food items are required to be certified by FSSAI, after verifying the technicalities as the
press, media and audio visual advertisements play vital role in attracting the public towards food products.
A mechanism may be developed for scrutinizing all the advertisements related to food items.

83
6.14 National Institute of Nutrition submitted that FSSAI as an authority has least control on Food
Advertising as it can only regulate claims on food packs and labels but not how they advertise. It is under
the purview of Advertising Standards Council of India which is a voluntary industrial body. However,
FSSAI can create a monitoring cell for food advertising which suo-moto can take up false or misleading
advertisements to report to the appropriate authorities or voluntary regulatory bodies.
6.15 V oice Society in its written submission has stated that in 2016, FSSAI signed MOU with Advertising
Standard Council of India (ASCI) to check misleading advertisements of food products. FSSAI website
does not disclose about details of complaints received by ASCI of food products, number of complaints
about non compliance forwarded to FSSAI and action taken by FSSAI on such advertisements which
should have been in public domain. Details of penal action taken against manufacturer should also be
disclosed in public caution.
6.16 FSSAI has signed an MoU with Advertising Standard Council of India (ASCI) for "Processing the
complaints of misleading advertisements with respect to Food & Beverages (F&B) Sector" on its behalf.
Complaints received directly by ASCI from consumers/other stakeholders across media are processed by
ASCI and included in the report to be provided to FSSAI. Further, the role of ASCI is to bring to FSSAI's
notice any F&B advertisements that is violating the FSS Act, Rules & Regulations made thereunder in
Advertising, making unsubstantiated claims and misleading the consumers, action taken by ASCI during
examination and scrutinization of complaint and non-compliance of ASCI's opinion for further action
required to be taken by the FSSAI.
6.17 The Committee would like to emphasise upon the power and hold of advertisement on
gullible consumers who may be adults, senior citizens, children who are easily influenced and
swayed by the promises of a better quality of health and well being by consuming various food
products. Several of such advertisements may be misleading which can not only fleece the
consumers of their money for a wasted product but also harm their well being. The Committee
would like the Food Authority to take this issue with utmost seriousness and devise ways to stop
misleading advertisements. The Committee feels that FSSAI can suo moto take cognizance of
such advertisements and involve the ASCI for appropriate actions.
6.18 The Committee recommends creation of a food advertising monitoring cell that can monitor
all the food advertisements and take up complains related to advertisements. The Committee
would like FSSAI to share information w.r.t. number of complaints received by ASCI and the
action taken against the offenders. The misleading advertisements should be banned immediately
and the information be shared with the public.
STANDARDS OF EXPORTED AND IMPORTED FOODS UNDER THE NATIONAL FOOD
CONTROL SYSTEM
6.19 India's National Food Control System is broadly divided into two different categories. The first
category is the domestically manufactured and imported food which is regulated by FSSAI that comes
under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The second is the exported food that is regulated by
the Export Council of India which comes under Ministry of Commerce and Industry. The Committee
notes that Export Council of India (ECI) facilitates worldwide access for Indian exports through an
inspection and certification system. ECI also conducts training of manpower on international requirements
and instils confidence in importers about quality and safety of Indian exports.

84
6.20 It is surprising to note that the standards followed by ECI & FSSAI, are not the same. ECI is in
line with the international standards where non-conformance in even one parameter leads to rejection of
the export consignment. On the other hand is FSSAI which has not even been able to ensure that all
the food articles follow the domestic standards. Cases with non-conformance on different parameters
have been reported across the country but such food articles are still openly produced and sold in the
market.
6.21 The Committee recommends that whether the food is exported, imported or domestically
produced, it should follow a uniform standard and should be tested on the same parameters. The
domestic consumers cannot be treated as second class citizens and therefore the standard for
imported/domestic production should be at par with the international benchmarks. The Committee
also recommends that there should be only one organization to overlook the National Food
Control System and also monitor the imported, exported and domestically manufactured food
item.
GREIV ANCE  REDRESSAL
6.22 Office of the Commissioner of Food Safety, Kerala submitted that in order to facilitate quick
redressal of food concern, FSSAI has an online food concern redressal system namely 'Food Safety
Connect' as part of the existing online Food Licensing and Registration System (FLRS) in order to
facilitate quick redressal of food concerns. This online platform helps consumers to register their
complaints and feedbacks about food safety issues related to adulterated food, unsafe food, substandard
food, labelling defects in food and misleading claims and advertisements related to various food products.
On successful registration of a food concern, the consumer receives a reference number through a SMS
on the mobile number. This reference no. can be used to track his/ her concern in the online system.
The FSSAI team, the State DOs/FSOs and the FBOs - all three stakeholders have online access to the
grievances raised by consumers.
6.23 FSSAI submitted that it also has a robust Consumer Grievance Redressal System in place. The food
complaints received by Jago Grahak Jago are forwarded to FSSAI through Grievances Against Misleading
Advertisements (GAMA) portal. The complaints are taken up with State Food Safety regulatory Authorities/
concerned Food Business Operators. A total of 61 complaints mere received through GAMA portal during
the year 2017-18.
6.24 The Committee recommends that all the complaints related to food safety should be taken
seriously and immediate action should be taken by the food authority. A timeframe should be
established for speedy disposal of the cases. FSSAI should also analyse the status of pendency
in these portals. The same data should also be shared with the respective States so that immediate
action can be taken. Most of the people in the country may not be aware of the food safety
connect system and the different means through which food safety concerns can be voiced.
Therefore, the Committee recommends spreading awareness among the consumers. Skits and
Plays can be an effective method to spread awareness regarding consumer rights. A dedicated
helpline should also be opened for food safety complaints and wide scale advertisement regarding
these different means should be publicised.
6.25 Indian Beverage Association submitted that establishment of a suitably equipped Cell at the FSSAI
office which an FBO can approach/write to for getting queries addressed/ clarifications provided in case

85
of ambiguities in regulations and guidelines would greatly facilitate ease of doing business whilst ensuring
compliance.
6.26 FSSAI in its reply stated that the queries/clarifications are received from FBOs through various
platforms like e-mail, twitter, whatsapp, mobile app, walk-in, etc. are being addressed by FSSAI regularly.
Suitable clarifications are provided to FBOs/stakeholders accordingly.
6.27 The Committee recommends the creation of a cell that deals with different queries of FBOs
regarding regulations. FBOs form the backbone of the food safety regime and it is the responsibility
of the FSSAI to ensure that their problems and queries are immediately solved. Accurate
knowledge about food safety practices and procedures will help in better compliance by FBOs
which will in turn ensure production of safe food. The Committee also recommends holding
monthly meetings and seminars for the FBOs where they are provided information regarding any
change in amendments and regulations and are constantly updated with the current good
manufacturing practices.
INFORMATION EDUCATION COMMUNICATION (IEC)
6.28 KEFTA submitted that Food Safety should be part of school curriculum to create a culture of food
safety among students and parents. A specific subject on food safety at school level is essential. The
curriculum can cover basic knowledge of food supply including hand washing, basic food hygiene in
canteens, the quality of food they bring from home, food safety during camps, personal hygiene, Good
Manufacturing Practices, Cleaning and disinfection, waste disposal, pest management, labelling details
and allergens. A complete awareness of food that is available for all- 'Know your food'. Relevant Food
and water borne diseases, NFSD programme. This shall make our public food safety awareness in a
much more practical and compulsory way.
6.29 FSSAI in its reply submitted that FSSAI's Safe and Nutritious Food (SNF)@ School initiative is
focussed on school children. FSSAI has developed Yellow Book (Level I-II ) manual with age appropriate
simple messages and activities to be carried out within school and at home. Yellow Book (Level II)
including section on reading Labels and a suggested activity around it. FSSAI is encouraging State
Education Board, NCERT and CBSE to include this book or its content in the mainstream curriculum
and carry out activities suggested for children.
6.30 The Committee applauds the FSSAI's Safe and Nutritious Food (SNF) @ School Initiative
which entails dissemination of simple food safety messages through books that have been
developed by FSSAI. The Committee reiterates the initiative of FSSAI that activities promoting
food safety should be made part of the school curriculum. More efforts have to be put to deliver
age appropriate messages to the students. The Committee recommends all the States to introduce
Yellow book developed by FSSAI in the schools. The Yellow book should also be made available
in the regional languages and necessary changes can be made according to the region.
6.31 Khadhya Tel V yapari Association, Maharashtra (Reg) submitted that stock register should be maintained
on the computers. They also requested that all State Food Commissioner should not insist for Registers
and instead treat the computerised record as valid.
6.32 The Committee recommends that FSSAI should promote computerised records rather than
insisting on registers. The digitised records will help in better data management and better

86
accessibility. This will also help in bringing transparency in the food business management
system and prevent unnecessary wastage of paper and loss of any information.
STANDARDS  FOR  LOCAL/TRADITIONAL  BEVERAGES  AND  FOOD
6.33 In a large country like India, there is diversity in food, beverages and eating habits. Different regions
of our country serve different kinds of local beverages that is a reflection of their local culture and
flavours. Local drink such as "feni" of Goa has been accorded heritage drink status by the State
Government. Drinks made from Mahua flowers and other local spices have been popular among the tribal
people and its popularity is also growing among the urban masses. Such local beverages have been
commercialized by private companies and are being sold in the market.
6.34 The Committee observes that there are no uniform standards for the formulation of such traditional
drinks/beverages and there are no guidelines for regulating and monitoring the production process of
these drinks.
6.35 The Committee recommends that FSSAI should set standards for these local beverages.
Standards for the alcoholic content in the traditional beverages will ensure the supply of quality
drinks and prevent instances of alcohol poisoning. There is a need to standardise the ingredients
use and regulate the production especially for local traditional heritage drinks so That these local
drinks are safe for consumption and at the same time commercially competitive and at par with
international drinks.
6.36 The Committee also observes that States are famous for their local food items which are
produced by small scale industries generally in households. There is a growing demand for these
food items in other States. In view of absence of regulations for such food items, it is imperative
that to ensure safety food products of different States should adhere to basic standards of food
safety. The Committee recommends that the FSSAI should co-ordinate with State Food
Departments for monitoring of such food items generally produced by cottage small scale industries
in order to ensure adherence to basic food safety standards.
MEGA  FOOD  PARK
6.37 The main aim of establishing the mega food park has been to link the agricultural production directly
to the consumer market. Mega food parks provides excellent infrastructure for food processing along
the value chain from farm to processing and then to consumer markets. The Mega food parks along with
the food processing units also consists of in house food testing facility that helps in better quality check
for the food and better enforcement of the food standards.
6.38 The Committee during its study visit to Jodhpur, Rishikesh and Bhopal from 1st to 8th July, 2018
visited the Patanjali Mega Food Park, Haridwar. It is one of the fully functioning mega food park in the
country. This food park has been able to fulfil its objective by reducing wastages and ensuring value
addition especially in ayurvedic formulations and food items. The Patanjali Mega Food Park has made
food processing more economically viable and also created large employment opportunities. The Committee
has also been apprised that US FDA inspection has been carried out in Patanjali Food and Herbal Park.
During the audit all facilities, infrastructure, processes, Good Manufacturing and Good compliances
practices and systems were thoroughly checked and verified by the Authority for all the products which
are exported from Patanjali Ayurved Limited.

87
6.39 The Committee is of the view that the role of FSSAI in ensuring food safety standards in
Mega Food Parks is of immense importance as monitoring of all processes of food manufacturing
in a specified area can effectively be carried out as is being done in the Patanjali Mega Food
Park. The Committee appreciates the concept of Mega Food Park which ensures adherence to
food safety standards as well as bridging the gap between the farm and the market. The Committee
has been given to understand that all the 42 sanctioned Mega Food Parks would be operational
by 2019. In view of this, the role of FSSAI would increase and there is an urgent need for FSSAI
to augment its resources in all respects so as to carry out its mandate of an effective food quality
control management system.

88
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A  GLANCE
The Committee is of the view that India as a welfare State has primary responsibility to
take a key role in establishing a rojbust food safety mechanism for the welfare of its citizens
but time and again the State has failed to address the same. The policies and the existing food
laws are inadequate and are weakly enforced. This poor implementation of the Food Law has
resulted in rampant food adulteration and various food scandals. Substandard quality food has
been reaching the market and causing irreparable damage to public health. The fundamental
right to pure food has been compromised and long since forgotten. Food Safety, nutrition and
food security are intricately interlinked. Poor food safety infrastructure inadvertently poses a
threat to public health as nutritious and safe food is fundamental to good health. (Para 1.7)
COMPOSITION OF FSSAI
It has been given to understand that FSSAI is presently operating with staff from state
apparatus. The Committee opines that FSSAI cannot function to its optimum level without
employing technical persons as permanent staff. The Committee recommends that FSSAI should
be restructured and persons with domain knowledge and expertise in the food sector should be
employed to run the organization. (Para 1.20)
The Committee notes that FSSAI is the apex regulatory body for food safety in the country
and the Preamble to FSS Act inter-alia seeks to lay down science based standards for articles of
food and ensure availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption. Food safety is
thus a specialized job and FSSAI being a science based organization should be equipped with
proper tools and capabilities and headed by someone with the requisite technical acumen and
appropriate expertise to address the challenging task of food regulation for a country like India.
Engaging man-power with technical skill and competence, therefore, becomes imperative for
effective rendering of important mandate given to FSSAI. The Committee is of the opinion that
the regulatory body should be run by experts/ scientists in the food sector with bureaucratic
support. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the qualifications and procedures of selection
and appointment of Chairman and CEO of FSSAI be reviewed so that the best professionals with
domain expertise are selected for this onerous regulatory responsibility. While reviewing and
modifying the process of selection and appointment of Chairman and CEO, the Government may
take a cue from similar regulatory mechanisms functioning in some of the developed countries
like USA, UK, Australia etc. Composition of Central Advisory Committee. (Para 1.22)
The Committee notes that as per the information available on the website of FSSAI, out
of its 9 members of Central Advisory Committee (CAC) representing the interests of food
industry, agriculture, consumers, relevant research bodies and food laboratories, 5 are from
Delhi as in Annexure II. The ex-officio Chairman of CAC is also Delhi based which makes this
number six. Given the fact that there are 24 chapters under trade laws dealing with food and
scope of FSSAI and there is a vast pool of expertise available country-wide, this Delhi centric
composition of CAC hardly represents various interest groups. The Committee feels that this
factor is certainly depriving FSSAI of the sage advice and expertise of the immense talent
present in the food sector in the country. This also leads the Committee to the conclusion that
there is no transparent procedure for selection of members of CAC. (Para 1.25)
88

89
The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be written guidelines on the
selection process of members of CAC and the whole selection criteria should be made transparent.
Bio data of selected candidates and their areas of competency/proven track record should be
displayed on the website of FSSAI. It also recommends that the composition of CAC be broad
based so that the pool of expertise in the food sector spread across the country could be tapped.
(Para 1.26)
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE AND SCIENTIFIC PANELS
The Committee recommends that proper guidelines for selection of members in the Scientific
Committee must be made and strictly adhered to. The Scientific Panel should also have some
members with industrial experience so that the diverse views from other sectors are also
accommodated. (Para 1.28)
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR FSSAI
The Committee notes that FSSAI has cited financial constraint as one of the main reasons
in its failure to upgrade the food safety mechanism in the country. The annual budget allocated
to FSSAI is extremely low when compared to annual budgets of counterpart organizations in
different countries. This highlights the inadequate attention being given to matters related to
food safety. The Committee would like to emphasize that food safety not only ensures good
health but is also vital for economic growth and progress. The food processing industry has
tremendous potential to generate employment, boost exports of agro-products and provide
remunerative prices to farmers for their produce. However, tapping such opportunities is possible
only if our food safety apparatus is brought at par with international standards. (Para 1.40)
The Committee underlines the need for an effective allocation of financial resources to
FSSAI coupled with an effective State Food regulatory mechanism to strengthen the food safety
infrastructure in the country. The Committee, accordingly, recommends a quantum jump in the
budgetary allocation for FSSAI. The States should also enhance outlay for food safety to ensure
safe and wholesome food for the citizens. (Para 1.41)
The Committee observes that the responsibility for surveillance and enforcement of food
laws lies squarely on the State/UT Governments. But given the resource crunch in the States,
it would be unrealistic to expect that the States would be in a position to improve the infrastructure
and increase the manpower without central assistance for overhauling their food regulatory
system. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
should work out a fully Centrally Sponsored Scheme for up gradation of manpower, strengthening
of food safety infrastructure including food testing laboratories and setting up a robust surveillance
system at State level. (Para 1.42)
CAG REPORT NO. 37 OF 2017- PERFORMANCE AUDIT ON IMPLEMENTATION OF FOOD
SAFETY AND STANDARDS ACT, 2006
The Committee notes the shortcomings pointed out by CAG report about the administration
of food safety laws. The Committee opines that there is a need to restructure or revamp the
FSSAI so as to enable it to meet the multiple challenges in the arena of food safety and

90
regulation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that only technically competent officers with
expertise in subject of food science should be appointed/selected in FSSAI so that they are most
suitable for the task assigned to them by FSS Act 2006. (Para 1.53)
The Committee would like the Ministry to launch a national level awareness programme to
sensitize all the sections of the society on the food safety subject aiming to infuse a national
commitment towards reduction of food contamination from all the stages of food chain. This sort
of a mission mode project will assure that the stakeholders take full ownership and responsibility
and ensure self compliance to the FSS Act, 2006. Also, a comprehensive food policy must be
devised and the shortcomings of the present Act need to be rectified. (Para 1.54)
EFFICACY OF THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Regulatory Analysis
The Committee notes that the first objective of FSSAI, is to lay down science based standards
for articles of food and regulate their manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import to
ensure availability of safe and wholesome food. However, the indicators of food safety show that
the objective of formation of FSSAI has not been fulfilled as the quality of food stuffs is
deteriorating and use of contaminants is increasing day by day. Milk and food which were safe
previously are no longer safe because adulteration and use of hazardous chemicals for artificial
ripening of fruits and vegetables have witnessed tremendous increase in the recent past. The
Committee observes that FSSAI has failed to assess the impact of the FSS Act on food safety
and therefore recommends that FSSAI should systematically evaluate the performance of the
FSS Act, its rules and regulations. Certain indicators need to be developed to measure the
outcomes of the food safety policy and institutions. (Para 2.3)
REGULATIONS YET TO BE FRAMED
The Committee understands that the process of framing regulations involves extensive
consultations with various stakeholders including related ministries, agencies, NGOs, farmer
organizations, etc. However, failure to examine the requirement to frame regulations in respect
of remaining seven areas even after a decade of enactment of the Act is indicative of FSSAI's
lethargy and procrastinated decision making in the matter. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that FSSAI should frame and notify the remaining regulations within a period of one year from
the date of presentation of this Report to the Parliament. (Para 2.6)
INORDINATE DELAYS WHILE NOTIFYING AMENDMENTS
The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Ministry to the recommendation of
the Lok Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislations which has stipulated (December 2011)
that the rules should be notified within six months of last date of receipt of comments from
stakeholders if a large number of such comments/ suggestions have been received and within
three months if nil or less comments are received. The CAG Audit observed that though only
one to two comments of minor nature were received on the draft notifications in four cases,
FSSAI took five to ten months for final notification. FSSAI while notifying rules should consider
the recommendations of the Lok Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation and work to
strengthen its scientific and administrative machinery so that further delays are avoided. Moreover,
the frequency of meetings of Scientific Committee and Panels and Food Authority should be
increased and a strict timeline should be set and adhered to. (Para 2.9)

91
PRODUCT APPROV AL SYSTEM
Considering all the facts, the Committee is constrained to observe that though the Supreme
Court struck down the Product Approval System based on the advisories issued by FSSAI in
August 2015, FSSAI took a very long time to review all the cases of NOCs granted under this
system. The status of 192 NOCs is still not clear as to whether these products are covered under
any new regulations or not. The Committee endorses the view of CAG that FSSAI failed to
ensure the cancellation of licenses issued under this suspended system. There is every likelihood
that FBOs with invalid licenses under this system are still producing and selling unsafe food to
the consumers. FSSAI should therefore expedite the whole process of withdrawal of such NOCs
and carry out within six months inspection of the FBOs that claim to comply with the new
regulations. (Para 2.12)
STATE LEVEL STEERING COMMITTEE
The Committee recommends that the State Level Advisory Committee should be constituted
in every State with the Food Safety Commissioner as the Chairperson and all the stakeholders
as its members. The guidelines for its constitution and role should be issued. The Committee
agrees with Central Advisory Committee (CAC) that the Director of the State Food Testing Lab,
officers of the Food Authority and representatives from the industry associations should also be
included as its members. The Committee feels that the presence of such a system at State and
District level will not only help in better handling of licensing/registration regulations but also
facilitate integration of local bodies with the Food Safety Administration. The Committee would
like the Authority to nudge the State Governments to expedite the formation of State and
District Level Advisory Committees. Monthly meetings should be conducted by these Committees
and appropriate actions taken to ensure robust food safety surveillance in the State. Section 70
of the FSS Act requires the State Government to establish one or more tribunals to be known
as the Food Safety Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals from the decisions of the Adjudicating
Officer under Section 68. The Committee observes that there is no Food Safety appellate tribunal
in Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Odisha, Sikkim and Tamil Nadu even after more than a decade of the FSS Act. The Committee
therefore recommends establishing of tribunal in each of these States so that the litigation
process can be fast tracked. (Para 2.15)
ABSENCE OF SEPARATE FOOD SAFETY DEPARTMENT
The implementation and enforcement of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 rests primarily
with the State/ UT Governments, for which regular surveillance, monitoring and inspection are
required to be undertaken by them. The Committee however notes that many States do not have
a separate food safety Department. The Committee is of the view that food adulteration, lack
of quality checks, misleading labelling, sale of defective food products etc. that have become the
norm these days are primarily an offshoot of absence of a dedicated and robust food safety
apparatus at the State level. The Joint Committee of Parliament on the Prevention of Food
Adulteration (Amendment) Act, 1974 had recommended long back that for effective implementation
of the Act, a separate food safety department under the control of the Director of Health should
be established in all the States. Endorsing the same view, the Committee strongly recommends

92
establishment of a separate agency or Department of Food Safety in each State for enforcing a
robust food safety mechanism in the country. The Committee also recommends that the creation
of a dedicated food regulatory mechanism in each State be taken up by the Union Government
with the State Governments at the highest level. (Para 2.17)
In some States/UTs officers in Health Department are holding additional charge of food
safety department. Section 30 of the FSS Act states that the State Government shall appoint the
Commissioner of Food Safety for the State for efficient implementation of food safety and
standards and other requirements laid down under the Act. The Section spells out the functions
of the Commissioner of Food Safety in terms of (i) regulating manufacture, storage, distribution
or sale of any article of food in the interest of public health, (ii) carrying out survey of the
industrial units engaged in manufacture or processing of food, (iii) conducting or organising
training programmes for the personnel, (iv) generating awareness of food safety, (v) ensuring an
efficient and uniform implementation of the standards and (vi) sanctioning prosecution for
offences etc. The Committee understands that the Food Safety Commissioner has to perform a
wide range of functions. It, therefore, recommends that the officer should be conversant with
food science and technology and should be a whole time officer. Part time arrangement for such
important functions in many States/UTs will not serve the interests of the Act. (Para 2.18)
The Committee notes that there is no uniformity in the food safety infrastructure across
the country. Some States do not even have a food safety department and a food safety appellate
tribunal. The food testing laboratories lack functional equipments as well as technical manpower.
This inadequate arrangement has failed to control food adulteration in the country. Therefore the
Committee recommends removal of this existing inconsistency and introduction of a uniform
structure across the country. The Central Government should work in cooperation with the State
Government to establish a uniform food safety regulatory regime in the country. It is also very
important for the food testing laboratories across States/UTs to follow uniform procedure/
methodology and guidelines so that consistent results are obtained. (Para 2.20)
The Committee notes that packaged drinking water is already included in the definition of
food. The Committee recommends that the definition of drinking/ portable water should also be
added to Section 3 (1) (j). The water that is served as drinking water in the eateries should also
come under the purview of the FSS Act. The water that is provided in the food business premises
such as eating outlets should also be timely inspected. All this should be done to ensure that the
FBOs provide clean drinking water in their eateries. (Para 2.23)
The Committee notes that the use of food dyes has to be regulated because time and again,
the food dyes have been linked to health problems. Excessive use of colouring matter in food may
cause allergic reaction to some people or hyperactivity in sensitive children. The Food Authority
should ensure that the artificial coloring matter used in food meets the strict food safety
requirements. The uniform guidelines for food dyes will ensure that the food samples are
correctly analysed and labelled as substandard or unsafe as per the prescribed limit. The Committee
recommends that the provisions proposed by the office of Food Safety Commissioner, Kerala be
considered for addition to the Section after due legislative vetting. Use of coloring matter above
the prescribed limit or use of non-permitted coloring matter should both be punishable and
stringent action should be taken against FBOs involved in this practice. (Para 2.26)

93
The Committee gathers that a large number of food products are sold as health food, "rich
in...., contains added...., fortified with..., added with....., natural, herbal, organic" etc. As of now,
there are no definitions for these products under the FSS Act, 2006 and consumers are also not
aware of these terms and their health implications. Though large number of products is sold by
manufacturers under these claims, these terms are not clear to manufacturers either. Even the
food inspectors have their own interpretation due to which corrupt practices are prevailing. The
Committee is of the view that since these claims have health as well as financial implications
for the consumers, the matter should not be left to market forces and manufacturers. In fact
all terms and claims used on the label must be defined under the Act or the rules and no one
should be allowed to make claims without scientific evidence or data. Besides all these terms
must have verification criteria and reporting system under the law. (Para 2.27)
The Committee notes with concern that many of the harmful components and contaminants
enter the food system at the time of primary production whereas such primary food production
is exempted from the coverage of the law. The Committee believes that this exclusion of farmer/
fisherman or farming operations including fisheries, livestock from FSS Act is a major challenge
and lacuna in the Act because unless the raw material is of good quality, the good quality of final
product cannot be ensured. The Committee agrees that it is important to ensure that the food
is safe right from the beginning of the food chain and for this, the Food Authority will have to
work closely with the primary producers. The major issues in primary production like overuse
of pesticides, use of growth hormones, drug use in livestock etc. pose health risks and a significant
threat to ensuring food safety. The Committee is convinced that without primary production
system coverage, food will never be safe. The Committee is aware that once hazardous
contaminants, excessive antibiotic residues and pesticide residues etc. enter the food system,
there is no technology by which they can be removed from the foods. The Committee, therefore,
expects the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to make guidelines/ code of practices and the
Ministry of Agriculture to impose restrictions on pesticides and harmful components. The issue
of amendment to necessary guidelines/code of practices may be taken up with the highest
authorities concerned. (Para 2.30)
The Committee further recommends that all the laws including Agricultural Produce
Marketing Committee Act hurting safe food production should be reviewed and amended to
ensure food safety for citizens. The Committee desires to be apprised about the outcome in this
matter. (Para 2.31)
The Committee also recommends that there must be a nationwide campaign on Good
Agricultural Practices across all food sectors. Ministry of Agriculture must establish dedicated
website for this purpose in regional languages to communicate good practices. Agriculture
Universities of respective States be roped in to educate farmers about Good Agriculture and
Animal Production Practices and maintaining database on contamination. Additionally, FSSAI/
State Food Safety Authorities should conduct training and awareness program about the Act and
best agricultural practices for the primary producers. The focus of such training should be to
prevent food contamination at the primary level and evolve a proper monitoring mechanism.
(Para 2.32)

94
The Committee has taken cognizance of certain sting operations conducted by some TV
Channels showing some food inspectors' readiness to approve sub-standard products against
payment of bribes or sometimes even manipulate food items if the supplier does not pay them
bribe. Lack of an effective accountability mechanism for malpractices and provision of absolute
discretion of food inspectors in the matter of picking up samples leaves the door wide open for
corruption. There appears a clear nexus between corrupt food inspectors and unethical Food
Business Operators. Once a food product is found to have violated food safety procedures by the
Food Regulator, there is no effective recourse available because the appeal procedure is entirely
internal and departmental and even a legal challenge is too slow to be effective. Taking into
consideration the above, the Committee recommends that an anti-corruption unit be created to
prevent food inspectors from engaging in bribery and extortion. (Para 2.34)
The Committee underlines the need of suitable guidelines for the disposal of seized and
confiscated food items. The Food Safety Officer and the Designated Officers need to be trained
on the disposal of seized articles of food so that the seized articles do not pose any threat. The
Committee is in total agreement with the suggestion that the disposal of seized item/article be
within the jurisdiction of the court in which the case has been filed. The Committee, therefore
recommends, that Section 47 (4) be modified suitably to ensure a provision for prescribing
procedure and manner for disposal of seizure in the Act. (Para 2.37)
The Committee recommends that some provisions fixing the responsibility for the custody
of the seized article should be introduced in the FSS Act. A provision should be added that in
cases where it is not possible for food business operator to keep the seized article, the Food
Safety Officer should maintain the seized article in his safe custody. A proper storage facility
should be provided to the FSO. Also, in case the seized article is in the custody of FBO, special
attention should be paid that the FBO does not attempt to sell the same articles in the market.
Proper record of the seized article should be maintained by the FSO. (Para 2.39)
The Committee feels that such power to the Food Safety Officer may be misused by some
unscrupulous officers to harass the food business operator. But at the same time inspecting the
food packages is essential and fundamental duty of a Food Safety Officer. The Committee
recommends that FSO should be empowered to check any package and break open the door of
any premises where any article of food may be kept for sale but all this should be within the
prescribed guidelines and the same must be videographed for solid evidence. The FSO should
keep a record of packages inspected and the number of packages that were opened during
inspection. The Committee feels that the Food Authority should also ensure that the Food Safety
Officers are not bullied and harassed. The FBOs and the FSOs should both respect and support
each other. FSSAI should be committed to ensuring safe working environment for the FSOs as
well as the FBOs. Any kind of harassment, intimidation, bullying or discrimination from both
sides should be condemned. The Committee recommends that the above provision in Section
10 (5) of the PFA Act may be incorporated in this Act after due consideration in the Ministry and
vetting by Ministry of Law and Justice. (Para 2.41)
The Committee learnt that FSSAI has recently proposed amendments to the FSS Act for
stringent punishment for adulteration. The amendment proposes that any person who "adds an
adulterant to food so as to render it injurious for human consumption with an inherent potential

95
to cause his death or is likely to cause grievous hurt, irrespective of the fact whether it causes
actual injury or not, shall be punishable for a term which shall not be less than 7 years but which
may extend to imprisonment for life and also fine which shall not be less than ````` 10 lakh". The
Committee endorses the proposed amendments and recommends its inclusion in the FSS Act
subject to the condition that adequate provisions may also be made to prevent its misuse.
(Para 2.43)
The Committee notes that this conflict in time period may lead to practical difficulties and
cause unnecessary confusion and delays. The Committee therefore recommends that a clause
must be added to Section 42(3) specifying that the time of 14 days shall start after the completion
of the scrutiny of the food analyst report by the Designated Officer. The scrutiny shall include
the final disposal of objection/appeal raised on food analyst report. A different time-frame has
to be established for perishable items. Special attention should be paid that the perishable food
items with a short shelf life are tested before getting spoiled so that the test reports are
authentic. (Para 2.46)
The Committee notes that the time of 14 days stipulated for analysis of samples of food
articles seems inadequate given the state of the present lab infrastructure in the country, but
the efforts should be made to decrease this time limit rather than increasing it. Reliable and
speedy food testing is important for determining the qualitative parameters of the food. The
Committee therefore, recommends that the food authority and the State/UT Governments should
ensure that the laboratories where the food is sent for analysis have adequate number of
technical staff and are technically equipped so that the time-frame of fourteen days can become
a practical possibility. (Para 2.49)
The Committee recommends that all the States should strictly adhere to the FSS regulations
and the final order should be passed within 90 days from the date of first hearing. The Adjudicating
Officer should be a full time officer. The practice of appointing Additional District Magistrates
as Adjudicating Officers should be reviewed. It becomes difficult for Officers working on additional
charge to do justice to their job. Also it is important for adjudicating officers to be knowledgeable
and experienced while dealing with cases involving food safety. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that only officers having experience and expertise in food safety should be appointed
as adjudicating officer. The Committee also r ecommends that the adjudicating officer should set
a time-frame and actively monitor the progress of each case. Attempts should be made to
incorporate technology into the proceedings by digitizing all the records. (Para 2.52)
The Committee recommends that provisions regarding sealing the premises of FBO that
operate without license and actions to be taken against such an FBO should be added in the Act.
The Food Safety Officer should stop the production of any food article and immediately send the
food sample for analysis. The food articles that have been supplied to the market should immediately
be recalled and information regarding the same should be intimated to the general public. Strict
actions have to be taken against such FBOs operating without licenses/registrations and heavy
penalty must be imposed. (Para 2.55)
LICENSING , REGISTRATION, INSPECTION AND SAMPLING
Licensing and registrations issues
The Committee is constrained to observe that the unregistered FBOs and FBOs operating
with expired licenses pose a threat to public health. The Committee would like to emphasize that

96
the Food Licensing and Registration System (FLRS) should be updated regularly mentioning the
name of the FBOs whose licenses have expired or cancelled. The Committee also would like to
point out that granting of licenses without complete paperwork by State Licensing Authorities
(SLAs) or Central Licensing Authority (CLA) indicate a casual approach of the authorities since
granting of licenses and issuing registration certificate is vital to ensuring a stringent food safety
regime and such job should be done meticulously and seriously. A robust and reliable database
on FBOs needs to be prepared for effective monitoring of FBOs. The Ministry should also take
initiative towards encouraging the States/UTs to establish a system of inter-connected databanks
on FBOs, food licenses issued, cancelled, expired etc and a centralized databank may also be
created to which all State Food Regulatory Authorities should be linked. (Para 3.8)
The Committee notes that out of total 72,499 samples analyzed in 2015-2016, 16,133 were
found to be adulterated and misbranded. 1450 criminal and 8529 civil cases were filed which
resulted in conviction in 540 cases. Similarly, in the year 2016-17, out of 78,340 samples
analyzed, 18,325 were found to be adulterated and misbranded. 13,080 cases were filed which
resulted in conviction in 1605 cases. The Committee finds that there is a huge gap between the
total number of cases filed and total number of convictions as the rate of conviction seems to
be quite low. This indicates that the FBOs involved in supplying adulterated or misbranded food
products are not caught and get away easily without punishment. The Committee expreses its
anguish over the low conviction rates and desires the Ministry to undertake scrutiny as to
whether the low conviction rates are a result of shortage of trained manpower, lax enforcement
or the statute being riddled with inadequacies and take remedial measures accordingly. The
Committee would also like the Ministry to pursue the matter of low conviction rates with the
Ministry of Law and Justice to find a solution to the problem. The Committee believes that
regular monitoring, inspection and lifting of samples needs to be done by the Central / State
Authorities so as to save the people from consuming adulterated and misbranded food items.
(Para 3.10)
The Committee would like the food authorities to take stringent actions against FBOs
working without licenses and impose fines and penalty against the errant. Such FBOs pose risk
to the lives of many and should be suitably punished /penalized as per the provisions of the Act.
The regular offenders should also be given wide publicity in newspapers and social media so that
the masses are aware of the wrong practices. The Committee emphasizes the optimum utilization
of the food testing labs by collection and analysis of more and more food samples. FSSAI may
prescribe a minimum number of samples to be collected by each Food Inspector. Online reporting
of all the samples tested by food analysts should be documented and close scrutiny of these
samples should be done on a daily basis. Persons involved in sampling and analysis should be
accountable for cases which fail in court due to wrong sampling and wrong analysis.
(Para 3.11)
The Committee agrees with the reply of the FSSAI that Condition No 4, 12 and 14 are
fundamental to ensuring food safety. FSSAI should follow a mechanism to ensure that the Food
Business Operators follow and strictly adhere to these conditions. The Committee also notes that
the manufacturers/importers/distributors have to be heedful that they buy and sell food products
only from licensed/registered vendors. Also, the State Licensing Authorities and the Food Safety

97
Officer should ensure through timely inspections that these conditions are being followed by the
FBOs. A technical help in the food business premise will help in effective control and safety of
the production process. Hence, these conditions are essential to ensure that safe manufacturing
practices are being followed by the food business operators. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that the FBOs should strictly buy/sell only from vendors who hold a valid FSSAI
license. The Committee believes that FSSAI alone cannot enforce the FSS Act. It is the duty and
the responsibility of the FBOs, vendors, consumers to be vigilant about food safety issues and
help in effective implementation of the Act. Needless to mention, food safety can be ensured by
combined effort of the Government, the FBOs and the consumers as food safety is a shared
responsibility. Industry should also play a proactive role when it comes to manufacturing safe
food and complying with the food safety norms. (Para 3.16)
The Committee observes that the purpose of licensing and registration is to ensure that
minimum safety standards are in place with food operators before they offer products to
consumers. However, certain unscrupulous Food Safety Officers/ Food Inspectors indulge in
unethical and illegal practices without concern for the health of common people, as a result of
which unhygienic factories are being given licences in gross violation of the quality norms
prescribed under the FSS Act 2006. With a view to curb such corrupt practices, the Committee
recommends that no factory visit or inspection should be done without photographic evidences
of the factory's hygienic conditions. All inspection reports must be accompanied by photographs
of all the sections of the factory. (Para 3.19)
The Committee also recommends that all sampling and inspections should be made on real
time basis and result(s) of samples should be reported online from the site itself with photographs
of the sample and the witnesses. (Para 3.20)
The Committee also desires to be informed of how many licences of FBOs were cancelled
during the last three years for not meeting the quality norms prescribed under the FSS Act 2006.
(Para 3.21)
The Committee recommends that there has to be uniform structure across the country with
respect to the guidelines to be followed in case of exigencies warranting food recall. The Committee
notes that FSSAI had released guidelines for food recall and had directed the top 200 food
companies to submit their food recall plans. The Committee recommends examining of the Food
recall Plan of all the companies on the same lines. This should also include the procedure to be
followed at the time of an emergency food recall. FSSAI should ensure that every food business
irrespective of its size should have a food recall plan and ensure compliance with the recall
procedure. The Committee calls upon every FBO to mandatorily submit a Food Safety Management
System (FSMS) Plan during application for a new FSSAI License or renewal of FSSAI License.
FSSAI has to ensure that the food recall guidelines are implemented stringently. (Para 3.23)
The Committee notes that according to various reports, about 30% food supplied in India
is either adulterated or unsafe and recommends that no unsafe food products should be allowed
to be kept on the shelf as such products pose serious health issues. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that FSSAI should provide recall reports on its website on a fortnightly basis so that
consumer is aware of all adulterated or misbranded food products. The Committee is aware that

98
FSSAI has constituted a Risk Assessment Cell to carry out functions of risk assessment to
support risk management and risk communication. The Committee desires to be apprised of the
findings of the Risk Assessment Cell and the action taken thereon. (Para 3.24)
The Committee takes note of the fact that the proprietary food has been defined in regulation
2.12 of Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulations,
2011 as food which has not been standardized under these regulations but does not include any
normal food, food for special dietary use, functional food, nutraceutical, health supplement etc.
They can be made from milk/ milk products, cereals, eggs or meat products, vegetables, fruits
or nuts etc like ready to cook cereals including instant poha, upma, chips, instant coffee tea,
masala mixes, mixes used for making items like cakes, sweets etc. In case of proprietary food,
there is always a possibility of innovation. However, there are many other concerns associated
with proprietary food like permitted ingredients including food additives that can be used in the
proprietary food and chances of combinatorial effect of ingredients. The Committee is of the view
that at a time when States are struggling to provide basic food safety infrastructure, an additional
responsibility of granting licenses to proprietary food can be a burden. Until and unless there is
a proper scientific panel and research team in each food safety department, keeping a check on
the quality and safety of proprietary food can be a big issue. At present, many States do not even
have a separate food safety department, let alone a scientific research team. Therefore granting
licenses for Proprietary Food should be the prerogative of the Central Licensing Authority.
(Para 3.29)
The Committee recommends that the process to make the online payment system for
licensing/registration should be expedited and proper awareness should be spread in the States.
The FBOs should be timely informed to remove any deficiency in the application. The Committee
would like the FSSAI to ensure speedy issuance of licenses to FBOs once they have submitted
their responses to the queries. The Committee strongly recommends adopting a fast track single
window approval system for the new Licenses/registrations and renewals of Licenses which will
also accelerate the ease of doing business. (Para 3.30)
The Committee agrees with FSSAI that some stringent measures are essential for ensuring
that the FBOs comply with the FSS Act. The Committee believes that life time licenses are not
at all feasible and desirable as the information regarding the food business has to be timely
updated and checked. Life time licenses can result in lax compliance with the food safety
standards whereas requirement of annual returns and renewal of licenses ensures checks and
balances for compliance with the food safety norms. (Para 3.34)
The Committee is in agreement with the justification behind separating the two lines of
activities in terms of licensing and enforcement through FSOs. Due to staff shortage, the FSO
is burdened with multiple assignments and is not able to do justice with the main duties/tasks
assigned to him for enforcement of the FSS Act. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to
the Ministry and Food Authority to take into cognizance the ground realities and contemplate
solutions for the same apart from augmenting the manpower. (Para 3.36)
FOOD SAFETY SURVEY
The Committee observes that FSSAI has left the task of undertaking the surveys to the
States ignoring the fact that the State machinery is not equipped to take such surveys. This has

99
also been highlighted in the CAG Report. CAG Audit found that neither FSSAI nor the Food
Safety Commissioners of States have conducted any such survey. The very perception of FSSAI
that surveys are neither feasible nor desirable is not acceptable. The Committee feels that while
FSSAI is completely ignorant of the importance of surveys, the fact is that such surveys will not
only help in better insight of the food safety situation in the country but also make monitoring
and surveillance easy. (Para 3.39)
The Committee is of the view that the importance of surveys cannot be underestimated and
therefore, FSSAI should conduct timely surveys for the identification of food business operators.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that both FSSAI and State Food Authorities must focus
on conduct of surveys. The need of the hour is to augment the manpower who can conduct the
survey at the Central as well as State level. Till the time, the required manpower is arranged,
the FSSAI and the State Food Authorities can very well outsource the work of surveys to a third
party. (Para 3.40)
The Committee notes the changes proposed in the Food Safety (Licensing and Registration
of Food Business) Regulation 2011 and observes that until and unless the regulations are strictly
implemented, running food business without licenses will always pose a major challenge in
ensuring food safety. The FSS Act already empowers the Food Authority to conduct regular/
surprise inspections but the inspection system has proved to be very inefficient. The Committee
welcomes the mandatory annual inspection proposal by the Food Authority but only framing
regulation will not bring any change. The Committee recommends that FSSAI and the State Food
Authority should first ensure that the shortage of officers in the food safety regime is properly
addressed so that mandatory provision fetches the desired results. Needless to say, for this
officers with technical qualifications should be recruited and required posts should be created.
The Committee recommends a strict Food Safety compliance through regular inspection and
sampling system (FoSCoRIS) in all the States to bring transparency in food safety inspection and
sampling. Regular inspections and awareness among the FBOs is also necessary for implementation
of good hygienic and manufacturing practices. All the FBOs involved in processing, manufacturing,
packing, storing, catering and distribution need to be educated about self compliance. The
Committee recommends that the FBOs should clearly display the FSSAI License number at their
food premises and the practice of Food Safety Display Boards (FSDBs) should be encouraged
among all the FBOs. Until and unless the FBOs comply with the present regulatory standards,
new regulatory reforms will not succeed in developing a food safety culture in the country.
(Para 3.42)
The Committee also notes that the rejection rate of the licenses for renewal is very low in
the country. The Committee recommends that licenses for FBOs should not be issued blindly and
a well established mechanism should be developed for scrutinizing such FBOs who apply for
renewal of the license. In developed countries like US, application of renewal licenses is taken
seriously and there is a high rate of rejections due to non-conforming of food standards. FSSAI
should also examine the FBO's previous track record with regards to compliance with the FSS
Act. Any previous non-compliance should be taken seriously. The Commfttee recommends
expediting the development of an e-portal that will create a compliance history of food business
which the Food Authority can refer while renewing licenses. The Food Authority should also

100
develop a detailed inspection plan for companies that apply for renewal of licenses and mandatorily
check the premises of the FBOs. (Para 3.43)
Inspections
The Committee is of the view that Inspections form the core of a food safety network and
therefore FSSAI or the State food authorities should conduct inspections before issuance of any
license or make inspections mandatory post issuance of license/registration. There should be a
provision wherein the FBO should submit a detailed plan to be adopted in case of an emergency
situation. (Para 3.47)
The Committee feels that in a country like India that has a large unorganised food sector
with many small food businesses, it becomes more important to conduct inspections in a time
bound manner. The DOs and FSOs should inspect the premises of FBOs and guide the
manufacturers to maintain proper hygienic conditions. There should be surprise inspections.
Every effort must be made so that the FBOs do not evade the inspection process. In view of
various instances of corruption cases reported and to avoid nexus between the FBOs and lower
level employees of the Food Regulatory Authorities, the place of inspection should be decided by
the State Food Commissioners and the reports of the inspection should be directly submitted to
him. The Committee would like to point out that the United States has a separate agency called
Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) that conducts inspections and monitors food related
establishments. It is a separate authority handling the inspection system in the United States for
which their inspectors undergo a unique training program. The FSIS inspectors ensure that the
meat, poultry and egg products are safe and do not result in any food borne diseases. The
Committee would like FSSAI to introduce a specialized training programme for food inspections
on similar lines. This will ensure timely inspection and help in identification of the FBOs engaged
in the manufacture of adulterated or unsafe pr oducts. Further, the inspection process should be
streamlined to ensure that the same is used to regulate and monitor food safety and not harass
FBOs. (Para 3.49)
The Committee recommends that a risk based inspection program should be inducted. The
Inspectors should maintain a proper record of the inspections conducted. All the States/UTs
should establish an electronic database of food failures and testing reports. The Committee would
like to emphasize on creation of such an electronic database which will not only help in better
monitoring of the Food Business Operators but also shift the present system of random inspections
to focused surveillance. (Para 3.51)
The Committee is of the view that the importance of surveys and their outcomes can very
well be documented to help in creation of a national database relating to food safety. The
Committee, therefore, recommends creation of a National Food Safety Database so that India is
better prepared to tackle any outbreak of food borne diseases and other food safety related
issues. This database can be accessed by the consumers, food industry and other private and
public health organization at large. It will ensure efficient risk assessment and better preventive
actions can be taken. (Para 3.53)

101
LIFTING OF SAMPLES
The Committee feels that analysis of the sample in the food testing labs will be successful
only when the sample that is picked up by a FSO is properly stored and transported to the
laboratory. The guidelines on sampling have to be followed. The FSOs have to be trained,
qualified in the procedure of lifting, keeping and sending samples properly so that the samples
that are sent to the labs give accurate results. It is necessary to specify a time-limit by which
a FSO should submit the samples to the Food Analyst for laboratory analysis. (Para 3.58)
The Committee appreciates the initiative of FSSAI in launching FoSCoRIS and recommends
that it should be implemented by all the States/UTs. This platform has features like geo-tagging,
time-stamping of inspections and real-time verification. This IT enabled system will introduce
uniformity and transparency in food safety inspections on pan India basis. The FSO should be
trained on handling the devices and they should conduct inspection through these devices which
have been provided by FSSAI. The information shared by FSO through this system should be
constantly checked by the Designated Officers and the State Food Safety Commissioners. Web
based FoSCoRIS System in all the States/UTs would ensure that existing discrepancy in food
inspection and subsequent lifting, storing and dispatching samples is eliminated and the Food
Safety Officers become more accountable, efficient in their tasks. (Para 3.59)
The Committee recommends that FSSAI should expedite the process of framing up suitable
guidelines for disposing off the seized articles. The Food Safety Officer and the Designated
Officers need to be trained on the disposal of seized articles of food so that the seized articles
do not pose any threat. This procedure should be followed by all the States and stringent actions
should be taken against erring food officials. (Para 3.62)
TRAINING OF FBOs
The Committee recommends development of specific training modules for the manufacturers,
importers, sellers, distributors and the FBOs. The training should be industry specific and for a
shorter period. Regular trainings should be conducted for FBOs and small industries to adequately
equip them to comply with the standards of the FSS Act. Training program can also act as a
mechanism to check the status of FBOs, the validity of their licenses and as a tool to keep them
updated of the changes in the food safety environment in the country. As regards training fees,
the Committee recommends that the training should be imparted free of cost for small food
businesses. The Committee is very well aware of the shortage of staff but every effort should
be made by FSSAI to conduct some training programme in a year for the FBOs. FSSAI/State
Food Safety Authorities should also ensure that the training partners who conduct training
programmes are experienced and skilled. A holistic training program dealing with compliance
with the FSS Act, good manufacturing practices, Safe food handling, practices, guidelines, hygiene
standards etc. should be conducted at regular time intervals. (Para 3.66)
SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER
The Committee has learnt that the State Food Authorities are grossly understaffed and this
results in inadequate supervision of the FBOs. As per information given by FSSAI, the total
number of Food Safety Officers in the country has increased from 2324 to 3130 i.e. 34.7% in last

102
three years. States where the increase in no. of FSOs is significant are Uttar Pradesh (200%),
Karnataka (191%), Delhi (100%), Kerala (97%) and Gujarat (25%). However, there are some
States where there has been a decline in no. of FSOs e.g. Punjab (43%), Rajasthan (25%) and
Madhya Pradesh (13%) but this number is not sufficient. If the manpower requirements of Food
Regulatory Authorities do not correspond with their volume of work such shortage is bound to
strain their ability to discharge their mandated functions efficiently. (Para 3.72)
The Committee, therefore, desires the Ministry to draw an action plan in coordination with
State/UT Governments for overcoming the shortage of manpower of Food Regulatory Bodies. The
Committee also recommends that as a short-term measure, professionally qualified persons
should be engaged on short-term contract till adequate manpower is made available. Due to the
very sensitive nature of regulatory work, great care will need to be used to ensure that they do
not indulge in corrupt and illegal practices. (Para 3.73)
The Committee recommends that all States/UTs should have 1 DO for every District and 1
FSO for each Development Block in rural areas and 1 FSO for every 1000 FBOs in urban Areas.
FSSAI has informed that a proposal to increase the staff strength of FSSAI has been taken up
by the Government. The Committee is hopeful that the proposal for increasing the staff strength
of FSSAI to monitor the centrally licensed FBOs directly would be considered favorably by the
Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the issue of creation of posts may be
expedited. The recruitment regulations should be notified and vacancies for the post of Designated
Officers and Food Safety officers should be filled immediately. (Para 3.74)
The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that before the amendment, minimum
qualification of bachelors' degree in Science with Chemistry as one subject and compulsory
training was required for a DO which has been done away with. The Committee fails to understand
the reason for diluting the qualification of DO from technical to non-technical. The Committee
recommends that the previous qualification requirement and necessary training for a DO should
be restored. Only full-time officers should be appointed as DO so that better food safety
surveillance mechanism can be enforced. The Committee would like to emphasize that the
Designated Officer (DO) is a key post to ensure effective compliance and enforcement of the
food safety law in the country. At the State level, the Food Safety Commissioner is the head of
the enforcement machinery and the DO is responsible for the food safety administration of a
district. DO acts as the licensing authority and is authorized to issue or cancel licenses of FBOs
and gets the report and samples of article of foods from Food Safety Officer analyzed. DO can
prohibit the sale of any article which are not as per prescribed standards. The recent amendment
authorizes the Commissioner of Food Safety to appoint Sub-Divisional Officer of the area on
additional charge basis as the designated Officer and he/she is not required to undergo any
training. (Para 3.77)
EFFICACY OF FOOD TESTING LABS
The Committee is happy to note that National Food Laboratory in Ghaziabad and Kolkata
are being upgraded with sophisticated instruments under public-private-partnership mode and
would contribute immensely in analytical and qualitative testing. The Committee calls upon the
Ministry to set up two more such labs with cutting edge technology and state-of-the art facilities

103
to cater to the needs of food testing in all four regions of the country. Emphasis should also be
given on research and development and offering engagement of only the best of the talent in
the country. These four labs would help in ensuring a highly standardized analytical testing
facility in the surrounding regions for sound food safety network. (Para 4.5)
The Committee takes note of the existing food testing infrastructure in the country and
observes that given the magnitude of the problem of food contamination and adulteration in the
country, availability of mere 266 laboratories in a country with 130 crore population is grossly
insufficient. The Committee is of the considered view that despite having a legal framework for
food regulation in place, India is struggling with enforcement of food safety norms and standards
because the number of food testing labs per million people in the country is far below than the
USA, China, Germany etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Centre should
provide financial assistance to strengthen the State food regulatory systems so that each State
has sufficient number of food testing laboratories proportionate to the population of the State.
The Committee desires to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to create new laboratories
and strengthen the existing laboratories as well. (Para 4.12)
TESTING PROTOCOLS AND PROCEDURES
The Committee is constrained to note that most food labs including those accredited by the
NABL do not have facilities to test articles of food on all parameters. For food safety, the samples
have to be checked for heavy metals contamination, pesticide residues, bacterial contamination,
toxic chemicals etc., therefore, it is important that the laboratories are functional, well equipped
and adequately staffed. The Committee treats microbiological analysis and testing as a specialized
field for a country like ours that has relatively high outbreak of food borne diseases. Specialized
training is required for the sampling procedure and the particular test method. There should be
a specialized technical officer for carrying out microbiological testing. The Food Safety Officer
should also be trained on the kinds of samples that have to be lifted for microbiological testing
and analysis. The Committee opines that all the food testing labs across the country should follow
a uniform procedure/methodology of testing so that accurate results are obtained. Further, a
guideline document for tolerances of macro and micro nutrients based on different categories of
food should be developed. There is also a need to have a Laboratory quality audit mechanism so
that all the samples are analysed qualitatively. There should be a fixed list of parameters for
testing a specific food item and such parameters should be uniform across the food testing labs
in the country. FSSAI should prepare a list of food safety parameters that should be mandatorily
checked. The Committee also recommends that the imported food should mandatorily be checked
for all the parameters. Manuals of food testing procedures must be brought out as early as
possible to ensure uniformity in testing and methodology. (Para 4.21)
The Committee recognises the importance of a network of National Referral Laboratories
whose very mandate is to set standards for testing, validation, development of new testing
methods etc. The Committee believes that these referral labs can play a pivotal role in bringing
about uniformity in food testing and prescription of parameters. The Committee recommends
that FSSAI needs to promote such labs which can help in enforcing and evolving new standards
in tune with best international practices. Such standards and methodology as furthered by these
referral labs would certainly impact the food testing labs across the country and make their

104
results credible and reliable. Further, specific time line must be specified for referral labs to give
their reports. (Para 4.22)
The media reports suggest that India is one of the top three countries to face rejections in
the monthly refusal list of food items by the Operational and Administrative System for Import
Support (OASIS) of the US FDA. The Committee understands that some private food testing
laboratories do not fail samples of their clients for fear of losing business. There have also been
instances when food samples tested in Indian food labs were found "of good quality" but failed
quality tests when they reached their foreign destinations. These rejections bring bad name to
the country. The Committee, considers this state of affairs as very serious and recommends that
an enquiry be conducted into such cases reported during the last three years so that the
responsibility is fixed and appropriate action is taken against the guilty. (Para 4.23)
The Committee also recommends that every laboratory recognised for food testing should
be required to submit daily report online to FSSAI about the number of samples tested and the
number of food articles found defective or unsafe. (Para 4.24)
NABL  ACCREDITATION  OF  LABS
The Committee observes that accredited competent food testing laboratories are fundamental
to ensuring a stringent food safety mechanism in the country. Today when food security is a
global concern, different methods are employed to increase the agricultural productivity and crop
production. Excessive use of pesticides and insecticides to increase agricultural production is not
an unknown phenomenon. Rampant use of pesticides and insecticides results in toxic chemical
entering the food chain. Similarly microbiological testing and chemical hazard analysis for foods,
drug residue testing etc. require a food testing laboratory fully equipped with modern technology.
The Committee is of the firm view that NABL accreditation of labs would certainly ensure high
standards of testing and enhance credibility and reliability. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that FSSAI must insist on NABL accreditation ot all labs for efficient food quality
management system.  (Para 4.30)
The Committee is constrained to note that absence of.a mechanism to monitor NABL
empanelled labs is a matter of grave concern as the reliability and accuracy of results of testing
for various parameters remains questionable. The Committee feels that the very purpose of
accreditation of labs is defeated if they are not able to execute their mandate efficiently. The
Committee strongly recommends that the FSSAI should inspect, monitor and investigate these
labs at periodic intervals so that their efficacy in testing samples on the requisite parameters is
maintained. (Para 4.31)
STATUS  OF  MANPOWER  IN  LABS
The Committee notes the acute shortage of manpower in the States/UTs as well as FSSAI.
Non-availability of the technical manpower is one of the primary reasons behind poor functioning
of these food testing laboratories. The number of food analyst is very low in the country considering
the magnitude of food adulteration prevalent in the country. Even if the State laboratories
receive the sophisticated instruments, they are not put to use because technical manpower to
handle such sophisticated instruments is absent. The Committee recommends that each State/

105
UT should frame its recruitment regulations according to its size and population and regular
exams should be conducted to recruit suitable persons in the food testing laboratories. A minimum
number of technical staff required for proper functioning of food testing laboratory should be
prescribed. (Para 4.37)
The Committee observes that in our country availability of technical graduates is not a
problem but availability of employable graduates is. Collaboration between the Universities/
Educational Institutions and Industry is very important for skill development. The Committee
is of the view that the connect between the Industry and the Educational Institutions needs to
be fostered and encouraged. The graduates need to be given on ground practical training so that
they acquire adequate skills to be employed. There is a huge demand of technical manpower in
the food testing laboratories but this gap remains unfilled despite large pool of technical graduates
available in the country. The graduates in Food Science and Technology should be groomed to
undertake the technical responsibility in these labs. This can solve the twin problems of increasing
unemployment among the graduates and the shortage of manpower in labs. Further, the Committee
also recommends that every Central, State and Private food testing laboratory must have a
mandatory minimum number of staff specially Food Analysts in order to make it adequately
functional. FSSAI and the State Food Authorities should also ensure that only qualified graduates
with Science background are employed in the labs. The Food Analyst should work within a time
limit and submit his report within a prescribed period. The Laboratory Quality Audit should also
pay special attention to the fact that only skilled people with technical knowledge form part of
the staff. (Para 4.39)
The Committee recommends norms desired for proper functioning of food testing lab with
adequate manpower may be strictly adhered to in accordance with the suggestions of the Joint
Committee of Parliament. (Para 4.41)
STRENGTHENING OF STATE FOOD TESTING LABORATORIES (SFTLs)
State food testing laboratories are in urgent need of a major overhaul and upgrade both in
terms of shortage of analytical personnel and equipments to perform sophisticated analysis of
pathogens including chemicals, microbial toxins, heavy metals, residues of pesticides, etc. Food
is a matter of health encompassing crucial life and death issues and therefore according a high
priority to food safety is the need of the hour. Since the implementation and enforcement of Food
Safety and Standard Act, 2006 is primary the responsibility of the State/ UT Food Regulatory
Authorities, equipping them with the high-end sophisticated equipments is therefore very essential.
In that direction, the Committee welcomes implementation of the Central Sector Scheme for
"Strengthening of Food Testing System" in the country. The Committee is, however, constrained
to note the tardy progress of the scheme to the extent that out of a total outlay of ````` 481.95 crore
between 2016-17 and 2018-19 only funds to the tune of ````` 109.95 crore have been released. Given
the fact that only nine months are left before the Financial Year 2018-19 concludes, the Scheme
is certain to face massive financial under performance. Apparently, there are serious shortcomings
in the mechanisms of Centre-State coordination in implementation of this scheme. The Committee
therefore desires the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to address the pending issues
pertaining to implementation of the Scheme and make vigorous efforts to speed up the process
of implementation of the Scheme by taking up corrective measures with sustained monitoring.

106
The Committee would like to be apprised of the results of the efforts of the Ministry at the
earliest. (Para 4.47)
The Committee has taken cognizance of the Governments' proposal for opening laboratories
equipped with most modern and sophisticated apparatus. Having laboratories with no proper
equipments will not achieve the objective. Here the Committee agrees with the observations of
the Joint Committee of Parliament on Prevention of Food Adulteration (Amendment) Act, 1974
that though a high tech food testing laboratory is desirable but for financial constraints and the
scarcity of trained analytical chemists, microbiologists, technicians and other food-scientists, it
may not be advisable to open many laboratories. Therefore, the Committee emphasises that it
would be more advisable to ensure that facilities available in existing laboratories are strengthened/
upgraded instead of setting up of new labs with inadequate infrastructure and manpower.
(Para 4.48)
The Committee understands that due to the scarcity of food analysts, most State Drug
Testing Labs operate far below their desired capacity and in many cases, laboratories have had
to be shut down due to the unavailability of Food Analysts. As per a Times of India report
published in 2014, Rajasthan had closed down seven public health laboratories due to shortage
of food analyst. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to chalk out an action plan
for overcoming the shortage and expanding the pool of food analysts. The Committee also desires
to be apprised of the actual number of Food Analysts vis-a-vis their requirement. (Para 4.49)
FOOD SAFETY ON WHEELS (FSW)
The Committee is of the view that mobile food testing labs hold immense potential to
improve the food safety situation in the country in general and in remote areas in particular.
The Committee feels that the Mobile Food Testing Labs should be used for creating awareness,
transporting samples, educating consumers and on spot test facilities as suggested by FSSAI.
These mobile labs can open new job opportunities for the unemployed youth of our country. India
has a large number of science and technical graduates but in the absence of job specific technical
vocational training, they are unskilled & deemed unsuitable for jobs. The Committee recommends
that the FSSAI should utilise the rich demographic dividend of the country and conduct extensive
training program for the youth. These young graduates should be trained in managing these
mobile labs in every block. The Committee opines that mini labs are a cost effective method for
basic analysis and smaller laboratories and sample collection points at various areas of surrounding
districts of main laboratories will cater to the testing need efficiently. This will distribute the
workload and evenly manage the samples throughout the state. The sample collection points
should be at an optimum distance from the food testing labs so that there is no delay in sending
the samples to the labs and results are declared quickly. (Para 4.54)
The Committee has been given to understand that each mobile lab would cover every 20
districts of the State. However, given the large size of our country and huge population, we need
far more Food Safety on Wheels (FSWs). The Committee, therefore, recommends that number
of FSWs should be sanctioned taking into consideration the size of population of a State so as
to ensure facilities of testing food within the reach of the general public. The Committee also
recommends that FSSAI should realistically assess the need of FSWs in the States and one FSW
in each district must be provided to increase its outreach among the common man.  (Para 4.55)

107
The Indian food safety regime is well below the international benchmarks in terms of
availability of desired lab infrastructure, food safety institutions, regulatory policies, manpower
(technical & non-technical) and financial resources. The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006
(FSS Act) is the primary law for the regulation of food items. However, a survey by CIFTI and
FICCI has revealed that about one-third of the industry is unaware about the FSS Act and its
regulations. This lack of information among the food suppliers, sellers and buyers is one of the
major challenges in the present food safety regime. The Committee strongly believes that it is
the obligation and duty of the State to spread awareness on food safety and quality and ensure
that any food borne disease does not go unreported. A robust overhaul of the current food safety
regime is needed so that the food law is implemented both in letter and spirit. (Para 4.57)
REGULATION OF FOOD ITEMS
Milk Adulteration
The Committee expresses its serious concern over the«growing menace of adulteration of
milk and dairy products by unabated use of hazardous chemicals and substances like pesticides,
caustic soda, urea, detergents, antimicrobial residues, white paint etc and also the sale of synthetic
milk in different parts of the country. It is indeed alarming that as per a national level milk
quality survey conducted by FSSAI in 2011, 68% of milk samples were found to be adulterated
and non-conforming to the stipulated quality standards. Consumption of adulterated and synthetic
milk is hazardous and poses grave risks to human health. The Government, therefore, needs to
bring forth necessary amendments to the FSS Act 2006 and Indian Penal Code providing for
enhancement of punishment for adulteration of milk and milk products. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in consultation with State/ UT
Governments must take expeditious action to bring in necessary amendments in the statute and
apprise the Committee in this regard. (Para 5.10)
The Committee understands that on a Writ Petition (Civil) NO. 159 of 2012 before the
Hon'ble Supreme Court, it had directed the FSSAI and State Food Safety Authorities to check
the menace of milk adulteration. However, no concrete action has been taken by authorities to
combat milk and food adulteration. The Committee desires to be apprised of status of the action
taken thereon by the FSSAI and State Food Regulatory Authorities. (Para 5.11)
The Committee is not convinced with the sampling procedure, analysis time and protocols
followed in the national milk quality surveys conducted by FSSAI in 2011 and 2016 as they were
not uniform. The Committee observes that a precise and accurate conclusion out of survey(s) can
be drawn only with appropriate sample size. Sample size of 1791 and 1663 in the surveys of 2011
and 2016 were not adequate. Taking into account the size of population and the quantity of milk
produced in the country, the Committee would, therefore, exhort the Ministry to ensure that in
future the sample size of such surveys should be appropriate and truly representative. The
Ministry has to ensure that protocols followed for such surveys are uniform so that they lead
to valid conclusions. The Committee also desires to be kept apprised of the findings of the
national milk quality survey initiated in May, 2018. (Para 5.12)
The Committee understands that India is the largest producer and consumer of milk in the
world and most of the milk is consumed in its basic form. The collection and distribution of milk

108
especially in smaller towns and villages however remain largely unorganised as the same is done
by small scale livestock keepers in an unregulated manner which often results in poor quality
of milk. The Committee would, therefore, like that FSSAI/Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
in consultation with State/UT Governments should strive to put in place a regulatory mechanism
for spot testing of milk supplied by branded milk suppliers as well as small-scale milk distributors
in towns and villages through Milk Testing Labs at all stages right at the door step of consumer.
(Para 5.13)
The Committee observes that loose edible oils are prone to adulteration and even if edible
oil sellers comply with food safety regulations and standards at the first point of sale, there is
no guarantee that the oil would remain unadulterated as they pass through several hands. There
have been countless instances of sale of adulterated loose oils which have resulted in masses
being afflicted by dropsy. The Committee gathers that Delhi-based consumer organisation, namely,
Consumer Voice, had in the year 2016 collected samples of loose edible oils of eight varieties,
namely, Mustard, Sesame, Groundnut and Cottonseed from 15 States and got them tested on
safety as well as quality parameters in a NABL accredited laboratory. The laboratory results
revealed that adulteration was found in loose oil samples collected from all 15 States and 85%
samples of coconut oil, 74.07% samples of cottonseed oil, 74% samples of mustard oil were found
adulterated. Adulterated edible oil is one of the main reasons behind several diseases like cardiac
arrest, cancer, epidemic dropsy, liver damage, paralysis etc. Without packaging, batch number
or FSSAI license number, it is very difficult to trace the source of the problem in the event of
health epidemic breaking out due to adulterated edible oils. (Para 5.19)
With a view to safeguard the interests of consumers, the Committee would like to recommend
to the Central Government to impress upon the State Governments to ensure that edible oils
are retailed in packaged form only. (Para 5.20)
The Committee simultaneously observes that there is another dimension to the sale of
edible oil in loose form which should not be lost sight of. Small consumers especially daily wage
labourers and the rural poor purchase loose edible oils out of their payment on daily basis. They
cannot afford to buy oil sold in pack of one litre or more and therefore buy loose edible oil in
small quantity. It is, therefore, absolutely essential for the FSSAI to push for smaller packages
of 100 ml and 200 ml of edible oil. (Para 5.21)
The Committee is aware that in our rural areas, people buy loose mustard oil extracted from
the local extraction machines. The Committee would like the FSSAI to impress upon the State
Governments to ensure that till such time a blanket ban is worked out on the sale of loose edible
oils, a system for testing of oil samples from the local extraction machines are put in place to
ensure that they are not contaminated with seeds of argemone or other toxic materials.
(Para 5.22)
The Committee appreciates the FSSAI initiative for fortification of oils given the large scale
micronutrient deficiency in the country. However, FSSAI needs to establish adequate infrastructure
for testing the fortified oil and for this assistance should be taken from the different National
Institutes working in the scientific field. Fortification of oil should be encouraged among the
manufacturers with a proper monitoring mechanism of the fortified oil testing. Regular and

109
timely inspections have to be conducted by the food authority . Moreover, there is need to conduct
more research to find out the efficacy of vitamins pre and post usage in fortification of oil.
(Para 5.24)
The Committee is surprised to note that the standards for oil have not been revised since
1960. The Committee would like the FSSAI to set a timeline on priority for expediting the whole
process of revision of standards conducive to the food processing industry as well as ensuring
food safety. All the stakeholders need to be consulted and involved in the whole process. While
establishing the Indian standards, international benchmarks such as CODEX standards for oil
should also be considered. The Committee hopes that new revision in standards would take into
account the nature of oil-seed, changes in atmosphere and soil conditions to ensure the availability
of safe edible oil to the consumer. The Committee desires to be kept updated in this regard.
(Para 5.27)
Keeping in view the annual growth in edible oil consumption, the Committee underlines the
need for an ecosystem for collection of used cooking oil and its conversion into biodiesel keeping
in view the increase in non-communicable life style diseases that are increasing day by day.
FSSAI in coordination with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should also on a continuous
basis evolve standards for the Indian population in respect of edible oils in India to determine
as to what constitutes 'safe standards' for consumption of edible oils in order to minimize the
risks of non-communicable life style diseases. (Para 5.30)
REGULATION OF PRESERV ATIVES/CHEMICALS USED FOR STORAGE FOR FISHES,
ARTIFICIAL RIPENING OF FRUITS/VEGETABLES AND EDIBLE ICE
The Committee expresses serious concern over rampant use of toxic chemical formalin for
preserving fish and calcium carbide for artificial ripening of fruits. This sector being unorganized
and there being fewer food inspectors for quality checks are serious challenges of food safety.
However, an even bigger challenge is to raise consumer awareness about food safety standards
in the country. The Committee emphasizes that while ensuring stringent enforcement of food
safety laws, we need capacity building not just of the food professionals, but also of consumers.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that a National Consumer Awareness Campaign in
partnership with all stakeholders including the Central and State Agencies, Street vendors,
universities and colleges, NGOs, small and big food industry players need to be launched for
safety issues including use of hazardous chemicals in fruits and vegetables. (Para 5.37)
The Committee would urge upon FSSAI to issue advisories to State Food Regulatory Authorities
to monitor use of calcium carbide, formalin and other hazardous chemicals for artificial ripening
of fruits and take stringent action for violation of the regulatory provisions of the relevant Act/
rules. Farmers also need to be sensitised to understand the benefits of natural ripening of fruits
and vegetables. The Committee also notes that the Government has banned Oxytocin drug and
restricted its manufacture and sale to prevent its misuse. Oxytocin would now only be manufactured
by Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (KAPL) and rampant misuse of Oxytocin will
be checked. The Committee therefore recommends that on similar lines the manufacture of
toxic chemicals such as Calcium Carbide and Formalin etc. should be restricted and only a few

110
companies should manufacture these chemicals for industrial use. Also the Committee recommends
FSSAI to promote safer alternatives to chemicals used as preserving and ripening agent.
(Para 5.38)
The Committee would like to point out that the Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
Maharashtra has directed the manufacturers to use blue colour for industrial ice which helps in
differentiating it from the edible ice. Industrial ice manufacturers have already been directed to
use Indigo Carmine or Brilliant Blue FCF up to 10 parts per million (ppm). The Committee
recommends that this visual difference between industrial ice and edible ice should be replicated
in all the States and Union Territories. This will help in preventing the use of industrial ice in
place of edible ice and ensure that industrial/contaminated ice is not used in drinks. State Food
Regulatory Authorities should conduct regular inspections at ice manufacturing sites and strict
actions must be taken against manufacturing units and vendors who manufacture/use ice from
contaminated water. Timely inspections have to be conducted at the premises. The ice that is
manufactured for preservation and the ice for edible purposes should not be manufactured at the
same location. (Para 5.39)
PLASTIC IN FOOD ITEMS/WATER
The Committee is aware of the ill effects of plastic on the environment and human health.
Plastic is non-biodegradable and it cannot be recycled but only down-cycled. There is strong
evidence that the chemicals leached from plastic and PET containers cause harm to human
health but the ban on plastic and PET packaging of food article remains unaddressed by the
Government. Since the subject of human health and food safety falls under the domain of FSSAI,
the Committee would like the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to set up a high level
committee with members representing all entities to take a policy decision on banning the usage
of plastic and PET packaging food articles. (Para 5.45)
The Committee applauds the measures taken by Sikkim to dissuade the use of plastics by
not giving licences/licences not being renewed every year if shopkeepers were using plastic bags/
heavy fines being imposed/consumers being made aware/campaigns being carried out in school
to educate children on the damage plastic can do. The Committee would like the FSSAI to study
the Sikkim model and encourage other States to strive to emulate the measures being taken by
the Government of Sikkim to curb the use of plastics to ensure that the next generation is able
to live in a plastic free environment. (Para 5.46)
REGULATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED (GM) FOODS
The Committee observes that in India, the GM food imports require approvals under the
Environment Protection Act of 1986 and the Food Safety and Standards Act of 2006. While the
former law covers the environmental impacts of the food products, the latter assesses the food's
impact on human health. Since no regulation has been finalized for GM products, it is still
banned in the country. Further, even after the Environment Ministry gives clearances for imports,
permission is also required under the food safety law but importers have got away without having
the mandatory approval under the Food Safety and St andards Act. A large number of products
are coming in India with GM ingredients but neither consumers nor authorities are aware of

111
what is inside because there is nothing mentioned on the label. Taking the above fact into
account, the Committee recommends formulation of regulations to the effect that those importing
foods must provide mandatory declaration on the label mentioning that "this food is from GM
free source". Countries like China, Australia, the European Union nations have strict regulations
about GM foods labelling so that the consumer makes informed choices. (Para 5.50)
The Committee observes that even after more than a decade of enactment of FSS Act, a
regulatory vacuum exists in the import of GM Food. FSSAI has neither put the regulations for
such approvals in place nor taken any measures to stop the imports. The Committee recommends
that the FSSAI should urgently finalise "Guidelines for safety assessment of food derived by GM
technology" and implement them within three months of presentation of the Report to the
Parliament. FSSAI should also work to upgrade the GM food testing infrastructure and make
use of the already present laboratories in the country and equip them with latest technology.
(Para 5.51)
The Committee is perturbed to note that the action (or lack of it) in regulation of GM foods
by FSSAI has been painstakingly slow. Recently, FSSAI has decided to have the labelling norms
for genetically modified food products in order to give informed choice to the consumers. All food
products having total Genetically Engineered (GE) ingredients 5% or more shall be labelled. The
labelling shall be as — "Contains GMO/Ingredients derived from GMO". The absence of regulation
for a decade in respect of GM foods would have caused irreversible damage to the consumers,
who are the core constituency for whom FSSAI was set up. The Committee strongly censures
the FSSAI for this lackadaisical attitude and implores upon it to pull up its socks and ensure
that the regulation made in respect to GM foods be implemented within a time bound period and
also provide training to its personnel involved in regulation of GM foods. The Committee also
directs that FSSAI should also educate the citizens of the country as to what constitutes GM
foods as a vast majority of people are not aware of the concept of GM foods. (Para 5.52)
Regulation of imported food items
The Committee desires the FSSAI to ensure that all the provisions laid down in the FSS
Regulations are being followed by all the importers and imported food products fulfill all the
required standards and international benchmarks. The Committee recommends that FSSAI
should frame specific guidelines for the food products that have been banned elsewhere in the
world. Special care should be taken to ensure that expired food items do not get clearance and
the country should not be a dumping ground for food items rejected elsewhere due to quality
issues. (Para 5.54)
The Committee also recommends close monitoring of imported food items once the food
item enters the market. Any quality issue that is reported across the country should be taken
seriously. In the eventuality of ban on the imported item entering the Indian market, the
information should be immediately shared with the industry as well as the consumers.
There should be a recall plan for immediate withdrawal of imported food items.
(para 5.55)

112
The Committee has been given to understand that presently it takes five to eight days to
get import clearance for a food consignment while there has been demand to reduce this time
for ease of doing business. The Committee recommends that steps should be taken to reduce the
import clearance time but not at the cost of quality and safety aspects. Especially with respect
to the perishable items, FSSAI should aim on reducing the import clearance time significantly
so that only fresh food items reach the consumers. (Para 5.56)
The Committee is constrained to note that custom officials who have a different job profile
have been notified as Authorized Officers and appointed to act as Food Safety Officers in order
to check safety of imported food at 135 points of entry for importing food in the country. The
Committee is unable to reconcile itself with the fact that such appointments have been made in
contravention to the FSSAI's own regulations which mandate food safety officers to have technical
qualifications but the customs officials notified as Authorised Officers for food safety checks are
not checked against the mandated qualifications before the additional charge of food safety of
imported food is handed over to them. The Committee would, therefore, in the first instance,
like the FSSAI to explain this apparent violation of its own regulations. (Para 5.60)
In addition to above the Committee is of the considered view that the appointment of
customs officials for food safety checks amounts to compromised food safety in the country.
While the Committee is all for the ease of doing business and cutting down delay in clearing
imported food consignments through the single window process, it firmly believes that the food
safety be given a top priority. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should
draw an action plan to appoint dedicated food safety officials across all food importing points in
the country. (Para 5.61)
The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that the officers of the FSSAI
are present at six ports, namely, Chennai, Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi, Kochi and Tuticorin covering
21 points of entry. To assess the quantum of food products routed through these 21 points of
entry vis-a-vis 135 other custom locations, the Committee would like to be apprised of the total
volume and worth of food item imports routed through these 21 and 135 points of entry separately.
(Para 5.62)
REGULATION OF ORGANIC FOOD
The Committee notes that FSSAI has recently framed regulations for organic food which
makes it mandatory for the domestic producers to certify their food as organic either from the
National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP) System or from the cheaper Participatory
Guarantee System-India (PGS), under which farmers form a collective and vouch for the others'
produce. The Committee also notes that earlier this certification was compulsory only for exports
and optional for domestic supply. The Committee appreciates this regulation of certifying organic
food as this will remove non-certified/fake products from the market. Further, the Committee
also recommends that a separate certification mechanism should be in place for small farmers
who cannot afford these two certification options at an additional cost, (Para 5.67)
Regulation of fortified food
The Committee notes that safety net programs- both Mid-Day Meal (MDM) and Integrated
Child Development Scheme (ICDS) have mandated the use of fortified wheat flour, oil and

113
doubled fortified salt nationally, ensuring that the most vulnerable sections of society receive
appropriate and timely nutrition. The Committee is of the view that the above safety net
programs involve economies of scale and are not in the domain of Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare. However, in the present scheme of things, provision of even basic items under these
two programs are prone to massive pilferage/sub-standardization/leakages. Various media reports
have highlighted many cases of food poisoning involving contamination and adulteration of meals
under the MDM Scheme making several children severely ill. Even under ICDS, health of small
children and lactating mothers is at stake due to unsafe food items. How FSSAI would ensure
provision of fortified foods under these programs remains to be seen as conversion of intent into
actual realization is what counts the most. The Committee while not discounting the importance
of these schemes would like the FSSAI to embark upon a time-bound due diligence process on
the States which have an efficient distribution of resources under these two safety net programs
and introduce the fortified items in these States and replicate the success of these programs in
other States in a time bound manner. (Para 5.71)
The Committee further notes that the Ministry of Food and Public Distribution has
recommended distribution of fortified wheat flour in States in place of wheat grain, and the
distribution of fortified edible oil under Public Distribution System (PDS). As on date, 49 fortified
products are available in the open market across all 5 commodities. 13 States have already
implemented fortification across districts or the entire state and 9 States have initiated action.
The Committee recommends that FSSAI should ensure that the distribution of fortified wheat
flour and edible oil through PDS adheres to the standards set. (Para 5.72)
REGULATION OF FOOD IN EATERIES
The Committee recommends that every eatery including hotels, fast food chains, restaurants
and e-commerce food sellers should provide all statutory information concerning packaging and
labelling of food item on menu cards, advertisement and display panels and also mandatorily
print calorie information on their menu so that the consumer makes informed choice and
healthy eating is promoted. The Committee also notes that restaurants do not have a fixed
quantity of the meal they serve. The Committee recommends that the eateries should also
specify the quantity of the portion in their menu. FSSAI has issued various guidelines for
restaurants but time and again cases of non adherence to the basic hygiene practices have been
reported. The Committee therefore recommends that once the eatery has been issued license,
timely inspection should be conducted. Also before giving license, the basic infrastructure of the
premises should be inspected and checked for its compliance with the FSSAI guidelines.
(Para 5.76)
The Committee opines that food safety is also to be kept in mind while designing the site/
floor plan of a restaurant. The places of the equipment, the cooking area, the storage, sink and
drainage area, position of garbage containers, restrooms etc should be clearly demarcated so that
there is no cross contamination. The Committee understands that though the new provision does
not seek submission of such documents under the simplified registration/Licensing process yet
this should not be at the cost of ensuring food safety. The Committee recommends that the site
plan premises of the restaurant should be mandatorily checked by the food authority. Because
even if good quality food articles are used, a poor design may lead to cross contamination and
increased health issues. (Para 5.77)

114
REGULATION OF UNORGANIZED SECTOR
The Committee is of the view that such initiatives on the lines of Project Clean Street Food
is laudable and worth emulating across the country. Such a measure would also help in getting
feedback in areas where the street vendors lack in hygiene issues and the data can be mapped
by FSSAI. Such data would form a base for ensuring certain food safety standards in the country.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that FSSAI in partnership with State Governments
should evolve a mechanism to train such registered street vendors and also collate data on
difficulties vendors face in food hygiene. FSSAI should formulate the standards to regulate street
food vendors within a period of one year from the date of presentation of this Report of the
Committee to the Parliament. (Para 5.81)
DUPLICITY OF STANDARDS/CERTIFICATION
The Committee understands that multiplicity of Standards and certification from different
agencies is a cumbersome process for the industry. The main idea behind FSS Act has been the
consolidation of food laws but varied Standards under a law defeats this very idea. The Committee
recommends one certification procedure under the FSS Act. For Blended oils and Fat spread
products there should be one Standard that can be obtained by merging the AGMARK certification
and the FSS Standards. (Para 5.87)
The Committee agrees with the recommendations of the Defence Food Research Laboratory
and understands that there is a need to address the existing overlap between standards. BIS and
AGMARK Standards should be reviewed to explore the extent to which they can be merged into
the FSS Act Standards regulations. The focus should be on the simplification of standards without
compromising them. There should be a clear division of responsibility between FSSAI, BIS, and
the Directorate of Marketing and Inspection (DMI). The responsibility and mandate of each
authority has to be addressed. Mandatory and voluntary requirements lead to ambiguity that can
be avoided if there is one mandatory standard for each product. This will give relief to the food
suppliers and they will have to fulfill only one mandatory regulation/requirement for a particular
'product. All the standards can base their criteria on the international standards of the Codex
Alimentarius Commission (FAO). (Para 5.88)
MISCELLANEOUS
Packaging
The Committee underlines the need to establish a proper monitoring mechanism for checking
the claims of the packaged food. FSSAI should ensure that the food companies do not make any
false claims regarding the nutritional information. All the packaged food irrespective of the size
of the packet should include a list of ingredients, additives, nutritional information etc so that
the consumer makes a well informed choice. (Para 6.9)
The Committee understands that assessing the safety of food contact material is very
crucial as there is always a high possibility of chemicals leaking from the material down to the
food. This can change the composition of the food and make the food unsuitable for consumption.
Moreover, the food packaging material on reaction with food article can introduce toxicity.

115
Therefore, the Committee recommends that FSSAI should specify the toxicity levels of the food
contact materials under different conditions especially during storage, processing and transportation
where the food package can be exposed to different environmental conditions. The Committee
also recommends constitution of a scientific working group to study the impact of food packaging
on health aspects. FSSAI needs to bring standards and specifications for food packaging materials
so that any unwanted toxic contamination by use of sub standard packaging material is avoided.
(Para 6.10)
The Committee recommends that any changes in the Packaging and Labelling regulations
should be timely disclosed to the FBOs so that they get enough time to conform to the changed
standards. The regulations should be implemented in a phased manner rather than haphazardly.
Proper training to the FBOs is essential for enforcement of the labelling norms. (Para 6.13)
The Committee understands that the illiterate section of the country may find it difficult
to read the labels and gauge the nutritional information on the food packages. The Committee
notes that the National Institute of Nutrition has recommended new forms of labelling especially
symbol based as it is more effective for a country like India. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that FSSAI should collaborate with such institutes and work on labelling based on
colors and symbols. The Committee also recommends the traffic light labelling system as practised
in other countries for packaged food items in India. This labelling will enable people to have a
better idea of the nutritional content of the packaged foods. Food with high salt, sugar and fat
content will be marked red which is a sign for unhealthy food, amber for moderate, and green
for low (healthy). (Para 6.14)
The Committee would like to emphasise upon the power and hold of advertisement on
gullible consumers who may be adults, senior citizens or children who are easily influenced and
swayed by the promises of a better quality of health and well being by consuming various food
products. Several of such advertisements may be misleading which can not only fleece the
consumers of their money for a wasted product but also harm their well being. The Committee
would like the Food Authority to take this issue with utmost seriousness and devise ways to stop
misleading advertisements. The Committee feels that FSSAI can suo-motu take cognizance of
such advertisements and involve the ASCI for appropriate actions. (Para 6.19)
The Committee recommends creation of a food advertising monitoring cell that can monitor
all the food advertisements and take up complains related to advertisements. The Committee
would like FSSAI to share information w.r.t. number of complaints received by ASCI and the
action taken against the offenders. The misleading advertisements should be banned immediately
and the information be shared with the public. (Para 6.20)
STANDARDS OF EXPORTED AND IMPORTED FOODS UNDER THE NATIONAL FOOD CONTROL
SYSTEM
The Committee recommends that whether the food is exported, imported or domestically
produced, it should follow a uniform standard and should be tested on the same parameters. The
domestic consumers cannot be treated as second class citizens and therefore the standard for
imported/ domestic production should be at par with the international benchmarks. The Committee
also recommends that there should be only one organization to overlook the National Food

116
Control System and also monitor the imported, exported and domestically manufactured food
item. (Para 6.23)
The Committee recommends that all the complaints related to food safety should be taken
seriously and immediate action should be taken by the food authority. A timeframe should be
established for speedy disposal of the cases. FSSAI should also analyse the status of pendency
in these portals. The same data should also be shared with the respective States so that immediate
action can be taken. Most of the people in the country may not be aware of the food safety
connect system and the different means through which food safety concerns can be voiced.
Therefore, the Committee recommends spreading awareness among the consumers. Skits and
Plays can be an effective method to spread awareness regarding consumer rights. A dedicated
helpline should also be opened for food safety complaints and wide scale advertisement regarding
these different means should be publicised. (Para 6.26)
The Committee recommends the creation of a cell that deals with different queries of FBOs
regarding regulations. FBOs form the backbone of the food safety regime and it is the responsibility
of the FSSAI to ensure that their problems and queries are immediately solved. Accurate
knowledge about food safety practices and procedures will help in better compliance by FBOs
which will in turn ensure production of safe food. The Committee also recommends holding
monthly meetings and seminars for the FBOs where they are provided information regarding any
change in amendments and regulations and are constantly updated with the current good
manufacturing practices. (Para 6.29)
INFORMATION EDUCATION COMMUNICATION (IEC)
The Committee applauds the FSSAI's Safe and Nutritious Food (SNF) @ School Initiative
which entails dissemination of simple food safety messages through books that have been
developed by FSSAI. The Committee reiterates the initiative of FSSAI that activities promoting
food safety should be made part of the school curriculum. More efforts have to be put to deliver
age appropriate messages to the students. The Committee recommends all the States to introduce
Yellow book developed by FSSAI in the schools. The Yellow book should also be made available
in the regional languages and necessary' changes can be made according to the region.
(Para 6.32)
The Committee recommends that FSSAI should promote computerised records rather than
insisting on registers. The digitised records will help in better data management and better
accessibility. This will also help in bringing transparency in the food business management
system and prevent unnecessary wastage of paper and loss of any information. (Para 6.34)
STANDARDS FOR LOCAL/TRADITIONAL BEVERAGES AND FOOD
The Committee recommends that FSSAI should set standards for these local beverages.
Standards for the alcoholic content in the traditional beverages will ensure the supply of quality
drinks and prevent instances of alcohol poisoning. There is a need to standardise the ingredients
use and regulate the production especially for local traditional heritage drinks so that these local
drinks are safe for consumption and at the same time commercially competitive and at par with
international drinks. (para 6.37)

117
The Committee also observes that States are famous for their local food items which are
produced by small scale industries generally in households. There is a growing demand for these
food items in other States. In view of absence of regulations for such food items, it is imperative
that to ensure safety food products of different States should adhere to basic standards of food
safety. The Committee recommends that the FSSAI should co-ordinate with State Food
Departments for monitoring of such food items generally produced by cottage small scale industries
in order to ensure adherence to basic food safety standards. (Para 6.38)
MEGA FOOD PARK
The Committee is of the view that the role of FSSAI in ensuring food safety standards in
Mega Food Parks is of immense importance as monitoring of all processes of food manufacturing
in a specified area can effectively be carried out as is being done in the Patanjali Mega Food
Park. The Committee appreciates the concept of Mega Food Park which ensures adherence to
food safety standards as well as bridging the gap between the farm and the market. The Committee
has been given to understand that all the 42 sanctioned Mega Food Parks would be operational
by 2019. In view of this, the role of FSSAI would increase and there is an urgent need for FSSAI
to augment its resources in all respects so as to carry out its mandate of an effective food quality
control management system. (Para 6.41)

MINUTES

*VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 16th February, 2016 in Committee Room 'A',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shri Bhushan Lal Jangde
4. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
5. Shri Ambeth Rajan
6. Shri Jairam Ramesh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Thangso Baite
8. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
9. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
10. Shri Devendra alias Bhole Singh
11. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
12. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
13. Dr. K. Kamraj
14. Shri Arjunlal Meena
15. Shri C.R. Patil
16. Shri M.K. Raghavan
17. Shri Manoj Rajoria
18. Shri R.K. Singh
19. Shrimati Rita Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
121
*Minutes of I-V Meetings relate to other matters.

122
WITNESSES
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri B.P. Sharma, Secretary
2. Shri K.B. Agarwal, Additional Secretary
3. Shri K. L. Sharma, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Ashish V . Gawai, Deputy Secretary
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna, Chairperson
2. Shri Pawan Kr. Agarwal, CEO
3. Shri Kumar Anil, Advisor
4. Dr. Sandhya Kabra, Director
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear the views of Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
along with President, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) on the Functioning of Food
Safety and Standards Authority of India.
3. Emphasizing the need for examining the functioning of FSSAI, the Chairman of Committee in his
opening remarks inter-alia stated that the food regulator, FSSAI is entrusted with the task of ensuring
availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption. But despite the food regulator being
in existence, the concerns of consumers regarding safety of food products, including packaged food
products are growing. There had been a number of controversies plaguing FSSAI in the recent past.
There was therefore, an imperative need to holistically examine the functioning of FSSAI.
II. Functioning of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
functioning of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India. The Health Secretary threw light on the
various functions mandated to be performed by FSSAI, stating that the Food Safety and Standards
Authority of India was set up in 2008 as envisaged under Section 4 of the Food Safety and Standards
Act, 2006 and Rules and Regulations made thereunder were notified and made operational on August,
2011 with administrative authority of FSSAI being given to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Then,
the CEO, FSSAI made a power-point presentation on the functioning of Food Safety and Standards
Authority of India. During the power-point presentation, the following points were highlighted -
(i) Integration of Food Laws across food chains like, raw material, transport, food processor, slaughter
houses, importers/wholesalers/retailers/restaurant and consumer; (ii) coverage of all kinds of food
businesses; (iii) key features of the new law and critical shifts; (iv) paradigm shifts from food adulteration
to food safety and wholesome food; (v) six key regulations were framed, namely (a) Food Safety and

123
Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011, (b) Food Safety and
Standards (Packaging and Labelling) Regulations, 2011, (c) Food Safety and Standards (Food Product
Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011, (d) Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and
Restriction on Sales) Regulation, 2011, (e) Food Safety and Standards (Contaminants, Toxins and
Residues) Regulations, 2011, (f) Food Safety and Standards (Laboratory and Sampling Analysis) Regulations,
2011; (vi) Joint responsibility of States and Centre under the Act; (vii) Setting up of sixteen scientific
panels; (viii) Status of Standards/Regulations including horizontal standards and vertical standards;
(ix) Licensing/registration and enforcement; (x) Current status and issues of imports from different
ports; (xi) setting up of a single window clearance system from Delhi and Mumbai airports; (xii) National
network of food labs including 14 referral labs, 72 state food labs and 82 NABL accredited labs and
further action being taken/proposed; (xiii) Training and Capacity building of Food Business Operators
(FBOs); (xiv) consumer awareness e.g. joint campaign with Ministry of Consumer Affairs, like, 'Jago
Grahak Jago', etc.
5. Thereafter, members sought clarifications on (i) the role of Food Safety Commissioner in States;
(ii) status of standards/regulations; (iii) Enforcement of licensing system for all food producers; (iv) need
to ensure a national network of food labs; (v) setting up of sophisticated food labs in States; (vi) training
and capacity building of FBOs; (vii) action taken/being taken against adulteration in food/milk/water;
(viii) measures taken to curb usage of pesticides/hazardous chemicals in post harvest system in food/
vegetables; (ix) measures, if any, taken to strengthen the existing law; (x) discrepancy in reports of two
labs with regard to maggi controversy; (xi) steps taken to generate awareness among consumers
regarding expiry date of food at railway stations; (xii) steps being taken to rope in more labs and appoint
more food safety officers, etc. Some of the queries were replied to by the witnesses. The Chairman
directed the witnesses to furnish replies to the issues which remained unanswered, within a week's time.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M.

124
*XII
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 24th May, 2016 in Committee Room 'A', Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
4. Shri Ambeth Rajan
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Thangso Baite
7. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre
8. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
9. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
10. Dr. K. Kamaraj
11. Shri Arjunlal Meena
12. Shri M.K. Raghavan
13. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
14. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
15. Shri R.K. Singh
16. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
17. Shrimati Rita Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Director
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
* Minutes of VII-XI Meetings relate to other matters.
124

125
WITNESS
Dr. Gurudayal Singh Toteja, Scientist 'G' and Head -Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical
Research (ICMR)
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and briefed them about the
agenda of the meeting i.e., to hear D. Gurudayal Singh Toteja, Scientist 'G' and Head -Nutrition, Indian
Council of Medical Research (ICMR) on the functioning of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
(FSSAI).
3. The Committee also decided that the views of the State Governments may be sought on the subject
and, if need be, the Chief Secretaries of the States may also be called for oral presentation in this regard.
4. * * *
II. Oral Evidence of Dr. Gurudayal Singh Toteja, Scientist 'G' and Head -Nutrition, ICMR
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard Dr. Gurudayal Singh Toteja, Scientist 'G' and Head-Nutrition,
ICMR, on the functioning of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). He inter alia
touched upon the following points (i) requirement of standards and mechanism under FSSAI to curb
adulterants/contaminants and need for strict compliance of standards; (ii) need for structured mechanism
of surveillance and monitoring of food contaminants and adulterants by the State Governments; (iii) need
for targeted approach for collection of samples in a district for various commodities, timely analysis and
reporting; (iv) need for strengthened and upgraded enforcement structure in terms of manpower and
equipments at the state level; (v) need for accredited analytical laboratories in States to monitor the level
of contaminants and adulterants; (vi) need for generating research data from time to time, especially on
newer contaminants and adulterants, etc.
6. Thereafter, Members sought certain clarifications on the functioning of Food Safety and Standards
Authority of India (FSSAI) which were replied to. The Chairman then directed the witness to send
written replies to queries which could not be answered orally.
III. Study visit
7. Thereafter, the Committee decided to undertake a study visit to Bengaluru, Mumbai, Pune and Goa
to interact with the stakeholders on (i) functioning of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
(FSSAI); * * * The Committee authorised its Chairman to finalise the dates of the study visit and the
tour programme and take necessary approval from the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the purpose.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 12.05 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

126
*II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 10th November, 2016 in Room No. '63', First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
3. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
4. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
6. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
7. Shri K. Somaprasad
8. Dr. C.P. Thakur
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
10. Shri Arjunlal Meena
11. Advocate Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
12. Shri C. R. Patil
13. Shri M.K. Raghavan
14. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
15. Shri R.K. Singh (Arrah)
16. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
17. Shrimati Rita Tarai
18. Shri Manohar Utawal
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Director
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
126
*Minutes of Ist Meeting relate to other matters.

127
WITNESS
Shri Vijay Sardana, Food Safety Expert
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear the views of Shri Vijay Sardana in connection with the functioning
of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI).
3. * * *
II. Oral Evidence of Shri Vijay Sardana
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of Shri Vijay Sardana, Food Safety Expert on the
functioning of FSSAI. Emphasizing on food safety, Shri Sardana was of the view that the food safety
system should be reviewed and new scientific development should be accommodated since, 80% of the
health related problems were due to bad food and water. An important issue of transparency and
accountability of the FSSAI was highlighted by him. According to him, all details from picking up of
samples; testing of samples by food testing labs and their test reports needed to be uploaded on the
website of FSSAI so that consumer is better informed and hence empowered.
5. Shri Sardana then drew attention of the Committee to the following gaps in the FSSAI Act, 2006
and made following submissions to make the Act more sound:- (i) there is no provision in FSSAI to have
surveys about consumer satisfaction/feedback and suggested to have an institutionalized mechanism for
the same; (ii) lack of transparency and proper guidelines on the process of sampling and testing of food
products; (iii) need for prompt posting of sample reports on the FSSAI website; (iv) failure of Food
Inspectors in carrying out their assigned duties and need for calling for performance reports of Food
Inspectors; (v) Indian food for export purposes, certified by Indian labs are rejected by foreign countries,
indicating failure of our testing laboratories hence, the need for making the food testing labs accountable
too; (vi) need to have a powerful analytical system for finding toxins and contaminants in food items
and laboratory strengthening measures; (vii) need to have stringent criteria for advertisement and labelling
of food products to restrict and stop misleading claims of manufacturers; (viii) FSSAI Act should be
applicable on all the e-commerce sites; (ix) need to have provisions for risk assessment and communication
wherein food companies should communicate about the risks attached to any product to the consumers
mandatorily (x) need to have a Food Alert Website for the information of consumers; (xi) need for
Central and State Food Authorities to put on their websites a monthly/bi-monthly/quarterly report on the
samples taken, samples tested and action taken on the samples found unsafe alongwith the names of
inspectors who took the sample/certifying audit party/manufacturer of the product whose articles were
found unsafe; (xii) selection and composition of the members of FSSAI based on expertise and competence
with emphasis on scientific capability especially in the appointment of CEO of FSSAI.
6. Apart from the much needed changes in the FSSAI Act, Shri Sardana was of the view that there
was a need to put in place a robust food safety management system which may include setting up food
testing centres across the country by roping in Indian Space Research Organisation/Defence Research
Development Organisation and other research institutions to develop low cost food testing lab devices
in the country itself without importing expensive laboratory machines/equipments.
***Relate to other matters.

128
7. Thereafter, Members sought some clarifications from the witness regarding the setting up of
Government and Private Labs; immediate amendments needed under FSSAI Act, 2006; rules/regulations
for food handling by small businesses; cases of food poisoning to be reported by hospitals, etc. The
Chairman then directed Shri Sardana to send written replies to queries which remained unanswered and
give additional submissions, if any, on the subject to the Secretariat within a week.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 
P.M.

129
*XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 18th May, 2018 in Committee Room No. ‘A’ ,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
3. Shri Jairam Ramesh
4. Dr. C.P. Thakur
5. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
6. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chouhan (Nandu Bhaiya)
8. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Dr. K. Kamaraj
11. Shri Arjunlal Meena
12. Advocate Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
13. Shri Mahendra Nath Pandey
14. Shri C.R. Patil
15. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
16. Shri Manohar Utawal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
129
* Minutes of I-XI Meetings relate to other matters.

130
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
WITNESSES
1. Association of Food Scientists and Technologists (India), Mysore
(i) Dr. Eram Rao, President, AFST Delhi
(ii) Dr. Uday Annapure, Vice President
2. Confederation of All India Traders, Delhi
(i) Shri Kirti Rana, President
(ii) Shri Ramniklal Chheda, Vice President
(iii) Shri Mahesh Bakhai, General Secretary
(iv) Shri Shankar Thakkar, Core Committee Member of Confederation of All India Traders and
President of Khadya Tel Vyapari Association, Maharashtra
(v) Shri Gopaal Ahuja, Chairman, World Clove Council
3. Defence Food Research Laboratory, DRDO, Mysuru
(i) Dr. Rakesh Kumar Sharma, Director
(ii) Dr. R. Kumar, Scientist 'F'
4. National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal
(i) Dr. Bimlesh Mann, Joint Director (Research)
(ii) Dr. Rajan Sharma, Principal Scientist, Dairy Chemistry Division
5. ICMR– National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad
Dr. B. Dinesh Kumar, Scientist-F
6. Food Analysts Association (India)
(i) Shri S. M. Bhardwaj, President
(ii) Shri R.G Gupta, Patron
(iii) Shri Hemant Kulkarni, General Secretary
(iv) Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Spokesperson
(v) Shri Ashok Kumar, Vice President
(vi) Shri V . D. Joshi, National Co-ordinator

131
7. Food Safety Officer Cadre Association, Uttar Pradesh
(i) Shri Ram Aashish Maurya, President
(ii) Shri Nandlal Yadav, Secretary
(iii) Dr. T. R. Rawat, Working Member/Subject Specialist
(iv) Shri Amit Prakash Verma, Former President
(v) Shri Krishna Gopal Yadav, Member
8. The Solvent Extractors' Association of India, Mumbai
(i) Shri Sudhakar Desai, Member and CEO, Emami Agrotech Ltd.
(ii) Shri Akshay Modi, Member, (Regulatory Committee) and Director of MODI Naturals Ltd.,
New delhi
(iii) Shri S.P . Kamrah, Advisor (SEA), New Delhi
9. Shri Pradip Chakraborty, Former Director, Food Safety Standard Association of India
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that the
Committee will be hearing the views of experts on the subject" Functioning of FSSAI".
3. * * *
II. Oral evidence
Oral evidence of the representatives of (i) Association of Food Scientists and Technologists (India);
(ii) Confederation of All India Traders; (iii) Defence Food Research Laboratory, DRDO, Mysuru;
(iv) National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal; (v) ICMR- National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad; (vi)
Food Analysts Association (India); (vii) Food Safety Officer Cadre Association, Uttar Pradesh;
(viii) The Solvent Extractors, Association of India; and (ix) Shri Pradip Chakraborty, Former Director,
FSSAI on the functioning of FSSAI.
4. The Committee then heard the views of Dr. Eram Rao, President, AFSTI who first briefly stated
the objectives and role of the Organization in consumer awareness and safety and thereafter inter-alia
highlighted the need to have modifications in FSS rules for appointment of Food Safety Officer, having
science background, employment of a technically qualified Food Technologist in Food Business Operations,
increase of budget of FSSAI, banning of sale of loose oil, etc.
5. Thereafter, Shri Kirti Rana, President, Confederation of All India Traders (Maharashtra Unit) during
his deposition inter-alia highlighted the issues faced by traders viz. the conditions prescribed in the
licensing process under FSS Act and Rules being impractical making the process complex and cumbersome,
no rules for taking action for seizing of food, no procedure/time limit/directions for disposal of seized
stock. He suggested for simplification of licensing procedure which may help in implementation of food
***Relate to other matters.

132
laws, conducting certified training programs for small business owners and their employees and display
of all licensed Food Business Operators on FSSAI website to make it easier for Food Business Operators
to verify the same and avoid selling to unregistered vendors. He also suggested that mobile testing labs
should be deployed at the farm level to check the fitness of grain for human consumption.
6. The Committee then heard Shri R. K. Sharma, Director, Defence Food Research Laboratory who
inter-alia highlighted the findings in a survey done by CIFTI and FICCI that showed that about one third
of the food industry is unaware about FSS Act and its rules, eighty-six per cent of the industry
appreciates the consolidation and unification under FSS Act, ten per cent of the respondants expect
further unification with bodies like AGMARK, BIS., ninety two per cent industry hopes for harmonization
with international standards like CODEX for issues on food categorization system, food additives and
labelling etc. It was also highlighted that there is lack of information and clarity on compliance to food
safety regulations, due to which FBOs are unable to track procedural, compliance and regulatory changes.
It was inter-alia suggested that FSSAI should simplify the regulations and standards at all levels, upgrade
food testing labs, to deal with the complexity of issues like nanotechnology and animal cloning, merge
BIS and AGMARK with FSSAI, mandate adequate expertise in the domain knowledge of Food Science
and Technology for employment in FSSAI and devise stringent and adequate enforcement mechanism
towards misleading advertisement and food adulteration.
7. The Committee, then, heard the views of Dr. Bimlesh Mann, Joint Director (Research) National
Dairy Research Institute who first briefly touched upon the mandate of National Dairy Research Institute
i.e. research in dairy/dairy products along with dissemination of knowledge to dairy farmers/industries.
She then informed the Committee that the Institute had developed rapid method to check quality of milk
which is to be adopted by FSSAI. She was of the view that vacant posts of food commissioner affect
the implementation of FSS Act in some States and mechanism of food testing at points of import should
be done. In reply to a question, she submitted that pasteurization of milk is 45% in India, and at present
the pasteurization is done at 71.5 degree celsius for 15 seconds which is effective in killing all micro-
organisms including tuberculosis bacteria making pasteurized milk TB free.
8. Thereafter, Dr. B. Dinesh Kumar, Scientist F, National Institute of Nutrition during his deposition
inter-alia highlighted that there is need to establish more accredited labs and strengthen the existing labs
for food testing, symbol based food labelling should be made for easy understanding, efforts should be
made to enhance the food safety and food label reading skills among the children by making them part
of skill building activity in schools, fortification of certain foods like vegetable oils, milk etc. for the
purpose of reducing malnutrition. It was also suggested that FSSAI should work towards creating 'food
advertising monitoring cell' to take up false and misleading advertisements to the appropriate authorities
and 'Food Risk Communication Wing' which would serve as one stop shop for authentic and verified
scientific information of all food items.
9. The Committee, then, heard the views of Shri S.M. Bhardwaj, President. Food Analysts Association
(India) who inter-alia highlighted various issues viz. no defined status of food analyst in FSSA and rules
made thereunder, paucity of technical manpower, no engagement of FSSAI in policy making, no direct
recruitment of officers for key posts. It was suggested that FSS Act must be re-written to make it
relevant for the country, enforcement staff must be given place in constituting authority under section
5, 11 and 14 of FSS Act, way to dispose off seized items should be delineated in the Act, etc.

133
10. Thereafter, Shri Amit Prakash Verma, Food Safety Officer Cadre Association highlighted the
inadequacies in the present FSS Act 2006 viz. lack of clarity regarding procedure of disposal of seizures,
and process to keep the seized articles in custody of FBOs, non cooperation of FBOs with regulatory
authority, non inclusion of Drinking/portable water in definition of water in the Act. He also stated that
the appointment of officer from a non science background hampers the functioning of food safety.
11. Shri Sudhir Kumar Desai, Member, The Solvent Extractors' Association of India, Mumbai inter alia
highlighted the following points viz. removal of mandatory AGMARK certification, doing away with
storage control order, banning of sale of loose oil, fortification of oils by Vitamin A, D on voluntary basis
and crude/virgin/raw oils should be kept out of the purview of fortification, etc.
12. Thereafter, Shri Pradip Chakraborty , Former Director, FSSAI inter alia highlighted various issues
infringing on the functioning of FSSAI like lack of infrastructure in States, non technical food officers,
ineffective enforcement of FSS Act, etc. He suggested that regulations need to change and packaging
and labelling should be harmonized with CODEX etc. The Committee also directed that the recommendations
of the Codex Alimentarious Commission for the quality and safety of food be called for from the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare.
13. During the course of the meeting, Members raised certain queries on the said subject. The witnesses
replied to some of the queries raised by the Members. The Chairman directed the witnesses to furnish
detailed written replies to the queries left unanswered within a week.
14. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
15. The Committee then adjourned at 5.13 
P.M.

134
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 4th June, 2018 in Committee Room ‘A’, Gr ound
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia
3. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh
5. Shri Ashok Siddharth
6. Dr. C.P. Thakur
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Thangso Baite
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shri C.R. Patil
10. Shri M.K. Raghavan
11. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
12. Shri Gyan Singh
13. Shri Bharat Singh
14. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
15. Shri Manohar Utawal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
134

135
WITNESSES
Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Ms. Preeti Sudan, Secretary, H&FW
2. Dr. R.K. Vats, AS&DG
3. Mr. Sudhir Kumar, Joint Secretary
Food Safety & Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)
1. Mr. Ashish Bahuguna, Chairman, FSSAI
2. Mr. Pawan Kumar Agarwal, CEO, FSSAI
3. Ms. Madhavi Das, Chief Management Services Officer , FSSAI
4. Mr. Anil Kumar, Adviser (Standards), FSSAI
5. Dr. N. Bhaskar, Adviser (QA), FSSAI
6. Ms. Garima Singh, Director (RCD), FSSAI
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that the
Committee will be hearing the views of the Secretary of the Department of Health and Family Welfare
alongwith the officials of the FSSAI on the subject "Functioning of FSSAI".
3. * * *
II. Oral evidence of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare along with the
officials of the FSSAI on the functioning of FSSAI
4. The Committee heard the views of Secretary of Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
functioning of FSSAI and the Secretary gave a brief outline regarding the subject. Thereafter CEO of
FSSAI made a power point presentation on the subject and inter alia  highlighted the following points
like—
(i) development of FSSAI and paradigm shifts from fragmented approach to a single food law,
from combating adulteration in food product to food safety across food chain, from prosecution
to prevention and capacity building to build a culture of self compliance;
(ii) ensuring safe and wholesome food through its four pillars namely (a) food standards and safe
practices, (b) food testing, (c) food safety compliance and (d) training and capacity building;
(iii) development of Quick Access System which is a one point source for all vertical and horizontal
Food Standards and Lab Management System;
(iv) Food Safety Knowledge Assimilation Network for development of science based standards;
(v) harmonisation with globally benchmarked standards (Codex);
***Relate to other matters.

136
(vi) status of notified Labs and support for State Food Labs;
(vii) introduction of new testing methods and Indian Food Laboratory Network;
(viii) introduction of food safety on wheels and Mobile Testing Labs to strengthen the food testing
infrastructure in the States;
(ix) strengthening of the process of licensing, registration, enforcement of FSSAI rules and
regulations;
(x) domestic food control through smart and digital compliance;
(xi) food import control at 20 ports;
(xii) training and capacity building programme for the food safety supervisors, food testing and
regulatory staff;
(xiii) setting up of food fortification standards to address the micronutrients deficiency;
(xiv) focus on elimination of trans-fats by 2022;
(xv) proper food labelling to reduce intake of high fat, sugar and salt foods in order to prevent non-
communicable diseases;
(xvi) launch of various books to bring about social and behavioural changes and increase consumer
awareness;
(xvii) development of mobile apps for consumer and a dedicated food smart consumers portal.
5. He further deliberated upon the challenges faced by FSSAI - (a) shortage of regulatory staff,
(b) poor food testing infrastructure, (c) training and capacity building issues, (d) lacunae in Food Safety
and Standards Act, Rules and Regulation.
6. During the course of the meeting, Members raised certain queries to which the witnesses replied.
The Chairman directed the witnesses to furnish detailed written replies to the queries left unanswered
within a week.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 P.M.

137
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.15 A.M. on Tuesday, the 7th August, 2018 in Room No. 62, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Santanu Sen
3. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh
5. Shri K. Somaprasad
6. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Thangso Baite
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Dr. K. Kamaraj
10. Shri Arjunlal Meena
11. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
12. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
13. Shri Gyan Singh
14. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
15. Shrimati Rita Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
137

138
Opening Remarks
1. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that the
meeting has been convened to consider and adopt draft 110th Report of the Committee on "Functioning
of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)".
2. The Committee then considered the draft 110th Report of the Committee on "Functioning of Food
Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)". After some discussion, the Committee adopted the
said Report with minor changes. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Report may be presented
to the Rajya Sabha and simultaneously laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the 8th August,
2018. The Committee authorized its Chairman, Shri Jairam Ramesh and Dr. Santanu Sen to present the
Report in Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal and Dr. K. Kamaraj to lay the Report on the Table of the
Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 11.00 
A.M.

139
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
List of the experts heard on the FSSAI
24th May, 2016
Dr. Gurudayal Singh Toteja Scientist 'G' and Head-Nutrition, Indian Council
of Medical Research (ICMR)
10th November , 2016
Shri Vijay Sardana, Food Safety Expert
18th May, 2018
1. Association of Food Scientists and (i) Dr. Eram Rao, President, AFST Delhi
Technologists (India), Mysore (ii) Dr. Uday Annapure, Vice President
2. Confederation of All India Traders Delhi (i) Shri Kirti Rana, President
(ii) S hri Ramniklal Chheda, Vice President
(iii) Shri Mahesh Bakhai, General Secretary
(iv) Shri Shankar Thakkar, Core Committee Member
of Confederation of All India Traders and
President of Khadya Tel Vyapari Association,
Maharashtra
(v) Shri Gopaal Ahuja, Chairman, World Clove
Council
3. Defence Food Research Laboratory, (i) Dr Rakesh Kumar Sharma, Director
DRDO, Mysuru (ii) Dr R Kumar, Scientist 'F'
4. National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal (i) Dr. Bimlesh Mann, Joint Director (Research)
(ii) Dr. Rajan Sharma, Principal Scientist, Dairy
Chemistry Division
5. ICMR - National Institute of Nutrition, Dr. B.Dinesh Kumar, Scientist-F
Hyderabad
6. Food Analysts Association (India) (i) Shri S. M. Bhardwaj, President
(ii) Shri R.G Gupta, Patron
(iii) Shri Hemant Kulkarni, General Secretary
(iv) Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Spokesperson
(v) Shri Ashok Kumar, Vice President
(vi) Shri V D Joshi, National Co-ordinator
7. Food Safety Officer Cadre Association, (i) Shri Ram Aashish Maurya, President
Uttar Pradesh (ii) Shri Nandlal Yadav, Secretary
(iii) Dr. T .R. Rawat, Working Member / Subject
Specialist
141

142
(iv) Shri Amit Prakash Verma, Former President
(v) Shri Krishna Gopal Yadav, Member
8. The Solvent Extractors' Association of (i) Shri Sudhakar Desai, Member and CEO,
India, Mumbai Emami Agrotech Ltd.
(ii) Shri Akshay Modi, Member, (Regulatory
Committee) and Director of MODI Naturals
Ltd, New delhi
(iii) Shri S.P. Kamrah, Advisor(SEA), New Delhi
9. Shri Pradip Chakraborty Former Director, Food Safety Standard Association
of India

143
ANNEXURE II
Central Advisory Committee
1. Shri Pawan Agarwal
Chairperson (ex-officio), CAC CEO, FSSAI
2. Ms. Nirupama Sharma
C/o PHD Chamber, PHD House, 412 Siri Institutional Area,
August Kranti Marg, New Delhi
3. Shri Dbaram Vir Malban
C/o All India Food ProecessorsAssociation, 206 Aurbindo Place,
Aurbindo Marg,Hauz Khas, New Delhi - 110016
Agriculture:-
4. Shri Ajay Jakhar
C/o Bharat Krishak Samaj, A-1,
Nizamuddin West, New Delhi.
5. Dr. T.P. Rajendran
701 A, Vasundhara Apartment, Plot No. 16,
Sector 6, Dwarka, New Delhi-110075
Consumers :-
6. Shri Bejon Kumar Mishra
C/o Consumer Online Foundation, F9, 2nd Floor,
Kailash Colony, New Delhi -110048
7. Shri George Cberiyan
C/o CUTS International Bhaskar Marg, Bani Park, Jaipur-302016
Research Bodies and Food Research Bodies and Food Laboratories:
8. Dr. Deepa Bhajekar
C/o 'd' Technology 407, Mint, India Bulls,
Hiranandani Meadows,Thane (W),
Mumbai - 400060
9. Dr. S.S. Marwaha,
C/o Punjab Biotechnology Incubator,
SCO: 7&8, Top Floor, phase - V ,
SAS Nagar, Mohali.
143

144
Commissioners of Food Safety :
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Andaman & Nicobar Island
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Andhra Pradesh
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Arunachal Pradesh
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Assam
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Bihar
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Chandigarh
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Chhattisgarh
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Dadara & Nagar Haveli
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Daman & Diu
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Delhi
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Goa
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Gujarat
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Haryana
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Himanchal Pradesh
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Jammu and Kashmir
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Jharkhand
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Karnataka
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Kerala
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Lakshadweep
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Madhya Pradesh
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Maharashtra
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Manipur
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Meghalaya
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Mizoram
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Nagaland
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Odisha
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Puducherry

145
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Punjab
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Rajasthan
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Sikkim
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Tamil Nadu
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Tripura
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Telangana
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Uttrakhand
• Commissioner of Food Safety, Uttar Pradesh
• Commissioner of Food Safety, West Bengal
• Chairperson of the Scientific Committee (ex-officio)

146
ANNEXURE-III
Administrative Setup with States/UTs Under FSS Act, 2006
Sl. Name of State FSC No. of No. of No. of Steering Tribunal
No. Adjudicating Designated Food Committee
Officers  Officers Safety
Officers
1 2 34 5 678
1. Andaman and Nicobar Island 1 3 3 14 Yes Y es
2. Andhra Pradesh 1 13 17 45 Yes Y es
3. Arunachal Pradesh 1 20 20 3 Yes Y es
4. Assam 1 27 5 37 Yes Y es
5. Bihar 1 38 10 14 Yes No
6. Chandigarh 1 1 1 7 Yes Y es
7. Chhattisgarh I 27 27 71 Yes Y es
8. Dadara and Nagar Haveli 1 1 1 2 Yes Y es
9. Daman and Diu 1 2 2 2 Yes Y es
10. Delhi 1 11 5 24 Yes Yes
11. Goa 1 2 2 17 Yes No
12. Gujarat 1 33 27 263 Yes Yes
13. Haryana 1 22 22 12 Yes Yes
14. Himachal Pradesh 1 12 12 2 Yes No
15. Jammu and Kashmir 1 22 19 85 Yes No
16. Jharkhand 1 24 24 218 Yes No
17. Karnataka 1 36 36 198 Yes No
18. Kerala 1 21 14 130 Yes Yes
19. Lakshadweep 1 1 1 13 No Y es
20. Madhya Pradesh 1 51 51 158 Yes Y es
21. Maharashtra 1 7 62 298 Yes Y es
22. Manipur 1 9 10 22 Yes Yes
146

147
1 2 34 5 678
23. Meghalaya 1 11 3 8 Yes Yes
24. Mizoram 1 8 3 10 Yes No
25. Nagaland 1 11 11 11 Yes No
26. Odisha 1 34 37 26 No No
27. Puducherry 1 2 1 2 Y es Y es
28. Punjab 1 22 22 26 Yes Yes
29. Rajasthan 1 48 42 65 Yes Yes
30. Sikkim 1 4 2 2 No No
31. Tamil Nadu 1 32 32 584 Yes No
32. Telangana 1 10 15 11 Yes Yes
33. Tripura 1 8 9 4 Yes Y es
34. Uttarakhand 1 13 12 29 Yes Y es
35. Uttar Pradesh 1 75 72 686 Yes Y es
36. West Bengal 1 19 19 31 Yes Y es
T
OTAL 36 680 651 3130 33 25

148
ANNEXURE-IV
Section Suggested Regulations Current Status Remarks %
Regulations made under Section 16(2)
16(2) (a) the standards and guidelines in Covered under FSS (Food Regulation framed
relation to articles of food and products Standards and
specifying an appropriate system Food additives) Regulations,
for enforcing variousstandards 2011.
notified underthisAct;
16(2) (b) the limits for use of food Covered under FSS Regulation framed
additives, crop contaminants, (Contaminants, Toxins and
pesticide residues, residues of Residues) Regulations, 2011.
veterinary drugs, hea metals,
processing aids, myco-toxins,
antibiotics and pharmacological
active substances and irradiation
of food;
16(2) (c) the mechanisms and guidelines Draft FSS (Food Safety Regulation is in the
for accreditation of certification Auditing) Regulations, 2017 process of final
bodies engaged in certification of are notified on 12.10.2017 notification
food safety management systms and the same are in the
for food businesses; process of finalisation
16(2) (d) The procedure and the Covered under FSS (Import) Regulation framed
enforcement of quality control Regulations, 2017
in relation to any article of food
imported into India
16(2) (e) the procedure and guidelines for Draft FSS (Recognition and Regulation is in the
accreditation of laboratories and Notification of laboratories) process of final
notification of the accredited Regulations, 2017 has been notification
laboratories; notified on 27.12.2017 and
the same are in the process
of finalisation.
16(2) (f) the method of sampling, analysis Covered under FSS Rules, Regulation framed
and exchange of information 2011 and individual manual
among enforcement authorities; are placed on website for
dissemination to the
stakeholders.
16(2)(g) Conduct survey of enforcement This issue was flagged in Regulations will be
and administration of this Act in the last Central Advisory framed
the country Committee meeting (16 May,
148

149
Section     Suggested Regulations    Current Status  Remarks  %
2017) and discussed. Based
on the outcome framing of
his regulation is being
initiated with the consultation
of state enforcement
agencies.
16(2) (h) Food labelling standards including Draft FSS (Advertisement Food Safety and
claims on health, nutrition, special and Claims) Regulations, Standards (Packaging
dietary uses and food category 2018 has been notified on and Labelling)
systems for foods; and 13.03.2018And Draft FSS Regulations, 2011 has
(Labelling and Display) been framed and now
regulation was approved in these regulations are
23rd authority meeting under comprehensive
held on 25th May, 2017 are revision and 3
in the process of draft separate regulations
notification. has been framed. Out
of which two
regulations are draft
notified and now both
of them are in the
process of final
notification and one
dealing with labelling
requirement is in the
process of draft
notification.
16(2) (i) The manner in which and the Guidelines on Risk Based Guideline only
procedure subject to which risk Inspection System have been
analysis, risk assessment, risk framed and will be placed
communication and risk manage- before upcoming Food
ment shall be undertaken Authority meeting.
Regulations made under Section 92
92 (2) (a) salaries and other conditions of Covered under Food Safety Regulation framed
service of officers and other and Standards Authority of
employees of the Food Authority India (Salary. Allowances
under sub -section(3) of Section 9; and other Conditions of
service of Officers and
Employees) Regulations,
2013.

150
Section     Suggested Regulations    Current Status  Remarks  %
92 (2) (b) R ules of procedure for transaction Covered under Food Safety Regulation framed
of business under sub-section (5) and Standards Authority of
of Section 11 India (Procedure for
Transaction of Business of
92 (2) (c) Other functions of Central Central Advisory Committee) Regulation framed
Advisory Committee under Regulations, 2010
sub-section (2) of Section 12
92 (2) (d) Procedure of Scientific Committee Covered under Food Safety Regulation framed
and Panels under sub-section (4) and Standards (Transaction
of section 15; of Business and Procedures
for the Scientific Committee
and Scientific Panels)
Regulations, 2016.
92 (2) (e) Notifying standards and guidelines Covered under Food Safetv Regulation framed
in relation to articles of food And Standards ("Food
meant for human consumption Products Standards And
under sub-section (2) of section16; Food Additives) Regulations,
2011.
92 (2) (f) Procedure to be followed by Covered under Food Regulation framed
Food Authority for transaction Safety and Standards
of business at its meeting under (Transaction of Business)
sub-section (1) of Section 17 Regulations, 2016.
92 (2) (g) Making or amending regulations The Law Ministry suggested The Ministry of
in view of urgency concerning that there is no necessity to Law has opined that
food safety or public health under frame regulations under this regulation is not
clause (d) of sub-section (2) of clause as  the Pow er has required.
section 18 already been given in section
18 (2) (d).
92 (2) (h) limits of additives under Covered under Food Safety Regulation framed
section 19; and Standards (Food Products
Standards and Food Additives)
Regulations, 2011.
92 (2) (i) Limits of quantities of Covered under Food Safety Regulation framed
contaminants, toxic substance and Standards (Contaminants,
and heavy metals etc. Under Toxins and Residues)
section 20; Regulations, 2011.
92 (2) (j) Tolerance limit of pesticides, Regulation framed
veterinary drugs residues, etc.
under section 21;

151
Section     Suggested Regulations    Current Status  Remarks  %
92 (2) (k) the manner of marking and Covered under Food Safety
labelling of foods under and standards (Packaging
section 23; and Labelling) regulation,
2011. Regulation framed
92 (2) (1) form in which guarantee shall be Covered under sub-regulation Regulation framed
given under sub-section(4) of 2.1.14 (form El) of Food
section 26; Safety and Standards
(Licensing and Registration
of Food Businesses)
Regulation, 2011.
92 (2) (m) conditions and guidelines relating Covered under Food Safety Regulation framed
to food recall Procedures and Standards (Food Recall
under sub-section(4) of Procedure) Regulations,
Section 28; 2017.
92 (2) (n) regulations relating to functioning Covered under Food Safety Regulation framed
of Food Safety Officer under and Standards Rules, 2011.
sub-section (5) of Section 29;
92 (2) (o) notifying the registering authority Covered under Food Safety Regulation framed
and the manner of registration; and Standards (Licensing and
the manner of making application Registration     of    Food
for obtaining  license,  the  fees Businesses) Regulation, 2011.
payable    therefore   and   the
circumstances under which such
license may be cancelled or
forfeited under Section 31;
92 (2) (p) The respective areas of which Order issued by FSSAI and Guideline only
the Designated Officer shall be State Authorities from time
in-charge   for   food   safety to time for respective areas.
administration under sub-section
(1) of Section 36;
92 (2) (q) procedure in getting food Covered under Food Safety Regulation framed
analysed, details of fees etc., and Standards (Laboratory
under sub-section (1) of and Sampling Analysis)
Section 40;
92 (2) (r) functions, procedure to be Regulation, 2011, Food Regulation framed
followed by food laboratories Safety and Standards Rules,
under sub-section (3) of 2011 and FSS (Import)
Section 43; Regulations, 2017.

152
Section     Suggested Regulations    Current Status  Remarks  %
92 (2) (s) procedure to be followed by Regulation framed
officials under sub-section (6)
of Section 47;
92 (2) (t) Financial regulations to be adopted Draft Food Safety and Under the process
by the Food Authority in drawing Standards Authority of of draft notification.
up its budget under sub-section India (Financial) Regulations,
(2) of Section 2017 is approved by Food
Authority in its 23rd meeting
92 (2) (u) Issue guidelines or direction for Covered under the guideline Guideline only
participation in Codex meeting for preparation of national
and preparation of response to response or national view
Codex matters; point to codex and partici-
pation in codex meeting and
guidelines for codex contact
point, national codex
committee, and nation
shadow committee issued
by FSSAI.
92 (2) (v) Any other matter which is Covered under FSS (Organic Regulation framed
required to be, or may be, Food) Regulations, 2017
specified by regulations or in notified on 29.12.2017 other
respect of which provision is Relevant regulations are
to be made by regulations. being framed as and when
required.
Regulations made under Section 22
22(1) Foods for special dietary uses or Covered under Food Safety Regulation framed
functional foods or Nutraceuticals and Standards(Health
or health supplements Supplements, Nutraceuticals,
Food for Special Dietary
Use, Food For Special
Medical Purpose, Functional
Food and Novel Food)
Regulations, 2016
22(2) Genetically engineered or modified This section has not been guidelines for risk
food enforced, as envisaged assessment of GM
under sub section 3 of food are being
section 1 of FSS Act, as prepared and the
yet. same would suitably
framed as regulations.

153
Section     Suggested Regulations    Current Status  Remarks  %
22(3) Organic Food Covered under FSS (Organic Regulation framed
Food) Regulations, 2017
notified on 29.12.2017
22(4) Proprietary and Novel food Covered under FSS (Food Regulation framed
Products Standards and
Food Additives) Regulations,
2011 and Food Safety and
Standards (Health Supplements.
Nutraceuticlas, and Food for
Special Dietary Use, Food
For Special Medical Purpose,
Functional Food and Novel
Food) Regulations, 2016
respectively.

154
ANNEXURE-V
Annual Public Laboratory Testing Report for the year 2015-16
Sl. Name of State T otal No. of No. of No. of Cases No. of Convictions/
No. No. of Samples Samples Launched Penalties
samples Analysed found
received Adultera- Criminal Civil Convictions Penalties/
ted and Amount
Misbran- raised in
ded Rupees
1 2 3 456 7 8 9
1. Andaman and 156 156 25 0 0 0 Rs. 2,71,000
Nicobar Island
2. Andhra Pradesh 4860 4860 870 194 347 4 83/Rs.52,15,000
3. Arunachal Pradesh 290 290 30 0 28 0 5/Rs.15,000
4. Assam 503 503 72 10 80 2 4
5. Bihar 2032 1447 35 0 93 0 4/Rs.20,000
6. Chandigarh 206 206 15 0 15 0 Rs.10,52,000
7. Chhattisgarh 1026 1026 298 3 17 0 Rs.85,000
8. Dadara and Nagar 65 65 5 0 2 0 0
Haveli
9. Daman and Diu 106 106 11 0 11 0 0
10. Delhi 1472 1472 239 149 0 0 Rs.44,82,500
11. Goa 1132 1155 72 0 4 1 1/Rs.5,000
12. Gujarat 151 15 14891 1242 30 507 1 182/
Rs.1,90,05,906
13. Haryana 2121 2063 180 7 149 0 111/Rs.27,43,600
14. Himachal Pradesh 415 390 53 22 12 25 Rs.9,50,000
15. Jammu and Kashmir 1354 1215 334 1 335 215 0/Rs.22,14,400
16. Jharkhand
17. Karnata ka 2894 2340 433 58 0 0 Rs.4,36,000
18. Kerala 2364 2196 459 138 246 17 44/Rs.66,33,500
154

155
1 2 3 456 7 8 9
19. Lakshadweep
20. Madhya Pradesh 10035 9994 1311 82 879 36 447/
Rs.4,48,26,000
21. Maharashtra 8841 8066 2195 190 418 24 186/
Rs.59,16,053
22. Manipur 67 67 0 0 8 8 8/Rs.1,64,000
23. Meghalaya 124 87 4 0 0 0 0
24. Mizoram 24 17 4 0 0 0 0
25. Nagaland 187 187 76 32 20 20/Rs.10,000
26. Odisha 211 211 61 2 1
27. Puducherry 827 827 11 0 1 0 1/Rs.5,000
28. Punjab
29. Rajasthan
30. Sikkim 5 5 0 0 0 0 0
31. Tamil Nadu 1742 1783 607 107 308 23 202/
Rs.58,90,800
32. Telangana
33. Tripura 814 814 17 5 0 0 Rs.2,750
34. Uttar Pradesh 17726 14833 7189 506 4864 164 2370/
Rs. 11,51,20,480
35. Uttarakhand 1073 1073 183 10 95 0 Rs.15,35,000
36. West Bengal 154 154 102 1 13 0 0
T
OTAL 77,941 72,499 16,133 1,450 8,529 5,40 3669/
Rs.21,65,98,989
Source- States/UT

156
ANNEXURE-VI
Annual Public Laboratory Testing Report for the year 2016-17
Sl. Name of State/ T otal No. of No. of No. of Cases No. of Convictions/
No. U.T. No. of Samples Samples Launched Penalties
samples Analysed found
received Adultera- Criminal Civil Convictions Penalties/
ted and Amount
Misbran- raised in
ded Rupees
1 2 3 456 7 8 9
1. Andaman and
Nicobar Islands*
2. Andhra Pradesh* 4687 4687 552 153 396 8 1 19/Rs.11107000
3. Arunachal Pradesh 302 302 10 1 8 0 12/Rs. 348400
4. Assam 536 526 67 3 23 0 2/Rs. 30000
5. Bihar 2507 2427 42 3 30 6 Rs. 73000
6. Chandigarh 251 251 19 2 14 1 Rs. 300000
7. Chhattisgarh 1693 1693 425
8. Dadra and Nagar 44 44 3 3
Haveli
9. Daman and Diu*
10. Delhi 1155 1152 120 9 98 106 68/Rs. 3741500
11. Goa 920 874 111 5 1 1/ Rs. 20000
12. Gujarat 11364 11329 839 46 513 2 Rs. 16681000
13. Haryana 2041 2033 188 18 243 14 71/Rs. 2982170
14. Himachal Pradesh 351 315 57 35 23 Rs. 195000
15. Jammu and Kashmir 320 2952 1114 24 611 1 320
16. Jharkhand*
17. Karnataka 2837 2837 341 26 112 112/
Rs. 2195900
18. Kerala 1899 1784 457 83 124 15 4/Rs. 375380
156

157
1 2 3 456 7 8 9
19. Lakshadweep*
20. Madhya 5675 5461 609 60 483 26 252/ Rs.
Pradesh 7427700
21. Maharashtra 10716 10030 2529 313 943 0 340/
Rs.11080888
22. Manipur 207 207 30 0 30 0 5/ Rs. 520000
23. Meghalaya 47 43 3
24. Mizoram 26 20 2 0 0 0
25. Nagaland 285 285 42 0 0 0 0
26. Odisha 508 508 75 12 52 0 2/Rs. 20000
27. Puducherry 495 495 32 0 0 0
28. Punjab 4431 4054 2240 56 1442 Rs. 1410921
29. Rajasthan 5801 4923 1276 193 169 0 65/ Rs. 115557
30. Sikkim*
31. Tamil Nadu 4080 3022 970 244 617 109 442/ Rs.
7898500
32. Telangana 1480 1480 330 103 85 15 17/Rs.504000
33. Tripura 173 173 12 0 6 0
34. Uttar Pradesh 19755 13567 5663 375 5101 1273 2906/
Rs.101962350
35. Uttarakhand 749 676 119 3 199 19/
Rs. 1004000
36. West Bengal 195 190 48 11 0 5 Rs. 200000
T
OTAL 88,530 78,340 18,325 13,080 1605 4757/
              Rs.17,01,93,266
Source: States/UTs, Note: Annual Report of the States* are awaited.

158
ANNEXURE-VII
International & national research reports on harmful effects of PET packaging
   Publication Place and Year Dangers
"CHEMICAL EXPOSURE DURING UK, 2013 Impact during pregnancy on health of
PREGNANCY" by RCOG - Royal unborn child
College of Obstetrics & Gynaecology
ASRM - American Society of USA, 2013 Direct increase in miscarriage by 80%
Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) &
American Society of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology (ASOG)
"Public Health Impact of Plastics: An New Delhi, Linked with cancers, birth defects, impaired
overview"   by  MAULANA  AZAD Dec'2011 immunity, endocrine disruption, developmental
MEDICAL   COLLEGE,   JNM and reproductive effects etc.
HOSPITAL, VMMC & SAFDARJUNG
HOSPITAL
"Environmental and health hazards of Sweden, Leaching of toxic non bound chemical
Chemicals in Plastic polymers and 2011 used in making PET/Plastics
products" by University of Gothenburg.
Research commentary by Leonard Sax USA, 2010 Increased adiposity and insulin resistance,
from Montgomery Center for Research decreased anogenital distance in male
in Child and Adolescent Development infants, decreased levels of sex hormones and
other consequences for the human
reproductive system
PET - INTERNA TIONAL STUDY CANADA, Antimony trioxide present in PET is listed
(TOXIC FREE CANADA) 2009 as a po ssible human carcinogen and effects
lungs, cardiovascular system, and liver from
acute exposure and may cause Tumors &
Cancers
158

159
ANNEXURE VIII
Tests by IITR - Lucknow
CPCB sponsored a study to Indian Institute of Toxieological Research (IITR), Lucknow on 'Impact
of Plastic Waste Disposal on Soil and Water Quality at Lucknow Dumpsites" - 2012
Control Water Sample   Mean concentration (SD) of phthalates (mg/l)
DMP DEP DBP DEHP ** DOP
Pre—Monsoon B D L 0.958 ± 0.258 0.747 ± 2.12 1.005 ± 2.46 0.462 ± 1.35
Post—Monsoon B D L 1.033 ±2.95 0.832 ± 2.37 1.358 ± 3.45 0.517 + 1.51
Safety Limits (US EPA) 70 5.6 0.007 0.006 0.006
159

160
ANNEXURE IX
Leaching increases in hot / warm conditions, and also over period of time
Test done by NTH (NATIONAL TEST HOUSE) by AIIHPH (All India Institute of Hygiene & Public
Health) and IIT - Madras
(1) Test done by AIIHPH at NTH
Source IS: 13428: IS: 13428: IS: 13428: US - EPA
2005 2005 2005
12 3 4 5 6
Pharmaceuticals
           Safety Limits 0.005 0.01 0.05 0.006
Product Storage Temp. Antimony Lead Chromium DEHP
Benadryl Syrup RT 0.020 0.03 0.018 0.018
40°C 0.032 0.03 0.019 0.023
60°C 0.048 0.05 0.026 0.028
Polybion Syrup RT 0.012 0.03 0.008 0.031
40°C 0.012 0.03 0.008 0.045
60°C 0.036 0.03 0.020 0.048
Alex Cough Syrup RT 0.016 0.01 0.020 0.009
40°C 0.020 0.02 0.022 0.016
60°C 0.048 0.02 0.030 0.029
Mucaine Syrup RT 0.014 0.05 0.011 0.036
40°C 0.014 0.05 0.011 0.044
60°C 0.029 0.05 0.012 0.045
Hemfer Syrup RT 0.039 0.03 0.011 0.011
40°C 0.046 0.04 0.011 0.017
60°C 0.047 0.04 0.011 0.025
Soft Drinks
Safety Limits 0.005 0.01 0.05 0.006
Product Storage Temp. Antimony Lead Chromium DEHP
Sprite RT 0.015 0.007 0.003 0.016
40°C 0.019 0.009 0.006 0.019
160

161
12 3 4 5 6
60°C 0.02 0.009 0.008 0.021
Mountain Dew RT 0.012 0.006 0.016 0.014
40°C 0.018 0.007 0.019 0.016
60°C 0.021 0.009 0.02 0.018
Pepsi RT 0.029 0.011 0.002 0.028
40°C 0.032 0.012 0.006 0.033
60°C 0.043 0.012 0.008 0.036
7 UP RT 0.011 0.004 0.012 0.018
40°C 0.011 0.006 0.018 0.02
60°C 0.023 0.006 0.02 0.02
Coca Cola RT 0.006 0.009 0.011 0.026
40°C 0.014 0.011 0.013 0.028
60°C 0.019 0.012 0.013 0.034
Liquor
Safety Limits 0.005 0.01 0.05 0.006
Product Storage Temp. Antimony Lead Chromium DEHP
Twin Tower Whiskey RT 0.014 0.01 0.020 0.014
40°C 0.016 0.01 0.030 0.016
60°C 0.016 0.01 0.030 0.017
Santra GM, Country Liquor RT 0.012 0.01 0.005 0.007
40°C 0.012 0.01 0.014 0.007
60°C 0.014 0.01 0.031 0.008
AsliSantra , Country Liquor RT 0.010 0.01 0.013 0.006
40°C 0.012 0.01 0.019 0.007
60CC 0.012 0.01 0.023 0.009
Good Evening , Country Liquor RT 0.014 0.01 0.007 0.020
40°C 0.016 0.01 0.007 0.022
60°C 0.016 0.01 0.015 0.023

162
(2) Test done by IIT - Madras
Source IS: 13428: IS: 13428: IS: 13428: US - EPA
2005 2005 2005
         Safety Limits 0.005 0.01 0.01 0.006
Product Storage Temp. Antimony Cadmium Lead DEHP
Soft Drinks (PET bottle) RT 0.005 0.008 0.067 0.007
40°C 0.007 0.014 0.146 0.008
60°C 0.009 0.025 0.274 0.012
Liquor (Tetra pack) RT 0.006 0.01 0.049 0.057
40°C 0.008 0.016 0.066 0.075
60°C 0.009 0.04 0.094 0.103
RT 0.006 0.053 0.021 0.004
Liquor (PET bottle) 40°C 0.008 0.095 0.072 0.006
60°C 0.011 0 117 0075 0.007
Frooti (Tetra pack) RT 0.005 0.006 0.047 0.007
40°C 0.007 0.012 0.065 0.0091
60°C 0.009 0.024 0.069 0.009
Hair Oil (PET bottle) RT 0.006 0.002 0.035 0.017
40°C 0.007 0.008 0.044 0.019
60°C 0.01 0.012 0.058 0.028
Cough Syrup (PET bottle) RT 0.006 0.012 0.118 BDL
40°C 0.007 0.017 0.147 0.006
60°C 0.009 0.021 0.275 0.015