PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA      42 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
  
FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-11 OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF AIDS CONTROL 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28TH APRIL, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28TH APRIL, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
APRIL, 2010/VAISHAKHA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
  
FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-11 OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF AIDS CONTROL 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28TH APRIL, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28TH APRIL, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
APRIL, 2010/VAISHAKHA, 1932 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. P REFACE ......................................................................................................................... (iii)  
3. R EPORT .......................................................................................................................... 1-13  
4. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ---- AT A GLANCE ............................................................... 14-19 
5. M INUTES ......................................................................................................................... 21-26  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2009-2010) 
 1. Shri Amar Singh   -----  Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
 3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
 5. Shri Balbir Punj 
 6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
 7. Shrimati Brinda Karat 
 8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
 9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy 
 10. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid 
 12. Shri Ashok Argal 
 13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
 14. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
 15. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan 
 17. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
 18. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai 
 19 Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
 20. Shri N. Kristappa 
 21. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
 22. Shri Datta Meghe 
 23. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
 24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
 25. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
 26. Shri M. K. Raghavan 
 27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
 28. Shrimati Meena Singh 
 29. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
 31. Shri Ratan Singh 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 

  Shri R. B. Gupta, Director 
  Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director 
  Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director  
  Shti Satis Mesra, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PREFACE 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare, 
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Re port on its behalf, do hereby present this Forty-second 
Report of the Committee on the Demand for Grants of the Department of AIDS Control, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare for the year 2010-11. 
2. The Committee considered the various documents and re levant papers received from the Department of AIDS 
Control, Ministry of Health and Family  Welfare and also heard the Secretary an d other officials of the Department on 
the said Demands for Grants (2010-11) in its meeting held on the 6th April, 2010. 
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on the 26th April, 2010. 
 
 
  AMAR  SINGH  
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
26
th
 April, 2010 Department-related Parliamentary 
Vaishakha 7, 1932 (saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
I. INTRODUCTION  
1.1 India, the second largest country in the world, also has the third largest number of people living with HIV / 
AIDS. As per the provisional HIV estimate of 2008-09, there are an estimated 22.71akh people living with HIV / AIDS 
in the country. The epidemic is concentrated among high risk group populations and is heterogenous in its spread. 
1.2 The National AIDS Control Programme launched in 19 92, is being implemented as a comprehensive programme 
for prevention and control of HIV / AIDS in India. Improved understanding of the complex HIV epidemic in India has 
enabled substantial changes to be made in the policy frameworks and approaches of NACP. The focus has shifted from 
raising awareness to behaviour change, from a national response to a more decentralized response and to increasing 
involvement of NGOs and network of people living with HIV / AIDS. 
1.3 The National AIDS Control Programme  Phase-III has been introduced with the aim to halt and reverse the AIDS 
epidemic in India over the five year period, i.e., 2007-2012. The programme hopes to achieve this through a four 
pronged strategy: 
z Prevent infection through saturation of coverage of high-risk groups with Targ eted Interventions (TI) and 
scaled up interventions for the general population. 
z Provide greater care, support and treatment to larger  number of People Living with HIV / AIDS (PLHA). 
z Strengthen the infrastructure systems and human resources in prevention, care, support and treatment at the 
district, State and National levels. 
z Strengthen the nationwide Strategic Information Management System to help track the epidemic and 
identify pockets of infection. 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
2.1  The Committee takes note of the trend of utilization of funds by the Department during the first three years of the 
Eleventh Plan period:- 
(Rs in crore) 
Year Allocation RE Exp. 
at BE stage    
2007 -08 815.00 953.89 917.59 
2008-09 1100.00 1123.36 1032.09 
2009-10 1100.00 980.15 961.65 
2010-11 1435.00   
  
 There has been optimum utilization of allocated funds under NACP III so far. The only exception is that 
during 2008-09 inspite of margin al increase at the RE stage, pace of ut ilization at the end of the year was not 
very satisfactory with Rs. 91.00 crore remaining unspent at the end of the year. 
2.2 Regulation of release of funds to the State AIDS Control Societies due to availability of considerable balances 
with them has been cited as the main reason for this saving. On a specific query in this regard, the Committee was 

informed that opening balance amounting to Rs. 219.55 crore was available with SACS as on 1st April, 2008. Position 
was similar with opening balance of Rs. 238.68 crore being available at the beginning of 2009-10 also. A comparative 
analysis of State-wise figures during 2008-09 and 2009-10 indicates that main defaulter State AIDS Control Societies 
remained unchanged. Following details are self-explanatory:- 
 (Rs. in crore) 
SACS 2008-09 2009-10 
Opening Balance Opening Balance  
Andhra Pradesh SACS 25.96 37.37 
Karnataka SACS 14.74 21.70 
Maharashtra SACS 22.11 34.41 
Nagaland SACS 10.05 12.97 
Tamil Nadu SACS 17.18 13.71 
Uttar Pradesh SACS 21.98 9.35 
Delhi SACS 10.78 12.38 
  
2.3 The Committee was informed that due to action taken by NACO, quantum of unspent balance has gradually 
declined over the year and the closing balance with the SACS at the end of 2009-10 was only Rs. 128.84 crore. 
2.4 The Committee appreciates that with focused interven tion of NACO, there is a considerable decline in 
unspent balances available with the Societies. The Commi ttee would, however, like to point out that availability 
of unspent balance with some SACS, like Karnataka SACS (Rs. 11.34 crore), Tamil Nadu (Rs. 8.40 crore) and 
West Bengal (Rs. 8.99 crore) is st ill quite high. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to 
introduce stricter monitoring mechanis m and financial discipline so that  funds do not get accumulated and 
remain unutilized. 
2.5 The Committee was informed that there were constr aints being faced by these Societies. These included 
structural issues like no supportive structure below State level which has been resolved by forming District AIDS 
Prevention & Control Units, especially in high priority district s to coordinate the activities at district level. The second 
constraint relates to personnel viz. large vacancies at SACS, non- availability of qualified staff and weak capacity of 
State personnel. These have been resolved by authorizing the States for contractual appointments, relaxation in either 
qualification or experience on case to  case basis and providing more attractive remuneration package. The third 
problem area was that of training and capacity building issues for which the Department has made training and capacity 
building as one of the components of the programme with de velopment of training modules and establishment of State 
Training and Resource Centres. Last problem area was weak monitoring of SACS, poor financial management and 
reporting, and large outstanding balances on account of advan ces to peripheral units. The Department has stated that 
regular monitoring of activities by NACO is being done to identify the bottlenecks and help Societies in resolving 
them. Further, Computerized Project Management System (CPFM S) is used in all SACS to monitor financial progress. 
To address outstan-ding balance problems, NACO is now impl ementing e-payments of releases to SACS and insisting 
SACS for e-payment to peripheral units. 

2.6 The Committee would, however, like to point out that th ese efforts need to be sustained till the elimination 
of all the problem areas being faced QY different States. The Committee is constrained to observe that there was 
downward revision of funds at the RE stage during 20 09-10. The Committee does not find any merit in the 
justification putforth by the Department  that across the board cut resulted in the downward revision of funds. 
In the Committee’s opinion, opening ba lance of Rs. 238.68 crore at the beginning of 2009-10 seems to be the 
main reason for reduction of allo cated funds during the year. The Commi ttee would like to point out that 
various components under NACP deserve to be pursued vi gorously and any cut in funds for the same would 
severely hamper the ongoing fight against the deadly disease. 
2.7  The allocation projected by the Department for 2010 -11 was Rs. 1494.43 crore which was restricted to Rs. 
1435.00 crore by the Planning Commissio n. Significant component of capita l expenditure for establishing Blood 
Banks in 4 Metro cities, viz., Kolkata, Delhi, Mumbai and Chennai woul d be adversely affected as the allocated 
domestic budget support woul d not be available and the Department would be seeking enhanced allocation 
therefor. 
III. ROLE OF NGOs  
3.1 The Committee understands that NACO identifies NGOs th rough an elaborate mechanism for implementation of 
Targeted Interventions (TI) by SACS . In response to a query regarding blacklisted NGOs, the Committee has been 
informed that during 2007, 176 NGOs implementing TI were discontinued to restructur e the TI programme in the 
country. In 2008, 21 NGOs implementing TI were discontinued based on their poor performance. It has been stated that 
the performance of TI NGOs (both physical and financial) is evaluated by external experts to comply with World Bank 
norms. The performance evaluation is done against a set of  performance indicators already agreed upon during the 
contract. As regards details of the unspent balances avai lable with these blacklisted NGOs and the action taken to 
recover the same, the Committee has been apprised that as per information available from 13 States, an amount of Rs 
16.65 lakhs has been recovered out of Rs 37.91 lakhs r ecoverable from 47 NGOs terminated during 2007 and 2008. 
Action has been initiated with respect to the recovery of Rs 21.26 1akhs by carrying out internal audit and necessary 
action as mentioned in the contract norms. 
3.2 The Committee is dismayed to note that even after abou t two years, the Department has not been able to 
recover the unspent funds available with the discontinued NGOs. There appears to some slackness on the part of 
the Department and the other implementing agencies. Fu rther, the fact that the Department has information 
only from 13 States, is an indicator of poor monitoring  and control. The Committee would, accordingly, like to 
have a complete updated status till 2009-10 on this inter-alia containing the issues lik e contract norms fixed for 
NGOs, their selection criteria, number of blacklisted/disc ontinued NGOs - State-wise alongwith officials in the 
Government set-up held responsible, if  any, for poor monitoring/selection , unspent funds available with such 
NGOs, amount recovered and the reasons for delay in recovering the same. The Committee would also 
recommend imposing severe penalties on NGOs which indulge in fraud or financial embezzlement. 
3.3  The Committee apprehends that the discontinued/blacklisted NGOs may also resurface again by changing 
their name or place of work. The Committee would like to  be apprised about the specific steps taken by the 
Department to thwart any such attemp ts by such NGOs and share with it such instances, if any, when it has 
been successful in preventing re-entry of such NGOs in the NACO network. 
3.4 The Committee observes that achievement level of va rious components under NACP during the first three 
years of the Eleventh Plan period ha s been more or less satisfactory. Sign ificant achievement has been reported 
under treatment of new STI cases and persons living wi th HIV/ AIDS, setting up of ART Centres, Community 
Care Centres and Integrated Counselli ng and Testing Centres. However, th e same cannot be said about other 

components. Against 220 lakh persons to be counseled and tested at the ICTC every year, target has remained 
between 46.00 lakh to 85.00 lakh and that too, has remained unaccomplished. 
3.5 The Committee is constrained to observe that the ac hievement level under many of the physical targets set 
during 2009-10 has been far from satisfactory. There ar e instances of severe under-  achievements under the 
components like --- Setting new core group targeted interventions; setting  up new bridge population targeted 
interventions; setting up new Blood Component Separation Units; setting  up new District Level Blood Banks 
etc. The Committee fails to understand that under such circumstances how the Department has utilized more 
than 98 % of the funds during 2009-10  without achieving the satisfactory level of achievement under many of 
the physical targets. The Department n eeds to understand that it is good to achieve financial targets but what is 
more important is that achievement of the financial targets should be commensurate with the achievement of the 
set physical targets. The same is a pparently missing here. Under such circumstances, the Committee has serious 
doubts over the planning and th e subsequent execution strategies of most  of the components of the Programme. 
The Committee can only infer that ei ther the funds sought have been mi scalculated or the Department has 
pumped in more money under certain components running  successfully whereby it could show a higher 
percentage of utilization of allocated funds. The Department needs to clarify the same. 
IV. SETTING UP OF NEW BLOOD COMPONENT SEPARATION UNITS (BCSUs)  
4.1  The progress reported during the Eleventh Plan period so far under the target of setting up of new Blood 
Component Separation Units has been very discouraging. Out of 162 such units targeted to be set up, during the first 
three years of the Plan period only 47 units could be set up. As informed by the Department, the reasons for targeted 
units not being set up are on account of non-compliance by the States to the requirements as laid down under the 
provisions of Drugs and Cosmetics Act for setting up of Blood Component Separation Units (BCSUs). This includes 
infrastructural requirement of 7 rooms in an area of 150 sq.mts and availability of manpower trained in Blood 
Component Separation, to be undertaken by States. It was also clarified that under the Programme, 131 Blood 
Component Separation Units are fully functional and there are 33 more units to be set up in the last two years of the 
Eleventh Plan period. 
4.2 The Committee is constrained to observe that the data made available to the Committee through the 
response to a query made twice reveals that the Department has fixed a target of 162 for setting up of new Blood 
Component Separation Units by the e nd of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee notes that no target was fixed for 
the first year, i.e., 2007-08, and for 2008-09 and 2009-10, 40 BCSU s each were kept as targets. However, a 
cumulative achievement of only 47 BCSU s could be made till February 2010. Out of the total target of 162 units 
for the Eleventh Plan period, a total of 115 more such units are required to be set up during the last two years of 
the Eleventh Plan period. The Committee would like the same to be clarified. 
V. SETTING UP OF NEW DISTRICT LEVEL BLOOD BANKS  
5.1 The Committee is given to understand that at present, 783 low volume blood banks are functioning in various 
districts of the country. During the planning of NACP Phase - III, an assess ment was carried out about the requirement 
of blood banks in the country. Accordingly, a target of setting up of 39 Blood Banks in newly created districts was kept 
in NACP - III. The States which are having maximum shor tfall of low volume blood banks in districts are Uttar 
Pradesh and Jharkhand. 
5.2 The Committee notes that against the target of setting up of 39 Blood Banks during the Eleventh Plan, a target of 
only 15 Blood Banks was fixed during the first three years of the Plan. Further, against an already low target of 15 
Blood Banks, only 11 Banks could be set upto February, 2010. When enquired about the reasons for the same, the 
Department has stated that against the target of setting up of Blood Banks in the 39 newly created districts with support 

under NACP III, 10 districts have obtained the license to operate as a Blood Bank in district level hospitals. Out of the 
remaining 29 districts, in 6 districts, necessary requireme nts as per provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act have 
been provided and these blood banks are waiting for joint inspection from State Drug Control Authorities for issuance 
of licenses. The constraints in setting up the blood banks in these districts are non availability of adequate 
infrastructure, manpower and delay in issuance of license. 23 districts are not having a district hospital of their own. 
The matter is being followed up with the State Governments from time to time. In the remaining districts, the blood 
banks will be set up only after the conditions are fulfilled as per the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act. 
5.3  The Committee is dismayed at the fact that the Depa rtment has not been able to take up the matter of 
setting up of the district level blood ba nks with a sense of urgency. The Depart ment itself is aware that these 39 
Blood Banks have been identified on  the basis of an assessment of urge nt requirement in underserved areas. 
Hence, a delay in setting up of the blood  banks as envisaged, is against Depa rtment’s obligations to see that the 
facilities reach these underserved areas.  Most of the reasons cited for the de lay are non-availability of adequate 
infrastructure, manpower and delay in issuance of license. The Department n eeds to play a pro-active role by 
taking up the matter with the concerned State Governments as well as the agencies at an appropriate level to 
expedite the procedural form alities. The Department should also co nsider providing appropriate additional 
funds, if required, for infrastructure and manpower related matters so that there is no  delay due to financial 
constraints. 
5.4  The Committee also recommends to the Department to take special notice of the underserved districts of 
Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand. The Commi ttee also hopes that the Departme nt would keep on assessing the 
requirements of Blood Banks based on actual needs in various States due to migration and other issues. 
5.5 The Committee is given to understand that a provis ion of Rs. 25.00 crore has been made for 2010-11 for 
establishing Blood Banks in 4 Metro cities, i.e.Kolkata, Delhi, Mumbai and Chennai as Centres of Excellence. These 
banks will have state-of-the-art facilities with 100 per cent blood components preparation and a capacity to process 
more than 100,000 units of blood annually. 
5.6 In reply to a query regarding the progress in this re gard the Committee is informed that the respective State 
Governments have confirmed the availability of land for the proposed Blood Banks. NACO has selected Design DPR 
Consultants who have submitted their preliminary designs for Delhi, Chennai and Kolkata site of the Metro Blood 
Banks, which are in the process of appr oval. During the year 2010-11, the construction of these metro blood banks is 
proposed to be initiated for which a provision of Rs.25.00 crore has been requested for. 
5.7 The Committee welcomes this new initiative of the Department for establishing four Metro Blood Banks as 
Centres of Excellence. However, th e Committee is unhappy to note the sl ow progress of the Department in 
realizing this initiative which has been pending since 2008-09. These blood banks would not only act as model 
blood banks with latest equipments a nd technology but would al so be of great help in meeting the ever rising 
demands of these metro cities. The Committee however no tes from the records available with it that no 
deadlines have been set regarding ma king the same functional. Keeping in mind the delay already made in 
implementation of this initiative, the Committee recommends to the Departme nt to have a targeted approach in 
making the four metro blood banks functional at the earliest. The Committee would also like to draw the 
attention of the Department to th e undue delay in the operationalisatio n of model Blood Bank at Tirupati. 
Infrastructure for the Blood Bank has already been pr ovided by the State Govern ment. The Secretary assured 
the Committee that action for sending the equipment for the Blood Bank would be taken immediately. 
 
 

VI. INTEGRATED COUNSELLING AND TESTING CENTRES (ICTC)  
6.1 The Committee notes that the Eleventh Plan target under this component is 75 lakh mothers to be counseled and 
tested per year. However, the target has been kept very lo w during the Plan period so far, and even that remained 
unachieved as indicated below:- 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Target Achievement Target Achievement Target Achievement 
52.7 35.1lakhs 56.2 46.31 lakhs 70.15 47.83 lakhs 
lakhs  lakhs  lakhs  
  
6.2 It was clarified that the annual targets are fixed in consultation with SACS depending on the achievement of the 
previous year, expansion plans for the current year and the ov erall capacity. The target of 75 lakh/year is for the end of 
NACP-3 i.e. March 2012. During 2009-10 itself a target of 70.15 lakh/year was fixed which is almost close to the 
NACP-3 (Eleventh Plan) target of 75 lakh/year. Hence targets are not kept lower than what was envisaged. It was 
further stated that the targets for counselling and testing of pregnant women have been substantially achieved. The 
achievement of results under this programme is linked with in stitutional delivery. Institutional delivery is low in some 
States, particularly in North India; which was the reason for not fully achieving the targets. 
6.3 The Committee is not convinced with the evasive reply of the Department. In the opinion of the 
Committee, while fixing targets for some component, one has to realistically assess all the hurdles/problem areas 
vis-a-vis the abilities of the system to deliver and achieve the same. Before fixing a target the Department should 
have taken into account all the relevant factors. Low le vel of institutional delivery  being cited as the negative 
factor amounts to criticizing its own planning. 
6.4 This needs focused attention of the Department, sin ce the Department has itself  informed the occurrence 
of rising trends of HIV prevalence among pregnant women in the low prev alence/ vulnerable States of North 
India. The Committee is of the opinio n that the Department can hope for achieving the set targets by proper 
planning and execution. It needs to strengthen its network of ICTCs and focus on strong Information, Education 
and Communication activities in such States to motivate institutional deliveries. 
VII. PERSONS TO BE COUNSELED AND TESTED AT  ICTCs (Target of 220 lakh per year) 
7.1 The Committee is given to understand that the overall target of 220 lakh/ year people to be counseled and tested 
in ICTCs comprises of all clients who come to an ICTC incl uding pregnant women. The overall target of 220 lakh/year 
people to be counseled and tested in ICTCs is for the end of NACP-III i.e. March 2012. Following is the achievement 
level under the component during the Eleventh Plan so far:- 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Target Achievement Target Achievement Target Achievement 
99.5 78.4 lakhs 122.9 102.18lakhs 155.34 127.47 lakhs 
lakhs  lakhs  lakhs  (till end of 

     F e b . )  
  
7.2 The Committee is informed that the Department is on th e right track of setting up the target of 220 lakh/year by 
the end of March 2012. However, it also admitted to slight underachievement of target which was on account of 
shortage of kits due to quality issues as well as shortage of laboratory technicians in States such as Orissa. 
7.3 In response to a query regarding the shortage of kits, the Committee was informed that the quality issues as 
regards HIV test kits have been addressed and as of now they stand resolved. The shortage of lab technicians in States 
such as Orissa is on account of less number of medical colleges that offer the DMLT course, which is a minimum 
qualification required for employment as lab technician in an ICTC. It has been informed that as per the guidelines of 
the National Accreditation Board for Te sting and Calibration Laboratories (NABL), the qualifications for employment 
as Laboratory Technician in an ICTC have been revised now and the same will ensure the availability of adequate staff 
in ICTCs in States such as Orissa. 
7.4  The Committee is happy to note that  the quality issues related to HIV test kits have been resolved. The 
Committee hopes that the Department would keep a close mo nitoring of the quality related aspects of the kits so 
that such problems do not recur. Th e Committee also appreciates that some  concrete steps have been taken to 
solve the issue of shortage of lab t echnicians by way of revising the gu idelines of NABL. The Committee hopes 
that with concerted efforts like these, the Department would see an increase in the achievement level. 
VIII.  ART CENTRES 
8.1  Achievement level with regard to setting up of ART Centres during the Eleventh Plan period has been 
satisfactory. There are nearly 9 lakh patients registered for ART in the country. This number is gradually increasing as 
more and more HIV +ve persons become eligible for treatment. Currently 269 ART centres are fully functional and 
providing treatment to nearly 3,02,896 persons requiring ART without any waiting time. Usually 30 to 35% of HIV+ve 
persons require ART based on eligibility criteria. 
8.2 The Committee in its previous reports has been actively taking up the issue of availability of the second line of 
treatment so that the sufferings of patients, who have been receiving anti-retroviral treatment (ART) under the National 
AIDS Control Programme and have become drug resistant, can be lessened to some degree. The Committee has been 
given to understand that patients who fail on first line ART are referred from 269 ART Centres to the linked 10 Centers 
of Excellence. Such patients are further investigated to assess requirement of second line ART. These Centres of 
Excellence are equipped for such investig ations and starting second line ART. Curr ently 1051 patients are stated to be 
on second line ART. All patients who are seeking ART from government supported centres, persons below poverty 
line, widows and children are eligible to get second line ART free of cost. The number of Centres of Excellence will be 
increased in the coming years to commensurate with the need. 
8.3  The Committee is satisfied that at present the number of patients undergoing second line of ART is within 
the manageable range. However, the Committee is of the considered opinion that the number of Centres of 
Excellence being limited to just 10 where the patients can have treat-ment faci lities, the patients, especially the 
poor people residing far away from th ese Centres, will have to spend a lot of money for transportation for 
visiting these Centres regularly. The Committee thinks that with the facili ties of ART Centres expanding, more 
number of patients requiring second line of treatment is  going to increase consid erably. Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends to the Department to have a realis tic assessment of the requirement of new Centres of 
Excellence with a view to make the facilities for treatment available within reasonable distance of the patients. 
IX. NEW  INITIATIVES  

9.1 The Committee is aware that the Department had taken up the following new initiatives during  
2008-09: 
z  Setting up of National Blood Transfusion Authority.  
z Setting up of a Plasma Fractionation Plant. 
 The draft Cabinet Note on setting up of National Blood Tr ansfusion Authority was prepared and sent to various 
Departments for their comments. Based on the comments received, the draft has been revised and is being followed up. 
In respect of Plasma Fractionation Centre, it has been informed that as recommended by the Expert Working Group, it 
has peen decided to adopt “Cohn n Chromatography” technology for this project. An EOI for Project Management 
Consultant (PMC) will be issued by March 2010. 
9.2  The Committee is pained at the slow progress in esta blishing the National Bl ood Transfusion Authority 
and setting up of a Plasma Fractionation Plant. Both these initiatives are very important. It is very disappointing 
that the same still remains on pape r even after two years. The Committee would like to be informed about the 
reasons for the inordinate delay and the deadline by wh ich the same would be set up. It recommends to the 
Department to make all conceivable efforts to achieve the aforesaid targets at the earliest. 
X. ADOLESCENCE  EDUCATION  PROGRAMME  (AEP)  
10.1  The Committee has been given to understand that in 2005, NACO in collaboration with the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development started the implem entation of the Adolescence Education Programme (AEP) targeting students 
in IX and XI standards. The Programme is a key intervention to build life skills of the ad olescents to enable them to 
cope with negative peer pressure, develop positive behaviour and prevent HIV infections. In 2007, the Programme was 
suspended by eight States due to the concerns raised against the content of the material used under the Programme. The 
matter was also taken up by the Committee on Petitions, Rajya Sabha in 2007 which recommended revision in the 
material. Since then, the material has been reviewed by an expert committee constituted by NACO in consultation with 
M/HRD and NCERT. The revised material was disseminated to States. As a follow-up some States have completed the 
adaptation process of the material including Andhra Pradesh,  Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Delhi, Goa, Haryana, Tamil 
Nadu, Kerala, Orissa, Punjab, West Bengal and Jharkha nd. The Committee is informed that Andhra Pradesh, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Orissa, Punjab, West Bengal and Jharkhand have started the 
implementation of the Adolescence Educ ation Programme (AEP) as per the revised material which was adapted by 
these States. Assam is likely to start implementation as per the revised programme from the year 2010-11. However, 
Delhi and Haryana are yet to implement the Programme as per the revised material. Kerala has resumed the 
implementation of Adolescence Education Programme after ha ving series of consultations to seek consensus on the 
revised toolkit, after incorporating the changes, adapted a new module and have organised training of resource persons 
in four districts. The States of Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan, and Uttar 
Pradesh were approached for implementing the revised AEP. The revised material was disseminated to these States in 
July 2008 with the direction to adapt the revised material and implement the AEP. However, the programme continues 
to be suspended in these States. 
10.2  As per latest figures made available to the Committee, during 2009-10, about 47000 schools were covered across 
the country under the Adolescence E ducation Programme implemented by NACO in collaboration with the State 
Education department against the target of 43956 schools. 
10.3  The Committee is happy to note that the Department  in collaboration with the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (MHRD) has been able to al lay the apprehensions of  many of the States w.r.t. 
implementation of the Programme. The Committee fully sh ares the concerns of the various State Governments 
regarding suitability of the contents of  the Programme due to various demographic and cultural diversities that 

exist in the country. However, the Commi ttee is of the opinion, that the Programme, which aims at generating 
awareness amongst adolescents under its p reventive strategy, is the need of th e hour against this deadly disease. 
With changes in the study material and new modules already introduced under the revised AEP which take care 
of the concerns of the States, the Committee hopes th at the Department needs to  make concerted efforts 
alongwith MHRD to bring the remainin g States on board where the Programm e is still under suspension. The 
Committee may be informed about the efforts made by the Department in this regard. 
XI. NEW STRATEGIES  
11.1  Setting up of District AIDS Preven tion and Control Unit (DAPCU) ---- Of 156 districts where setting up of 
DAPCU has been sanctioned, DAPCU has been set up in 151 districts. Barring Bihar (2) and Haryana (1), all States 
have set up DAPCUs in Category ‘A’ dist ricts as per the requirement. With rega rd to ‘B’ category districts, Assam (1) 
and Bihar (1) have yet to set up DAPCUs. 
11.2  Scheme of link workers in rural area s of category A and B districts -  The activity has to be implemented in 
all category A and B districts. A total of 187 category A and B districts are to be covered. During 2009-10, the scheme 
was initiated in 126 districts. For the FY 2010-11, it is proposed to expand the programme in another 61 districts. 
11.3  Collaboration with NRHM : 
z In 2009-10, there were 5135 stand alone ICTCs model and 930 ICTCs in 24x7 PHCs under facility 
integrated model in collaboration with NRHM. It is proposed to set up ICTCs in all 24x7 facilities (PHCs& 
CHCs) in phases. For the year 2010-11 discussion are being held with States to finalize number of 
additional facilities to be strengthened for ICTCs. ICTCs also provide HIV-TB Collaborative services and 
cross referrals with the RNTCP programme. The monitoring process of cross referral is proposed to be 
strengthened to reduce missed opportunities. 
z Provide PPTCT training to doctors, nurses at ICTCs & close monitoring for assured access to services. 
z Currently 230 ART centers are functional with provision of human resources, equipment, training & 
logistics at identified facilities. Consultation with SACS are ongoing to decide the number of additional 
ART centers to be opened in year 2010-11. 
z Presently 300 Link ART centers are func tional to facilitate delivery of ART drugs nearer to residence of 
stabilized PLHAs. Discussions with states are ongoing to decide the number of new link ART centers to be 
opened in year 2010-11. 
z For STI services at PHCs & CHCs, NACO is coordinating with NRHM and has proposed to procure 
colour-coded drug kits for the PHCs and CHCs under NRHM. Proposals are being developed for joint 
training plan and operational guidelines for doctors & lab. Technicians and common treatment protocols. 
z Assist in skill up-gradation & quality monitoring of blood storage centers in FRUs. 
z Proposal to include HIV related service in IPHS facility accreditation systems. 
z Upgrading ASHA training modules on HIV related contents & improving community awareness & 
referrals through ASHA’s. 
z Exploring setting up of Oral Substitution Therapy clin ics in identified hospitals for which protocols have 
been developed by NACO. 

z Addressing stigma & discrimination against PLHA at public health facilities through communication 
campaigns with a component on service providers & health facility. 
z Joint Condom promotion through Social Marketing Organizations in high fertility & high HIV prevalence 
districts. 
11.4  Preferred private provider scheme for management of sexually transmitted infections among high risk 
groups - During 2009-10, 4533 preferred private providers were id entified by targeted interventions projects in their 
project area so as to provide quality STI care near to the high risk population. All these preferred private providers have 
been trained in syndromic case management and drugs will be  provided by  TI projects. During 2010-11, the scheme 
will be continued with a strong element of supportive supervision and monitoring. 
11.5 The Committee is happy to note the progress made with regard to the new initiatives started in 2009-10. 
The Committee is of the opinion that setting up of the Di strict AIDS Prevention and Control Units would fill up 
the necessary gap required as a support ive structure below the state level to  coordinate the activities at the 
district level. The Committee would recommend expanding the same to more districts in the near future so as to 
implement the Programme effectively. 
11.6  The Committee notes that the Link Work Scheme is an intensive rural-based intervention reaching out to 
the marginalized groups which remain uncovered even  after the expansion of urban based prevention 
programmes. However, the Committee notes that the same is being implemented only in 18 States as of now. The 
Committee recommends to the Department to assess the need to cover the re maining States and closely monitor 
the scheme as the success of this scheme is crucial for achieving the goal of halting and reversing the epidemic of 
AIDS. 
11.7 The Committee welcomes Department’s collaboration of it s various activities with the backbone of India’s 
healthcare delivery system in rural areas - the NRHM. The Committee hopes that the Department would keep in 
close touch with the Department of Health and Fa mily Welfare and explore more avenues to use its 
infrastructure and manpower under NRHM to further its various activities. 
11.8  The Committee hopes that the Department would expand the preferred privat e provider scheme for 
management of sexually transmitted infections among high risk groups from existing 11  States to all the States 
having High Risk Groups in 2010-11. However, the Co mmittee recommends close and strict monitoring of the 
scheme as the numbers may be fudged by the provider to get the token amount of Rs. 50 which is being given as 
consultation. 
XII.  NATIONAL  PEDIATRIC  INITIATIVE  
12.1  The Committee has been given to understand that at present there may be around 70,000 HIV+ children in the 
country. After launch of National Pediatric Initiative in November 2006, there has been rapid identification of HIV+ 
children and currently nearly 60 thousand children have  been registered at ART centres in the country. The 
predominant mode of HIV transmission in children is stat ed to be from HIV+ pregnant women to new born children. 
To prevent this transmission, Prevention of Parent to Child Transmission (PPTCTC) programme is being implemented 
which envisages counseling and motivation of pregnant women attending ante-natal clinics to opt for HIV testing, 
identification of HIV+ pregnant women and providing them  ART or prophylactic treatment based on immunological 
status. During the year 2008, 21349 HIV+ pregnant women were detected and 10613 (49%) mother-baby pairs were 
given prophylactic treatment. In the year 2009, 19357 HIV+ pregnant women were detected and 11489 (59%) mother-
baby pairs were given prophylactic treatment. 

12.2 In response to a query regarding the status of HIV positive children in the High Risk States of Andhra Pradesh 
and Tamil Nadu, the Committee is informed that till January 2010, 13793 HIV positive children have been registered 
and 3346 eligible HIV+ children are on pediatric ART in Andhra Pradesh whereas, 7847 HIV positive children have 
been registered and 2430 eligible HIV positive children are on pediatric ART in Tamil Nadu. The Committee is also 
given to understand that rising trends of HIV prevalence among pregnant women are noted in some of the low 
prevalence/vulnerable States of North India such as Gujarat, West Bengal, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. 
12.3  The Committee is very concerned at  the increasing number of HIV + ch ildren and rising trend of HIV 
prevalence in pregnant women in lo w prevalence/ vulnerable States of North India. However, the Committee 
considers it to be due to Departmen t’s proactive approach in identifying and tracking the HIV+ mothers or it 
may be an indication of rise of the disease in the low prevalence States. The Committee would recommend to the 
Department to keep a strict vigil on  rising trends of HIV prevalence amon g pregnant women in low prevalence 
States and take immediate steps to contain the same. The Committee may be informed of the specific steps taken 
by the Department in this regard. 
12.4  The Committee is pained to imagin e the plight of the small children who would be requiring the ART 
treatment in the long run. The Committee recommends to the Department to intensify its approach to detect the 
HIV + children by targeting the HIV + mothers and en suring full care and support to them. The Committee 
may be informed about the status of all HIV + children in India, State-wise. 
12.5 The Committee is very concerned for the welfare of the HIV patients a nd their dependents. On a specific 
query regarding any initiative taken by the Departme nt to come up with a rehabilitation policy for AIDS 
affected patients and their dependent s, especially those of the weaker s ections, in consultation with other 
Ministries/agencies, the Committee is informed that th ere is no scheme to provide rehabilitation to AIDS 
affected patients under NACP-III. 
12.6  The Committee does not find the Department’s response to be a healthy one. Even if there is no such 
scheme under NACP - III, the Department can take up the id ea further with other Ministries like Social Justice 
and Empowerment, Finance etc. In the opinion of the Committee providing financial security to the patients and 
their dependents will be a boon in Department’s fight against the epidemic and he lp in containing it. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to the Department to take a proactive approach in this regard. 
XIII.  INFORMATION  EDUCATION  AND  COMMUNICATION  (IEC) 
13.1  The Committee appreciates the various interventions initiated for carrying out IEC campaigns, theme-
wise campaigns for promoting HIV couns eling etc., Multi-media campaigns, b ooklets for High Risk Groups etc. 
Red Ribbon Express, a specially design ed exhibition train can be rightly considered as World’s largest mass 
mobilization against HIV/ AIDS. The Committee would, however, like to draw the attention of the Department 
towards reports received from time to time on the pr ojected claims about successf ul treatment of HIV/AIDS. 
However, apprehensions were raised by some Members dur ing the deliberation of th e meeting as regards the 
presence of quacks coming up in the name of Indian medicines promoting that AIDS is 100 percent curable. The 
Committee was informed that the Depart ment has very strong IEC component in their intervention for fighting 
HIV / AIDS. The Committee was apprised of the Red Ri bbon Express Programme launched by the Department 
across the country, aiming at spreading knowledge and awareness about the disease. 
13.2  The Committee is of the opinion that  mere presence of statutory provisi ons for prohibiting quacks is not 
sufficient. The Committee strongly recommends that there is  need to combat all such myths by providing the 
masses with the actual information in this regard by involving the State Governments. 

 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ---- AT A GLANCE 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 There has been optimum utilization of allocated funds under NACP III so far. The only exception is that 
during 2008-09 inspite of margin al increase at the RE stage, pace of ut ilization at the end of the year was not 
very satisfactory with Rs. 91.00 crore remaining unspent at the end of the year.  (Para 2.1) 
 The Committee appreciates that with  focused intervention of NACO th ere is a considerable decline in 
unspent balances available with the Societies. The Commi ttee would, however, like to point out that availability 
of unspent balance with some SACS, like Karnataka SACS (Rs. 11.34 crore), Tamil Nadu (Rs. 8.40 crore) and 
West Bengal (Rs. 8.99 crore) is st ill quite high. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to 
introduce stricter monitoring mechanis m and financial discipline so that  funds do not get accumulated and 
remain unutilized.    (Para 2.4) 
 The Committee would, however, like to point out that these efforts need to be sustained till the elimination 
of all the problem areas being faced by different States. The Committee is co nstrained to observe that there was 
downward revision of funds at the RE stage during 20 09-10. The Committee does not find any merit in the 
justification put forth by the Depart ment that across the board cut resulte d in the downward revision of funds. 
In the Committee’s opinion, opening ba lance of Rs. 238.68 crore at the beginning of 2009-10 seems to be the 
main reason for reduction of allo cated funds during the year. The Commi ttee would like to point out that 
various components under NACP deserve to be pursued vi gorously and any cut in funds for the same would 
severely hamper the ongoing fight against the deadly disease. (Para 2.6) 
 The allocation projected by the Department for 2010 -11 was Rs. 1494.43 crore which was restricted to Rs. 
1435.00 crore by the Planning Commissio n. Significant component of capita l expenditure for establishing Blood 
Banks in 4 Metro cities, viz., Kolkata, Delhi, Mumbai and Chennai woul d be adversely affected as the allocated 
domestic budget support woul d not be available and the Department would be seeking enhanced allocation 
therefor.      (Para 2.7) 
III. ROLE  OF  NGOs 
 The Committee is dismayed to note that even after ab out two years, the Department has not been able to 
recover the unspent funds available with the discontinued NGOs. There appears to some slackness on the part of 
the Department and the other implementing agencies. Fu rther, the fact that the Department has information 
only from 13 States, is an indicator of poor monitoring  and control. The Committee would, accordingly, like to 
have a complete updated status till 2009-10 on this inter-alia containing the issues lik e contract norms fixed for 
NGOs, their selection criteria, number of blacklisted/disc ontinued NGOs - State-wise alongwith officials in the 
Government set-up held responsible, if  any, for poor monitoring/selection , unspent funds available with such 
NGOs, amount recovered and the reasons for delay in recovering the same. The Committee would also 
recommend imposing severe penalties on NGOs which indulge in fraud or financial embezzlement.  (Para 3.2) 
 The Committee apprehends that the discontinued/blac klisted NGOs may also resurface again by changing 
their name or place of work. The Committee would like to  be apprised about the specific steps taken by the 
Department to thwart any such attemp ts by such NGOs and share with it such instances, if any, when it has 
been successful in preventing re-entry of such NGOs in the NACO network.  (Para 3.3) 
 The Committee observes that achievement level of various components under NACP during the first three 
years of the Eleventh Plan period ha s been more or less satisfactory. Sign ificant achievement has been reported 

under treatment of new STI cases and persons living with HIV/AIDS, setting up of ART Centres, Community 
Care Centres and Integrated Counselli ng and Testing Centres. However, th e same cannot be said about other 
components. Against 220 lakh persons to be counseled and tested at the ICTC every year, target has remained 
between 46.00 lakh to 85.00 lakh and that too, has remained unaccomplished.  (Para 3.4) 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that the ac hievement level under many of the physical targets set 
during 2009-10 has been far from satisfactory. There ar e instances of severe under-  achievements under the 
components like - Setting new core gr oup targeted interventions; setting up new bridge population targeted 
interventions; setting up new Blood Component Separation Units; setting  up new District Level Blood Banks 
etc. The Committee fails to understand that under such circumstances how the Department has utilized more 
than 98 % of the funds during 2009-10  without achieving the satisfactory level of achievement under many of 
the physical targets. The Department n eeds to understand that it is good to achieve financial targets but what is 
more important is that achievement of the financial targets should be commensurate with the achievement of the 
set physical targets. The same is a pparently missing here. Under such circumstances, the Committee has serious 
doubts over the planning and th e subsequent execution strategies of most  of the components of the Programme. 
The Committee can only infer that ei ther the funds sought have been mi scalculated or the Department has 
pumped in more money under certain components running  successfully whereby it could show a higher 
percentage of utilization of allocated funds. The Department needs to clarify the same.  (Para 3.5) 
IV. SETTING UP OF NEW BLOOD COMPONENT SEPARATION UNITS (BCSUs) 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that the data made available to the Committee through the 
response to a query made twice reveals that the Department has fixed a target of 162 for setting up of new Blood 
Component Separation Units by the e nd of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee notes that no target was fixed for 
the first year, i.e., 2007-08, and for 2008-09 and 2009-10, 40 BC SUs each were kept as targets. However, a 
cumulative achievement of only 47 BCSU s could be made till February 2010. Out of the total target of 162 units 
for the Eleventh Plan period, a total of 115 more such units are required to be set up during the last two years of 
the Eleventh Plan period. The Committee would like the same to be clarified.  (Para 4.2) 
V. SETTING UP OF NEW DISTRICT LEVEL BLOOD BANKS 
 The Committee is dismayed at the fact that the Depa rtment has not been able to take up the matter of 
setting up of the district level blood ba nks with a sense of urgency. The Depart ment itself is aware that these 39 
Blood Banks have been identified on  the basis of an assessment of urge nt requirement in underserved areas. 
Hence, a delay in setting up of the blood  banks as envisaged, is against Depa rtment’s obligations to see that the 
facilities reach these underserved areas.  Most of the reasons cited for the de lay are non-availability of adequate 
infrastructure, manpower and delay in issuance of license. The Department n eeds to play a pro-active role by 
taking up the matter with the concerned State Governments as well as the agencies at an appropriate level to 
expedite the procedural form alities. The Department should also co nsider providing appropriate additional 
funds, if required, for infrastructure and manpower related matters so that there is no  delay due to financial 
constraints.    (Para 5.3) 
 The Committee also recommends to the Department to take special notice of the underserved districts of 
Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand. The Commi ttee also hopes that the Departme nt would keep on assessing the 
requirements of Blood Banks based on actual needs in various States due to migration and other issues.   
      (Para 5.4) 
 The Committee welcomes this new initiative of the De partment for establishing four Metro Blood Banks as 
Centres of Excellence. However, th e Committee is unhappy to note the sl ow progress of the Department in 

realizing this initiative which has been pending since 2008-09. These blood banks would not only act as model 
blood banks with latest equipments a nd technology but would al so be of great help in meeting the ever rising 
demands of these metro cities. The Committee however no tes from the records available with it that no 
deadlines have been set regarding ma king the same functional. Keeping in mind the delay already made in 
implementation of this initiative, the Committee recommends to the Departme nt to have a targeted approach in 
making the four metro blood banks functional at the earliest. The Committee would also like to draw the 
attention of the Department to th e undue delay in the operationalisatio n of model Blood Bank at Tirupati. 
Infrastructure for the Blood Bank has already been pr ovided by the State Govern ment. The Secretary assured 
the Committee that action for sending the equipment for the Blood Bank would be taken immediately.   
      (Para 5.7) 
VI. INTEGRATED COUNSELLING AND TESTING CENTRES (ICTC) 
 The Committee is not convinced with the evasive reply of the Department. In the opinion of the 
Committee, while fixing targets for some component, one has to realistically assess all the hurdles/problem areas 
vis-a-vis the abilities of the system to deliver and achieve the same. Before fixing a target the Department should 
have taken into account all the relevant factors. Low le vel of institutional delivery  being cited as the negative 
factor amounts to criticizing its own planning.    
      (Para 6.3) 
 This needs focused attention of the Department, sin ce the Department has itself  informed the occurrence 
of rising trends of HIV prevalence among pregnant women in the low prev alence/ vulnerable States of North 
India. The Committee is of the opinio n that the Department can hope for achieving the set targets by proper 
planning and execution. It needs to strengthen its network of ICTCs and focus on strong Information, Education 
and Communication activities in such States to motivate institutional deliveries.  (Para 6.4) 
VII. PERSONS TO BE COUNSELED AND TESTED AT  ICTCs (Target of 220 lakh per year) 
 The Committee is happy to note th at the quality issues related to HIV test kits have been resolved. The 
Committee hopes that the Department would keep a close mo nitoring of the quality related aspects of the kits so 
that such problems do not recur. Th e Committee also appreciates that some  concrete steps have been taken to 
solve the issue of shortage of lab t echnicians by way of revising the gu idelines of NABL. The Committee hopes 
that with concerted efforts like these, the Department would see an increase in the achievement level.  (Para 7.4) 
VIII.   ART  CENTRES 
 The Committee is satisfied that at present the number of patients undergoing second line of ART is within 
the manageable range. However, the Committee is of the considered opinion that the number of Centres of 
Excellence being limited to just 10 where the patients can have treatment facilities, th e patients, especially the 
poor people residing far away from th ese Centres, will have to spend a lot of money for transportation for 
visiting these Centres regularly. The Committee thinks that with the facili ties of ART Centres expanding, more 
number of patients requiring second line of treatment is  going to increase consid erably. Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends to the Department to have a realis tic assessment of the requirement of new Centres of 
Excellence with a view to make the facilities for treatment available within reasonable distance of the patients.  
      (Para 8.3) 
IX. NEW  INITIATIVES 
 The Committee is pained at the slow progress in es tablishing the National Bl ood Transfusion Authority 
and setting up of a Plasma Fractionation Plant. Both these initiatives are very important. It is very disappointing 

that the same still remains on pape r even after two years. The Committee would like to be informed about the 
reasons for the inordinate delay and the deadline by wh ich the same would be set up. It recommends to the 
Department to make all conceivable efforts to achieve the aforesaid targets at the earliest.  (Para 9.2) 
X. ADOLESCENCE EDUCATION PROGRAMME (AEP) 
 The Committee is happy to note that the Departme nt in collaboration with  the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (MHRD) has been able to al lay the apprehensions of  many of the States w.r.t. 
implementation of the Programme. The Committee fully sh ares the concerns of the various State Governments 
regarding suitability of the contents of  the Programme due to various demographic and cultural diversities that 
exist in the country. However, the Committee is of the opinion that the Programme, which aims at generating 
awareness amongst adolescents under its p reventive strategy, is the need of th e hour against this deadly disease. 
With changes in the study material and new modules already introduced under the revised AEP which take care 
of the concerns of the States, the Committee hopes th at the Department needs to  make concerted efforts 
alongwith MHRD to bring the remainin g States on board where the Programm e is still under suspension. The 
Committee may be informed about the efforts made by the Department in this regard.  (Para 10.3) 
XI. NEW  STRATEGIES 
 The Committee is happy to note th e progress made with regard to the new initiatives started in 2009-10. 
The Committee is of the opinion that setting up of the Di strict AIDS Prevention and Control Units would fill up 
the necessary gap required as a support ive structure below the State level to  coordinate the activities at the 
district level. The Committee would recommend expanding the same to more districts in the near future so as to 
implement the Programme effectively.  (Para 11.5) 
 The Committee notes that the Link Work Scheme is an intensive rural-based intervention reaching out to 
the marginalized groups which remain uncovered even  after the expansion of urban based prevention 
programmes. However, the Committee notes that the same is being implemented only in 18 States as of now. The 
Committee recommends to the Department to assess the need to cover the re maining States and closely monitor 
the scheme as the success of this scheme is crucial for achieving the goal of halting and reversing the epidemic of 
AIDS.      (Para 11.6) 
 The Committee welcomes Department’s collaboration of its various activities with the backbone of India’s 
healthcare delivery system in rural areas - the NRHM. The Committee hopes that the Department would keep in 
close touch with the Department of Health and Fa mily Welfare and explore more avenues to use its 
infrastructure and manpower under NRHM to further its various activities.  (Para 11.7) 
 The Committee hopes that the Department would expand the preferred privat e provider scheme for 
management of sexually transmitted infections among high risk groups from existing 11  States to all the States 
having High Risk Groups in 2010-11. However, the Co mmittee recommends close and strict monitoring of the 
scheme as the numbers may be fudged by the provider to get the token amount of Rs. 50 which is being given as 
consultation.     (Para 11.8) 
XII. NATIONAL  PEDIATRIC  INITIATIVE 
 The Committee is very concerned at the increasing number of HIV+children and rising trend of HIV 
prevalence in pregnant women in lo w prevalence/vulnerable States of No rth India. However, the Committee 
considers it to be due to Departmen t’s proactive approach in identifying and tracking the HIV+mothers or it 
may be an indication of rise of the disease in the low prevalence States. The Committee would recommend to the 
Department to keep a strict vigil on  rising trends of HIV prevalence amon g pregnant women in low prevalence 

States and take immediate steps to contain the same. The Committee may be informed of the specific steps taken 
by the Department in this regard.  (Para 12.3) 
 The Committee is pained to imagin e the plight of the small children who would be requiring the ART 
treatment in the long run. The Committee recommends to the Department to intensify its approach to detect the 
HIV+children by targeting the HIV+mothers and ensuri ng full care and support to them. The Committee may 
be informed about the status of all HIV+children in India, State-wise.  (Para 12.4) 
 The Committee is very concerned fo r the welfare of the HIV patients and their dependents. On a specific 
query regarding any initiative taken by the Departme nt to come up with a rehabilitation policy for AIDS 
affected patients and their dependent s, especially those of the weaker s ections, in consultation with other 
Ministries/agencies, the Committee is informed that th ere is no scheme to provide rehabilitation to AIDS 
affected patients under NACP-III.  (Para 12.5) 
 The Committee does not find the Department’s response to be a healthy one. Even if there is no such 
scheme under NACP - III, the Department can take up the id ea further with other Ministries like Social Justice 
and Empowerment, Finance etc. In the opinion of the Committee providing financial security to the patients and 
their dependents will be a boon in Department’s fight against the epidemic and he lp in containing it. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to the Department to take a proactive approach in this regard.  
      (Para 12.6) 
XIII.   INFORMATION  EDUCATION  AND  COMMUNICATION  (IEC) 
 The Committee appreciates the various intervention s initiated for carrying out IEC campaigns, theme-
wise campaigns for promoting HIV counselling etc., Multimed ia campaigns, booklets for High Risk Groups etc. 
Red Ribbon Express, a specially design ed exhibition train can be rightly considered as World’s largest mass 
mobilization against HIV/ AIDS. The Committee would, however, like to draw the attention of the Department 
towards reports received from time to time on the proj ected claims about successful treatment of HIV/ AIDS. 
However, apprehensions were raised by some Members dur ing the deliberation of th e meeting as regards the 
presence of quacks coming up in the name of Indian me dicines promoting that AIDS is 100 per cent curable. 
The Committee was informed that the Department has ve ry strong IEC component in their intervention for 
fighting HIV/ AIDS. The Committee was apprised of  the Red Ribbon Express Pr ogramme launched by the 
Department across the country, aiming at spreading knowledge and awareness about the disease.  (Para 13.1) 
 The Committee is of the opinion th at mere presence of statutory provisions for prohibiting quacks is not 
sufficient. The Committee strongly recommends that there is need to combat all such myths by providing 
the masses with the actual information in this regard by involving the State Governments.   (Para 13.2) 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VIII 
EIGHTH  MEETING 
(2009-10) 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 6th April, 2010 in Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri Amar Singh      -------         Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur  
 3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
 5. Shrimati Brinda Karat 
 6. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
  LOK  SABHA 
 7. Shri Ashok Argal 
 8. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
 9. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
 11. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai 
 12. Dr.(Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
 13. Shri N. Kristappa 
 14. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
 15. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
 16. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
 17. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
 18. Shrimati Meena Singh 
 19. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 20. Shri Ratan Singh 
  REPRESENTATIVES  FROM  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  AIDS  CONTROL 
 1.  Shri K. Chandramouli, Secretary 
 2. Ms. Aradhana Johri, Joint Secretary 
 3. Dr. S. Venkatesh, DDG 
 4. Dr. Mohd. Shaukat, ADG 
 5. Dr. Neeraj Dhingra, ADG 
 * * * 
 * * * 
  SECRETARIAT 

  Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
  Shri R. B. Gupta, Director 
  Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director 
  Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director 
  Shri Satis Mesra, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and informed them about the agenda of the 
meeting, i.e., examination of Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and taking 
oral evidence of the Secretaries of the Departments of H ealth and Family Welfare (NRH M Sector), Health Research 
and AIDS Control in connection therewith. 
3. * * * 
4. * * * 
5. * * * 
6. * * * 
7. * * * 
8. * * * 
9. * * * 
10.   Thereafter, the Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary and other officials of the Department of AIDS 
Control on the Demand for Grants (2010-11) pertaining to the Department. 
11.   A power-point presentation of the activities undertaken,  achievements of the Department during the last year and 
plans for the current year on various schemes and progr ammes for preventing and reducing HIV/AIDS undertaken by 
the Department was made. Members sought clarifications on the activities and achievements of the Department and 
deliberated on the adequacy or otherwise of budgetary allocations under different heads, manpower and infrastructure 
available with the Department. The Secretary and other officers of the Department replied to a few queries raised by the 
Members and assured to furnish detailed written replies to th ose queries, which remained unanswered, within a week’s 
time. 
12.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

IX 
NINTH  MEETING 
(2009-10) 
  The Committee met at 5.00 P.M. on Monday, the 26th April, 2010 in Room No. '63', First Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri Amar Singh      -------         Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
 3. Shrimati Brinda Karat 
  LOK  SABHA 
 4. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
 5. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
 7. Dr.(Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
 8. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
 9. Shri Datta Meghe 
 10. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
 11. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
 12. Shri M. K Raghavan 
 13. Shri Ratan Singh 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
  Shri R. B. Gupta, Director 
  Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director 
  Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director 
  Shri Satis Mesra, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised th em of the agenda of the 
meeting, i.e., consideration and adoption of draft 39
th, 40 th, 41 st and 42 nd Reports on Demands for Grants (2010-11) 
pertaining to Departments of Health and Family welfare AYUSH Health Research and AIDS Control, respectively. He 
invited Members to share their specific suggestions for improvements and incorporation in the Draft Reports. 
 * * * 
3.  The Committee then discussed the four draft Report. A few changes were suggested by Members for 
incorporation in the Reports. After some discussion, the Committee adopted all the four Reports with some 
modifications. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the 28th April, 2010.  The Committee authorized Dr. Prabhakar Kore and in his 
absence Shrimati Brinda Karat to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Jyoti Mirdha, and in her absence Shri 
Ratan Singh to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
4. * * * 

5. * * * 
6. * * * 
7. * * * 
8.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.50 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 