Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
NINETY-SECOND REPORT
 
REPORT NO. 
92
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th March, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2016)
The Functioning of Medical Council of India
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
NINETY-SECOND REPORT
The Functioning of Medical Council of India
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 th March, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th March, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic. in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE  C OMMITTEE ................................................................................ (i)-(iii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... (iv)-(v)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................. (vi)-(vii)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................. 1-63
Chapter - I
Background ........................................................................................................... 1-6
Chapter-II
State of Affairs in Health Systems and Challenges in the Delivery of
Health Services in the  Country ................................................................................. 7-12
Chapter-III
Constitution and Composition of  MCI....................................................................... 13-19
Chapter-IV
Establishment of Medical  Colleges............................................................................. 20-25
Chapter-V
Undergraduate (UG) Medical  Education..................................................................... 26-33
Chapter-VI
Post Graduate (PG) Medical  Education ...................................................................... 34-39
Chapter-VII
Deficiency of Teaching Faculty................................................................................. 40-43
Chapter-VIII
Need for an Accreditation Body for Medical Education ................................................ 44-45
Chapter-IX
Regulation of Professional Conduct of doctors........................................................... 46-51
Chapter-X
Maintenance of Indian Medical Register (IMR)........................................................... 52-54
Chapter-XI
Need for Attractive Remuneration for Doctors and Medical Faculty.............................. 55-56
Chapter-XII
Corruption  in the MCI............................................................................................ 57-60
Chapter-XIII
Concluding comments ............................................................................................. 61-63
4. O
BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS–AT A G LANCE ........................................................... 64-84
5. A PPENDIX ................................................................................................................ 85-95
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................. 97-120
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................. 121-127
ANNEXURE - I........................................................................................................... 123
ANNEXURE -II........................................................................................................... 124-125
ANNEXURE -III......................................................................................................... 126-127

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2014-2015)
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
%4. Shri Vijay Goel
^5. Dr.Bhushan Lal Jangde
5. Shrimati B. Jayashree
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
7. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
&8. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
9. Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem
10. Dr. T.N. Seema
@11. Shri Jairam Ramesh
LOK SABHA
12. Shri Thangso Baite
13. Dr. Subhash Bhamre
14. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chouhan (Nandu Bhaiya)
15. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
16. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
17. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
18. Dr. K. Kamaraj
19. Shri Arjunlal Meena
20. Shri J. J.T. Natterjee
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri M.K. Raghavan
23. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
24. Shri Alok Sanjar
#25. Dr. Mahesh Sharma
(i)
% Resigned from the membership of the Committee  w.e.f. 2nd December, 2014
^Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 19th December, 2014
&Ceased to be member of the Committee  w.e.f. 28th November, 2014.
@ Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 28th November. 2014.
# Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f. 9th November, 2014.

26. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
27. Shri Raj Kumar Singh
28. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
29. Shrimati Rita Tarai
30. Shri Manohar Untwal
31. Shri Akshay Yadav
*32. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
**33. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
*nominated as a member  of the Committee w.e.f. 22nd December, 2014.
** nominated  as a  member  of the Committee w.e.f. 22nd December, 2014.
(ii)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-16)
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav –  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde
5. Shrimati B. Jayashree
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
7. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
8. Shri Ambeth Rajan
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh
10. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Thangso Baite
12. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre
13. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
14. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
15. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
16. Shri Devendra alias Bhole Singh
17. Dr. (Smt.) Heena Vijay Gavit
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
19. Dr. K. Kamaraj
20. Shri Arjunlal Meena
21. Shri J. Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
22. Shri Chirag  Paswan
23. Shri C. R. Patil
24. Shri M.K. Raghavan
25. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
26. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
27. Shri R.K. Singh
28. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
29. Shrimati Rita Tarai
30. Shri Manohar Untwal
31. Shri Akshay Y adav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(iv)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family
Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf present this Ninety-
second Report of the Committee on the Functioning of Medical Council of India (MCI).
2. The previous Committee had identified the subject ‘Medical  Council of India’ at its meeting held on
18th September, 2014. However, it could not conclude its examination of the subject. The present Committee
also took up the subject for detailed examination at is meeting held on 23rd September, 2015.
3. The Committee examined the subject, in its sittings held on 25th September, 2014,  28th January,
2015, 12th May, 2015, 25th May, 2015, 27th July, 2015, 6th October, 2015 and 1st March, 2016. During
the course of the examination it took oral evidences of representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare and experts on the subject.  The Committee also received written submissions from experts. The
Committee wishes to appreciate the  contribution made by various official witnesses/experts (Annexures I
and II) who richly deserve Committee’s encomia for sharing their perspectives and valuable views with the
Committee and suggesting remedies to the problems afflicting Medical Education and Practice in the country
through their evidences and written submissions. The Committee also benefited  from discussions with
certain stakeholders and representatives of the State Governments during its study visit to Tamil Nadu and
Karnataka from 8th June to 12th June, 2015 and local study visit to Vardhaman Mahavir Medical College
(VMMC), New Delhi and Shri Guru Govind Singh Tercentenary Medical College (SGGSTMC), Gurgaon on
the 2nd February, 2016.
4. The Committee had also invited views from various stakeholders in response to which 46 Memoranda
had been received (Annexure-III). The Memoranda were forwarded to the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare for comments which informed the Committee that the  same had been forwarded to the MCI which
has formed a Committee to examine the issues raised in the memoranda. The President, MCI informed that
the report is already prepared and has passed through EC (Executive Committee) and now will go to GB
(General Body) in March, 2016. On a direction by the Committee to expedite the said GB body meeting, the
President, MCI promised to expedite the same. Till the presentation of this report the comments have not
been received, and Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over such casual attitude of the Ministry and the
MCI.
5. During the finalization of its Report, the Committee relied upon the following documents/papers: ----
(i) Status Note on MCI received from Department of Health and Family W elfare;
(ii) Oral Evidence tendered by Secretary, Department of Health and Family W elfare alongwith the
President, MCI;
(iii) Oral Evidence tendered by Experts/Stakeholders;
(iv) W ritten submissions made by Experts/stakeholders; and
(v) Replies to the questionnaires received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare;

(v)
(vi) W ebsites of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and MCI;
(vii) Articles published in various fora; and
(viii) Other relevant documents
6. The Committee considered the Draft Report and ad opted the same in its meeting held on 1st March,
2016.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report and also reproduced at the end of the Report in
‘Observations/Recommendations----at a Glance’ .
NEW DELHI; PROF.  RAM  GOPAL  Y ADAV
1st  March, 2016 Chairman,
Phalguna 11, 1937 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
Rajya Sabha

ACRONYMS
AICTE – All India Council for Technical Education
AIPGME – All India Post Graduate Medical Examination
AIPMT – All India Pre-Medical Test
BMJ – British Medical Journal
BoGs – Board of Governors
CEE – Common Entrance Examination
CHC – Community Health Centre
CME –  Continuing Medical Education
CMOs – Chief Medical Officers
CPD – Continuing Professional Development
DNB – Diplomat of National Board
DM – Doctor of Medicine
ESIS – Employees State Insurance Scheme
E U – European Union
GMC – General Medical Council
ICT – Information and Communications Technology
IMA – Indian Medical Association
IMC Act – Indian Medical Council Act
IMR – Indian Medical Register
IT – Information Technology
MBA – Master of Business Administration
MBBS – Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery
MCI – Medical Council of India
MD – Doctor of Medicine
MS – Master of Surgery
MTP – Medical Termination of Pregnancy
NAAB – National Assessment and Accreditation Board
NAB – National Accreditation Board
NAC – National Advisory Council
NAAC – National Assessment and Accreditation Council
NBE – National Board of Examinations
(vi)

NBMR – National Board for Medical Registration
NCHRH – National Council for Human Resources for Health
NEB – National Ethics Board
NEET – National-Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test
NGOs – Non Governmental Organisations
NMC –  National Medical Commission
OoP – Out-of-Pocket
PHCs – Primary Health Centres
PG – Post Graduate
PG - METB – Post Graduate-Medical Education and Training Board
RML Hospital – Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital
SA THI – Support Advocacy and Training to Health Initiatives
SEB – State Ethics Board
UG – Under Graduate
UGC – University Grants Commission
UG - METB – Under Graduate-Medical Education and Training Board
UHC – Universal Health Coverage
U K – United Kingdom
UPRN – Unique Permanent Registration Number
UPSC – Union Public Service Commission
USA – United S tates of America
USFDA – United States Food and Drug Administration
UTs – Union Territories
VMCC – V ardhaman Mahavir Medical College
WHO – World Health Organisation
(vii)

REPORT
CHAPTER–I
BACKGROUND
1.1 Despite having the most number of medical colleges in the world, and currently having approximately
9.29 lakhs doctors enrolled on the Indian Medical Register, India is way behind in achieving the targeted
doctor population ratio of 1:1000 as per WHO norms. Shortage of doctors, who are the most important
cog in the health care delivery system, has derailed both access to and quality of health care, especially
to the vulnerable and poorer sections of the country.
1.2 Though there have been substantial improvements in health outcomes over the years, there are still
large gaps in health care accessibility in many parts of the country and Universal Health Care still remains
a distant dream. Issues concerning medical education, access to adequate health care to all people and
the entrenched inadequacy of health and clinical governance in the country have been engaging the
attention of the Committee for quite some time. The Committee has been given to understand that the
following issues have been widely debated in various fora across the country:
i. failure of the current system to produce doctors including specialists and super specialists
in adequate numbers and of requisite quality;
ii. deficiency of teachers in medical colleges;
iii. poor regulation of Undergraduate (UG) and Postgraduate (PG) education;
iv. disconnect between medical education system and health system;
v. opacity in the functioning of the existing regulatory body of medical education ( i.e. Medical
Council of India);
vi. lack of accountability of Medical Council of India (MCI);
vii. geographical mal-distribution of medical colleges;
viii. failure of the MCI in discharging its mandated responsibilities;
ix. allegations of rampant corruption in the MCI;
x. constitution and composition of the MCI;
xi. absence of proper screening and admission procedures in private medical colleges;
xii. need for common entrance test for admissions to MBBS,Postgraduate and Super-specialty
medical courses;
xiii. prevalence of capitation fee in private medical colleges in flagrant violation of the law;
xiv. barriers to expansion of medical education;
xv. lack of a robust accreditation system for UG and PG Medical education;

2
xvi. gross inequity between rural and urban India in terms of availability of health care services;
xvii. ethical issues;
xviii. need for reforms in the regulatory framework of medical education and practice;
xix. over-investigation and over-treatment in private hospitals;
xx. inadequacy of self-regulatory processes for medical profession.
1.3 Since the Medical Council of India is mandated to play a pivotal role in regulating medical
education and practice in the country, the Committee decided to holistically examine its role and functioning
with the ultimate aim of suggesting veritable solutions to the inadequacies that are currently plaguing our
medical education and health care delivery systems.
1.4 At the initial stage of examination of the subject, the Committee called for a background note on
the functioning of Medical Council of India (MCI) from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Background of MCI furnished by Ministry
1.5 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in the background note submitted to the Committee
stated that the Medical Council of India was established in 1934 under the Indian Medical Council Act,
1933, with the main function of establishing uniform standards of higher qualifications in medicine and
recognition of medical qualifications in India and abroad. The Act was repealed and replaced by a new
Act in 1956. The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 was further amended in 1964, 1993, 2001.
Organization Chart of MCI
(i) According to the Ministry, the following is the organization chart of MCI.


3
Objectives:
(ii) The Ministry stated that the Council has the following objectives:
(a) Maintenance of uniform standards of medical education, both under graduate and postgraduate.
(b) Recommendation for recognition/de-recognition of medical qualifications of medical institutions
of India or foreign countries.
(c) Permanent registration/provisional registration of doctors with recognized medical
qualifications.
(d) Reciprocity with foreign countries in the matter of mutual recognition of medical qualifications.
Functions and Duties:
(iii) As per the note submitted by the Ministry the following are the functions and duties of the Council:
(a) Permission to establish a new medical college or opening of a new or higher course of study
or training or increase in admission capacity in any course of study or training, including
exercise of power to finally approve or disapprove the same.
(b) Inspection/visitation with a view to maintain minimum standard of medical education in
India.
(c) Recognition/de-recognition of
(i) Indian Qualifications
(ii) Foreign Qualifications
(d) Registration
(i) Permanent Registration
(ii) Provisional Registration
(iii) Registration of Additional Qualifications
(iv) Issue of Good Standing Certificates to doctors going abroad
(v) Issue of Eligibility Certificate to candidates going abroad for pursuing primary medical
qualifications.
(e) Indian Medical Register: Maintenance of an Indian Medical Register of persons who hold
any of the recognized medical qualification or for the time being registered with any of the
State Medical Councils or Medical Council of India.
Further Amendments to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956:
(iv) Explaining about the further amendments to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, the Ministry
explained as under:
(a) Following an announcement by the President of India in June, 2009 that Government would
establish a National Council of Human Resources in Health (NCHRH) as an overarching
regulatory body for health sector to reform the current regulatory framework and enhance
the supply of quality skilled personnel, the Hon’ble Prime Minister in his Independence Day

4
speech to the nation in the year 2010 mentioned about constitution of two separate councils
in the higher education and health respectively so that reforms in these two areas can be
accelerated. But no such action was taken at that stage because of an observation of the
Prime Minister, when the matter was presented to him, that further public consultation may
be necessary.
(b) The issue acquired momentum again in 2010 when former President, MCI was arrested and
the MCI was suspended and placed under the administration of a Board of Governors
nominated by the Government. The National Council of Human Resources in Health (NCHRH)
was then revived as a possible way to regulate the MCI.
(c) The Central Government amended the Indian Medical Council (IMC) Act, 1956 through the
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 on 15th May, 2010 and superseded
the Medical Council of India (MCI) for one year and subsequently notified constitution of
Board of Governors (BoG) to perform the function of the Council during the interregnum.
In July, 2010 the Replacement Bill for the Ordinance was passed by the Parliament and
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 received the assent of the President on
04th September, 2010. Subsequently, the term of the BoG was extended to one year at a
time by amending the Act in 2011 and 2012. As per the amendments in the Act, the Council
has to be reconstituted within a period of 3 years from the date of the supersession, i.e.
by 14th May, 2013.
(d) In the meantime, the Ministry of Health & Family W elfare proposed to set up a National
Commission for Human Resources for Health (NCHRH) as an overarching regulatory body
which would subsume various functions of the existing councils including MCI. The NCHRH
Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 22.12.2011 which was referred to Department
related Parliamentary Standing Committee for examination and report. The Committee after
taking into consideration the views of various stakeholders, recommended in its Report
dated 30.10.2012 that the Ministry may withdraw the Bill and bring a fresh Bill after
appropriately addressing the apprehensions of the stakeholders.
(e) Since the chances of enacting the proposed NCHRH before the completion of the term of
the BoG i.e. 14th May, 2013 were remote and seeking another extension for BoG beyond
the 14th May, 2013, the Ministry prepared a Bill to amend the IMC Act, 1956. The IMC
(Amendment) Bill, 2013 was approved by the Cabinet on 07.03.2013 and introduced in the
Rajya Sabha on 19.03.2013. However, the Bill could not be taken up for consideration
during the Budget Session, 2013.
(f) In the above circumstances, the Ministry again extended the term of BoG for a period of
180-days i.e. upto 10th November, 2013 by way of IMC (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013
on 21st May, 2013. Subsequently, the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013 to
replace the Ordinance was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 19th August 2013. The Bill
however could not be taken up for consideration and passing. As the said replacement Bill
could not be passed at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament in
terms of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) of Article 123 of the Constitution, the aforesaid

5
Ordinance ceased to operate on the 16th September, 2013.
(g) In view of the position explained above, the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Second
Ordinance 2013 was notified on the 28th September, 2013 making it effective w.e.f.
14th May 2013, so that the work already done by the Board of Governors of the Medical
Council of India as per provisions of earlier Ordinance is validated and may continue. As
per the provisions of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Second Ordinance 2013, the
Government re-constituted the Council on the 06th November, 2013 vide its notification
dated the 05th November, 2013.
(h) The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare,
in its 73rd report, presented to the Chairman Rajya Sabha on the 20th November, 2013,
recommended some modifications in the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
and desired that the Government may incorporate the modifications in the Bill replacing the
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Second Ordinance, 2013.
(i) The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare examined the Report and modified the Indian
Medical Council (Second Amendment) Bill 2013, for replacing the Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Second Ordinance, 2013, after incorporating such recommendations of the
Committee which are acceptable to this Ministry. The Indian Medical Council (Second
Amendment) Bill 2013 was approved by the Cabinet in its meeting held on the 5th December,
2013, which was to be introduced in the Rajya Sabha.
(j) The Indian Medical Council (Second Amendment) Bill, 2013 to replace the said Ordinance
could not be introduced in the Rajya Sabha, despite all efforts, during the winter session
2013 of Parliament as the House was adjourned sine die on W ednesday, the 18th December,
2013.
Re-constitution of MCI:
(v) The Ministry stated that the Medical Council of India was reconstituted on 06.11.2013 as per
provisions contained in section 3(1) of IMC Act, 1956. The strength of MCI as on 29th January,
2016 was 104 members. The details of provisions under which the Council was reconstituted and
the strength (as per Status Note dated 29th January, 2016) was as under:
Section Total number of Present
representation strength
3 (1) (a) – State Recommendation 30 27
3(1) (aa) – UTs Recommendation (In rotation from 5 UTs) 1 1
3 (1) (b) – Elected by Government Universities/Health Universities 68 52
3 (1) (c) – Elected by Registered Medical Practitioners in the States 22 16
3 (1) (e) – To be nominated by Central Government 8 8
T
OTAL 129 104

6
Committees of MCI:
(vi) The Ministry further stated that as per provisions contained in Section 9(1) of IMC Act, 1956,
MCI has constituted an Executive Committee and various sub- committees viz., Academic Sub-
Committee, Ethics Sub-Committee, Migration Sub-Committee, TEQ-Equivalence Sub-Committee,
Registration Sub-Committee, Finance Sub-Committee, Administration & Grievance Sub- Committee,
etc. Further, as per provisions contained in section 20 of IMC Act, 1956, a Post-Graduate Medical
Education Committee has been constituted for assisting the Council in matters relating to Post-
Graduate Medical Education.
Funding pattern of the Council:
(vii) According to the Ministry, the funding pattern of the Council is that Ministry of Health & Family
W elfare, Government of India provides grant under Plan & Non-Plan Schemes. During the year
2015-2016, an amount of R110 lakhs has been earmarked as Grant-in-Aid to the Council. The
Council generates sufficient revenue by way of various types of fee like Inspection Fee u/s 10A,
Annual Inspection Fee and fee for issuing of various Registration Certificates.
The major reforms needed:
(viii) The Ministry in the background note, submitted to the Committee, indicated that the following
major reforms are needed:
(a) There is need to restructure the MCI. The model favoured is that of a lean and professional
body with a mix of medical and lay people. There should be a full time Chairman, full time
members and ex-officio members representing the Government to bring about synergy in
its functioning. The Apex Body should have four distinct bodies under it, one each for
Licensing, Accreditation, Under Graduate Curriculum, and Post Graduate Curriculum.
(b) There is need to incorporate ICT tools and revisit the minimum standards requirements
under the Act. Virtual classrooms, e-learning, e-journals are some of the modern tools that
must find place while considering various requirements/resources for medical college.
(c) The Code of Ethics for medical professional needs to be well defined and at par with the
global standards.
(d) A common Entry and Exit exam at the national level is required to ensure quality of medical
education.
Steps taken for revamping the functions of MCI:
(ix) The Ministry explained to the Committee that a Group of Experts was constituted under the
Chairmanship of Dr. Ranjit Roy Chaudhury to study the existing IMC Act, 1956 governing the
Medical Council of India (MCI) and inter-alia make recommendations to the Government to
streamline the functioning of MCI. The Committee was later informed that the Group of Experts
had submitted its Report to the Ministry in the month of February, 2015 which was under
consideration of the Ministry.

7
CHAPTER-II
STATE OF AFFAIRS IN HEALTH SYSTEMS AND CHALLENGES IN THE
DELIVERY OF HEALTH SERVICES IN THE COUNTRY
2.1 The Committee would, at the outset like to assess the state of affairs in health care delivery systems
in the country, for, medical education cannot be seen as an end in itself, but should be geared and attuned to
providing general, appropriate, accessible and affordable healthcare to all countrymen.
Access to Health Care Services
2.2 Though India has made considerable progress towards improving healthcare indicators such as life
expectancy, child mortality, maternal and infant mortality over the years, yet the outreach and services
delivery for the urban and rural poor has been inadequate and the gaps in health outcomes continue to widen.
2.3 “Despite being home to 17·5% of the global population, India accounted for 20% of the global burden
of disease in 2013 - only a slight improvement from 21% in 2005. India accounts for 27% of all the neonatal
deaths and 21% of all the child deaths (younger than 5 years) in the world. Diarrhoea, pneumonia, preterm
birth complications, birth asphyxia, and neonatal sepsis account for 68% of all deaths in children younger
than 5 years in the country.” 1
2.4 The following paragraph, which is an extract from the Report of the Group of Experts constituted by
the Ministry to study the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 highlights the magnitude of the gaps in our
healthcare services:-
“While many important healthcare indices, such as life expectancy, infant and maternal mortality
have improved significantly since independence, we lag woefully behind developed countries and
even other countries with similar socio economic status as ours, in these indicators. India’s Under
5 Child Mortality (Probability of dying before reaching age of 5 per 1000 live births) as in 2011
was 61, as compared to Nepal 50, Bhutan 54, Bangladesh 46, Peru 18, Maldives 15, China 15,
Brazil 16, Thailand 12, Sri Lanka 12, Chile 9, USA 8, Cuba 6, UK 5, Japan 3 and is slightly better
than only Pakistan 88. Maternal Mortality figures (number of maternal deaths per 100,000 live
births) are worse: India 200, Bhutan 180, Nepal 170, Brazil  56, Thailand 48, Sri Lanka 35, China
37, Chile 25 as compared to  USA 21, UK 12, Japan 5, Singapore 3.”
2.5 As per written submissions furnished by the experts, India faces a high degree of inequity in access
to health care services. There are urban-rural inequities and there are also geographical inequities. With rapid
privatization of medical education and healthcare since the 1980s, around 70% of medical professionals
work in the private health sector and around 70% of these are concentrated in urban well-to-do areas. As per
an article published in the Lancet, “a consequence of the insufficient reach of the public sector has been the
growth of a massive, heterogeneous and mostly unregulated private health-care sector. In 2014, more than
70% of outpatient care (72% in the rural areas and 79% in the urban areas) and more than 60% of inpatient
care (58% in rural areas and 68% in urban areas) was in the private sector.... Private practitioners are now
therefore the first point of contact in both rural and urban areas for many ailments, including fevers and
acute illnesses, care of neonates, and treatment of diseases such as tuberculosis. However, a substantial
proportion of, and in some areas even the majority of private providers might be unqualified or under-
1  The Lancet dated December 12, 2015: Assuring Health Coverage for all in India.
7

8
qualified. For example, a study in rural Madhya Pradesh found that only 11% of the sampled health-care
providers had a medical degree, and only 53% of providers had completed high school Informal care
providers, with no formal medical training or registration with Government for medical practice, are estimated
to represent 55% of all providers and are also frequently the first point of contact, especially in rural areas.”
2
2.6 The major source of professional healthcare for rural and also many urban poor households is through
the public sector which is insufficient in infrastructure, human resources, equipment and drugs (especially
at the primary level). The first point at which a doctor is available in rural public health system is at the
Primary Health Centre (PHC) and there are 25308 PHCs
3 as on 31st March, 2015 for a rural population of
83.3 crore plus. This is just a drop in the ocean. These PHCs suffer from staff shortages. The shortfall of
allopathic doctors at PHCs as compared to requirement based on existing infrastructure is 11.9%3 “Moreover,
as compared to requirement for existing infrastructure, there was a shortfall of 83.4% of surgeons, 76.3%
of obstetricians & gynaecologists, 83.0% of physicians and 82.1% of paediatricians. Overall, there was a
shortfall of 81.2% specialists at the CHCs as compared to the requirement for existing CHCs.”
3
2.7 There has been a steady increase in vacancies in the positions of doctors at Primary Health Centres
over the last five to ten years (27% in 2015)
3 and an even more shocking increase in the vacancies of
specialists at secondary facilities. “The current position of specialists manpower at CHCs reveal that as on
31st March, 2015, out of the sanctioned posts, 74.6% of Surgeons, 65.4% of obstetricians & gynaecologists,
68.1% of physicians and 62.8% of paediatricians were vacant. Overall 67.6% of the sanctioned posts of
specialists at CHCs were vacant.” 4 Thus, there are very few surgeons, anesthetists, gynecologists and
paediatricians in the public health system, and people who live far from cities and towns have no option but
to travel long distances to avail surgical care.
2.8 Explaining about the status of health services in the country, Dr. Devi Shetty, Former Member, BoG,
MCI who deposed before the Committee on 27th July, 2015 submitted that:
“I am not really that concerned about the medical education but I am very concerned about the
impact it has on the lives of common people of this country. Every ten minutes a pregnant lady
dies during child birth and ten lakh children die within the first year of life. Why?” It is because
the common hospital these people approach, is the community health centre which takes care of
the health of 1,54,512 people.”
2.9 The strong link between poverty and ill health is a documented fact. According to the Government’s
draft National Health Policy 2015, “over 63 million persons are faced with poverty every year due to health
care costs alone. People have no financial protection for the vast majority of health care needs. In 2011-12,
the share of out-of-pocket expenditure on health care as a proportion of total household monthly per capita
income was 6.9% in rural areas and 5.5% in urban areas. This led to an increasing number of households
facing catastrophic expenditure due to health costs (18% of all households in 2011-12 as compared to 15%
in 2004-05).” Public funding is estimated to be of the order of only 19.67% of the expenses of health care
in the country (as per National Health Accounts Estimates-2004-05) and most of private expenditure is out-
of-pocket (OOP) expense, which has the potential of pushing even the non-poor into poverty. This clearly
indicates that the expansion of medical education has not fulfilled the increasing health needs of the people.
2  The Lancet dated December 12, 2015: Assuring Health Coverage for all in India
3 Rural Health Statistics, 2015.
4 Rural Health Statistics, 2015.

9
2.10 The Committee observes that though there have been substantial improvements in certain
health outcomes, especially in life expectancy, maternal and infant mortality, these achievements
should not mask India’s failures in achieving the desired level of health care delivery. As per the
Report of the Working Group on Tertiary Care Institutions for the Twelfth Five Y ear Plan, rates of
infant and maternal deaths still remain high, nearly one million Indians die every year due to
inadequate healthcare facilities, 700  million people have no access to specialist care and 80% of
specialists are working in urban areas. Despite India’s economy today being one of the world’s
fastest growing and third largest in terms of Gross National Health Income, our health system
continues to face a huge need gap in terms of access to adequate healthcare and availability of
health professionals and facilities. India also has the dubious distinction of lagging behind countries
like Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh, Peru, Maldives, China, Brazil, Thailand, Srilanka and Chile on
important health indicators including child mortality and maternal mortality. If 63 million persons
are faced with poverty every year due to health care costs alone (as per Draft National Health
Policy, 2015), it clearly indicates that health care is moving away from the reach of the people in
general and the poor in particular. This also indicates that India has not been able to leverage its
economic growth to achieve the desired health outcomes. The fact that there is an acute shortage of
doctors in the country and the effective delivery of health care services cannot be guaranteed
without the availability of doctors in adequate numbers, testifies to the point that the system of
medical education, as regulated by the Medical Council of India, has not been able to address the
many unmet health care needs of our health system and needs reforms urgently.
Shortage and uneven distribution of Doctors
2.11 The Committee has been informed by an expert that in large measure, the failure to improve the health
of our people is strongly linked to failure to expand the trained human resource- both in quantity and quality.
2.12 In a reply to a question the Ministry has informed the Committee that as per MCI records there are
9.29 lakh doctors registered in the Indian Medical Register as on 31.03.2014. Assuming 80% availability, it
is estimated that around 7.4 lakh doctors may be actually available for active service. It gives a doctor-
population ratio of 1:1674 against the WHO norm of 1:1000. At present, every year around 55000 doctors
and 25,000 PG doctors are passing out from various colleges. At this rate of growth, the country should
have a doctor (allopathic)- population ratio of 1:1250 for a population of 133 crores by 2020 and 1:1075 by
2022 (population: 136 crores). However, the Committee has been informed by an expert who deposed
before the Committee that doctors cannot be produced overnight and if we add 100 medical colleges every
year for the next five years, only by the year 2029, will the country have adequate number of doctors.
2.13 The following observation made by the Group of Experts constituted to study the IMC Act on 1956,
outlines the inadequacy of availability of medical professionals in India:-
“India has significantly lower numbers of doctors, nurses, midwives, community health workers and other
allied groups for health care delivery, as compared to the recommended global norms. The shortfall of
doctors is in spite of the massive expansion in the number of medical colleges, from 23 in 1947 to the
current 398; the total number of medical seats in 2014 is 49,930. As of 2010-11, India has only 6.5 doctors
per 10,000 of population, as compared to 17.6 in Brazil, 14.6 in China, 27.7 in UK, and 24.2 in USA. This is
far short of the global average and even below the target of 1 for 1000 of population recommended by the
High Level Expert Group Report on Universal Health Coverage for India”.

10
2.14 The then Health Secretary during deposition before the Committee admitted that the doctor population
ratio in India vis-a-vis WHO norm was indeed abysmal. He further submitted that it takes more than R 200
crore to set up a medical college and about R1500 crore to set up an AIIMS and because of resource
constraints, it was not possible to set up enough medical colleges and AIIMS-like institutions to take care of
the backlog.
2.15 The representative of the IMA during evidence tendered before the Committee submitted that India’s
assessment of requirement of doctors was based on the western concept where a specialist hardly sees 15
patients per day. In India even a general practitioner sees 500-1000 patients daily. He suggested that the
manpower requirement should be assessed assuming that a doctor sees 50-100 patients daily.
2.16 An expert who appeared before the Committee submitted that India was very very short of doctors
and to meet this shortfall, India needs to have not four hundred, but one thousand medical colleges.
2.17 The representative of the MCI during evidence informed the Committee through a power-point
presentation that there were 9.29 lakh doctors that were registered on the Indian Medical Register. When
asked whether this figure also included doctors who had gone abroad, the representative of the MCI replied
in the affirmative. When further asked about the actual number of doctors practicing in India, the representative
stated that the process to collect such data had been undertaken. The Joint Secretary who was present
during the evidence informed the Committee that those doctors who studied here and moved out were not
captured in the figures.
2.18 Besides acute shortage of medical doctors, there are serious issues concerning mal-distribution of
doctors and imbalanced growth of medical colleges in the country. In reply to a question, the Joint Secretary
of the Ministry during evidence submitted that “the capacity that we are seeing on UG and PG seats, almost
sixty five per cent is concentrated in the South and the West of the country. So, the deficit areas are really
the north and the East of the country.” The Health Secretary, who was also present during the deposition
informed that the doctors were distributed in an uneven manner and ensuring that the doctor goes to rural
areas remains a challenge and for that several measures have been taken.
2.19 Some experts who deposed before the Committee pointed out that:
(i) “there was a lot of geographical mal-distribution of medical colleges with clustering in some
parts and lacking in others.”
(ii) “We are unable to meet this demand and supply mismatch because the Medical Council of
India is standing as a big barrier in the development of new medical colleges and the same
thing applies to the geographical mal-distribution…”. He also informed the Committee that
“Six States which represent 31 per cent of India’s population have 58% of the MBBS seats;
on the other hand eight States which comprise 46% of India’s population have 21% of the
MBBS seats.”
(iii) “We have to decentralize health care manpower planning from the Centre to the State
Governments. Each State Government should get one of the top global consultancy firms
and find out what is the requirement of specialists, nurses, paramedics, etc.”
(iv) “health being a State subject, the planning for having adequate number of doctors should
be the State’s responsibility. The States should open new medical colleges and raise funds

11
for the purpose.”
2.20. During the Committee’s study visit to Coimbatore, Ooty and Bengaluru some of the stakeholders
suggested that to address the issue of uneven distribution of medical colleges in the country, the Central
Government should fund medical colleges in areas where there are very few medical colleges.
2.21 The Committee agrees that there is an acute shortage of medical doctors in the country
besides their geographical mal-distribution. The Committee takes note of the submission of Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare that the total number of doctors registered on the Indian Medical
Register is 9.29 lakhs out of which 7.40 lakhs are available for active practice and that the doctor -
population ratio in India is 1:1674 as against the WHO norm of 1:1000. However, given the fact that
the Indian Medical Register is not a live database and contains names of doctors who may have
passed away or retired from active practice, by now, as well as those with a permanent address
outside India and that there is no mechanism in place for filtering out such cases, the Committee is
highly sceptical of the Ministry’s claim of having one doctor per 1674 population. In view of the
above, the Committee feels that the total universe of doctors in India is much smaller than the
official figure and we may have one doctor per 2000 population, if not more. The Committee observes
that the imbalances in availability of affordable and quality health care cannot be corrected without
augmenting the capacity of production of medical doctors including specialists and super-specialists
in adequate numbers and of requisite quality and competence. Apart from the unfinished agenda of
communicable diseases, India is witnessing the rapidly rising burdens of non-communicable diseases
(Cardiovascular diseases, Cancer, Diabetes, Chronic respiratory disorders, Mental illness, Liver
and Kidney diseases), which call for the availability of many more category of doctors and specialist
doctors. The Committee is constrained to observe that the MCI has been unresponsive to health
system needs with the result that shortage in number of basic doctors and specialists, mal- distribution
of medical colleges and doctors across the States continue to plague the delivery of effective and
equitable health services. At the present rate of production of doctors, the shortfall in basic and
specialist doctors will not be met for many years. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
urgent measures may be taken to spell out policy stance in great detail and with clarity to augment
the capacity of production of doctors including specialists and super-specialists at the scale and
speed required to meet India’s health needs.
2.22 The Committee is concerned to note that the medical colleges in the country are distributed
in a skewed manner, with nearly sixty five per cent medical colleges concentrated in the Southern
and Western States of the country which has resulted in great variation in doctor-population ratio
across the States. The States of North, North-East and Central India have a severe shortage of
doctors because of very few medical colleges they have. The Committee also notes with concern the
that six States with 31% of India’s population account for 58% of the MBBS seats, while eight
States which comprise 46% of India’s population have 21% of the MBBS seats. The Committee is of
the opinion that the mere increase in medical seats to enable correction of this doctor-population
imbalance will not automatically address this skew because experience shows that doctors normally
settle in the cities they go to for their medical education and do not return to serve in their own
urban or rural areas. Also, even if compulsory rural service is introduced throughout India, graduates
of each State would be required to serve only in their State, as per present State health regulations,

12
and the States with very few medical colleges would continue to be disadvantaged. The Committee
would, therefore, recommend that an institutional mechanism be put in place to ensure better
distribution of medical colleges across the country. State level doctor-population ratio should guide
the setting up of new medical colleges and also the increase in UG and PG seats.
2.23 The Committee also observes that the present approach in the matter of healthcare manpower
planning is a top-down one. Since health is a State subject and State Governments are major
stakeholders in the delivery of healthcare services, medical manpower planning should be bottom-
up also. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that each State should plan for an optimal number
of doctors, with a target of 1:1000 doctor-population ratio.

13
CHAPTER III
CONSTITUTION AND COMPOSITION OF MCI
3.1 The Composition of the Medical Council of India is structured in terms of Section 3 of the IMC Act,
1956. The representative of the Medical Council of India during his deposition before the Committee submitted
the following:-
“Section 3 basically contemplates that the Central Government shall be responsible for constituting
a Medical Council of India in terms of representation. Section 3(1) (a) contemplates that each
State would make a nominee from amongst the registered medical practitioners of that State to
be nominated by the Central Government. Subsequent sub-section says that this would not only
be attributable to a State, but even Union Territories would be entitled on the basis of rotation.
Section 3(1) (b) contemplates that every university that has got a medicine faculty, through its
Senate, will be in a position to elect one representative by the Board of Management or the Senate,
as the case may be. Then, subsequent sub-section contemplates that every State will be in a
position to elect one representative from among the registered medical graduates in that particular
State, who will represent the registered medical graduates of that State and finally, the Central
Government, under Section 3(1) (e), is entitled to nominate eight persons from amongst whomsoever
they deem necessary, who will be nominated members of the Medical Council of India. So, the
Council has a representative character of elected and nominated members. Elected members are
with reference to universities and registered medical graduates, and nominated members are with
reference to State Governments and the eight nominees by the Government of India. So, this is
the composition which is stipulated in Section 3.”
3.2 As per the information made available by one of the experts, currently there are 102 members of MCI
which 35 are nominated and 67 are elected. Of these elected 67 members, 1/4 th (16) are from registers of
medical graduates. Rest 3/4th (51) are elected from university members. Within the category of nominated
members, about ¼ (8) are nominated by the Central Government to represent it and rest ¾ (27) are nominated
by the Central Government in consultation with different State Governments.
3.3 It has also been informed by the expert that, even State Governments and Central Government have
nominated doctors from corporate private hospitals to represent themselves in the current MCI.
3.4 The Committee notes from the information furnished by an expert that there is a trend of rapid
expansion of private medical colleges. Currently, there are 412 medical colleges of which 53% (217) are
from private sector and 47% (195) from Government. Therefore, if the current arrangement continues, the
private sector will get overrepresented on the MCI with the passage of time.
Composition of MCI - Elected versus Nominated Regulator
3.5 On being asked to clarify its position on the issue of elected versus nominated regulator, the Indian
Medical Association (IMA) in its written submissions on the issue was of the view that:
“Medical Council should be in-fact made more representative in character by having one elected
representative per 20,000 doctors, whereas now it is one per state medical council. The council
should have representatives of not only the academic institutions, but also of the whole medical
13

14
profession. Then only the medical needs of the society and the ground reality of the problem that
a basic graduate faces, as a primary care physician, can be addressed to effect changes in the
curriculum. With the emergence of medical universities, the number of elected representatives
from the teaching institutions has also become less. Instead of every University electing
representatives proportionate to the medical colleges, now one representative per Health University
is only elected. Here again the elected representatives from the academic institutions should be
proportionate to the number of medical colleges. If all the medical council members are nominated
by the Central Government, they can only implement the policies of the Government. The various
pronouncements made by the Hon’ble High Court and Supreme Court from time to time on the
said issue have specifically brought out that the composition of Medical Council of India should
be representative in character in as much as that not more than 1/3rd members of the council
should belong to nominated category whereby the ratio of elected: nominated members should be
2/3rd :1/3rd and if this ratio is to be breached then the same should be to the side of more elected
members and less nominated members, which would augur well with the desired autonomy for
effective dispensation of the task and the fulfillment of statutory objectives by the Medical Council
of India. The autonomy of the medical profession and the watch-dog role it should play to ensure
what is best for the medical profession and public health will be lost. In a democratic republic,
to conceive an institution with only nominated members will be contrary to the very basic principle
of democracy. It will only lead to autocracy in these institutions.”
3.6 Most of the experts who deposed before the Committee were in favour of nominated regulators on
the following grounds:-
(i) Elections are unlikely to produce regulators of repute and moral authority;
(ii) No regulatory body of medical education in the world has elected people. In the UK, USA,
Japan, Canada, Australia, regulators of medical education are appointed through transparent
processes.
(iii) Since Governments are accountable to the people for the performance of health system,
they should be empowered to appoint regulators of medical education.
(iv) The possibility of use of money in elections gives advantage to private management sponsored
candidates getting over-represented. Since the number of private medical colleges is increasing,
the over- representation of private medical college representative would affect the role and
responsibilities of MCI as there is possibility of dilution of standards.
(v) The MCI as presently elected has been mired in multiple controversies and corruption and
what is of greater concern is it has failed to address the needs of the health system in the
country.
(vi) The MCI as presently constituted is not accountable or transparent in its functioning.
(vii) Government appointed regulatory bodies such as the National Board of Examinations, Board
of Governors of MCI, the Delhi Medical Council etc., have performed commendably without
getting embroiled in alleged corruption and malpractices.

15
3.7 During the Committee’s study visit to Vardhman Mahavir Medical College, New Delhi, the
representatives of the College submitted that the regulatory body should be dominated by medical teachers
and the representation of private practitioners should be reduced. It was further submitted that the MCI is
presently an elected body. Many academicians do not tend to fight election and thus the body does not get
the talent which it should otherwise be able to get. This aspect needs to be looked into and methods should
be evolved to attract the best talent in the field of medical education.
3.8 Some of the medical stakeholders through their written submissions favoured a regulatory body
nominated by the Government.
3.9 The Committee’s attention has also been drawn to the following submissions made in the Ranjit Roy
Chaudhury Committee Report:-
“In large parts of the world, health delivery is a State subject. The licensing of doctors lies within
the Government in most of the EU countries. Only in a few of these (Austria, France, Ireland,
UK) is there  a  separate  independent  regulator.  Even  these  bodies have membership of
professionals appointed through transparent processes, often with a significant representation from
non-medical professionals and the general public. In the UK, GMC has a 12 person Council, in
which the non-medical representation is up to 50% and includes medical students. This is because,
UK is the only EU country besides Ireland, where the Council also oversees medical education.
In all other European countries, this is done directly by the concerned Ministry in the Government.
Elections from within the profession, has been discontinued around the globe. Indirectly, elected
representation may be there in some countries such as in Canada and South Africa”.
3.10 The Committee has carefully and comprehensively examined the issue of elected versus
nominated regulator and done a rigorous analysis to evaluate whether the architecture of regulatory
oversight for the medical profession in India should be elected or nominated one.
3.11 The Committee observes that the main objective of the regulator of medical education and
practice in India is to regulate quality of medical education, tailor medical education to the healthcare
needs of the country, ensure adherence to quality standards by medical colleges, produce competent
doctors possessing requisite skills and values as required by our health system and regulate medical
practice in accordance with the professional code of ethics. The Medical Council of India, when
tested on the above touchstone, has repeatedly been found short of fulfilling its mandated
responsibilities. Quality of medical education is at its lowest ebb; the current model of medical
education is not producing the right type of health professionals that meet the basic health needs of
the country because medical education and curricula are not integrated with the needs of our health
system; many of the products coming out of medical colleges are ill-prepared to serve in poor
resource settings like Primary Health Centre and even at the district level; medical graduates lack
competence in performing basic health care tasks like conducting normal deliveries; instances of
unethical practice continue to grow due to which respect for the profession has dwindled. But the
MCI has not been able to spearhead any serious reforms in medical education to address these
gaps.
3.12 Medicine deals with human life. Regulators are therefore, required to have the professional
excellence and moral authority to address complex issues related to content, standards, quality,

16
competencies and skills of medical education and practice. But the MCI, as presently elected, neither
represents professional excellence nor its ethos. The current composition of the Council reflects
that more than half of the members are either from corporate hospitals or in private practice. The
Committee is surprised to note that even doctors nominated under Sections 3(1) (a) and 3(1) (e) to
represent the State Governments and the Central Government have been nominated from corporate
private hospitals which are not only highly commercialised and provide care at exorbitant cost but
have also been found to be violating value frameworks. They indulge in unethical practices such as
carrying out unnecessary diagnostic tests and surgical procedures in order to extract money from
hapless patients and meet revenue targets (as documented by the BMJ, one of the top international
medical journals in an article titled “The unethical revenue targets that India’s corporate hospitals
set their doctors” dated 3 rd September, 2015) and flouting government rules and regulations,
especially about treating patients from underprivileged backgrounds.
3.13 The Committee also observes that the number of private medical colleges is growing and
therefore their representation in the MCI is certain to increase while the Government representation
will decrease in that proportion. In such a scenario, the needs of the country and the health system
have taken a backseat while the interests of practicing doctors have become primary. Thus, the
current composition of the MCI is biased against larger public health goals and public interest.
3.14 The paramount consideration for the regulation of medical education should be to ensure
that it safeguards the quality of medical education, well serves the needs of India’s health system
and enables the health needs of the people to be met. This is far more important than protecting the
elected character of the regulatory framework. Electoral processes, by their very nature, bring
about a lot of compromises and tend to attract professionals who may not be best-fitted for the
heavy academic responsibilities of a regulatory body. It is, therefore, highly unlikely that professionals
of the highest standards of eminence and integrity would be thrown up through electoral processes.
The Committee feels that perhaps this is one of the reasons why election from within the profession
has been discontinued around the globe.
3.15 The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that the governance of medical education in
India must be accountable to the people of India. Ultimately, popularly elected governments are
answerable to the people for the performance of the health system, not the MCI. Also, a regulatory
body nominated by the government need not always be suspect in quality or subservient in conduct.
Following the dissolution of a corruption-ridden MCI, the new Board of Governors of MCI appointed
by the Government in 2010, included professionals of the highest standards of integrity and
excellence who came up with a Vision Document 2015 wherein the Board had recommended a
number of reforms of far-reaching impact in the field of medical education and practice. Similarly,
the National Board of Examinations whose governing Board is nominated by the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare has acquitted itself creditably and has not been tainted by a scandal in its 33
years of history. The Committee also wonders that if none of the countries like the USA, UK,
Australia or Japan has elected regulatory body for medical education, why should India be the only
one to have elected regulators for medical education.
3.16 After serious reflection borne out of the above analysis and keeping in mind the disastrous
experience with an elected regulatory body, the Committee is convinced that if the quality of medical

17
education has to be maintained and medical profession disciplined in the context of mushrooming of
private medical colleges and the resultant commercialization of medical education, regulators of
the highest standards of professional integrity and excellence will have to be sought by the
Government through a rigorous selection process. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
the regulatory framework of medical education and practice should be comprised of professionals of
the highest standards of repute and integrity, appointed through a rigorous and independent selection
process. This process must be transparent. Nominations could be sought but the reason for the final
selection should be made public. The Committee also concurs with the recommendation of the
Ranjit Roy Chaudhury Committee Report that:
“In keeping with global standards, and as is the practice in other educational fields in our
country (AICTE and UGC) regulatory structure should be run by persons selected through
a transparent mechanism rather than by the current process of election and nominations.
Of course, keeping in mind the federal nature of the country, adequate provision must be
made for the representatives of the States to participate in the regulatory processes.”
Need for Diversity in the Membership of Regulatory Body
3.17 The Committee has been informed by experts who deposed before it and also by those who made
written submissions that the MCI is a self-regulatory professional body and the Council membership is
composed entirely of medical doctors and more than half of these are either from private medical institutions
or in private practice. The current composition of the Council reflects that the Council is dominated by
specializations in the discipline of surgery and medicine and within them, their super-specializations. The
dominance of these specializations and super specializations might have a bearing on the introduction of
these specialties and super-specialties departments. It has been impressed upon the Committee that setting
up of the standards and evaluation of these standards by the same professionals, may result in a conflict of
professional interests. These need to be accounted for and balanced by introducing more specialist doctors
who are not directly involved with delivery of clinical care but who understand the needs of medical practice
as well as of the health system as a whole. Specialists from the disciplines of public health, community
medicine, health economy, health/hospital administration, forensic medicine, medical jurisprudence and
toxicology could fulfill this criterion. Inclusion of the specialists of public health might help in addressing
some of the problem areas where MCI has failed. It has also been impressed upon the Committee that non-
inclusion of public health experts, social scientists and health economists, etc. in the MCI is one of the
important reasons for the inability of the MCI to address some of the problem areas like UG curricula being
not suitable for requirements of practice in rural and resource poor settings; disconnect between health
system and medical education system; complete lack of training in ethical practice; and clustering of medical
colleges in certain States and in metro/mega cities, etc.
3.18 An expert who deposed before the Committee submitted that “…we also need health economists to
come in to find out what is cost-effective and what is not cost-effective. Otherwise, the young doctors will
prescribe all kinds of expensive medicines and use all kinds of expensive tests unnecessarily.”
3.19 The Committee has also been informed that the General Medical Council of UK which is supposed to
be the father of the Medical Council of India has 50% non-doctor members. Similarly, the Canadian and
Australian Medical Councils also have non-doctors as their members. It has been impressed upon the

18
Committee that inclusion of experts from other disciplines will enrich the working of the Council and help
bring the concerns of the population whom the profession is supposed to serve, into the ambit of discussion
of the Medical Council of India.
3.20 The Committee observes that currently the MCI is an exclusive club of medical doctors as
the IMC Act does not call for diversity of backgrounds in the members. The Committee also observes
that across the world, a perspective has gained ground that self-regulation alone does not work
because medical associations have fiercely protected their turf and any group consisting entirely of
members from the same profession is unlikely to promote and protect public interest over and
above their own self-interest and therefore check-and-balance mechanisms are required. Besides,
in today’s dynamic world, inputs from people with excellence and competence in other disciplines
are also needed to add value to the working of an oversight body. It is for these reasons that in most
countries such as the UK, Australia, etc. regulators are drawn from diverse groups.
3.21 Keeping all these factors in mind and considering the fact that checks and balances in the
MCI are not underpinned on sturdy systems and procedures, the Committee is of the considered
view that the composition of the MCI is opaque and skewed and diversity needs to be brought into
this because having only medical doctors in the Council is not an enabling factor for ensuring
reforms in medical education and practice. The Committee is convinced that if the medical regulator
has to perform all its mandated functions in full measure and ensure that education in health
disciplines fulfils its social mandate, it needs a vibrant framework with the right kind of capacity
which can be achieved only by opening Council membership to diverse stakeholders such as public
health experts and social scientists, health economists, health NGOs with an established reputation,
legal experts, quality assurance experts, patient advocacy groups, to name but a few. Such diversity
and transparency will have the added advantage of reducing the monopoly of doctors in the MCI,
thereby reducing the scope of cronyism and corruption. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that urgent measures be taken to restructure the composition of MCI on the lines suggested above.
Power to the Government to issue Policy Directives to MCI
3.22 The Health Secretary during his deposition before the Committee had submitted that the Government
should have the power to give directions to the MCI on policy matters. The Joint Secretary, Department of
Health and Family Welfare during the course of evidence reiterated the above view.
3.23 During the examination of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2006, and the
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013, the Committee had examined this issue but not
favoured it on grounds that such sweeping powers might hamper the MCI in its day-to-day working
and would subject the MCI to interference and pressure from the Central Government.
3.24 The Committee has examined the issue afresh and given serious thought to the desirability
of empowering the Central Government to issue directions to the regulatory body on matters of
policy. The Committee notes that though all powers of approval/disapproval as per the MCI Act,
1956 rest with the Central Government and all permissions are issues in its name, yet the Central
Government has no power to disagree with the MCI. After comprehensive consideration, the
Committee observes that the Government is the most important stakeholder in shaping health
system in all its dimensions and attending to a range of reforms in medical education and practice.

19
To push its policy and vision of health, the Government is, therefore, entitled to give directives to
the MCI on policy matters of national importance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Government should have the power to give policy directives to the regulatory body. However,
what exactly would be policy matters should be clearly and unambiguously defined so that such
directives do not impinge on the functioning of MCI or violate its academic autonomy and any
possibility of its misuse is obviated. The directive itself should be in the form of a ‘speaking order’
giving background and reasons and that should be made public immediately on issue.
Restriction on the term of Council Members
3.25 On being asked whether there is any restriction on the term of the Council Member, the representative
of the MCI during his evidence before the Committee on the submitted that as per the existing IMC Act,
there is no restriction on the terms.
3.26 An expert through written submission impressed upon the Committee that term limits of members of
the MCI should be fixed with no more than two terms of five years each for any member.
3.27 The Committee also takes note of the observation made in the Ranjit Roy Chaudhary Committee
Report that “A member may not have more than two terms in office.”
3.28 The Committee takes note of the fact that currently there is no restriction on the term of a
Council member. The Committee feels that due to lack of embargo on the term of the Council
members, the vested interests tend to get entrenched. The Committee, therefore, agrees with the
recommendation of the Roy Chaudhary Committee that a member of the Council may not have
more than two terms in office. Such a provision will also bring a blend of experience and fresh
thinking in the functioning of the regulatory body.

20
CHAPTER- IV
ESTABLISHMENT OF MEDICAL COLLEGES
4.1 Establishment of Medical Colleges Regulations, 1999 governs the establishment of medical colleges.
These regulations contain all details regarding eligibility criteria for organizations to apply, procedure for
applying, infrastructure required (like land, building, manpower, equipment, hospital size, means of financing
the project, etc.), upgradation and expansion, etc.
4.2 The Committee has been informed that through the amendment of 1993, Section 10A was inserted by
which “permission for establishment of new medical college, new course of study” was brought under the
Central Government and the MCI. Thus, the legal framework of the IMC Act, 1956 vests ultimate power in
the Central Government which grants permission for the establishment of medical colleges. However the
actual power to grant permission for the establishment of a medical colleges vests in the MCI as a result of
a Supreme Court ruling date 23/9/2003 in P.C. Kesavan Kuttinayar V/s Harish Bhalla and others case wherein
the Hon’ble Supreme Court had ruled that whenever the verification of the claim of the applicant/college is
required, the Central Government cannot overrule the MCI’s recommendations. Prior to the amendment of
1993, States could start a medical college under State universities and run them for a period of five years
until the final examination which was to be inspected by the MCI and given approval for the course.
4.3 As regards the procedure for establishment of a medical college, the Committee has been informed by
one of the experts through written submissions that the MCI does the desk evaluation of the application for
establishment of a medical college, followed by a physical inspection to verify the information supplied by
the applicant. Inspectors appointed by the MCI do the physical verification. Elaborating further on this
issue, the Health Secretary during his deposition before the Committee informed that the MCI inspects
medical institutions before recommending establishment of medical colleges.
4.4 In reply to a question regarding mandate of MCI in establishment of Medical colleges the Committee
has been informed by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that opening of a new medical college is
done when an application is forwarded to the MCI and then the technical evaluation is done. The
recommendation of MCI is recommendatory.
4.5 In reply to a question regarding closing of Government medical colleges, the representative of the
MCI during his deposition reiterated the above position, stating that the MCI is not responsible for opening
or closing of a medical college. The MCI only ensures the fulfillment of the minimum standards requirements
which are mandatory in character and adherence to which is non-compromisable.
4.6 In reply to another question, the representative of the MCI during his deposition submitted that the
primary deficiencies which are taken note of by the MCI during inspections, are the clinical workload
deficiency, the faculty deficiency and the infrastructure deficiencies. These are three cardinal considerations
on the basis of which recommendation for de-recognition is made.
4.7 On being asked as to who takes the final decision regarding de-recognition, the Health Secretary
during his evidence on submitted that the recommendation for setting up of a new medical college comes to
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare which takes the final decision. But normally, the Ministry goes in
accordance with the recommendations of the MCI. This is the usual practice.
20

21
4.8 As submitted by MCI, it received 105 applications for establishment of new Medical Colleges for the
academic year 2014-15(Govt.31, Pvt.74). Of these, 16 (06 Govt., 10 Pvt.) were approved and 89 (25
Govt., 64 Pvt.) were disapproved. One Govt. Medical College was approved by Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare.
4.9 Regarding increase of MBBS seats, MCI received 42 applications for increase of seats for the academic
year 2014-15(Govt.04, Pvt.38). Of these, 10 (01 Govt., 09 Pvt.) were approved and 32(03 Govt., 29 Pvt.)
were disapproved.
4.10 Regarding applications for renewal of permission against increased intake, MCI received 124 (Govt.81,
Pvt.43) applications for the academic year 2014- 15 of which 100 (Govt.74, Pvt. 26) were approved and 24
(Govt. 05, Pvt. 19) were disapproved.
4.11 It would be pertinent to mention that the deficiencies pointed out in inspections on the basis of which
permission to medical colleges were denied, pertained to air-conditioning, library not stocking sufficient
journals, thickness of partition walls and shortage of faculty.
4.12 Several of the experts who appeared before the Committee submitted that the mandated infrastructure
requirements such as land, examination hall, size of examination hall, library etc. are very irrational and rigid
and there was an urgent need for flexibility in infrastructure requirements. It was argued that the flexibility
in infrastructure requirements would bring down the cost of medical education, which is a huge burden. An
expert submitted before the Committee that today 20 acres of land is required to build a medical college
which costs around R 500 crore. This leads to high capitation fee and deprives talented children from poor
families of the opportunity of getting medical education.
4.13 Most of the medical colleges/ institutions and stakeholders who made written submission opined that
the physical space, infrastructure requirements and faculty requirements as mandated by the MCI are huge
and irrational and an unnecessary burden. They also stated that starting a new medical college involved huge
costs and resources. They further submitted that the size of Library, Examination Hall, Auditorium etc. have
no direct bearing on the quality of medical education. They, therefore, pleaded that the infrastructure and
faculty requirements should be rationalized keeping in view the modern-day requirements.
4.14 During the Committee’s study visit to Coimbatore, Ooty and Bengaluru, various stakeholders who
deposed before the Committee pleaded that the requirement of manpower and infrastructure for establishment
of medical colleges and increase in UG/ PG seats were rigid and outdated and the Minimum Standard
Requirements (MSRs) including requirement of a unitary campus of not less than 20 acres of land should be
relaxed.
4.15 During the Committee’s study visit to Shree Guru Gobind Singh Tricentenary Medical College, Gurgaon,
the management of the College submitted that instead of insistence on 20 acres of independent land, the
emphasis should be laid on the availability of adequate facilities within the University set up which can be
shared. It was further pointed out that many outdated articles figure in the Minimum Standard Requirements
(MSRs) concerning UG course equipments. For example, despite ban on animal experiments in the country,
many of the labs like mammalian amphibian and experimental pharma labs are redundant but still required to
be maintained. These labs alongwith equipments and instruments should be deleted from MSR.
4.16 Several of the medical institutions/ stakeholders who made written submissions expressed similar
opinion, stating that animal experiments in the country are banned and therefore Animal House, Ambhibian
Lab, Mammalian Lab and related equipments and instruments should be dispensed with.

22
4.17 An expert who appeared before the Committee submitted that “as a Senior Professor and Academic
Chief of Maulana Azad Medical College, in the last six or seven years, I have had 24 university and MCI
inspections in my Institute and I was the coordinator for all of them. Every time we have seen only the
physical infrastructure. Never have we gone to the curriculum or the competency of either the faculty or the
student.”
4.18 During the Committee’s study visit to Coimbatore, Ooty and Bengaluru, some of the stakeholders
submitted that during inspections by MCI, focus is only on faculty, infrastructure and clinical material and
that academic standards of institutions should also be analysed in a more comprehensive manner.
4.19 It was also submitted by all stakeholders that the behaviour and attitude of inspectors created fear
psychosis and there was need to sensitize inspectors about their job.
4.20 During the Committee’s study visit to Shree Guru Gobind Singh Tricentenary Medical College, Gurgaon,
the management of the College submitted that inspections should be on the lines of National Assessment and
Accreditation Council inspections where it is interactive supported to the college inspected. It was also
submitted that inspectors should not be permitted to humiliate at the time of Assessment.
4.21 It was also submitted that the teaching staff have legitimate right for having leaves. Many inspections
fail because leaves other than permitted by Executive Committee decision are not taken into consideration.
It was suggested that the following leaves should be accepted:-
(1) Marriage (self, siblings/children)
(2) Death (Spouse/siblings/parents/children)
(3) Hospitalization (self, spouse, parents/siblings/children)
(4) Other leaves: (atleast 10% staff has to be permitted same sort of leave like casual leave, earned
leave) etc.
(5) 20% of deficiency of faculty/residents should be acceptable.
4.22 Some of the medical colleges and stakeholders who made written submissions also expressed similar
views, stating that genuine leave granted by the authority should be taken into consideration.
4.23 On being asked to indicate the action taken to address the complaint regarding bad behaviour of
assessors of medical college, the President, MCI submitted that the names of such assessors have been
removed from the list of assessors and only those having ten years experience are selected. She further
submitted that assessors are being sensitized to be soft while assessing medical colleges.
4.24 The Committee has been informed by an expert that a large number of young graduates are being
deprived of the opportunity of getting medical education which they aspire for and are going to Russia,
Belarus, Kazakhstan, China and a number of other places. More than 4000 students go every year. The
MCI does not go there; it does not measure the classroom; it does not measure the library, the area of the
hospital. The standards that the MCI is imposing here as Minimum Standard Regulations (MSRs) are not
applied there. When the students come back, they are just asked to appear for a theory examination with
pathetic results. If they pass the examination, they are pushed through internship and after internship, they
qualify for practice in India. Thus, the MCI is adopting different standards and depriving thousands of
young students of the opportunity to be trained as doctors.

23
4.25 Another expert who deposed before the Committee was of the opinion that flexibility in infrastructure
would bring down the cost of medical education. For instance, an auditorium of 650 or 1,000 or 1,200
capacities for lecture theatres for an Under-Graduate college were not needed. Similarly, labs and infrastructure
can be shared as it will cut down the cost of the infrastructure, which is a huge burden on anybody, whether
Government or private. An exercise done in this regard five years back has still not seen the light of day. The
expert was also of the opinion that the Government must take the responsibility on themselves and open
more medical colleges rather than handing over the responsibility to private players.
4.26 The Committee took up the matter of relaxation in infrastructure norms with the MCI. Subsequently,
the Committee was informed by the Health Secretary that the MCI had recommended relaxations in the
MSR. For example, the number of medical journals had been reduced to 60 from 100; the need for an
auditorium had been removed and it had been combined with the examination hall; the size of the examination
had been reduced; the number of beds required at the stage of recognition in respect of 100 and 150 seat
medical colleges had been reduced; the number of teaching faculty had been reduced. However, the land
requirement of 20 acres for the establishment of a medical colleges has not been relaxed. The Ministry has
also made a suggestion to MCI to make changes in the PG Teachers Regulations to provide for more
students per unit in the clinical disciplines.
4.27 The Committee has also been informed by the Ministry that in view of the anomalies in the Minimum
Standard Requirements (MSR), the Government had on 22 nd June 2015 set up a Group of Experts headed
by Professor Ranjit Roy Chaudhury to study the norms for establishment of medical colleges prescribed
now and to make recommendations to review the Minimum Standard Requirements (MSRs). The Committee
had been asked to study global best practices while making their recommendations. The said Group of
Experts has since submitted its Report to Ministry, a copy of which has been made available to the Committee.
The first part of the Report deals with global best practices in this field and then goes on to deal with the
constraints and difficulties facing the situation in our country. The requirements are then discussed under
the headings of infrastructure-land, Built physical Infrastructure, Equipment, Staff, Clinical opportunities
and Academic Output. Broad recommendations are made in each of these areas. In the foreword to the
Report, it has been stated that “If implemented, these measures will reduce the cost of setting up of medical
colleges and the cost of medical education without impairing the quality of medical education being provided.”
The Report concludes by stating that “these changes can be introduced only if the independent Accreditation
Council is established with the authority to monitor and supervise the standards. In the absence of this
provision, the rationalization of the requirements will be exploited to advantage of management and the
detriment of the students. The aim should be to adopt a long term 10 year policy for transformation of
medical education, with interim goals for phased implementation in a manner that all the concerned parties
will benefit and the overall objectives get realized.”
4.28 An expert during evidence opined that there was a need to prepare district hospitals to become
medical college hospitals. He was also of the opinion that large public hospitals should be emulated on the
lines of railway hospitals to become medical college hospitals. Similarly, there was a need to prepare a
number of large private hospitals to become medical college hospitals. The current regulations and the
minimum standards that are imposed are barriers in that process. Another expert during evidence submitted
that “every District Hospital should become a medical college. Without that you are not going to have
healthcare in eastern and most of the central India, because bright students from these States come to

24
Bengaluru, they become doctors in either the St. John’s Medical College or the Kasturba Medical College,
they never go back to their own town.” However, the representatives of IMA who appeared before the
Committee submitted that the move to convert district hospitals into medical colleges was not a good idea
because district hospitals were meant to provide health care to the local people.
4.29 During the Committee’s study visit to Coimbatore, Ooty and Bengaluru, the Health Secretary,
Government of Tamilnadu impressed upon the Committee that District Hospitals should be upgraded as
medical colleges to create more seats for medical courses. Some of the stakeholders/ medical colleges
through written memoranda submitted that District Hospitals should be upgraded as medical colleges.
4.30 During the Committee’s visit to Vardhman Mahavir Medical College (VMMC), New Delhi, the
representatives of the College submitted that new medical colleges should only be attached or linked to
District Hospitals. This will increase the level of services in these hospitals and also utilize the already
existing clinical material in them.
4.31 In reply to a query, the Ministry had informed the Committee that the Ministry had put in place a
Centrally Sponsored Scheme wherein 58 medical colleges would be set up during the Twelfth  Plan period
which will lead to 5800 additional MBBS seats on an annual basis. On being asked as to how many medical
colleges had been set up so far, the Secretary during evidence informed the Committee that this scheme was
introduced only previous year and the Ministry had released money to 19 medical colleges. But during
2015-16, the Ministry did not get the budgetary provision. Once the Ministry received budgetary provision
for the Scheme, money to other medical colleges would be released, he added.
4.32 The Committee observes that as per MCI norms, establishment of a medical college is based
only on physical space, infrastructure and rigid conformation for faculty requirements. The minimum
land requirement of 20 acres, the number of class rooms, lecture halls, examination hall as mandated
drive up the cost of establishment. Since the land is the most expensive commodity, the initial
investment itself is very high, which means that even Governments cannot open medical colleges
easily and promoters are more likely to be those with commercial interests rather than those with
genuine interest in medical education.
4.33 The MCI focuses heavily on nitty-gritties of infrastructure and human resources but does no
substantial evaluation of quality of teaching, training and imparting of skills. Though at the behest
of the Committee, the Minimum Standard Requirements Regulations for the establishment of
Medical colleges have been recently modified by MCI, yet they continue to be unrealistic. These
requirements will prevent district hospitals and large public sector hospitals (like Railways Hospitals,
Army Hospitals, etc.) and large private sector hospitals and multi-specialty hospitals from becoming
teaching hospitals for UG medical education. This will greatly limit the scope for the scaling up of
medical education, even when expansion of the existing capacity is a greatly felt need.
4.34 The Committee also observes that many young students who aspire for medical education but
are deprived of this opportunity in the country, go abroad for medical education in Russia, Belarus,
Kazakhstan, China and a number of other places. When these students come back after qualifying
in their examinations in foreign countries, they are required by MCI to appear for a Multiple
Choice Questions (MCQs) formatted, theory based examination conducted by the National Board of
Examinations. Those who pass the examination are required to do one year of internship and are
then recognized by MCI to be fully qualified doctors, eligible to practice in India

25
on par with a medical graduate who qualifies from an Indian Medical School. The Committee is
giving this example to buttress the argument that MSR should not become a fixation by which MCI
strangles the scope for scale up of medical education, even as it blithely ignores the irrelevance of
those standards for the foreign medical graduates who train in institutions which may markedly
deviate from them.
4.35 Taking all the above facts into account, the Committee is of the considered view that the
existing Minimum Standard Requirements as mandated by the MCI are irrational and artificially
rigid standards which are proving to be big impediment in the establishment and expansion of
medical colleges. The Committee is of the considered view that a R 500 crore of rupees investment
in a medical college would not be able to educate children from poor families for obvious reasons.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that physical infrastructure requirement be pruned down
in such a way that it should have just about 30 to 40 percent standing value in the total assessment
of a medical college.
4.36 The Committee takes note of the observations and recommendations of the committee of
experts set up to study the norms for establishment of medical colleges and make recommendations
to review the Minimum Standard Requirements (MSRs). The Committee has gone through the
report of the committee of experts and is in general agreement with the recommendations of the
committee. The Committee would however, recommend that the Ministry / regulatory body may
implement them in accordance with the plan of action as suggested by the expert committee.
4.37 The Committee lends its full support to the move to convert district hospitals into medical
colleges. The Committee is of the view that if a district hospital is converted into a medical college,
it will not only be equipped with specialists of all disciplines, providing the healthcare services
across the whole spectrum but will also produce some doctors in its area of operation and will thus
help reduce geographical mal-distribution of doctors.

26
CHAPTER-V
UNDERGRADUATE (UG) MEDICAL EDUCATION
Oversight
5.1 The Committee gathers from the information furnished that “Regulations of Graduate Medical
Education, 1997 lays, out the objectives, training approach and curriculum and examinations. It begins with:
“Graduate medical curriculum is oriented towards training students to undertake the responsibilities of
physician of first contact who is capable of looking after the preventive, promotive, curative and rehabilitative
aspect of medicine.” Sub-clause 2 of the Regulations inter-alia reads as under:-
“The training, though broad-based and flexible should aim to provide an educational experience of
the essentials required for healthcare in our country.”
5.2 This sub-clause was amended on 15 th December, 2008 and the following inserted: “Training should
be able to meet internationally acceptable standards.”
5.3 As per the information given in the Regulations on Undergraduate Medical Education 1997, the objective
of Medical Graduate Training Programme at the end of undergraduate programme is that the medical graduate
should be able to inter-alia achieve competence in practice of holistic medicine, encompassing promotive,
preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects of common diseases and become exemplary citizen by
observation of medical ethics and fulfilling social and professional obligation.
5.4 The Committee has been informed by experts that the Regulations on Undergraduate Medical Education,
1997 provide detailed guidelines on the curriculum, skills and competencies and how these should be assessed
by the institutions, but the MCI does not by itself conduct any evaluations of the final graduate or of the
curriculum as it is being implemented and taught, especially the skills. Thus, there is no evaluation of the
actual implementation of MCI’s detailed guidelines for UG medical education. MCI only does an inspection
of the first final examination of every new medical college.
5.5 From the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by different stakeholders, the following facts
emerged:-
(i) UG training needs radical changes.
(ii) The syllabi of medical education should ideally be revised once in 4- 5 years, according to
the needs of the population but it has not been changed for the last fourteen years. Areas
like family medicine, geriatrics, pain and palliative, emergency care have not been incorporated
into the syllabi due to which the medical graduates are not getting exposure to these areas.
(iii) When the syllabi are revised, it takes five years or more to notify them because the MCI
has no power to notify them without the approval of the Government. To avoid such undue
delay, the MCI should have the power to notify academics-related regulations without the
approval of the Government.
(iv) Our present system does not give respectability to a general practitioner.
(v) The skill training of an MBBS doctor is very important. But that is not happing in the present
curriculum. Most of it is theoretical, the practice comes in the internship. But today’s MBBS
26

27
doctor prepares for PG in internship. So, today’s MBBS is zero in knowledge and does not
have basic competencies like conducting a normal delivery or suturing wounds. It was
suggested that the PG entrance examination should be shifted immediately after final MBBS
examination.
(vi) There has been no innovation in medical education over the years. We have not changed
the concept of teaching.
(vii) Our MBBS doctors do not have the confidence to work in primary and secondary health
facilities because they work in a sheltered environment in a tertiary care hospital. It is,
therefore, necessary that a medical student in fourth year or pre-final year should be
exposed to secondary hospital where umbrellas of protection are less.
(viii) The MCI keeps a rigid control over all aspects, especially the curriculum including hours
of teaching, etc. The “maintenance of standards” is interpreted only in terms of a central
curriculum, which is static.
(ix) There has been no scope for local flavour or innovation. We are trying to produce doctors
with a tubular training uniform across the board, with absolutely not even one percent
relaxation from college to college. Flexibility in curriculum should be handed over to health
universities. There should be provision for diversity in the type of colleges-rural, urban,
even with differences in curriculum. There should be different kinds of training formats to
meet different specific needs. The current format is too centralized. There is absolutely no
recognition for the process of teaching, innovation, and evaluating the final product.
(x) More emphasis should be placed on skilled training and evaluating competencies.
(xi) Eighty per cent of our curriculum is on ten to fifteen per cent diseases and fifteen per cent
of the curriculum is on the other eighty five per cent of the diseases.
(xii) There is a mismatch between the training of doctors and the requirements of the country.
(xiii) There is need to have a reorganisation of functions in a manner that curriculums are not
put down as dictates. There should be provision of diversity in the learning process,
teaching process and the curriculum so that we can meet various aspirations.
(xiv) A few years back, there was what is called a reorientation of medical education. This
reorientation was envisaged in such a way that the undergraduates from the second year
itself, will be exposed to the community and community needs. Accordingly, they will be
trained, both on the clinical side as well as on the public-health side. But for some reasons,
this reorientation of medical education was scrapped and that is one of the reasons why
today our doctors do not come up to the expected standards. The doctors we are producing,
are neither good clinicians nor good public health or medical administrators.
(xv) Today, there is a need to focus on basic doctors as per the need of the nation.
(xvi) The curriculum has been designed in such a way that we have ignored the family practitioner
concept. We have also ignored the concept of basic doctors and general Practitioners.

28
(xvii) The MCI has failed in setting curriculum which suits the context and problems of our
country; especially those of rural health services.
(xviii) The undergraduate medical course should also incorporate soft skills. Young doctors are
required to be taught ethics, care, concern, courtesy, compassion and communication, not
only in the classroom, but also through appropriate role modelling.
5.6 During the Committee’s study visit to Vardhman Mahavir Medical College, New Delhi, the
representatives of the College submitted that the curriculum of most of the subjects are old Recommendations
for revising the curriculum have been made by various Committees, but they have not been implemented.
Curriculum revision and inclusion or exclusion of a subject from the professional examination should be
done once again on a major scale and then periodically every 5 years. Teaching methodologies should
become uniform and defined and strictly adhered to.
5.7 The management of Shree Guru Gobind Singh Tricentenary Medical College, Gurgaon to which the
Committee undertook a study visit, shared the views of the representatives of V ardhman Mahavir Medical
College, stating that syllabus and course curriculum should be updated as per the requirements and unnecessary
details should be taken out.
5.8 Some of the medical colleges and stakeholders who made written submissions also pleaded that the
syllabus should be revised and made more skill oriented.
5.9 The Committee is concerned to learn from the experts and other stakeholders that the medical
graduates emerging out of the medical colleges in the country, lack confidence and skills in
performing basic healthcare tasks and even basic skills like conducting a normal delivery, providing
early care for a fracture or suturing a wound are not within the competency of a graduate doctor.
Realising this deficiency, graduate doctors seek post- graduate qualifications in order to acquire
clinical expertise. Since, as against the approximately 55000 UG seats, there are only 25,000 PG
seats as of now, a large number of graduate doctors do not get into PG and become redundant second
class citizens because they are neither competent to practice independently nor do they have the
social status.
5.10 The Committee also takes note of the fact that one of the critical gaps in the system is the
separation between the medical education system and the health system. The primary reason behind
this separation is that our medical graduates work and train in tertiary care settings. Since the vast
majority of patients seek healthcare services in small clinics and out-patient departments of small
hospitals and a small proportion visits and an even smaller number are admitted to tertiary care
institutions, which often deal with exotic and rare diseases, the graduate doctors are not exposed to
primary and secondary health care conditions which is crucial to learn about common health problems
in the country. Due to this skew in training, the graduate doctors are not equipped to manage
common diseases and illnesses in the population. The MCI has failed to address this separation
between the medical education system and the health system in the country. The Committee feels
that the medical education that is imparted to a graduate doctor is only for basic treatment and if he
is not competent enough to do even that, there is basic problem in the system which needs to be
addressed.

29
5.11 The Committee also observes that the most important flaw in the oversight of undergraduate
medical education by the MCI is that the “maintenance of quality is assessed only in terms of
fulfilling physical/ infrastructural requirements and there is simply no overall evaluation of the
standard of medical education. Ironically, “maintenance of uniform standard of medical education”
is the first objective of the MCI, as stated in the IMC Act, 1956. There is also no effort to assess the
method of teaching/ learning, the evaluation process, the learning outcomes etc. The curriculum is
still didactic. The world has moved to competency-based curriculum long back and we are still
having workshops to decide whether we should switch-over to it or not”
5.12 Considering all these facts, the Committee is constrained to observe that the existing system
of the graduate medical education in the country has failed us and unless total revamping of the
undergraduate education system is undertaken, the present system will not be able to generate the
medical manpower required to deliver the ambitious programme of Universal Health Coverage. The
Committee, therefore, recommends complete restructuring of the undergraduate education. The
emphasis should be shifted to learning outcomes based on a curriculum that will train a holistic
doctor with the requisite skills. The training of MBBS doctors should also be in primary care centres
and secondary hospitals including district level hospitals. The curriculum should be designed keeping
in mind the disease profile of the country and the gaps in the present system. The Committee
simultaneously observes that India is a fast developing country and needs health services across a
wide spectrum- from the basic diarrhea treatment to the best tertiary care in the world. The country
therefore, needs to have doctors who are competent and trained to provide health care services
across this whole spectrum. It should therefore be ensured that the graduate doctor produced by
the system is a competent basic doctor who also has the background to specialize. The Committee is
convinced that unless these fundamental changes are carried out in the undergraduate medical
education, India will not be able to meet the health challenges of the 21 st century.
5.13 The Committee takes note of the submission that today’s graduate doctor after doing his
internship is not confident of practicing because his entire period of one year internship goes into
studying for the PG entrance exam. The Committee observes that skill training which is very
important for a medical professional, is not being acquired in internship. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the PG entrance exam should be held immediately after the final MBBS examination
so that the graduate doctor could concentrate on practical skills during his internship.
5.14 The Committee also observes that the medical education in India is increasingly depersonalized
and has failed to instill humane values of care, concern, courtesy and compassion. The Committee
feels that young doctors should not only have practical skills but also a lot of soft skills. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that soft skills (including ethics) should be made one of the
cornerstones of the syllabus of medical education.
Capitation Fee and the need for a Common Entry Examination
5.15 The MCI Regulations on Graduate Medical Education, 1997 declares that “the selection of students
shall be based on merit only…” A 2010 MCI amendment had recommended a common entrance examination
for admission to MBBS course each year.
5.16 The Committee has been informed that keeping in view deteriorating standards of medical Education,
the National-Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test (NEET) was introduced in the year 2012 and the NEET was

30
conducted. However, about 90 medical colleges defied the MCI on regulating entry into medical colleges
and conducted their own examination and obtained a stay from the Court. In May, 2012, the Supreme Court
issued an interim order, making NEET voluntary and permitting the medical colleges to take admissions
based on their own examinations.
5.17 In reply to a question regarding the current status of NEET, the Ministry in a written reply has
furnished the following information:- “At present All India Pre-medical Test (AIPMT) and All India Post
Graduate Medical Examination (AIPGME) are conducted centrally. The Ministry had introduced the single
window entrance test viz. National Eligibility and Entrance Test (NEET). Accordingly, the MCI had notified
NEET for admission to UG and PG courses in medicine. V arious court cases were filed against NEET in
various courts across the country. The Hon’ble Supreme Court, in its final judgment delivered on 18.7.2013,
quashed the Medical Council of India’s (MCI) notifications for holding NEET for MBBS, BDS and post-
graduate medical courses.
5.18 Since, the Government is of the firm opinion that it would be in the larger interest of the society and
the students aspiring to study medicine to have NEET, the Government has filed a Review Petition against
majority judgment of the apex court on 14.8.2013. Simultaneously efforts are on with the State Governments
to introduce AIPMT and AIPGME. Many States have already adopted these exams.”
5.19 The Committee has been informed that in the absence of a streamlined common entrance test, private
medical colleges/universities have developed their own screening and admissions procedure. The majority
of seats are allotted for a capitation fee ranging from R25 lakhs to R50 lakhs or even more.
5.20 The experts who deposed before the Committee also advocated the introduction of common entry
and exit examination, stating that a common unitary test will not only help in merit-based admissions and
standardization but also tackle the problem of capitation fee and everybody will have faith in the system.
5.21 During the Committee’s study visit to V ardhman Mahavir Medical College (VMMC), New Delhi, the
representatives of VMMC submitted that quality of doctors produced across the country can be ensured by
applying single window system of entry in UG and PG courses.
5.22 Several of the medical institutions/stakeholders through written submissions expressed their support
for common entry examination for the purpose of promoting merit and quality.
5.23 On being asked about the updated status of the proposal for Common Entrance Test (CEE) for
Undergraduate and Post-Graduate in the Government and Private Medical Colleges, the Health Secretary
during his deposition informed the Committee that the common entrance exam is not there under any
statute. The Hon’ble Supreme Court had declared it illegal and the Health Ministry has challenged it before
the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The Health Secretary/Joint Secretary detailed the action taken pursuant to the
challenge which is quoted below:-
“Now, in that case, there were many students who were parties. There were about 190 students
who had also filed that case before the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Private colleges and some students
were also there. So, now, the direction of the Court was that we have to service that notice on
all the students. We did not have the addresses. So, we tried to get it from the MCI. The MCI
could not give all the addresses. So, we went to the Registry of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
requesting that we should be allowed to put it in a newspaper so that everybody can be informed,

31
because getting address of each person or each institution is very difficult. Now, that petition is
to be heard. The hon. Supreme Court had given us one date and, on the next date, it is going to
be heard. They have allowed the petition and the Registry has also vetted the public notice which
is to go out.”
5.24 The Health Secretary further informed that it would require an amendment to the Act because the
proposal for holding CEE is being put under rules and the same would require an amendment to Section 33
of the IMC Act, 1956 for which the Ministry would approach Parliament.
5.25 On the issue of exorbitant and totally arbitrary fees charged by private medical colleges, the Health
Secretary submitted that the CEE would help in checking the capitation fee.
5.26 The Committee notes that though the MCI has sent its recommendations for a unitary Common
Entrance Test for admission to MBBS and PG courses long back, the Government is still grappling
with sorting out issues for the implementation of the unitary Common Minimum Test. In the
absence of a streamlined and transparent process of admissions, private medical colleges/ universities
have developed their own screening and admission procedures which are primarily monetary based.
It is public knowledge that the majority of seats in private medical colleges are allotted for a capitation
fee going upto R50 lakh and even more in some colleges despite the fact that the capitation is not
legal. This capitation fee is exclusive of the yearly tuition fee and other expenses. The Committee
observes that the issue is not just about capitation fee. This has serious implications for our whole
system of medical education and healthcare. One clear implication of this skewed process of
admissions by way of sale of seats is that there may be a large number of students entering the
system, who may not be upto the required standards. On the other hand, this system is keeping out
the most meritorious but underprivileged students who can neither pay for seats, nor the high
annual fee in private medical colleges. If a unitary Common Entrance Exam is introduced, the
capitation fee will be tackled in a huge way; there will be transparency in the system; students will
not be burdened with multiple tests; and quality will get a big push. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Government should move swiftly towards removing all the possible roadblocks
to the Common Medical Entrance Test (CMET) including legal issues and immediately introduce
the same to ensure that merit and not the ability to pay becomes the criterion for admission to
medical colleges. The Committee also recommends that introduction of CMET should be done across
the nation barring those States who wish to remain outside the ambit of the CMET. However, if any
such States wish to join the CMET later, there should be a provision to join it.
Common Exit Test for the passing out Graduate Doctor
5.27 The Committee has been informed that the existing number of medical schools, medical graduates
and post graduates is huge. Today, India turns out to be the largest producer of trained modern medicine
manpower in the world. There are more than 400 medical colleges, 55000 MBBS seats and 25000 post-
graduate seats, but there is no exit test.
5.28 Several of the experts who deposed before the Committee during the course of the examination of
this subject, favored introduction of a common exit examination to ensure certification of the competencies
of the graduate doctor.

32
5.29 An expert who appeared before the Committee submitted that
“…our basic doctor should be a leader of a community in a small area where he can manage
everything. Therefore, we want this exit examination. An Indian Medical Doctor should be certified
in such way that nobody should ask, ‘he has passed from Delhi, All-India Institute of Medical
Sciences; he has passed from Jammu and Kashmir or Kerala or from Bihar. From wherever he
has passed, he is an Indian Medical Doctor. If we can have one simple test ( i.e. exit exam) by
which nationally we can follow and standardize that this is the minimum standard for our basic
doctors.”
5.30 On being asked about any proposal for the introduction of a common exit examination for medical
students, the Ministry in a written reply has informed that “A proposal for introduction of a common exit
examination has been made by the Medical Council of India. The Ministry has sought formulation of relevant
procedural guidelines for the same, which are in the process of making.”
5.31 During the Committee’s study visit to Coimbatore, Ooty and Bengaluru, some of the stakeholders
supported the proposal of introduction of Exit examination for passing out MBBS doctors, saying that the
move will standardize the competencies of medical graduates and solve the disparity between different
medical colleges across the country. It was also suggested that the marks obtained in Exit Examination can
be considered for admission to PG programmes eliminating the need for another entrance exam.
5.32 During the Committee’s study visit to Vardhman Mahavir Medical College, New Delhi, the
representatives of the College suggested that instead of an exit exam, there should be common MBBS final
year exam where the candidates from all Government Colleges and Private Medical Colleges get same paper
at same time and are evaluated clinically at a centre other than their institute.
5.33 Several of the medical institutions/ stakeholders who made written submission favoured a common
exit test. However, some of the medical colleges/ stakeholders were not in favour of the common exit exam.
5.34 The Committee takes note of the fact that the MCI’s assessment of medical colleges is
limited to ensuring rigid conformation to infrastructural and faculty norms and an inspection of the
five year examination of new medical colleges. The MCI is not involved in any standardized summative
evaluation of the final product- the medical graduate- coming out of new or old medical colleges.
The final evaluation, and therefore, the final quality of every medical student, is left entirely to the
medical colleges/ universities to assess. The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that
an entrance test alone will not do justice to the entire process and there is an urgent need to
introduce a common exit test for MBBS doctors, which will go a long way in standardizing the
passing out medical graduates and certify the competencies which are expected to be generated out
of him. The Committee accordingly, recommends that urgent action be initiated to introduce a
common exit test for MBBS doctors as an instrument of quality assurance and to ensure that the
qualities and competencies of a doctor before he starts practicing are guaranteed and standardized
in terms of various quality norms.
Regulation of Fee in Medical Colleges
5.35 The Committee has been informed that the fees charged by private medical colleges is arbitrary and
exorbitant. When the Committee took up the issue of regulation of fee in medical colleges with the Ministry

33
of Health and Family W elfare, the Ministry informed the Committee through written submissions that in
case of Government medical colleges, the respective State Governments are responsible for fixation of fees.
However, in the case of private unaided medical colleges, the fee structure is decided by the committee set
up by the respective State Government under the Chairmanship of a retired High Court Judge in pursuance
of the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. It is for the committee to decide whether the fee
proposed by an Institute is justified and the fee fixed by the committee is binding on the Institute.
5.36 The Committee observes that though the constitutionally designated fee regulation committee
of the respective State Government fixes the fee to be charged by private medical colleges, yet the
yearly tuition fee and other expenses that have to be paid thorough a year duration work out in the
range of R12-13 lakh or even more which is certainly exorbitant and beyond the paying capacity of
poor but meritorious students and the same, therefore, needs to be rationalized. As of now, the
Union Health Ministry does not play any role in fixation of the tuition fee. The Committee is of the
opinion that since the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare plays a critical role in supporting the
regulation of medical education, it should be enabled to play a role in regulating fee structure in
private medical colleges so that the right quantum of tuition fees to be charged by private medical
colleges is ensured and there is uniformity in fees across the country amongst the public and
private sector medical colleges/institutions. The fee structure should be strictly be enforced and
action should be taken against erring managements.

34
CHAPTER––VI
POST GRADUATE (PG) MEDICAL EDUCATION OVERSIGHT
6.1 The Medical Council of India provides oversight to PG education through its Post Graduate Education
Committee.
6.2 In a written submission, the Ministry has furnished the following information about the Post Graduate
Committee:––
6.3 As per Section 20 of the IMC Act, 1956 –
(i) The Council may prescribe standards of Postgraduate Medical Education for the guidance
of Universities, and may advise Universities in the matter of securing uniform standards for
Postgraduate Medical Education throughout India, and for this purpose the Central Government
may constitute, from among the members of the Council, a Postgraduate Medical Education
Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Post-Graduate Committee)
(ii) The Postgraduate Committee shall consist of nine members, all of whom shall be persons
possessing postgraduate medical qualifications and experience of teaching or examining
postgraduate students of medicine.
(iii) Six of the members of the Postgraduate Committee shall be nominated by the Central
Government and the remaining three members shall be elected by the Council from amongst
its members.
(iv) For the purpose of considering postgraduate studies in a subject, the Postgraduate Committee
may co-opt, as and when necessary, one or more members qualified to assist it in that
subject.
(v) The views and recommendations of the Postgraduate Committee on all matters shall be
placed before the Council and if the Council does not agree with the views expressed or
the recommendations made by the Postgraduate Committee on any matter, the Council shall
forward them together with its observations to the Central Government for decision.
6.4 In reply to a question, the representative of MCI during his evidence before the Committee, submitted
that the Government nominates six members to the PG Committee but the restriction is that these six
members have to be from amongst the Members of the Medical Council of India.
6.5 The Committee has been informed by experts that to give permission for PG seats, the MCI has laid
down strict qualifications for PG teachers, based on their degrees and experience and has a set of requirements
in the form of beds, patient load, work load and infrastructure, both equipments and space. All this has been
laid down with the rationale that if the facilities are available, the student will learn. The MCI is not involved
in the evaluation of the teaching and learning process. The degrees are given by the various universities to
which the medical institutions are attached. This leads to vast variations in the quality of post graduates.
6.6 The Committee has also been informed by experts in their written submissions and oral evidences
that Section 19 A of the IMC Act, 1956 states that the Council may prescribe the minimum standards of
medical education required for granting recognized medical qualifications (other than PG medical qualifications)
34

35
by universities or medical institutions of India. Thus MCI is categorically proscribed to deal with post-
graduate medical education as a regulator. It is however permitted to advise universities on uniform standards
for the country through Section 20 of the same Act which states that a nine member Post Graduate Medical
Education Committee formed by the Government of India with six of its nominated members will assist the
Council in matters relating to PG medical education. This advisory role has been converted to a regulatory
power, sanctioning PG seats in medical colleges.
6.7 An expert during evidence submitted that “We are having an opportunity to train a large number of
post-graduates in different hospitals across the country, but we are not utilizing those resources in the
country. Ideally, we should have one major regulatory body for all post-graduate medical education in this
country, combining NBE and MCI together. But again, we need to have speciality Boards there. The United
States has a separate speciality Board for paediatrics, for surgery, for medicine, and within those specialty
Boards, they have obstetrics and gynaecology, radiology, etc. Then, within those speciality Boards, they
have sub- specialty Boards for cardiac surgery, neurosurgery, etc. Now, some post-graduate Committee,
sitting even without adequately empowered by the Act deciding what kind of cardiac surgeons, neurosurgeons,
urologists, cancer radiologists and cancer surgeons should be produced in this country, is not going to
work. So, there needs to be a radical transformation of post-graduate medical education as well if you have
to have the kind of specialists we need for this country.”
6.8 The Committee is concerned to note that the approval for PG seats is based on rigid criteria
for teachers, teaching beds, patient attendance and infrastructure and there is no mechanism in
place to evaluate the PG trainees for their skill and competence prior to their certification as a
designated specialist. The present MCI system of oversight of PG medical education does not at any
stage evaluate the teaching and learning process or have any benchmarks for quality. Instead of
devoting its attention to addressing the issue of quality and competence which has a direct bearing
on the safety of patients seeking treatment, the MCI is obsessed with enforcing rigid regulations
that stifle improvement and innovation. The Committee takes note of the information made available
to it that in the USA there are different speciality Boards to monitor and certify training, while the
MCI has a single nine-member Post Graduate Medical Education Committee to prescribe standards
of Post Graduate Medical education. The Committee finds it inconceivable that a single nine-member
Post Graduate Committee has the breadth of expertise to provide guidelines, let alone set standards,
to span multiple speciality disciplines. The Committee is, therefore, convinced that an overhaul of
the whole system is required, and accordingly, recommends that the PG medical education system
should be restructured in such a way that training is assessed by the quality of the product and not
by the infrastructure and a robust system be put in place for evaluation of skills and competencies.
The Committee also observes that there is a need to separate regulation of graduate and post-
graduate medical education as these two phases of medical education need different kind of expertise.
The Committee, therefore, concurs with the suggestion that there should be separate UG and PG
Boards for the regulation of UG and PG medical education.
6.9 The Committee also recommends that post-graduate education should be governed by a body
like NBE, integrating the two systems of PG medical education that currently exist and function
through a well-coordinated array of speciality sub-boards which define desired competencies and set
standards for each major discipline.

36
Capitation fee in PG Education and need for Common Entry and Exit Tests
6.10 The Committee has been informed by experts that of the 25,000 PG seats, a large number of seats are
for the non-clinical specialties (Anatomy, Physiology, etc.) which are less sought after as the employment
opportunities in these specialties exist only in the colleges themselves. This leads to cut-throat competition
for seats, especially in the clinical care branches. Due to judicial intervention, there is a common entrance
for part of 25000 seats, but the private centres ensure that all seats are not put on the common entrance test
as PG entrance is a lucrative business and private medical colleges charge huge capitation fee under the
table. The Committee has been informed that for a PG seat, the capitation fee ranges from 1.00 crore to 1.50
crore or even more due to which it is almost impossible for the meritorious ward of an honest person to
become a PG doctor.
6.11 The experts suggested that the capitation fee-based admission in PG courses must go because it was
compromising quality of medical education and there should be a transparent system. It was impressed
upon the Committee that there should be common entry and exit examinations for the PG courses also.
6.12 The Committee has already commented on the need for a Common Entrance and Exit Test for
UG medical education in the previous Chapter. The Committee is of the view that the grounds which
mandate introduction of common Entrance and Exit examinations for UG medical education are
also valid for PG education. Post-Graduate seats are in great demand. The Committee has been
given to understand that in the absence of a transparent and streamlined process of admission, PG
seats are sold from Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 1.50 crore per seat. The Committee has already dwelt on the
issue of capitation fee and its ill-effect. The Committee would, therefore, refrain from repeating
those details. Keeping all these factors in mind, the Committee recommends that the Government
in consultation with the MCI should swiftly move towards introducing a common entry test for
admission to post-graduate and super-specialties also. The Committee also recommends the
introduction of a common exist test for the passing out Post-Graduates to certify and standardize
their competencies.
Merger of the current DNB and MD/MS Programmes
6.13 The Committee has been informed that India is the only country with two parallel systems of PG
Training. The National Board of Examinations was created by the Government of India in 1982 to enable the
non-medical colleges to conduct post-graduate training, acknowledging the fact that competent specialists
in these centres could train post-graduate students with all the competency available at their hand. It has a
national single entrance system and a single common exit exam making the standard more uniform across
the country. However, the NBE is not a statutory body and hence the DNB is a diploma, not a degree.
6.14 Some experts who deposed before the Committee favored merger of the MD/MS and DNB, stating
that:
(i) “there should be an independent UG Board; there should be a PG Board which should
amalgamate DNB system and the university system of post-graduate medical education...’’
(ii) “no country in the world has two streams of PG medical education, which is causing so
much confusion. The National Board people are saying that they are equal to MD. The MD
people are saying that they are not  equal. He was of the view that there should be one
regulatory body for all Post-graduate education.’’

37
(iii) “ideally, there should be one major regulatory body for all PG medical education, but till this
is done, the equivalence of the DNB and MD/MS should be continued to be recognized.”
(iv) “in the USA, there are different speciality Boards which regulate core disciplines like medicine,
surgery, paediatrics, obstetrics and gynaecology, radiology etc. and that it is not possible
for the 9-member PG Education Committee of the MCI to regulate PG medical education
in a comprehensive manner. He suggested that India also needs to have speciality Boards
to regulate PG education.”
6.15 The Committee takes note of the submission that India is the only country in the world having
two parallel systems of Post-Graduate Certification. The Committee also takes notice of the
information made available to it that despite the Government of India’s order making DNB equivalent
to the MD/MS for all employment, the inspectors of MCI go and threaten medical colleges of de-
recognition if they employ a person with DNB certificate. The Committee observes that there needs
to be radical transformation of Post-Graduate medical education if we have to have the kind of
specialists we need for the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the current system
of PG medical education should be restructured taking the best of both systems that is, all India
common entrance exam for all seats and common exit evaluation for all candidates as practiced by
DNB and the training and evaluation processes of the university based system into one national
qualification. There should be only one regulatory body for post-graduate medical education and the
training should be made more robust. Till then, DNB students be given equitable status of MS/MD
only after completing two years of teaching experience in medical colleges.
Need for PG in Family Medicine
6.16 The Committee has also been informed by an expert during his evidence that the medical education
system in the country has been devised in such a way that the concept of Family Physician has been
ignored.
6.17 An expert who deposed before the Committee in her post-evidence written submissions stated that
“the target for the future should be to have PG opportunities for all medical graduates. In order to do this,
the target should be to make 30-50% of all seats in Family Medicine. Although the speciality exists on the
MCI list, the present rigid MCI framework (30 beds, separate department, 3 faculty members etc.) has not
allowed colleges to start this course. Also, except in practice, there are few career options and young people
are biased by the available career options when they opt for a speciality. Central and State Governments
should take a policy decision that wherever MBBS level posts are advertised, MD in Family Medicine will be
preferred with a substantial salary advantage. Over a time, the Medical Officers at all levels will be post-
graduates and this will enhance the level of primary care and decrease the load on tertiary care. Without this,
Family Medicine is not going to get established.”
6.18 The Committee agrees with the suggestion that there is an imperative need to promote PG
degree in Family Medicine because Family Medicine combines a broad set of clinical competencies
and therefore Family Physicians are more equipped to manage most of medical problems encountered
at primary level. The Committee recommends that the Government of India in coordination with
State Governments should establish robust PG Programmes in Family Medicine and facilitate
introducing Family Medicine discipline in all medical colleges. This will not only minimize the need
for frequent referrals to specialist and decrease the load on tertiary care, but also provide continuous
health care for the individuals and families.

38
Shortage of specialists
6.19 The Committee has been informed that there is shortage of qualified specialists and super specialists
in India. When the NRHM was launched in 2005 and it was decided that ‘Specialist Pediatrician’ and
‘Obstetrician’ would man Community Health Centres. The Ministry of Health and Family W elfare took a
decision that all Government colleges would double their PG intake. Almost ten years later, CHCs still have
no specialists, as in the climate of overall shortage, the market absorbed all additional seats that got trained.
The Committee has been informed by the experts that the recent increase in PG seats has been indiscriminate
which is likely to impact on the quality of PG doctors in future.
6.20 Some of the experts who deposed before the Committee opined that there was a need to equalize UG
and PG seats. They submitted that there are currently close to 25,000 PG seats compared to 55,000 UG
seats. Besides, there are 6,000 or so DNB seats and with the very rapid expansion of multi-specialty hospitals,
even these will not suffice to fill the shortage of specialists, leave alone the requirement for teachers. The
USA has got more PG seats than UG seats ( i.e 19,000 UG seats and 32,000 PG seats). Young MBBS
graduates, if they have money, go to USA to get a PG degree. However, those whose fathers are poor and
who study under a lamp-post, cannot get a PG degree.
6.21 The Committee observes that India is a country of 1.24 billion that will reach 1.7 billion by the
middle of the century. Therefore, only 24,000+ PG seats are unquestionably much less than national
needs. It is, therefore, critical for the country to augment the production of specialists both as a
development imperative and a pathway for ensuring quality universal health care to the masses.
Within the existing framework, it will not be possible to expand rapidly beyond the present strength.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the existing norms governing the allotment of number
of PG seats to an Institute on the basis of the bed strength and number of PG teachers be rationalized
and all the clinical facilities (both public and private) be utilized to impart training so that the
production of PG doctors is scaled up. The Committee has also noted that the recent increase in PG
seats has been indiscriminate and in future we may have a lot of Post-Graduate doctors who may
not be competent in the speciality in which they claim to be specialized. The Committee recommends
that the increase in PG seats should not be indiscriminate and great caution should be exercised on
maintaining quality of training and certification. The Committee also observes that while the increase
in PG seats will produce more specialists and also help to provide required faculty for medical
colleges, it may result in fewer graduate doctors opting for primary health care. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the framework of Post-Graduate education be designed in such a way
that it remains aligned with principles of universal health care.
Requirement of Research Thesis as part of PG Training Process
6.22 An expert who appeared before the Committee submitted that the MCI and the NBE require the PG
students to produce research thesis. However, about 90 to 95 per cent of these are never published and
many of them are not publishable because they don’t address the right kind of questions with the right kind
of methodology. On the other hand, there is huge paucity of relevant data that may prove helpful in the
management of prevalent diseases in the country. For example, there is no reliable data on the number of
patients suffering from malaria, the number of pregnant women with high blood pressure, or the number of
patients with antibiotic resistance. If these problems are addressed in research thesis by PG students through

39
well-developed protocols, it will lead to having regular sets of relevant data and the whole health information
system will be vitalized. The Indian Council of Medical Research can guide such studies by linking with
student researchers and faculty guides from select institutions across India. However, the current MCI rules
do not permit such externally guided multicentre research despite the obvious value of such studies.
6.23 The Committee observes that though research is a mandate of post-graduate training and
evaluation in both MCI and NBE PG Programmes, seventy years of having a thesis as part of the PG
programme has done nothing to produce nationally relevant data for the management of the diseases
prevalent in the country or to establish robust research enterprise within the medical colleges and
institutions. The absence of clinical research on common problems prevalent in the country and the
resultant lack of local information has created a disconnect between official statistics and the problems
on the ground. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the component of research thesis as
part of the PG programme needs to be holistically restructured in such a way that post-graduate
students are guided to conduct research relevant to national health program priorities and generate
nationally representative data periodically.
6.24 The Committee also recommends that the Indian Council of Medical Research should guide
such studies by linking with student researchers and faculty guides, from select institutions across
India.

40
CHAPTER ––VII
DEFICIENCY OF TEACHING FACULTY
7.1 The Committee has been informed by experts that though the number of medical colleges has increased
greatly in recent times, faculty has not registered a commensurate increase. Though data on the exact extent
of shortage of faculty is limited, the Committee has been informed that there is acute shortage of faculty and
the present deficiency of teachers in medical colleges may be to the tune of approximately 30 to 35% or
even more. As per the Report of the National Commission for Macroeconomics and Health, “there is an
overall shortage of teachers entailing adverse impact on the quality of instruction. The situation is so severe
that even Governments feel compelled to indulge in irregular practices of mass transfers of teachers of
different specialties from one college to another on a temporary basis at the time of inspection by the
Medical Council of India. Keeping fake rolls of medical teachers and showing expenditure under the salary
head is a common tactic adopted by managements of private medical colleges.”
7.2 On being asked about the qualifications and eligibility criteria for being designated a teacher in a
medical college or institution, and whether any assessment has been made to arrive at the number of teachers
required for the existing medical college, the MCI in a written reply has informed the Committee that the
eligibility criteria for a designated undergraduate teacher in a medical college are given in the Regulations of
the Council on “Teachers Eligibility Qualifications 1998.” With regard to Postgraduate courses faculty members,
only those who possess a total of eight years experience, out of which at least five years teaching experience
as Assistant Professor/Lecturer gained after Post-graduate degree, shall be recognized as Post-Graduate
Teachers. It has also been informed that the assessment of the cumulative shortfall of specialty/subject-wise
full-time teaching faculty for the undergraduate and post-graduate courses taken together is under way.
7.3 A representative of the IMA during his evidence suggested the use of Information Technology to tide
over the shortage of faculty stating that putting a catheter on a patient need not be taught on a patient; it can
be simulated and in this way teacher can be engaged in more than one classroom.
7.4 An expert during her deposition submitted that the country has a huge pool of talented clinicians and
specialists who do not belong to the teaching cadre. She suggested that the specialists of Government and
private hospitals, who are interested in teaching, should be allowed to become part-time or adjunct faculty.
For example a medicine physician can be allowed to teach physiology; a surgeon can come and teach
anatomy. If this pool of specialists can be tapped as adjunct faculty, the problem of paper faculties during
inspections will go away and the shortage of faculty will be wiped out.
7.5 In reply to a question as to how the MCI would deal with the issue of faculty in respect of district
hospitals which are planned to be converted into medical colleges under a centrally-sponsored scheme of
the Government of India, the representative of the MCI during evidence submitted that the matter would
come before the MCI for deciding the criteria for equivalence of the teacher. It was also submitted that
“there is already a benchmark. The 2004 Regulation is in vogue wherein the issue cropped up in regard to
Safdarjung Hospital and RML Hospital. Therefore, the Council had already taken a view on the basis of
which the Government of India approved a notification, and a regulatory notification has been issued that in
case of hospitals which are not teaching, there the professional experience will be double the number of
years of the teaching experience which is stipulated under Teachers’ Eligibility Qualification Regulation so
that the parity would be worked out in the sense of the cadre of teaching, Associate Professor, Professor
40

41
and Assistant Professor. So, there is already a benchmark which has been worked up. This benchmark is
expected to be availed as and when the need arises.”
7.6 On being pointed out by the Committee that if a PG doctor is having 20-30 years of practicing
experience, why can’t he be eligible for the post of Assistant Professor, the President, MCI during her
evidence submitted that “if the honorary system was there all these people could come in but the honorary
system has been discontinued.” She admitted that in the current scenario there was a need to utilize whatever
workforce is available for the teaching faculty and assured to come out with some solutions.
7.7 Responding to a query regarding the issue of shortage of faculty and employing doctors with 25-30
year’s experience on the clinical side as teaching faculty, the representative of the MCI submitted during
evidence that:-
“in a teaching set-up, an Assistant Professor becomes Associate professor at the end of four years,
with two years of two publications. In the case of the professional set-up, the number of years
required will be eight, not four, subject to fulfillment of the academic qualification and the
publication of the research done. I can submit to the Committee that when the ESIC contemplated
starting medical colleges, ESIC’s medical colleges were virtually started by virtue of this very
regulation, where clinical experiences in the hospitals which were managed by the ESIC, were
equated for the purposes of granting parity for the conversion of the said people into the teaching
cadre.”
7.8 When asked whether the said regulation was applicable to the non ESIC Government hospitals also,
the representative of the MCI stated that “the ambit of this regulation has to be broadened because it was
issue based.”
7.9 On being asked as to what are the grounds of distinction between somebody who is a post-graduate
teaching in a medical college and somebody who is a PG practicing medicine in a hospital, the representative
of the MCI stated that “the distinction is made on three prescribed counts. One is the pedagogical skills, the
second is the teaching training and third is the research skills. “
7.10 An expert who is a renowned heart surgeon, and who appeared before the Committee submitted that
the MCI guidelines regarding designating a teacher are so rigid that he and even Dr. Naresh Trahan, the
eminent heart surgeon of the Medanta Medicity, Gurgaon, cannot become a heart surgery teacher in India.
He informed the Committee that when he was a young medical student, almost all his charismatic teachers
were practicing busy physicians, stating further that all the specialist training programmes happened outside
medical colleges in the USA and Europe. He wondered, if this was what the USA and Europe had done, why
were we doing it differently? He also stated that in order to tide over the shortage of faculty, there was a
need to have a re-look at the policy of retirement of teachers. However, another expert who is an eminent
hematologist of the country disagreed with the above point of view, saying that he stuck to the existing
system. However, he suggested that there should be a rigorous system through which eminent people could
become teachers.
7.11 Another expert who deposed before the Committee submitted that the biggest impediment in opening
more medical colleges was the shortage of faculty. He supported the idea of employing District Hospitals
specialists as adjunct faculty on the ground that the country needed to utilize all available resources to take

42
care of the shortage of faculty. He shared his personal experience, stating that some of his best teachers
during his student days were honorary professors who were very good Practitioners. He also favoured the
idea of shared classroom, using the IT strength.
7.12 He further stated that the National Board of Examinations was established in 1982 to enable non-
medical colleges to conduct post-graduate training so that an Army Hospital, a Railway Hospital, Sir Ganga
Ram Hospital etc. could train post-graduate students with all the available expertise at hand. But, the MCI
has now said that they cannot become teaching faculty in medical colleges. Repeatedly, the MCI has
obstructed. The Government has issued clarifications and even courts have upheld the equivalence of the
DNB with MCI certified degrees. Yet, the inspectors of the MCI go and threaten Medical Colleges that if
they employ a person with DNB, the MCI will not recognize their college.
7.13 During the Committee’s study visit to Coimbatore, Ooty and Bengaluru, some of the stakeholders
submitted that the Regulations governing PG Teacher-Student ratio should be relaxed for certain specialties
like Radio Diagnosis, Psychiatry, TB and Respiratory Diseases, Community Medicine and Anatomy.
7.14 During the Committee’s study visit to V ardhman Mahavir Medical College (VMMC), New Delhi, the
Principal of VMMC submitted that in areas where the country is very short of specialists (e.g. Radiotherapy,
Psychiatry and Super-specialties) - the requirements for teaching manpower can be made little lax.
7.15 The Committee takes note of the fact that there is acute shortage of teaching faculty which
not only entails adverse impact on the quality of medical education but is also a barrier to the
establishment of new medical colleges. The MCI’s policies are largely responsible for this state of
affairs, because very rigid norms have been provided in the “Regulations on the Teachers Eligibility
Qualifications 1998” and only full-time teachers are acceptable to the MCI. It does not recognize
qualified specialists in district hospitals, reputed private and public sector hospitals not attached to
medical colleges and non-medical public health specialists as capable of teaching in a medical college
on a part time basis. The MCI also does not allow for sharing of faculty across Government medical
colleges in a State, through Information Technology enabled “common classrooms”. It also does not
permit surgeons to teach anatomy and physicians to teach physiology part time, though their
understanding of these basic disciplines is very clinically relevant.
7.16 The Committee is constrained to observe that had the MCI been able to unleash reforms of
far-reaching impact to tide over faculty shortages, these barriers would have been removed to a
large extent. The Committee therefore, recommends that keeping in mind that the country has a
huge pool of talented doctors in both public and private sector hospitals, the MCI should look
outside this rigid teaching faculty definition and find out-of-the-box solutions to tap the pool of
practicing doctors who are interested in teaching as adjunct or part time teaching faculty. Of course,
this should be done with some defined parameters and till a certain percentage only.
7.17 The Committee would also like the Government to have a re-look at the retirement policy of
teachers and work out a re-employment policy. The Committee does not see any reason why a
retired specialist at the age of 60 cannot be re-employed as a teaching faculty on a full time or part
time basis.
7.18 The Committee takes note of the submission made by the President of MCI that “If the
Honorary system is there, all these experienced people can come in. We must utilize whatever

43
workforce, experienced or trained or a degree holder is available” and expects that the words of the
MCI President would be matched with the action on the ground. The Committee recommends that
early action may be taken in this regard.
7.19 The Committee observes that the norms and standards as stipulated in the Regulations on
the “Teachers Eligibility Qualifications 1998” had been fixed at a time when Information
Communication Technology Tools wer e not so advanced. Despite tremendous advancement in IC
Technologies and the advantage of our IT strength, ICT tools, virtual classrooms, and e- learning
have not been incorporated in the medical curriculum in tune with the modern times. It is true that
there are certain practical skills which have to be learnt bedside in a teaching hospital or a district
hospital. But classroom teaching can be shared substantially with IT connectivity. The Committee
therefore recommends that immediate action needs to be initiated to allow for sharing of faculty
across government medical colleges in a state, through information technology enabled common
classrooms. Subsequently, this facility may be extended to private medical colleges also, with check-
and-balance mechanisms. The Committee is of the considered view that this measure will not only
go a long way in making up for faculty shortages, but also take care of the current practice of
engaging of ghost faculty by private medical colleges.
7.20 The Committee also recommends that the ambit of the Regulation by virtue of which the
clinical experience of the specialists in the ESIC hospitals were equated with the teaching experience
for the purpose of adopting them into teaching cadre, should be extended to other Government
Hospitals also so that the CMOs and other experienced doctors who have worked in the Government
Hospitals for long and have experience of dealing with thousands of patients can come into the
teaching faculty.
7.21 The Committee takes serious note of the fact that the MCI has continued to oppose the
induction of specialists who have passed the nationally standardized DNB examinations conducted
by the National Board of Examinations and declared that they cannot become teaching faculty in
medical colleges, despite the Government of India and even courts declaring the equivalence of
post-graduate degree awarded through MCI certified and NBE certified Programmes. Since lack of
teaching faculty is the main impediment in expanding and opening more medical colleges, there is
an imperative need to utilize all available expertise to augment the required pool of teaching faculty.
The Committee in the earlier part of this Report, has recommended the merger of the DNB with
MD Programmes. But till then, DNB certificate holders may be utilized in teaching faculty provided
they have at least two years of teaching experience.
7.22 The Committee takes note that the assessment of the cumulative shortfall of teaching faculty
for the undergraduate and post-graduate courses is underway. The Committee recommends that
the assessment be expedited so that the database so generated could be utilized for Human Resource
planning and forecasting.

44
CHAPTER–VIII
NEED FOR AN ACCREDITATION BODY FOR MEDICAL EDUCATION
8.1 On being asked about the existing system of accreditation of medical education in the country and
whether the accreditation is done by MCI or an independent body, the Ministry in a written reply has
informed that the MCI has informed that there is no system of accreditation of medical education in the
country as of now. The General Body of the Medical Council of India at its meeting dated 21-22 June, 2001
had decided to take steps to get accreditation component included as part of the Indian Medical Council Act,
1956 to initiate action to assess certain willing institutions for accreditation with the Council. The said
decision was communicated to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The General Body of the Council
at its meeting held on 26-27 th March, 2015 has resolved that “by insertion of an independent clause after
section 11 of the Indian Medical Council Act as 11(a), the Council be vested with authority and jurisdiction
towards accreditation of medical colleges in the country on the same footing as University Grants Commission
is vested with the statutory authority to accredit institutions of higher education through creation of autonomous
authority for the same and All India Council for Technical Education is entitled to accredit educational
institutions in the faculty of Engineering and Technology through creation of National Accreditation Board.”
The decision so taken by the General Body of the Medical Council of India has been communicated to the
Ministry for the needful.
8.2 The representatives of Indian Medical Association during their deposition before the Committee
submitted that the merit of the entire college or hospital cannot be decided with just a single inspection but
if there is an accrediting body which subsequently inspects, this deficiency can be corrected. They therefore
suggested that there was a need for an accreditation body for the purposes of accreditation of medical
colleges. They further submitted that the IMC Act 1956 does not have provisions for accreditation of
medical colleges and suggested that through a suitable amendment to the IMC Act, the provision for
accreditation of medical colleges be made on par with the AICTE Act, 1987 or the UGC Act, 1956.
8.3 During the Committee’s study visit to Coimbatore, Ooty and Bengaluru, some of the stakeholders
suggested that assessment of quality of teaching and learning process as followed by National Assessment
and Accreditation Council (NAAC) should be adopted to improve standards of medical education. Some of
the medical colleges/ stakeholders who made written submissions shared the above view.
8.4 Some of the experts who deposed before the Committee were of the view that the functions of
standard setting and accreditation should not be vested in the same body and should be separated.
8.5 In this regard the Report of the Group of Experts constituted by the Ministry to study the Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956 has made the following recommendations:-
“The concentration of power in a single agency, which lays down the educational standards,
approves the creation of institutions for UG and PG education and also oversees professional
conduct of practicing physicians, has not served its purpose. The structure of the present Council
is such that its actions are uni-directional, leaving no room for dialogue. Its structure violates the
general principle in education, which is that laying down the educational standards and accrediting
organizations based on their capability in achieving these standards need to be done by different
agencies”.
44

45
8.6 The Committee observes that robust accreditation processes are the foundation of quality
management in most educational systems and therefore there is an imperative need for having an
accreditation body for medical colleges. However, the Committee is not amenable to the suggestion
that the MCI should be empowered to do the task of accreditation through an amendment to the
IMC Act. The Committee observes that the same body giving permission and approvals for medical
colleges and also ascertaining quality leads to conflict of interest. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that a robust independent accreditation body be established and entrusted with the
task of ensuring quality of medical education. The Accreditation Body so created should be oriented
towards seeing whether the type of medical education given is appropriate for the country; whether
the product that comes out of medical colleges is a product that is needed; whether the teaching
methods are upto the mark and latest. The Committee also recommends that such an organization
should be autonomous.

46
CHAPTER– IX
REGULATION OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT OF DOCTORS
9.1 The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that Section 20A of the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956 empowers the MCI to prescribe standards of professional conduct and etiquette and a code of
ethics for medical practitioners. The Indian Medical Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics)
Regulations, 2002 lays down the duties and responsibilities of the physician in general.
9.2 Clause 6.8 of the Regulations deals with code of conduct for doctors and professional association of
doctors in their relationship with pharmaceutical and allied health sector industry and clause 6.8.1(h) inter
alia provides that a medical practitioner shall not endorse any drug or product of the pharmaceutical and
allied healthcare industry publically.
9.3 Regulation 8.7 and 8.8 of the Code of Medical Ethics provides for relationship between the MCI and
State Medical Council. Such relationship encompasses the following:-
“8.7 Where either on a request or otherwise the Medical Council of India is informed that any
complaint against a delinquent physician has not been decided by a State Medical Council within
a period of six months from the date of receipt of complaint by it and further the MCI has reason
to believe that there is no justified reason for not deciding the complaint within the said prescribed
period, the Medical Council of India may-
(i) Impress upon the concerned State Medical council to conclude and decide the complaint within
a time bound schedule;
(ii) May decide to withdraw the said complaint pending with the concerned State Medical Council
straightaway or after the expiry of the period which had been stipulated by the MCI in accordance
with para (i) above, to itself and refer the same to the Ethical Committee of the Council for its
expeditious disposal in a period of not more than six months from the receipt of the complaint in
the office of the Medical Council of India.”
“8.8 Any person aggrieved by the decision of the State Medical Council on any complaint against
a delinquent physician, shall have the right to file an appeal to the MCI within a period of 60 days
from the date of receipt of the order passed by the said Medical Council:
Provided that the MCI may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause
from presenting the appeal within the aforesaid period of 60 days, allow it to be presented within
a further period of 60 days.”5
9.4 The representative of the IMA during his deposition before the Committee submitted that there was
still no code of conduct for the nursing homes, hospitals, clinics, pharmacy and chemists. The MCI had
taken action against a super- specialty Hospital for certain lapses. The Hospital went to the Delhi High Court
stating that “we do not come under the MCI.” The High Court ruled that the Hospital indeed did not come
under MCI.
9.5 Another expert who deposed before the Committee submitted that ensuring ethical practice by the
doctors once they are produced, is one of the most important mandates of the Council. However, the MCI
has completely failed to take action against the doctors who are not following the code of ethics.
5 Source: www.mciindia.org
46

47
9.6 She further submitted that diversity needed to be brought into the composition of the Ethics Committee
of the MCI, which should have external members, preferably non-doctor lay members. She cited the example
of the Ethics Sub-Committee in the UK, which is headed by judges because they would understand larger
dimensions of ethical issues.
9.7 She also submitted that as of now the whole focus of the MCI was on the licensing of medical
colleges and ethics was completely ignored in that process. She argued that there was a need for bifurcation
of these two tasks and they should not be put under the control of one single body, stating that in Australia,
the Australian Medical Council sets the curriculum and does licensing of medical colleges, and the Australian
Medical Board is tasked with the registration of doctors and ethics. Something similar should be structured
in India also. In the UK, when the disciplinary action needs to be taken, the GMC vets and does the initial
documentary investigation and then passes that on to a Tribunal. The hearings are done by the Tribunal. The
adjudication decisions and final disciplinary action is decided by the Tribunal. The Tribunal is a separate
body independent of the GMC.
9.8 She also highlighted the gaps between the State Medical Councils and the MCI when disciplinary
action needs to be taken or complaints come. She stated that very often the State Medical Councils sit on
complaints. There is a six-month period within which action should be taken and if it does not get taken,
then it lapses. There is nothing on paper to say what the different roles of the Central Council and State
Medical Councils are and what the responsibility of State Medical Council exactly is. There is no clarity on
what the Central Council can do if the State Medical Council does not implement after the Central Council
has adjudicated. All this needs to be clarified.
9.9 She also suggested that a code of ethics is needed not only for individual doctors but also for institutions
providing medical care, because when something goes wrong, it is all a blame-game between the doctor and
the hospital. Today, the MCI is only looking at the individual doctor, but not the medical institution. The
Regulatory Body should be dealing with both of them.
9.10 The Committee was informed by an expert through written submissions that besides taking up
complaints including those referred by the State Medical Councils, the Ethics Committee of the MCI also
takes up those cases wherein convictions in courts had happened as the licenses of doctors convicted
would need to be revoked. However, the indictment record of the Ethics Committee has been quite low, just
109 doctors has been black-listed from 1963-2009.
9.11 The Committee’s attention has also been drawn to two articles published in the BMJ, one of the top
international medical Journals, which highlighted the unethical practice of doctors in the country. The
articles titled “Corruption ruins the doctor-patient relationship in India” by Mr. David Berger published on
the 8th May, 2014 and “The unethical revenue targets that India’s corporate hospitals set their doctors” by
Ms. Meera Kay published on the 3 rd September, 2015 in the BMJ (formerly the British Medical Journal)
have documented how kickbacks and corrupt practices are ruining the doctor-patient relationship and how
doctors face pressure from hospital management to overprescribe surgeries or investigations which cause
hazards for the patient.
9.12 The Committee’s attention has also been drawn to a Report titled “V oices of Conscience from the
Medical Profession” which was released by Support for Advocacy and Training to Health Initiatives (SATHI),
an NGO on the 28 th February, 2015 at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences. The Report contains

48
interviews of 78 doctors by the whistle-blowing doctor from Maharashtra, Dr. Arun Gadre and exposes the
realities of the private sector such as irrational drug prescriptions, bribes for referrals and unnecessary
diagnostics and surgeries, the distorting influence of corporate and multi-specialty hospitals on ethics of the
medical profession and the growing grip of pharmaceutical companies on private medical practice.
9.13 The Committee’s attention has also been drawn to an article written by Ms. Rema Nagarajan in the
Times of India under the title “Change in MCI’s code to exclude doctors’ association not notified” published
on June 9, 2015. The article inter alia states that the MCI in its executive committee meeting held in
February 2014 had decided to drop the words “and professionals association of doctors” from clause 6.8 of
the Code of Ethics Regulations, which meant that professional associations of doctors would be beyond the
purview of the MCI.
9.14 It has also been stated in the article that when the MCI was being run by the Board of Governors
appointed by the Government of India following the dissolution of MCI in the wake of allegations of massive
corruption against the then head of the MCI, it had argued in the Delhi High Court that “what is not allowed
to be done directly, cannot be permitted to be done indirectly”.
9.15 Following the February, 2014 decision of the MCI, several doctors, health activitists and organisations
of health advocacy groups, including Smt. Brinda Karat, ex-MP (Rajya Sabha) Jan Swasthya Abhiyan,
Indian Journal of Medical Ethics, All India Drug Action Network and Medico Friends had written to the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, stating that “We cannot conceive how an action that is ethically
impermissible for an individual doctor can become permissible if a group of doctors carry out the same
action in the form of an association.”
9.16 The Committee’s attention has been drawn to an article titled “MCI code of ethics gives doctors way
to accept freebies” published on the 10 th February, 2016 in the “Times of India” wherein it has inter alia
been reported that the amendment to clause 6.8 of the MCI code of Ethics Regulations, 2002 has been
notified on the 1st February, 2016 and the words “and professional association of doctors” deleted from the
said clause, thereby exempting professional association of doctors from the jurisdiction of MCI.
9.17 The Committee had received a representation from a doctor from Kerala and his spouse stating that
they had complained to the Medical Council of India in 2008 and 2010 that the Indian Medical Association
was endorsing commercial products of private companies, which was in violation of the MCI Code of
Ethics Regulations, 2002. He also informed the Committee that he had been issued show cause notices by
IMA for complaining to the Press, the MCI and the Ministry of Health and Family W elfare. However, the
reconstituted MCI has not taken action against the office bearers of IMA despite its earlier Ethics Committee
decision in its meetings held on the 9 th November, 2010 and 28 th and 29th June, 2013 holding the office
bearers of IMA guilty of violation of MCI Code of Ethics Regulations and recommending removal of their
names from the Indian Medical Register. The MCI has instead issued notices to him and his non-medico
wife asking them to appear in person before it.
9.18 When the Committee took up this matter with the President, MCI during her deposition before the
Committee, she submitted as under:
“The complaint has been withdrawn now. Our Ethics Committee has decided to close the case.
Minutes are under preparation. It will come to EC ( i.e. Executive Committee) and we will inform
them.”

49
9.19 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has informed that presently Indian Medical Council (IMC
Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2012 is applicable only on individual doctors and
not association of doctors.
9.20 The Committee observes that the oversight of professional conduct is the most important
function of the MCI. However, the MCI has been completely passive on the ethics dimension which
is evident from the fact that between 1963-2009, just 109 doctors have been blacklisted by the
Ethics Committee of the MCI. The Committee does not intend to taint the entire medical community
and there is no doubt that there are outstanding doctors and surgeons in all parts of India in all
kinds of health settings who have unblemished credentials and who are serving people with
compassion, selflessness, integrity and accountability. But it is equally indisputable that due to
crass commercialization of the health sector, many unprincipled doctors and private sector hospitals
have lost their moral compass and overcharge or subject their hapless patients to unnecessary
surgeries and diagnostic procedures. The instance of unethical practice continues to grow due to
which respect for the profession has dwindled and distrust replaced the high status the doctor once
enjoyed in society. What is of greater concern to the Committee is that the medical profession has
not been transparent in dealing with complaints.
9.21 The Committee notes with concern that although the MCI Code of Ethics Regulations, 2002
contains detailed prescriptions of what constitutes duties and responsibilities of the Physician, the
Code is idealistic in nature and there is no mechanism in place to oversee its implementation.
9.22 Considering all these factors the Committee recommends that the Code of Medical Ethics
needs to be well-defined to take care of the concerns of public safety and malpractices or medical
negligence by doctors so that the doctor-patient relationship which has taken a severe beating, can
be repaired and retrieved. For that to happen, there needs to be stronger mechanism for ethical
oversight of medical practice and the legislation governing the oversight of professional conduct of
doctors should be made more specific with provision for transparency and time-lines. There should
also be an appeal mechanism in place so that the patient does not feel stone- walled.
9.23 The Committee observes that the whole focus of the MCI has been on the licensing of medical
colleges and ethics is completely lost out in this process. It is a matter of surprise that despite the
worst kind of gross unethical practices happening by way of ghost faculty, fake patients and hired
instruments and substantial amount of money (not white, of course) reportedly changing hands at
the time of inspections, there is little proactive action on the part of the MCI to deal with this
malady. Against this backdrop, the Committee is of the firm view that the two major areas, i.e.,
medical education and practice of ethical conduct by the medical profession should be bifurcated so
that they receive full attention. The Committee is of the considered view that in order to earn back
the respect the medical profession has lost, concerted action is needed with proactive steps being
taken and implemented. The Committee accordingly recommends that a separate Board of Medical
Ethics be set up to take up the task of developing mechanisms for promotion of ethical conduct by
medical practitioners. This Board may be constituted on the lines of the GMC of UK and the
Australian Medical Council, which have bifurcated these two tasks and put persons of requisite
competence in the mechanisms so created for the governance of ethical practice by doctors. Such a
Board must plan for continuing renewal of codes of ethics, their dissemination through interactive

50
channels and active promotion of adherence to them. For this, organising workshops, conferences,
etc. should be on-going activities.
9.24 The Committee notes that the Ethics Committee of the MCI presently consists entirely of
medical doctors and is thus a self-regulatory body. But all over the world, it has now been realized
that the medical profession (or any profession for that matter) tends to protect its own flock. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the new Board of Medical Ethics should also have non-
doctor lay members from different fields.
9.25 The Committee observes that the current accountability mechanisms are not sufficient to
ensure observance of ethical practices by the health facilities in India. Though the Clinical
Establishment (Registration and Regulation) Act of 2010 is there, it has been adopted by a few
States only which means there is no appropriate legislation to regulate private clinical establishments
in most of the States currently. It has been seen in practice that individual doctors and the hospitals
where they work, pass the onus to the other when anything goes wrong with a patient. The Committee
feels that for individual doctors to practice ethically, they require an ethical working environment.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the new Board of Medical Ethics should be mandated
to develop standards and norms of professional conduct and codes of ethics for medical practice not
only for individual doctors, but also for institutions of health service delivery, i.e., hospitals, clinics,
nursing homes, rehabilitation centres, associations, etc.
9.26 The Committee observes that it is a well-known fact today that there is a lot of inappropriate
drug dispensing and unnecessary procedures and commission-linked diagnostics by medical
practitioners and health institutions in India mainly due to financial incentives. In this situation,
formulation of treatment guidelines for various health conditions and disseminating them widely
through publicity and media is imperative for protection of patient interests and rights. The Clinical
Establishment (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 can provide an umbrella legislation in this
regard as it has the power to prescribe guidelines for all healthcare facilities. In the absence of a
unified legislation, there are a few different legislations that regulate some healthcare services
such as the Pre- Conception and Pre-Natal diagnostics Technologies Act, 1994 enacted to stop female
foeticide and arrest the declining sex ratio and the Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MPT) Act,
1971 which lays down the conditions under which pregnancies can be terminated. Other health
services are not governed by any standards of treatment and pricing guidelines or reporting
frameworks.
9.27 The Committee also recommends that the Government should put in place a system of auditing
of medical practices. A beginning can be made by reviewing patient records for diagnosis and treatment,
use of antibiotics and caesarean sections in the private hospitals.
9.28 The Committee observes that there is some lack of clarity in the functioning of State Medical
Councils and the MCI when it comes to taking disciplinary action. Though there is a six month
period prescribed within which disciplinary action should be taken by the State Medical Councils
which are mandated to implement the adjudications of MCI, many times the State Medical Councils
sit on the adjudications beyond six months and no action gets taken allowing the errant doctor to go
scot free. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the relationship between the MCI and the

51
State Medical Councils be clarified in unambiguous terms to ensure that the complaints against
doctors are attended to in time and action taken without delay.
9.29 The Committee is astonished to note that the MCI has notified on 1 st February, 2016 an
amendment to clause 6.8 of the Regulations, deleting the words “and professional association of
doctors” and exempting professional association of doctors from the  ambit  of  MCI  Code  of Ethics
Regulations, 2002. The Committee observes that exempting professional association of doctors
from the ambit of Ethics Regulations is nothing short of legitimizing doctors’ associations indulging
in unethical and corrupt practices by way of receiving gifts in cash or kind under any pretext from
the pharma industry or allied health industry.  The Committee agrees with the view point of public
health activists that “an action that is ethically impermissible for an individual doctor cannot become
permissible if a group of doctors carry out the same action in the name of an association.” The
Committee could not uncover any rational reason as to why the MCI has taken such a retrograde
decision. It seems that the MCI has become captive to private commercial interests, rather than its
integrity in public interest.
9.30 The Committee also finds it intriguing that instead of intervening to thwart attempt of MCI
at subverting the system, the Ministry has meekly surrendered to MCI. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should take immediate action in the matter to ensure that the illegality committed
in terms of violation of ethical standards of 2002 Regulations, either by an individual doctor or a
group of doctors in the form of an association is not kept out of the jurisdiction of MCI and the
words “and professional association of doctors” are restored to clause 6.8 of the MCI Code of Ethics
Regulations 2002 so that no immunity, whatsoever, is accorded to any association or society of
doctors. If there are any other legal infirmities in the framework of the 2002 Regulations, they
should be removed.
9.31 The Committee taking note of the submissions of the President, MCI that the existing Ethics
Committee has closed the case against the whistleblower doctor from Kerala and his wife recommends
that completion of all formalities concerning the closing of the case be expedited by the MCI. The
Committee desires to be informed of the final outcome / fulfillment of the assurance made by the
President MCI, to the Committee in this regard, within one month from the presentation of this
Report.

52
CHAPTER ––X
MAINTENANCE OF INDIAN MEDICAL REGISTER (IMR)
10.1 The Committee has been informed that Section 23 of the IMC Act provides for the “Registration in
the Indian Medical Register”. Registration in IMR is either on receipt of Report of registration of a person in
State Medical Register or on application made in the prescribed manner by a person to have his name entered
into the IMR.
10.2 The Committee has been informed that MCI has to maintain such Register, revise it from time to time
and publish it in the Gazette of India in such other manner as may be prescribed. Further, information as to
the change in name or registration of additional qualifications or address or removal of name is also to be
provided by the State Medical Council to the MCI as and when received. Further, information as to the
change in name or registration of additional qualifications or address or removal of name is also to be
provided by the State Medical Council to the MCI as and when received.
10.3 The Committee has also been informed that Section 28 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 deals
with the obligation of the persons enrolled on the Indian Medical Register to notify change of place of
residence or practice, to the Council and the State Medical Council. Failure on the part of persons enrolled
in the IMR to notify such change may forfeit their right to participate in the election of members to the
Council or the State Medical Council by the Central Government.
10.4 An expert during evidence informed the Committee that the present figures of registered doctors
maintained by MCI are based on a static register. Even the persons registered in the year 1974 and who are
no more, still exist in the said register and there is no mechanism to remove the names.
10.5 Another expert informed that the current register also contains names of those with a permanent
address outside India.
10.6 During the Committee’s study visit to Coimbatore, Ooty and Bengaluru, some of the stakeholders
suggested that registration of doctors should be streamlined and single national registry should be maintained
so that the registered doctor could practice anywhere in the country.
10.7 During the Committee’s study visit to Shree Guru Gobind Singh Tricentenary Medical College, Gurgaon,
the representatives of the College submitted that registration should be common for the country and should
be honoured even if the person moves from one states to other state. Some of the medical institutions/
stakeholders who made written submissions expressed similar views.
10.8 On being asked whether it was compulsory for a medical doctor to register himself, the representative
of the MCI during evidence replied in the affirmative, stating further that without registration he cannot
practice. When asked whether the Indian Medical Register also included the people who have got MBBS
degrees and gone abroad, the MCI representative again replied in the affirmative. On being further asked
“how do you net out the people who have taken MBBS degree here and gone abroad” he replied that the
“process has been undertaken”.
10.9 In reply to a question, the Committee has been informed that the Council is in the process of
implementing the system of e-Governance and integral part of which would be live IMR/ updation of IMR,
conversion of existing registration numbers to Unique Permanent Registration Number (UPRN), etc. by
involving State Medical Councils also so as to invoke an online update in due course of time.
52

53
10.10 The Committee observes that the current Indian Medical Register (IMR) does not depict the
real picture since the same includes names of all medical practitioners who have ever registered
themselves in the IMR, be they dead or alive, in India or abroad. This register cannot be of much
help to planners and policymakers for HR planning and forecasting. The Committee is, therefore,
of the view that the Indian Medical Register needs a live database so that a realistic assessment of
the number of doctors actually practicing in the country and how they are distributed across the
public and private sectors and across rural and urban areas, could be made.
10.11 The Committee takes note of the submission that the Council is in the process of implementing
the system of e-Governance and integral part of which would be live IMR/ updation of IMR, conversion
of existing registration numbers to Unique Permanent Registration Number (UPRN), etc. by involving
State Medical Councils also so as to invoke an online update in due course of time. The Committee
therefore recommends that the IMR be made online and a live database be created in such a
manner that there is automatic update between States and the Centre. If the name of a doctor is
removed at one place, it should reflect in other site also. The Committee also recommends that the
Ministry should direct the Council to complete the process within a stipulated time.
Need for Mandatory Re-Certification and Continuing Medical Education
10.12 In majority of the countries in the world, medical education is not perpetual and needs to be reviewed
after five years. However, in India, recertification and mandatory Continuing Medical Education (CME) is
missing in the existing regulatory framework. In reply to a question, the Ministry informed that as per the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, registration was one time requirement and any change in it requires an
amendment to the Act.
10.13 In reply to a question, on whether the doctors are getting information from pharma people who have
their own commercial interest, the representative of the IMA submitted during his evidence before the
Committee that “we are forced to depend on pharmaceutical companies because there is no system where
the Drug Controller of India informs us about the introduction of a new drug as FDA does in USA. We don’t
have a compulsory pharmaco-vigilance department. Ultimately the doctors have to depend on pharma
companies. Whenever there is sponsorship from pharma companies, there will always be a bias.” The
representative suggested that there should be programme for updating of the knowledge of doctors once
they leave their medical colleges and the responsibility should be taken by the MCI, medical colleges and the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
10.14 The Committee was informed that in the USA there is a system according to which every five years
doctors have to get certified by a Board.
10.15 During the Committee’s study visit to Coimbatore, Ooty and Bengaluru, the representatives of the
Government of Tamil Nadu inter alia submitted that in majority of countries, medical registration was not
perpetual and needed to be renewed after every five years. It was impressed upon the Committee that there
was need to introduce a similar system in the country for ensuring maintenance of standards.
10.16 An expert who appeared before the Committee stated that re-registration occurred all over the world,
but not in India. She underscored the need for introduction of re-registration and re-training to all, for robust
medical education. Another expert submitted that the education of practicing doctors was being done by the

54
pharma industry because the MCI has failed to fill this gap. She also advocated the introduction of mandatory
continuing medical education so that the health system’s requirements, and not the pharma sector’s commercial
interests, are strengthened.
10.17 The Committee agrees with the need for mandatory recertification and   Continuing   Medical
Education  and   a  structured  programme of periodical update of the knowledge of doctors as
quality assurance mechanisms and observes that the MCI (or any other body) in consultation with
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should take the responsibility in this regard. The
Committee observes that in the absence of a structured mechanism for recertification and Continuing
Medical Education, pharma companies are filling the gap due to which doctors are dependent on
them for the update of their knowledge. This influences them in their professional practice. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the renewal of registration and Continuing Medical
Education be made mandatory so that the health system’s requirements get strengthened and
doctors practice more appropriate and rational technology instead of picking up the technologies
pushed by the interested agencies.

55
CHAPTER ––XI
NEED FOR ATTRACTIVE REMUNERATION FOR DOCTORS AND MEDICAL FACULTY
11.1 During the course of examination of the functioning of the MCI, the need for adequate remuneration
for doctors and faculty working in the public sector was emphasized by the experts who deposed before the
Committee.
11.2 It was impressed upon the Committee that un-remunerative pay structure of doctors and faculty was
one of the factors which was resulting in less students being attracted towards this profession. It was also
pointed out that the entry of corporate sector into the healthcare industry has attracted many high performing
doctors from public health facilities to private hospitals and medical colleges owing to financial incentives.
11.3 The Representative of Indian Medical Association during his deposition before the Committee made
the following submissions in this regard:-
“We make a big hue and cry that people are not opting for teaching posts. But, there are various
considerations where there is no regulatory mechanism. Even today, when we are talking of payment
of scales and service conditions, it is the UGC scales that become accruable and there is nothing with
the MCI or any mechanism associated with the medical education for the purposes of regulating the
service conditions of medical teachers, accruable pay-scales of medical teachers and all other incentives
and benefits which, of course, would be adding as a big incentive for people to take up the assignment
as full-time faculty in medical education”.
11.4 Experts who deposed before the Committee while echoing these views stated as under:-
(i) “......the medical profession should be made more attractive. In  2011 or 2012, there used
to appear three lakh candidates in Rajasthan, the State I come from, for the PMT examination.
I was told that in next year less than 50,000 students appeared. Nobody wants to join
medicine stream today. You want more medical colleges. You want more doctors. But
nobody wants to join! Our children say, No, no, we do not want to be like that. No
question! The reason is that an MBBS and an MD or a DM requires 12 years of study. By
then, he will be around 30 or 31 years old. He is already married with children, while he
is doing his DM. And, on the other side, an engineering or a business school guy has four
years plus two years. At twenty-five, he is good.
He is an earning member of the family. The medical courses are voluminous because the
doctors can get patient with any type of medical problem, and the teachers have the habit
of asking most difficult things. So, students keep reading…..But if you compare medicine
with other branches, the courses are very limited in other branches. Medicine is unlimited.
The other problem is that one in one- thousand becomes a super-specialist. We take exam
for two seats; 290- 300 students appear. That is for post-M.S. For MBBS, you get MBBS,
but from MBBS to MD, the ratio is generally 1:100, 1:40 and like that. But from there,
finally, to become a super-specialist of a heart or a lung or a brain, the ratio is one in 1000.
In other streams, this is not there. There are equal number of PG and job opportunities.
He can be an MBA; he can be an engineer.
55

56
(ii) “When the student passes out, after his super-specialization, he gets R70,000 to
R1,00,000, while the other guy gets close to five lakh rupees, three lakh rupees immediately.
As far as working hours are concerned, doctors have to be there all the time. The others
have flexi hours. You can work from home. All the time, there are chances of litigations
on doctors. There is nobody to save them. The profession is under deep trouble because
of this. And then there is public distrust.”
(iii) “Doctors are beaten up. So, the students are not trying to become doctors today. So, what
we need is to bring up medical profession and give young doctors new options. In 2010,
the Board of Governors (BoGs) of MCI had seven main agendas. This was the seventh
agenda, “The Remuneration Packages”. W e had requested Mr. Narayan Murthy to head a
Committee. The report was sent to the Health Ministry, which was never picked up. The
report of Narayan Murthy Committee, 2011 says, ‘Pay the doctor his worth.’ What are
three main things? Medical profession needs higher commitment, skills, accountability than
any other stream. So, the pay should be as per the number of years of training. Suppose
the engineer or an MBA is trained for six years. When he starts his service, he gets amount
equal to six years of training. The medical student, if has read for nine years for his M.S.,
give him three additional increments in UPSC, when he joins. If he has become a super-
specialist by putting six extra years, give him six increments at the time he joins. This was
a clear recommendation, and I think, if you implement it, this will make a huge change in
our profession.”
(iv) “Today , Government colleges do not have teachers. Everyone is in private. My student who
passes out gets four times more pay after my thirty-five years of work—four times more
pay on the day he passes.
So, why should he continue in Government service? So, what we want, in Government
service, give him increments as it is. Second, anybody who is doing clinical, teaching and
research—there are three heads— pay him three times. Believe me, this is the biggest fear
that I have. T omorrow, five years down the line, there will be no good teachers in the
medical colleges. You will have colleges. But the new AIIMS would not have teachers. To
keep teachers there, you must pay them their worth”.
11.5  The Committee notes with serious concern that medicine is no  longer a priority for the
brightest among the youth and the disinterest of our brightest to opt for teaching jobs in public
sector health institutions is increasing due to various factors, one of which is certainly inadequate
remuneration packages. The Committee observes that the whole medical education system will
collapse if there are not good teachers for our medical colleges. Let us also not forget that today’s
medical student is tomorrow’s physician and no society can afford to leave healthcare in the hands
of mediocre doctors. All these facts warrant that measures to attract good talent towards medical
profession and retain them, by way of offering attractive remuneration packages are required to be
immediately initiated. The Committee fully endorses the view that medical profession demands
much higher commitment, knowledge, skills, competence and accountability and doctors have to
work under very trying conditions. It is, therefore, imperative that the pay structure of doctors and
faculty should be so designed as to provide compensation to medical fraternity commensurate to
their years of training and research.

57
CHAPTER––XII
CORRUPTION IN THE MCI
12.1 The Committee keeps on hearing that there is corruption in the MCI and money changes hands for
increase of seats, recognition, etc.
12.2 The Health Secretary during his deposition before the Committee informed the Committee that following
allegations of corruption against the former President of MCI, the Medical Council was superseded in May,
2010 and a Board of Governors was installed.
12.3 On being asked about the kinds of corruption that is happening in the MCI, the President, MCI during
evidence before the Committee admitted that corruption was there when there was sanctioning of medical
colleges, or increasing or decreasing seats. The Committee has also been informed that the private medical
colleges arrange ghost faculty and patients during inspections by MCI and no action is taken for the irregularity.
The Committee has also been given to understand that MCI is proactive in taking action on flimsy grounds
against Government Medical Colleges which are 100% better.
12.4 On being asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to tackle corruption in the MCI which has been
there for the past 20-25 years, the Health Secretary during evidence submitted that the entire IMC act was
under review. He also informed that the MCI Act as it exists today does not empower the Government to
take action even in proven corruption charges. However, in the IMC (Amendment) Bill 2013, there is a
provision that if there are proven charges then the Member can be removed. Such a provision was in the
2010 Ordinance also during the Board of Governor’s time.
12.5 An expert through written submissions has raised the issue of lack of transparency and corruption in
the electoral process of the Council formation.
12.6 Another expert who deposed before the Committee highlighted the issue of corruption and also
suggested the following solution to stem the corruption in MCI:
“The large issues of non-transparency and corruption also stem from the issue of licensing of
colleges. Therefore, can we put these two apart? Could it be so that within the MCI we create
two sections, or do we have two separate bodies?”
12.7 The expert has also supplied a copy of an article titled “Vyapam is the symptom, Criminalization of
Medical Education is the Disease” dated 12th July, 2015 written by Professor Rama Baru and Ms. Archana
Diwate of the Centre for Social Medicine and Community Health, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
which was published in the WIRE, wherein the authors have highlighted malpractices at the MCI. It would
be pertinent to mention here that Prof. Rama Baru was a member of the Ethics Committee of MCI a few
years ago and is thus privy to information about corrupt practices at the MCI.
12.8 The Committee also takes note of a news report published in the Times of India on 18 th December,
2013 under the caption “Now MCI includes 17 tainted members”, wherein it has been reported that 17
members who were part of the previous MCI which was dissolved by the Government in 2010 on grounds
of rampant corruption have made a comeback in the new MCI.
57

58
12.9 The Committee is also in possession of a letter dated the 4 th March, 2014, written by the Joint
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family W elfare to the President, MCI wherein he had raised the issue of
appointment of some Advisors to the President in contravention of the legal provisions and requested to
cancel “all such appointments which are not authorised by the Act, with immediate effect”.
12.10 The Committee’s attention has also been drawn to the media report wherein Dr. Harshvardan, the ex-
Union Health Minister soon after taking over the charge of the Ministry of Health and Family W elfare had
stated that the Medical Council of India has been a “big source of corruption” so much so that it has
weakened the very edifice of medical education in the country .
12.11 The Committee is shocked to find that compromised individuals have been able to make it to
the MCI, but the Ministry is not empowered to remove or sanction a Member of the Council even if
he has been proved corrupt. In a day and age when the need for sturdy systems and enhanced
transparency based regimes are being increasingly emphasized, such state of affairs indicate that
the MCI has not evolved with the times. Such state of affairs are also symptomatic of the rot within
and point to a deep systemic malice. Otherwise how could it happen that the MCI, which has laid
down elaborate duties and responsibilities of the “Physician” under the MCI Code of Ethics
Regulations, 2002, could have at its very top a person who was arrested on charges of corruption in
2010. The former Union Health Minister, who must have an insider’s view of the functioning of the
MCI, making scathing comments about corruption in the MCI, speaks volumes of the decay in the
MCI and is an eye-opener on the need for urgent reforms in the structure and functioning of MCI.
12.12 The Committee is all for professional autonomy, but autonomy sans accountability tends to
degenerate into autocracy and therefore cannot be acceptable. The MCI is funded by the Government
and therefore the Government must have the leverage to enforce accountability in the MCI. Since
the real cause of the problem is systemic and cannot be fixed without setting the system right, the
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take expeditious action to amend the statute or
enact a new legislation in a manner that it comprises within its ambit accountability provisions as
well and empowers the Government with legal authority to intervene in matters of corruption. In
the same vein, the Committee would like to emphasize that bonafide conduct/decisions of the Council
members should be duly protected.
12.13 The Committee takes note of the admission of the President of MCI that corruption is there
when there is sanctioning of medical colleges or increasing or decreasing of medical seats. However,
the Committee finds the inaction of the MCI enigmatic in this matter. If the MCI is aware of the
fact that denial of recognition of a medical college or grant of seats and then its permission /
enhancement or reduction leads to corruption, then the Committee wonders why it has failed to put
in place a framework or system which can plug these loopholes. The Committee is of the view that
there is too much power concentrated in a single body ( i.e. the MCI), and it has failed to create a
transparent system of licensing of medical colleges. The MCI currently sets standards for recognition;
inspects and licenses medical colleges; overseas Registration and Ethical Conduct of Doctors. It
now proposes to undertake accreditation as well. Such concentration of powers creates a serious
conflict of interest and provides a fertile ground for misuse of authority. The Committee, therefore,
favours bifurcation of the functions of MCI and recommends that different structures be created
for discharging different functions.

59
12.14 The Committee also takes note of the allegations reported in the media report that the
former vigilance officer of MCI was harassed and had to quit for lack of cooperation from the
President and several officials of the MCI in his efforts to deal with corruption. The facts brought to
the notice of the Committee force the Committee to seek a thorough probe into the whole gamut of
issues due to which the said Vigilance Officer had to resign.
12.15 The Committee wonders to find that certain persons were appointed as Advisors to the President
in transgression of law and the Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide
his letter dated the 4 th March, 2014 had to write to the President to cancel “all such appointments
which were not authorized by the Act.” The Committee takes serious note of such flouting of law
and would like the matter to be thoroughly probed and an action taken report furnished to the
Committee within three months from the presentation of this Report.
Inspections and Corruption
12.16 The Committee has been informed by an expert that the desk evaluation of the application for
establishment of a medical college is done by the Executive Committee followed by physical inspection to
verify the information supplied by the applicant. Inspectors appointed by the MCI do the physical verification.
One permanent inspector, an MCI permanent staff, leads, along with 3-4 external Inspectors chosen by the
Executive Committee of the MCI.
12.17 The Committee has also been informed that a copy of the Inspection Report is not provided to the
University concerned, though section 17.3 of the IMC Act requires this.
12.18 As informed by the Ministry, as per the Delhi High Court order dated 20 th December, 2013, all the
assessment should be conducted as surprise inspection. However, it is in the Committee’s knowledge that
some medical colleges have prior information of inspection dates and are thus able to keep ready the required
number of ghost faculty and fake patients. The Reuters in a report titled “why India’s medical schools are
plagued with fraud” published on the 16 th June 2015 has documented such malpractices, stating that
“recruiting companies routinely provide medical colleges with doctors to pose as full-time faculty members
to pass Government inspections. To demonstrate that teaching hospitals have enough patients to provide
students with clinical experience, colleges round up healthy people to pretend they are sick.”
12.19 The Committee would also like to highlight the following facts which were brought out in an article
titled “The Murky world of medical college inspections” by Ms. Rema Nagarajan in the Times of India on
the 17th November, 2014: -
“Of 261 inspections, inspectors from medical colleges in Gujarat were involved in about 100 and
another 40 involved faculty from Bihar. Yet inspectors from Tamil Nadu, the state with the highest
number of Government medical colleges, were involved in just seven inspections. There were 24
inspectors involved in 40 inspections from just two medical colleges in Haryana, a state with just
three Government colleges, while only six faculty members were involved in seven inspections
from Kerala, a state with nine medical colleges. Out of 33 inspections done by inspectors from
Delhi, 21 were from just one medical college, Maulana Azad Medical College (MAMC), though
Delhi has six medical colleges. Of those from MAMC, just two doctors were involved in 11
inspections..... Despite hundreds of faculty members from 183 Government medical colleges being

60
available, the assessment reports show that about 20 inspectors have done as many as four to nine
inspections each. Some of those who did seven or nine inspections were mostly sent to private
medical colleges. These ‘serial inspectors’ were part of almost half the inspections conducted this
year i.e. 2014. “
12.20 The Committee observes that the current system of inspections is flawed and opaque in the
sense that there is no provision for constructive feedback and the whole procedure is oriented
towards penalizing rather than improving. The Committee also observes that though Section 17.3
of the IMC Act, 1956 requires to forward “a copy of any such report to the university or medical
institution concerned...” no such report is submitted to the university concerned. This opaqueness
means that these inspections give enormous scope for money to exchange hands. It is ironical that
the evaluation of quality of teaching and training and the final product, i.e. the doctor, does not
figure in inspection reports.
12.21 The Committee also observes that MCI regulations do not provide any clear-cut-criteria for
recruiting suitable evaluators. The obvious fallout of this is an arbitrary and partisan selection of
inspectors. The Committee is amazed to take note of media report titled “The murky word of
medical college inspections” that despite hundreds of faculty members from 183 Government medical
colleges being available, certain ‘serial inspectors’ were part of almost half the inspections conducted
in the year 2014 and of the 261 inspections done during 2014, inspectors from medical colleges in
Gujarat were involved in as many as 100 inspections and another 40 involved faculty from Bihar.
The Committee observes that this cannot be a mere coincidence but reeks of a serious scam. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to unravel the truth, an in-depth probe may be
conducted into the arbitrary appointment of inspectors in the year 2014 and an action taken note
furnished to the Committee within three months from the presentation of this report.
12.22 The Committee has recommended the establishment of a robust and autonomous accreditation
mechanism separately. Since the existing system of inspections of medical colleges has not been
able to promote quality and resulted, instead, in slashing of thousands of medical seats on flimsy
grounds, the Committee recommends, even at the cost of repetition, that the current system of
annual inspection be scraped and an autonomous accreditation body on the lines of the National
Accreditation and Assessment Council which is an autonomous body established by the University
Grants Commission and is mandated to assess and accredit institutions of higher education, be
established in the domain of medical education to deal with issues of quality.

61
CHAPTER-XIII
CONCLUDING  COMMENTS
13.1 The Committee observes that the Medical Council of India as the regulator of medical education
in the country has repeatedly failed on all its mandates over the decades. The Committee in the
earlier part of this Report has dealt with these failures in some detail. In this section, the Committee
before suggesting remedy to the problem, would like to briefly touch upon the following prominent
failures of MCI in order to put things into proper perspective:-
(i) failure to create a curriculum that produces doctors suited to working in Indian
context especially in the rural health services and poor urban areas; this has created
a disconnect between medical education system and health system.
(ii) failure to maintain uniform standards of medical education, both undergraduate and
post-graduate;
(iii) devaluation of merit in admission, particularly in private medical institutions due to
prevalence of capitation fees, which make medical education available only to the
rich and not necessarily to the most deserving;
(iv) failure to produce a competent basic doctor;
(v) non-involvement of the MCI in any standardized summative evaluation of the medical
graduates and post-graduates;
(vi) failure to put in place a robust quality assurance mechanism when a fresh graduate
enters the system and starts practicing;
(vii) very little oversight of PG medical education leading to huge variations in standards;
(viii) heavy focus on nitty-gritty of infrastructure and human staff during inspections but
no substantial evaluation of quality of teaching, training and imparting of skills;
(ix) Abysmal doctor-population ratio;
(x) failure to create a transparent system of medical college inspections and grant of
recognition or de-recognition;
(xi) failure to guide setting up of medical colleges in the country as per need, resulting
in geographical mal-distribution of medical colleges with clustering in some states
and absence in several other states and the disparity in healthcare services across
states;
(xii) acute shortage of medical teachers;
(xiii) failure to oversee and guide the Continuing Medical Education in the country, leaving
this important task in the hands of the commercial private industry;
(xiv) failure to instill respect for a professional code of ethics in the medical professionals
and take disciplinary action against doctors found violating the code of Ethics, etc.
61

62
13.2 The Committee simultaneously observes that the onus of failure of medical education system
cannot be laid exclusively on the Medical Council of India. The successive Governments have also
their share in it. The fact that there is imbalance in the distribution of medical colleges across
States is not so much MCI’s fault; it is the fault of the successive Governments that they have not
pushed the MCI in that direction. There is also failure on the part of State Governments.
13.3 The need for radical reforms in the regulatory framework of the medical profession has been
on the agenda for several years now. The National Commission for Human Resources for Health
Bill, 2011 which was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 22 nd December, 2011 was reported upon
by this Committee and the 60 th Report thereon presente d to Parliament on the 23 rd November,
2012. In its 60 th Report, the Committee had recommended to the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare to re-examine the concerns expressed by it and bring forward a fresh Bill. Rather than
seizing the opportunity to come up with a better Bill, the Ministry remained apathetic to the state of
affairs and did not respond with vigorous corrective measures.
13.4 Due to massive failures of the MCI and lack of initiatives on the part of the Government in
unleashing reforms, there is total system failure due to which the medical education system is fast
sliding downwards and quality has been hugely side-lined in the context of increasing
commercialization of medical education and practice. The situation has gone far beyond the point
where incremental tweaking of the existing system or piecemeal approach can give the contemplated
dividends. That is why the Committee is convinced that the MCI cannot be remedied according to
the existing provisions of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 which is certainly outdated. If we try
to amend or modify the existing Act, ten years down the line we will still be grappling with the same
problems that we are facing today. Nowhere in the world is there an educational process oversight,
especially, of medical education done by an elected body of the kind that MCI is. Managing everything
of more than 400 medical colleges is too humongous a task to be done by the MCI alone because the
challenges facing medical education of the 21 st century are truly gigantic and cannot be addressed
with an ossified and opaque body like MCI. Transformation will happen only if we change the
innards of the system.
13.5 Game changer reforms of transformational nature are therefore the need of the hour and
they need to be carried out urgently and immediately. Because, if revamping of the regulatory
structure is delayed any further on any grounds including political expediency, it will be too late as
too much momentum will have been built to offset attempts at reversing the direction later, with
the result that our medical education system will fall into a bottomless pit and the country will have
to suffer great social, political and financial costs.
13.6 Keeping all these facts in mind, the Committee is convinced that the much needed reforms
will have to be led by the Central Government. The MCI can no longer be entrusted with that
responsibility in view of its massive failures. The people of India will  not  be  well-served  by  letting
the modus-operandi of MCI continue unaltered  to  the  detriment of medical education and decay of
health system. The Government must therefore fulfill its commitment to preserve, protect and
promote the health of all Indians by leading the way for a radical  reform  which cleanses the
present ills and elevates medical education to contemporary global pedagogy and practices while
retaining focus on national relevance.

63
13.7 The expert committee led by (late) Prof. Ranjit Roy Chaudhury constituted by the Government
in July, 2014 to suggest reforms in the regulatory framework of medical profession has submitted
its report in February, 2015, a copy of which has been supplied to this Parliamentary Committee.
The expert committee has recommended major changes in the ethos of the regulatory body and
major structural reconfiguration of its functions. The expert committee has suggested the formation
of a National Medical Commission (NMC) through a new Act. The NMC will have four verticals
(i) UG Board of Medical Education and Training, (ii) PG Board of Medical Education and Training
(iii) National Assessment and Accreditation Board and (iv) National Board for Medical Registration.
Besides these vertical heads, the expert committee has also recommended the formation of a National
Advisory Council which will consist of members from the State Governments, Union Territories,
State Medical Councils, Medical Universities and members of NMC. The Committee has been informed
that the creation of National Medical Commission and the structure (at Appendix) envisaged has
been endorsed by a group of eminent medical educationists, experts and public health persons.
13.8 The Committee has done a rigorous analysis of the suggested new regulatory structure and
found that several of its concerns have been addressed in the suggested new model of regulation of
medical education and practice. The Committee is therefore in general agreement with the suggested
regulatory structure, and recommends to the Government to examine the structure proposed by
the Ranjit Roy Chaudhury Committee subject to the recommendations made by this Committee in
this report.
Summing up
13.9 To sum up, the Committee observes, even at the risk of sounding repetitive, that the need for
major institutional changes in the regulatory oversight of the medical profession in the country is
so urgent that it cannot be deferred any longer. The Committee is, however, aware that any attempt
at overhauling the regulatory framework will face huge challenges from the deeply entrenched
vested interests who will try to stall and derail the entire exercise. But if the medical education
system has to be saved from total collapse, the Government can no longer look the other way and
has to exercise its constitutional authority and take decisive and exemplary action to restructure
and revamp India’s regulatory system of medical education and practice. The Committee, therefore,
exhorts the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to implement the recommendations made by it
in this report immediately and bring a new Comprehensive Bill in Parliament for this purpose at
the earliest.

64
OBSERV ATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS –– A T A GLANCE
Health Systems and Challenges in the Delivery of Health Services
The Committee observes that though there have been substantial improvements in certain
health outcomes, especially in life expectancy, maternal and infant mortality, these achievements
should not mask India’s failures in achieving the desired level of health care delivery. As per the
Report of the Working Group on Te rtiary Care Institutions for the 12 th Five Y ear Plan, rates of
infant and maternal deaths still remain high, nearly one million Indians die every year due to
inadequate healthcare facilities, 700 million people have no access to specialist care and 80% of
specialists are working in urban areas. Despite India’s economy today being one of the world’s
fastest growing and third largest in terms of Gross National Health Income, our health system
continues to face a huge need gap in terms of access to adequate healthcare and availability of
health professionals and facilities. India also has the dubious distinction of lagging behind countries
like Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh, Peru, Maldives, China, Brazil, Thailand, Srilanka and Chile on
important health indicators including child mortality and maternal mortality. If 63 million persons
are faced with poverty every year due to health care costs alone (as per Draft National Health
Policy, 2015), it clearly indicates that health care is moving away from the reach of the people in
general and the poor in particular. This also indicates that India has not been able to leverage its
economic growth to achieve the desired health outcomes. The fact that there is an acute shortage of
doctors in the country and the effective delivery of health care services cannot be guaranteed
without the availability of doctors in adequate numbers, testifies to the point that the system of
medical education, as regulated by the Medical Council of India, has not been able to address the
many unmet health care needs of our health system and needs reforms urgently. (para 2.10)
The Committee agrees that there is an acute shortage of medical doctors in the country
besides their geographical mal-distribution. The Committee takes note of the submission of Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare that the total number of doctors registered on the Indian Medical
Register is 9.29 lakhs out of which 7.40 lakhs are available for active practice and that the doctor -
population ratio in India is 1:1674 as against the WHO norm of 1:1000. However, given the fact that
the Indian Medical Register is not a live database and contains names of doctors who may have
passed away or retired from active practice, by now, as well as those with a permanent address
outside India and that there is no mechanism in place for filtering out such cases, the Committee is
highly sceptical of the Ministry’s claim of having one doctor per 1674 population. In view of the
above, the Committee feels that the total universe of doctors in India is much smaller than the
official figure and we may have one doctor per 2000 population, if not more. The Committee observes
that the imbalances in availability of affordable and quality health care cannot be corrected without
augmenting the capacity of production of medical doctors including specialists and super-specialists
in adequate numbers and of requisite quality and competence. Apart from the unfinished agenda of
communicable diseases, India is witnessing the rapidly rising burdens of non-communicable diseases
(Cardiovascular diseases, Cancer, Diabetes, Chronic respiratory disorders, Mental illness, Liver
and Kidney diseases), which call for the availability of many more category of doctors and specialist
doctors. The Committee is constrained to observe that the MCI has been unresponsive to health
system needs with the result that shortage in number of basic doctors and specialists, mal- distribution
64

65
of medical colleges and doctors across the states continue to plague the delivery of effective and
equitable health services. At the present rate of production of doctors, the shortfall in basic and
specialist doctors will not be met for many years. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
urgent measures may be taken to spell out policy stance in great detail and with clarity to augment
the capacity of production of doctors including specialists and super-specialists at the scale and
speed required to meet India’s health needs. (para 2.21)
The Committee is concerned to note that the medical colleges in the country are distributed
in a skewed manner, with nearly sixty five per cent medical colleges concentrated in the Southern
and Western States of the country which has resulted in great variation in doctor-population ratio
across the states. The States of North, North-East and Central India have a severe shortage of
doctors because of very few medical colleges they have. The Committee also notes with concern the
that six states with 31% of India’s population account for 58% of the MBBS seats, while eight
states which comprise 46% of India’s population have 21% of the MBBS seats. The Committee is of
the opinion that the mere increase in medical seats to enable correction of this doctor-population
imbalance will not automatically address this skew because experience shows that doctors normally
settle in the cities they go to for their medical education and do not return to serve in their own
urban or rural areas. Also, even if compulsory rural service is introduced throughout India, graduates
of each state would be required to serve only in their state, as per present state health regulations,
and the states with very few medical colleges would continue to be disadvantaged. The Committee
would, therefore, recommend that an institutional mechanism be put in place to ensure better
distribution of medical colleges across the country.  State level doctor-population ratio should guide
the setting up   of new medical colleges and also the increase in UG and PG seats. (para 2.22)
The Committee also observes that the present approach in the matter of healthcare manpower
planning is a top-down one. Since health is a State subject and State Governments are major
stakeholders in the delivery of healthcare services, medical manpower planning should be bottom-
up also. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that each State should plan for an optimal number
of doctors, with a target of 1:1000 doctor-population ratio. (para 2.23)
Constitution and Composition of MCI
The Committee has carefully and comprehensively examined the issue of elected versus
nominated regulator and done a rigorous analysis to evaluate whether the architecture of regulatory
oversight for the medical profession in India should be elected or nominated one.  (para 3.10)
The Committee observes that the main objective of the regulator of medical education and
practice in India is to regulate quality of medical education, tailor medical education to the healthcare
needs of the country, ensure adherence to quality standards by medical colleges, produce competent
doctors possessing requisite skills and values as required by our health system and regulate medical
practice in accordance with the professional code of ethics. The Medical Council of India, when
tested on the above touchstone, has repeatedly been found short of fulfilling its mandated
responsibilities. Quality of medical education is at its lowest ebb; the current model of medical
education is not producing the right type of health professionals that meet the basic health needs of
the country because medical education and curricula are not integrated with the needs of our health

66
system; many of the products coming out of medical colleges are ill-prepared to serve in poor
resource settings like Primary Health Centre and even at the district level; medical graduates lack
competence in performing basic health care tasks like conducting normal deliveries; instances of
unethical practice continue to grow due to which respect for the profession has dwindled. But the
MCI has not been able to spearhead any serious reforms in medical education to address these
gaps. (para 3.11)
Medicine deals with human life. Regulators are therefore, required to have the professional
excellence and moral authority to address complex issues related to content, standards, quality,
competencies and skills of medical education and practice. But the MCI, as presently elected, neither
represents professional excellence nor its ethos. The current composition of the  Council  reflects
that more  than half of  the members  are either from corporate hospitals or in private practice. The
Committee is surprised to note that even doctors nominated under Sections 3(1) (a) and 3(1) (e) to
represent the State Governments and the Central Government have been nominated from corporate
private hospitals which are not only highly commercialised and provide care at exorbitant cost but
have also been found to be violating value frameworks. They indulge in unethical practices such as
carrying out unnecessary diagnostic tests and surgical procedures in order to extract money from
hapless patients and meet revenue targets (as documented by the BMJ, one of the top international
medical journals in an article titled “The unethical revenue targets that India’s corporate hospitals
set their doctors” dated 3 rd September, 2015) and flouting Government rules and regulations,
especially about treating patients from underprivileged backgrounds. (para 3.12)
The Committee also observes that the number of private medical colleges is growing and
therefore their representation in the MCI is certain to increase while the Government representation
will decrease in that proportion. In such a scenario, the needs of the country and the health system
have taken a backseat while the interests of practicing doctors have become primary. Thus,
the current composition of the MCI is biased against larger public health goals and public
interest. (para 3.13)
The paramount consideration for the regulation of medical education should be to ensure
that it safeguards the quality of medical education, well serves the needs of India’s health system
and enables the health needs of the people to be met. This is far more important than protecting the
elected character of the regulatory framework. Electoral processes, by their very nature, bring
about a lot of compromises and tend to attract professionals who may not be best-fitted for the
heavy academic responsibilities of a regulatory body. It is, therefore, highly unlikely that professionals
of the highest standards of eminence and integrity would be thrown up through electoral processes.
The Committee feels that perhaps this is one of the reasons why election from within the profession
has been discontinued around the globe. (para 3.14)
The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that the governance of medical education in
India must be accountable to the people of India. Ultimately, popularly elected Governments are
answerable to the people for the performance of the health system, not the MCI. Also, a regulatory
body nominated by the Government need not always be suspect in quality or subservient in conduct.
Following the dissolution of a corruption-ridden MCI, the new Board of Governors of MCI appointed
by the Government in 2010,  included  professionals  of  the  highest  standards  of  integrity    and

67
excellence who came up with a Vision Document 2015 wherein the Board had recommended a
number of reforms of far-reaching impact in the field of medical education and practice. Similarly,
the National Board of Examinations whose governing Board is nominated by the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare has acquitted itself creditably and has not been tainted by a scandal in its 33
years of history. The Committee also wonders that if none of the countries like the USA, U.K,
Australia or Japan has elected regulatory body for medical education, why India should be the only
one to have elected regulators for medical education.  (para 3.15)
After serious reflection borne out of the above analysis and keeping in mind the disastrous
experience with an elected regulatory body, the Committee is convinced that if the quality of medical
education has to be maintained and medical profession disciplined in the context of mushrooming of
private medical colleges and the resultant commercialization of medical education, regulators of
the highest standards of professional integrity and excellence will have to be sought by the
Government through a rigorous selection process. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
the regulatory framework of medical education and practice should be comprised of professionals of
the highest standards of repute and integrity, appointed through a rigorous and independent selection
process. This process must be transparent. Nominations could be sought but the reason for the final
selection should be made public. The Committee also concurs with the recommendation of the
Ranjit Roy Chaudhury Committee Report that:
“In keeping with global standards, and as is the practice in other educational fields in our
country (AITCE and UGC) regulatory structure should be run by persons selected through a
transparent mechanism rather than by the current process of election and nominations. Of course,
keeping in mind the federal nature of the country, adequate provision must be made for the
representatives of the States to participate in the regulatory processes.” (para 3.16)
The Committee observes that currently the MCI is an exclusive club of medical doctors as
the IMC Act does not call for diversity of backgrounds in the members. The Committee also observes
that across the world, a perspective has gained ground that self-regulation alone does not work
because medical associations have fiercely protected their turf and any group consisting entirely of
members from the same profession is unlikely to promote and protect public interest over and
above their own self-interest and therefore check-and-balance mechanisms are required. Besides,
in today’s dynamic world, inputs from people with excellence and competence in other disciplines
are also needed to add value to the working of an oversight body. It is for these reasons that in most
countries such as the UK, Australia, etc. regulators are drawn from diverse groups. (para 3.20)
Keeping all these factors in mind and considering the fact that checks and balances in the
MCI are not underpinned on sturdy systems and procedures, the Committee is of the considered
view that the composition of the MCI is opaque and skewed and diversity needs to be brought into
this because having only medical doctors in the Council is not an enabling factor for ensuring
reforms in medical education and practice. The Committee is convinced that if the medical regulator
has to perform all its mandated functions in full measure and ensure that education in health
disciplines fulfils its social mandate, it needs a vibrant framework with the right kind of capacity
which can be achieved only by opening Council membership to diverse stakeholders such as public
health experts and social scientists, health economists, health NGOs with an established reputation

68
legal experts, quality assurance experts, patient advocacy groups, to name but a few. Such diversity
and transparency will have the added advantage of reducing the monopoly of doctors in the MCI,
thereby reducing the scope of cronyism and corruption. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that urgent measures be taken to restructure the composition of MCI on the lines suggested
above. (para 3.21)
During the examination of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2006, and the
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013, the Committee had examined this issue but not
favoured it on grounds that such sweeping powers might hamper the MCI in its day-to-day working
and would subject the MCI to interference and pressure from the Central Government.   (para 3.23)
The Committee has examined the issue afresh and given serious thought to the desirability
of empowering the Central Government to issue directions to the regulatory body on matters of
policy. The Committee notes that though all powers of approval/disapproval as per the MCI Act,
1956, rest with the Central Government and all permissions are issues in its name, yet the Central
Government has no power to disagree with the MCI. After comprehensive consideration, the
Committee observes that the Government is the most important stakeholder in shaping health
system in all its dimensions and attending to a range of reforms in medical education and practice.
To  push  its  policy  and  vision  of  health,  the  Government is, therefore, entitled to give directives
to the MCI but only on policy matters of national importance. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Government should have the power to give policy directives to the regulatory
body. However, what exactly would be policy matters should be clearly and unambiguously defined
so that such directives do not impinge on the functioning of MCI or violate its academic autonomy
and any possibility of its misuse is obviated. The directive itself should be in the form of a
‘speaking order’ giving background and reasons and that should be made public immediately on
issue. (para 3.24)
The Committee takes note of the fact that currently there is no restriction on the term of a
Council member. The Committee feels that due to lack of embargo on the term of the Council
members, the vested interests tend to get entrenched. The Committee, therefore, agrees with the
recommendation of the Roy Chaudhary Committee that a member of the Council may not have
more than two terms in office. Such a provision will also bring a blend of experience and fresh
thinking in the functioning of the regulatory body. (para 3.28)
Establishment of Medical Colleges
The Committee observes that as per MCI norms, establishment of a medical college is based
only on physical space, infrastructure and rigid conformation for faculty requirements. The minimum
land requirement of 20 acres, the number of class rooms, lecture halls, examination hall as mandated
drive up the cost of establishment. Since the land is the most expensive commodity, the initial
investment itself is very high, which means that even Governments cannot open medical colleges
easily and promoters are more likely to be those with commercial interests rather than those with
genuine interest in medical education. (para 4.32)
The MCI focuses heavily on nitty-gritty of infrastructure and human resources but does no
substantial evaluation of quality of teaching, training and imparting of skills. Though at the behest

69
of the Committee, the Minimum Standard Requirements Regulations for the establishment of
Medical colleges have been recently modified by MCI, yet they continue to be unrealistic. These
requirements will prevent district hospitals and large public sector hospitals (like Railways Hospitals,
Army Hospitals, etc.) and large private sector hospitals and multi-specialty hospitals from becoming
teaching hospitals for UG medical education. This will greatly limit the scope for the scaling up of
medical education, even when expansion of the existing capacity is a greatly felt need. (para 4.33)
The Committee also observes that many young students who aspire for medical education but
are deprived of this opportunity in the country, go abroad for medical education in Russia, Belarus,
Kazakhstan, China and a number of other places. When these students come back after qualifying
in their examinations in foreign countries, they are required by MCI to appear for a Multiple
Choice Questions (MCQs) formatted, theory based examination conducted by the National Board of
Examinations. Those who pass the examination are required to do one year of internship and are
then recognized by MCI to be fully qualified doctors, eligible to practice in India on par with a
medical graduate who qualifies from an Indian Medical School. The Committee is giving this example
to buttress the argument that MSR should not become a fixation by which MCI strangles the scope
for scale up of medical education, even as it blithely ignores the irrelevance of those standards
for the foreign medical graduates who train in institutions which may markedly deviate from
them. (para 4.34)
Taking all the above facts into account, the Committee is of the considered view that the
existing Minimum Standard Requirements as mandated by the MCI are irrational and artificially
rigid standards which are proving to be big impediment in the establishment and expansion of
medical colleges. The Committee is of the considered view that a
 ` 500 crore of rupees investment
in a medical college would not be able to educate children from poor families for obvious reasons.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that physical infrastructure requirement be pruned down
in such a way that it should have just about 30 to 40 per cent standing value in the total assessment
of a medical college. (para 4.35)
The Committee takes note of the observations and recommendations of the committee of
experts set up to study the norms for establishment of medical colleges and make recommendations
to review the Minimum Standard Requirements (MSRs). The Committee has gone through the
report of the committee of experts and is in general agreement with the recommendations of the
committee. The Committee would however, recommend that the Ministry/regulatory body
may implement them in accordance with the plan of action as suggested by the expert
committee. (para 4.36)
The Committee lends its full support to the move to convert district hospitals into medical
colleges. The Committee is of the view that if a district hospital is converted into a medical college,
it will not only be equipped with specialists of all disciplines, providing the healthcare services
across the whole spectrum but will also produce some doctors in its area of operation and will thus
help reduce geographical mal-distribution of doctors. (para 4.37)
Undergraduate (UG) Medical Education
The Committee is concerned to learn from the experts and other stakeholders that the medical
graduates emerging out of the medical colleges in the country, lack confidence and skills in

70
performing basic healthcare tasks and even basic skills like conducting a normal delivery, providing
early care for a fracture or suturing a wound are not within the competency of a graduate doctor.
Realising this deficiency, graduate doctors seek post-graduate qualifications in order to acquire
clinical expertise. Since, as against the approximately 55,000 UG seats, there are only 25,000 PG
seats as of now, a large number of graduate doctors do not get into PG and become redundant second
class citizens because they are neither competent to practice independently nor do they have the
social status.  (para 5.9)
The Committee also takes note of the fact that one of the critical gaps in the system is the
separation between the medical education system and the health system. The primary reason behind
this separation is that our medical graduates work and train in tertiary care settings. Since the vast
majority of patients seek healthcare services in small clinics and out-patient departments of small
hospitals and a small proportion visits and an even smaller number are admitted to tertiary care
institutions, which often deal with exotic and rare diseases, the graduate doctors are not exposed to
primary and secondary health care conditions which is crucial to learn about common health problems
in the country. Due to this skew in training, the graduate doctors are not equipped to manage
common diseases and illnesses in the population. The MCI has failed to address this separation
between the medical education system and the health system in the country. The Committee feels
that the medical education that is imparted to a graduate doctor is only for basic treatment and if he
is not competent enough to do even that, there is basic problem in the system which needs to be
addressed. (para 5.10)
The Committee also observes that the most important flaw in the oversight of undergraduate
medical education by the MCI is that the “maintenance of quality is assessed only in terms of
fulfilling physical/infrastructural requirements and there is simply no overall evaluation of the
standard of medical education. Ironically, “maintenance of uniform standard of medical education”
is the first objective of the MCI, as stated in the IMC Act, 1956. There is also no effort to assess the
method of  teaching/learning, the evaluation process, the learning outcomes etc. The curriculum is
still didactic. The world has moved to competency-based curriculum long back and we are still
having workshops to decide whether we should switch-over to it or not.” (para 5.11)
Considering all these facts, the Committee is constrained to observe that the existing system
of the graduate medical education in the country has failed us and unless total revamping of the
undergraduate education system is undertaken, the present system will not be able to generate the
medical manpower required to deliver the ambitious programme of Universal Health Coverage. The
Committee, therefore, recommends complete restructuring of the undergraduate education. The
emphasis should be shifted to learning outcomes based on a curriculum that will train a holistic
doctor with the requisite skills. The training of MBBS doctors should also be in primary care centres
and secondary hospitals including district level hospitals. The curriculum should be designed keeping
in mind the disease profile of the country and the gaps in the present system. The Committee
simultaneously observes that India is a fast developing country and needs health services across a
wide spectrum- from the basic diarrhea treatment to the best tertiary care in the world. The country
therefore, needs to have doctors who are competent and trained to provide health care services
across this whole spectrum. It should therefore be ensured that the graduate doctor produced by

71
the system is a competent basic doctor who also has the background to specialize. The Committee is
convinced that unless these fundamental changes are carried out in the undergraduate medical
education, India will not be able to meet the health challenges of the 21 st  century.   (para 5.12)
The Committee takes note of the submission that today’s graduate doctor after doing his
internship is not confident of practicing because his entire period of one year internship goes into
studying for the PG entrance exam. The Committee observes that skill training which is very
important for a medical professional, is not being acquired in internship. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the PG entrance exam should be held immediately after the final MBBS examination
so that the graduate doctor could concentrate on practical skills during his internship.   (para 5.13)
The Committee also observes that the medical education in India is increasingly depersonalized
and has failed to instill humane values of care, concern, courtesy and compassion. The Committee
feels that young doctors should not only have practical skills but also a lot of soft skills. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that soft skills (including ethics) should be made one of the
cornerstones of the syllabus of medical education.   (para 5.14)
The Committee notes that though the MCI has sent its recommendations for a unitary Common
Entrance Test for admission to MBBS and PG courses long back, the Government is still grappling
with sorting out issues for the implementation of the unitary Common Minimum Test. In the
absence of a streamlined and transparent process of admissions, private medical colleges/universities
have developed their own screening and admission procedures which are primarily monetary based.
It is public knowledge that the majority of seats in private medical colleges are allotted for a capitation
fee going upto `50 lakh and even more in some colleges despite the fact that the capitation is not
legal. This capitation fee is exclusive of the yearly tuition fee and other expenses. The Committee
observes that the issue is not just about capitation fee. This has serious implications for our whole
system of medical education and healthcare. One clear implication of this skewed process of
admissions by way of sale of seats is that there may be a large number of students entering the
system, who may not be upto the required standards. On the other hand, this system is keeping out
the most meritorious but underprivileged students who can neither pay for seats, nor the high
annual fee in private medical colleges. If a unitary Common Entrance Exam is introduced, the
capitation fee will be tackled in a huge way; there will be transparency in the system; students will
not be burdened with multiple tests; and quality will get a big push. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Government should move swiftly towards removing all the possible roadblocks
to the Common Medical Entrance Test (CMET) including legal issues and immediately introduce
the same to ensure that merit and not the ability to pay becomes the criterion for admission to
medical colleges. The Committee also recommends that introduction of CMET should be done across
the nation barring those States who wish to remain outside the ambit of the CMET. However, if any
such States wish to join the CMET later, there should be a provision to join it.  (para 5.26)
The Committee takes note of the fact that the MCI’s assessment of medical colleges is
limited to ensuring rigid conformation to infrastructural and faculty norms and an inspection of the
five year examination of new medical colleges. The MCI is not involved in any standardized summative
evaluation of the final product-the medical graduate-coming out of new or old medical colleges. The
final evaluation, and therefore, the final quality of every medical student, is left entirely to the

72
medical colleges/universities to assess. The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that an
entrance test alone will not do justice to the entire process and there is an urgent need to introduce
a common exit test for MBBS doctors, which will go a long way  in standardizing the passing out
medical graduates and certify the competencies which are expected to be generated out of him. The
Committee accordingly, recommends that urgent action be initiated to introduce a common exit
test for MBBS doctors as an instrument of quality assurance and to ensure that the qualities and
competencies of a doctor before he starts practicing are guaranteed and standardized in terms of
various quality norms. (para 5.34)
The Committee observes that though the constitutionally designated fee regulation committee
of the respective State Government fixes the fee to be charged by private medical colleges, yet the
yearly tuition fee and other expenses that have to be paid through a year duration work out in the
range of `12-13 lakh or even more which is certainly exorbitant and beyond the paying capacity of
poor but meritorious students and the same, therefore, needs to be rationalized. As of now, the
Union Health Ministry does not play any role in fixation of the tuition fee. The Committee is of the
opinion that since the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare plays a critical role in supporting the
regulation of medical education, it should be enabled to play a role in regulating fee structure in
private medical colleges so that the right quantum of tuition fees to be charged by private medical
colleges is ensured and there is uniformity in fees across the country amongst the public and
private sector medical colleges/institutions. The fee structure should be strictly be enforced and
action should be taken against erring managements. (para 5.36)
Post-Graduate (PG) Medical Education
The Committee is concerned to note that the approval for PG seats is based on rigid criteria
for teachers, teaching beds, patient attendance and infrastructure and there is no mechanism in
place to evaluate the PG trainees for their skill and competence prior to their certification as a
designated specialist. The present MCI system of oversight of PG medical education does not at any
stage evaluate the teaching and learning process or have any benchmarks for quality. Instead of
devoting its attention to addressing the issue of quality and competence which has a direct bearing
on the safety of patients seeking treatment, the MCI is obsessed with enforcing rigid regulations
that stifle improvement and innovation. The Committee takes note of the information made available
to it that in the USA there are different specialty Boards to monitor and certify training, while the
MCI has a single nine-member Post Graduate Medical Education Committee to prescribe standards
of Post Graduate Medical education. The Committee finds it inconceivable that a single nine-member
Post Graduate Committee has the breadth of expertise to provide guidelines, let alone set standards,
to span multiple specialty disciplines. The Committee is, therefore, convinced that an overhaul of
the whole system is required, and accordingly, recommends that the PG medical education system
should be restructured in such a way that training is assessed by the quality of the product and not
by the infrastructure and a robust system be put in place for evaluation of skills and competencies.
The Committee also observes that there is a need to separate regulation of graduate and post-
graduate medical education as these two phases of medical education need different kind of expertise.
The Committee, therefore, concurs with the suggestion that there should be separate UG and PG
Boards for the regulation of UG and PG medical education.   (para 6.8)

73
The Committee also recommends that post-graduate education should be governed by a body
like NBE, integrating the two systems of PG medical education that currently exist and function
through a well-coordinated array of specialty sub-boards which define desired competencies and set
standards for each major discipline. (para 6.9)
Capitation fee in PG Education & need for Common Entry and Exit Tests
The Committee has already commented on the need for a Common Entrance and Exit Test
for UG medical education in the previous  Chapter.  The Committee is of the view that the grounds
which mandate introduction of common Entrance and Exit examinations for UG medical education
are also valid for PG education. Post Graduate seats are in great demand. The Committee has been
given to understand that in the absence of a transparent and streamlined process of admission, PG
seats are sold from `1 crore to `1.50 crore per seat. The Committee has already dwelt on the issue
of capitation fee and its ill-effect. The Committee would, therefore, refrain from repeating those
details. Keeping all these factors in mind, the Committee recommends that the Government in
consultation with the MCI should swiftly move towards introducing a common entry test for admission
to post-graduate and super-specialties also. The Committee also recommends the introduction of a
common exist test for the passing out Post-Graduates to certify and standardize their competencies.
(para 6.12)
The Committee takes note of the submission that India is the only country in the world
having two parallel systems of Post-Graduate Certification. The Committee also takes notice of the
information made available to it that despite the Government of India’s order making DNB equivalent
to the MD/MS for all employment, the inspectors of MCI go and threaten medical colleges of de-
recognition if they employ a person with DNB certificate. The  Committee  observes  that  there
needs  to  be radical transformation of Post Graduate Medical Education if we have to have the kind
of specialists we need for the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the current
system of PG medical education should be restructured taking the best of both systems that is, all
India common entrance exam for all seats and common exit evaluation for all candidates as practiced
by DNB and the training and evaluation processes of the university based system into one national
qualification. There should be only one regulatory body for post graduate medical education and the
training should be made more robust. Till then, DNB students be given equitable status of MS/MD
only after completing two years of teaching experience in medical colleges.  (para 6.15)
The Committee agrees with the suggestion that there is an imperative need to promote PG
degree in Family Medicine because Family Medicine combines a broad set of clinical competencies
and therefore Family Physicians are more equipped to manage most of medical problems encountered
at primary level. The Committee recommends that the Government of India in coordination with
State Governments should establish robust PG Programmes in Family Medicine and facilitate
introducing Family Medicine discipline in all medical colleges. This will not only minimize the need
for frequent referrals to specialist and decrease the load on tertiary care, but also provide continuous
health care for the individuals and families. (para 6.18)
The Committee observes that India is a country of 1.24 billion that will reach 1.7 billion by
the middle of the century. Therefore, only 24000+ PG seats are unquestionably much less than

74
national needs. It is, therefore, critical for the country to augment the production of specialists
both as a development imperative and a pathway for ensuring quality universal health care to the
masses. Within the existing framework, it will not be possible to expand rapidly beyond the present
strength. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the existing norms governing the allotment
of number of PG seats to an Institute on the basis of the bed strength and number of PG teachers be
rationalized and all the clinical facilities (both public and private) be utilized to impart training so
that the production of PG doctors is scaled up. The Committee has also noted that the recent
increase in PG seats has been indiscriminate and in future we may have a lot of Post Graduate
doctors who may not be competent in the specialty in which they claim to be specialized. The
Committee recommends that the increase in PG seats should not be indiscriminate and great caution
should be exercised on maintaining quality of training and certification. The Committee also observes
that while the increase in PG seats will produce more specialists and also help to provide required
faculty for medical colleges, it may result in fewer graduate doctors opting for primary health care.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the framework of Post Graduate Education be designed
in such a way that it remains aligned with principles of universal health care. (para 6.21)
The Committee observes that though research is a mandate of post-graduate training and
evaluation in both MCI and NBE PG Programmes, seventy years of having a thesis as part of the PG
programme has done nothing to produce nationally relevant data for the management of the diseases
prevalent in the country or to establish robust research enterprise within the medical colleges and
institutions. The absence of clinical research on common problems prevalent in the country and the
resultant lack of local information has created a disconnect between official statistics and the problems
on the ground. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the component of research thesis as
part the PG programme needs to be holistically restructured in such a way that post-graduate
students are guided to conduct research relevant to national health program priorities and generate
nationally representative data periodically. (para 6.23)
The Committee also recommends that the Indian Council of Medical Research should guide
such studies by linking with student researchers and faculty guides, from select institutions across
India. (para 6.24)
Deficiency of Teaching Faculty
The Committee takes note of the fact that there is acute shortage of teaching faculty which
not only entails adverse impact on the quality of medical education but is also a barrier to the
establishment of new medical colleges. The MCI’s policies are largely responsible for this state of
affairs, because very rigid norms have been provided in the “Regulations on the Teachers Eligibility
Qualifications 1998” and only full-time teachers are acceptable to the MCI. It does not recognize
qualified specialists in district hospitals, reputed private and public sector hospitals not attached to
medical colleges and non-medical public health specialists as capable of teaching in a medical college
on a part time basis. The MCI also does not allow for sharing of faculty across government medical
colleges in a state, through Information Technology enabled “common classrooms”. It also does not
permit surgeons to teach anatomy and physicians to teach physiology part time, though their
understanding of these basic disciplines is very clinically relevant.  (para 7.15)

75
The Committee is constrained to observe that had the MCI been able to  unleash reforms  of
far-reaching impact to  tide over faculty   shortages, these barriers would have been removed to a
large extent. The Committee therefore, recommends that keeping in mind that the country has a
huge pool of talented doctors in both public and private sector hospitals, the MCI should look
outside this rigid teaching faculty definition and find out-of-the- box solutions to tap the pool of
practicing doctors who are interested in teaching as adjunct or part time teaching faculty. Of course,
this should be done with some defined parameters and till a certain percentage only.  (para 7.16)
The Committee would also like the Government to have a re-look at the retirement policy of
teachers and work out a re-employment policy. The Committee does not see any reason why a
retired specialist at the age of 60 cannot be re-employed as a teaching faculty on a full time or part
time basis. (para 7.17)
The Committee takes note of the submission made by the President of MCI that “If the
Honorary system is there, all these experienced people can come in. We must utilize whatever
workforce, experienced or trained or a degree holder is available” and expects that the words of the
MCI President would be matched with the action on the ground. The Committee recommends that
early action may be taken in this regard. (para 7.18)
The Committee observes that the norms and standards as stipulated in the Regulations on
the “Teachers Eligibility Qualifications 1998” had been fixed at a time when Information
Communication Technology Tools wer e not so advanced. Despite tremendous advancement in IC
Technologies and the advantage of our IT strength, ICT tools, virtual classrooms, and e-learning
have not been incorporated in the medical curriculum in tune with the modern times. It is true that
there are certain practical skills which have to be learnt bedside in a teaching hospital or a district
hospital. But classroom teaching can be shared substantially with IT connectivity. The Committee
therefore recommends that immediate action needs to be initiated to allow for sharing of faculty
across government medical colleges in a state, through information technology enabled common
classrooms. Subsequently, this facility may be extended to private medical colleges also, with check-
and-balance mechanisms. The Committee is of the considered view that this measure will not only
go a long way in making up for faculty shortages, but also take care of the current practice of
engaging of ghost faculty by private medical colleges. (para 7.19)
The Committee also recommends that the ambit of the Regulation by virtue of which the
clinical experience of the specialists in the ESIC hospitals were equated with the teaching experience
for the purpose of adopting them into teaching cadre, should be extended to other Government
Hospitals also so that the CMOs and other experienced doctors who have worked in the Government
Hospitals for long and have experience of dealing with thousands of patients can come into the
teaching faculty. (para 7.20)
The Committee takes serious note of the fact that the MCI has continued to oppose the
induction of specialists who have passed the nationally standardized DNB examinations conducted
by the National Board of Examinations and declared that they cannot become teaching faculty in
medical colleges, despite the Government of India and even courts declaring the equivalence of
post-graduate degree awarded through MCI certified and NBE certified Programmes. Since lack of

76
teaching faculty is the main impediment in expanding and opening more medical colleges, there is
an imperative need to utilize all available expertise to augment the required pool of teaching faculty.
The Committee in the earlier part of this Report, has recommended the merger of the DNB with
MD Programmes. But till then, DNB certificate holders may be utilized in teaching faculty provided
they have atleast two years of teaching experience. (para 7.21)
The Committee takes note that the assessment of the cumulative shortfall of teaching faculty
for the undergraduate and post-graduate courses is underway. The Committee recommends that
the assessment be expedited so that the database so generated could be utilized for Human Resource
planning and forecasting. (para 7.22)
Need for an Accreditation Body for Medical Education
The Committee observes that robust accreditation processes are the foundation of quality
management in most educational systems and therefore there is an imperative need for having an
accreditation body for medical colleges. However, the Committee is not amenable to the suggestion
that the MCI should be empowered to do the task of accreditation through an amendment to the
IMC Act. The Committee observes that the same body giving permission and approvals for medical
colleges and also ascertaining quality leads to conflict of interest. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that a robust independent accreditation body be established and entrusted with the
task of ensuring quality of medical education. The Accreditation Body so created should be oriented
towards seeing whether the type of medical education given is appropriate for the country; whether
the product that comes out of medical colleges is a product that is needed; whether the teaching
methods are upto the mark and latest. The Committee also recommends that such an organization
should be autonomous. (para 8.6)
Regulation of Professional Conduct of doctors
The Committee observes that the oversight of professional conduct is the most important
function of the MCI. However, the MCI has been completely passive on the ethics dimension which
is evident from the fact that between 1963-2009, just 109 doctors have been blacklisted by the
Ethics Committee of the MCI. The Committee does not intend to taint the entire medical community
and there is no doubt that there are outstanding doctors and surgeons in all parts of India in all
kinds of health settings who have unblemished credentials and who are serving people with
compassion, selflessness, integrity and accountability. But it is equally indisputable that due to
crass commercialization of the health sector, many unprincipled doctors and private sector hospitals
have lost their moral compass and overcharge or subject their hapless patients to unnecessary
surgeries and diagnostic procedures. The instance of unethical practice continues to grow due to
which respect for the profession has dwindled and distrust replaced the high status the doctor once
enjoyed in society. What is of greater concern to the Committee is that the medical profession has
not been transparent in dealing with complaints. (para 9.20)
The Committee notes with concern that although the MCI Code of Ethics Regulations, 2002
contains detailed prescriptions of what constitutes duties and responsibilities of the
Physician, the Code is idealistic in nature and there is no mechanism in place to oversee its
implementation. (para 9.21)

77
Considering all these factors the Committee recommends that the Code of Medical Ethics
needs to be well-defined to take care of the concerns of public safety and malpractices or medical
negligence by doctors so that the doctor-patient relationship which has taken a severe beating, can
be repaired and retrieved. For that to happen, there needs to be stronger mechanism for ethical
oversight of medical practice and the legislation governing the oversight of professional conduct of
doctors should be made more specific with provision for transparency and time-lines. There should
also be an appeal mechanism in place so that the patient does not feel stone- walled.     (para 9.22)
The Committee observes that the whole focus of the MCI has been on the licensing of medical
colleges and ethics is completely lost out in this process. It is a matter of surprise that despite the
worst kind of gross unethical practices happening by way of ghost faculty, fake patients and hired
instruments and substantial amount of money (not white, of course) reportedly changing hands at
the time of inspections, there is little proactive action  on  the  part  of  the  MCI  to  deal  with  this
malady. Against this backdrop, the Committee is of the firm view that the two major areas, i.e.,
medical education and practice of ethical conduct by the medical profession should be bifurcated so
that they receive full attention. The Committee is of the considered view that in order to earn back
the respect the medical profession has lost, concerted action is needed with proactive steps being
taken and implemented. The Committee accordingly recommends that a separate Board of Medical
Ethics be set up to take up the task of developing mechanisms for promotion of ethical conduct by
medical practitioners. This Board may be constituted on the lines of the GMC of UK and the
Australian Medical Council, which have bifurcated these two tasks and put persons of requisite
competence in the mechanisms so created for the governance of ethical practice by doctors. Such a
Board must plan for continuing renewal of codes of ethics, their dissemination through interactive
channels and active promotion of adherence to them. For this, organising workshops, conferences,
etc. should be on-going activities. (para 9.23)
The Committee notes that the Ethics Committee of the MCI presently consists entirely of
medical doctors and is thus a self-regulatory body. But all over the world, it has now been realized
that the medical profession (or any  profession  for  that  matter)  tends  to  protect  its  own     flock.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the new Board of Medical Ethics should also have
non-doctor lay members from different fields. (para 9.24)
The Committee observes that the current accountability mechanisms are not sufficient to ensure
observance of ethical practices by the health facilities in India. Though the Clinical Establishment
(Registration and Regulation) Act of 2010 is there, it has been adopted by a few States only which
means there is no appropriate legislation to regulate private clinical establishments in most of the
States currently. It has been seen in practice that individual doctors and the hospitals where they
work, pass the onus to the other when anything goes wrong with a patient. The Committee feels
that for individual doctors to practice ethically, they require an ethical working environment. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the new Board of Medical Ethics should be mandated to
develop standards and norms of professional conduct and codes of ethics for medical practice not
only for individual doctors, but also for institutions of health service delivery, i.e., hospitals, clinics,
nursing homes, rehabilitation centres, associations, etc. (para 9.25)

78
The Committee observes that it is a well-known fact today that there is a lot of inappropriate
drug dispensing and unnecessary procedures and commission-linked diagnostics by medical
practitioners and health institutions in India mainly due to financial incentives.   In this situation,
formulation of treatment guidelines for various health conditions and disseminating them widely
through publicity and media is imperative for protection of patient interests and rights. The Clinical
Establishment (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 can provide an umbrella legislation in this
regard as it has the power to prescribe guidelines for all healthcare facilities. In the absence of a
unified legislation, there are a few different legislations that regulate some healthcare services
such as the Pre- Conception and Pre-Natal diagnostics Technologies Act, 1994 enacted to stop female
foeticide and arrest the declining sex ratio and the Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MPT) Act,
1971 which lays down the conditions under which pregnancies can be terminated. Other health
services are not governed by any standards of treatment and pricing guidelines or reporting
frameworks. (para 9.26)
The Committee also recommends that the Government should put in place a system of auditing
of medical practices. A beginning can be made by reviewing patient records for diagnosis and treatment,
use of antibiotics and caesarean sections in the private hospitals. (para 9.27)
The Committee observes that there is some lack of clarity in the functioning of State Medical
Councils and the MCI when it comes to taking disciplinary action. Though there is a six month
period prescribed within which disciplinary action should be taken by the State Medical Councils
which are mandated to implement the adjudications of MCI, many times the State Medical Councils
sit on the adjudications beyond six months and no action gets taken allowing the errant doctor to go
scot free. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the relationship between the MCI and the
State Medical Councils be clarified in unambiguous terms to ensure that the complaints against
doctors are attended to in time and action taken without delay. (para 9.28)
The Committee is astonished to note that the MCI has notified on 1st  February, 2016 an
amendment to clause 6.8 of the Regulations, deleting the words “and professional association of
doctors” and exempting professional association of doctors from  the  ambit  of  MCI  Code  of
Ethics Regulations, 2002. The Committee observes that exempting professional association of doctors
from the ambit of Ethics Regulations is nothing short of legitimizing doctors’ associations indulging
in unethical and corrupt practices by way of receiving gifts in cash or kind under any pretext from
the pharma industry or allied health industry.  The Committee agrees with the view point of public
health activists that “an action that is ethically impermissible for an individual doctor cannot become
permissible if a group of doctors carry out the same action in the name of an association.” The
Committee could not uncover any rational reason as to why the MCI has taken such a retrograde
decision. It seems that the MCI has become captive to private commercial interests, rather than its
integrity in public interest. (para 9.29)
The Committee also finds it intriguing that instead of intervening to thwart attempt of MCI
at subverting the system, the Ministry has meekly surrendered to MCI. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should take immediate action in the matter to ensure that the illegality committed

79
in terms of violation of ethical standards of 2002 Regulations, either by an individual doctor or a
group of doctors in the form of an association is not kept out of the jurisdiction of MCI and the
words “and professional association of doctors” are restored to clause 6.8 of the MCI Code of Ethics
Regulations 2002 so that no immunity, whatsoever, is accorded to any association or society of
doctors. If there are any other legal infirmities in the framework of the 2002 Regulations, they
should be removed. (para 9.30)
The Committee taking note of the submissions of the President, MCI that the existing Ethics
Committee has closed the case against the whistleblower doctor from Kerala and his wife recommends
that completion of all formalities concerning the closing of the case be expedited by the MCI. The
Committee desires to be informed of the final outcome/fulfillment of the assurance made by the
President MCI, to the Committee in this regard, within one month from the presentation of this
Report. (para 9.31)
Maintenance of Indian Medical Register (IMR)
The Committee observes that the current Indian Medical Register (IMR) does not depict the
real picture since the same includes names of all medical practitioners who have ever registered
themselves in the IMR, be they dead or alive, in India or abroad. This register cannot be of much
help to planners and policymakers for HR planning and forecasting. The Committee is, therefore,
of the view that the Indian Medical Register needs a live database so that a realistic assessment of
the number of doctors actually practicing in the country and how they are distributed across the
public and private sectors and across rural and urban areas, could be made. (para 10.10)
The Committee takes note of the submission that the Council is in the process of implementing
the system of e-Governance and integral part of which would be live IMR/ updation of IMR, conversion
of existing registration numbers to Unique Permanent Registration Number (UPRN), etc. by involving
State Medical Councils also so as to invoke an online update in due course of time. The Committee
therefore recommends that the  IMR be made online and a live database be created in such a
manner that there is automatic update between States and the Centre. If the name of a doctor is
removed at one place, it should reflect in other site also. The Committee also recommends that the
Ministry should direct the Council to complete the process within a stipulated time. (para 10.11)
The Committee agrees with the need for mandatory recertification and Continuing Medical
Education and a structured programme of periodical update of the knowledge of doctors as quality
assurance mechanisms and observes that the MCI (or any other body) in consultation with the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should take the responsibility in this regard. The Committee
observes that in the absence of a structured mechanism for recertification and Continuing Medical
Education, pharma companies are filling the gap due to which doctors are dependent on them for
the update of their knowledge. This influences them in their professional practice. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the renewal of registration and Continuing Medical Education be made
mandatory so that the health system’s requirements get strengthened and doctors practice more
appropriate and rational technology instead of picking up the technologies pushed by the interested
agencies. (para 10.17)

80
Need for Attractive Remuneration for Doctors and Medical Faculty
The Committee notes with serious concern that medicine is no longer a priority for the
brightest among the youth and the disinterest of our brightest to opt for teaching jobs in public
sector health institutions is increasing due to various factors, one of which is certainly inadequate
remuneration packages. The Committee observes that the whole medical education system will
collapse if there are not good teachers for our medical colleges. Let us also not forget that today’s
medical student is tomorrow’s physician and no society can afford to leave healthcare in the hands
of mediocre doctors. All these facts warrant that measures to attract good talent towards medical
profession and retain them, by way of offering attractive remuneration packages are required to be
immediately initiated. The Committee fully endorses the view that medical profession demands
much higher commitment, knowledge, skills, competence and accountability and doctors have to
work under very trying conditions. It is, therefore, imperative that the pay structure of doctors and
faculty should be so designed as to provide compensation to medical fraternity commensurate to
their years of training and research. (para 11.5)
Corruption in the MCI
The Committee is shocked to find that compromised individuals have been able to make it to
the MCI, but the Ministry is not empowered to remove or sanction a Member of the Council even if
he has been proved corrupt. In a day and age when the need for sturdy systems and enhanced
transparency based regimes are being increasingly emphasized, such state of affairs indicate that
the MCI has not evolved with the times. Such state of affairs are also symptomatic of the rot within
and point to a deep systemic malice. Otherwise how could it happen that the MCI, which has laid
down elaborate duties and responsibilities of the “Physician” under the MCI Code of Ethics
Regulations, 2002, could have at its very top a person who was arrested on charges of corruption in
2010. The former Union Health Minister, who must have an insider’s view of the functioning of the
MCI, making scathing comments about corruption in the MCI, speaks volumes of the decay in the
MCI and is an eye-opener on the need for urgent reforms in the structure and functioning of
MCI. (para 12.11)
The Committee is all for professional autonomy, but autonomy sans accountability tends to
degenerate into autocracy and therefore cannot be acceptable. The MCI is funded by the Government
and therefore the Government must have the leverage to enforce accountability in the MCI. Since
the real cause of the problem is systemic and cannot be fixed without setting the system right, the
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take expeditious action to amend the statute or
enact a new legislation in a manner that it comprises within its ambit accountability provisions as
well and empowers the Government with legal authority to intervene in matters of corruption. In
the same vein, the Committee would like to emphasize that bonafide conduct/ decisions of the
Council members should be duly protected. (para 12.12)
The Committee takes note of the admission of the President of MCI that corruption is there
when there is sanctioning of medical colleges or increasing or decreasing of medical seats. However,
the Committee finds the inaction of the MCI enigmatic in this matter. If the MCI is aware of the
fact that denial of recognition of a medical college or grant of seats and then its permission /
enhancement or reduction leads to corruption, then the Committee wonders why it has failed to put

81
in place a framework or system which can plug these loopholes. The Committee is of the view that
there is too much power concentrated in a single body (i.e. the MCI), and it has failed to create a
transparent system of licensing of medical colleges. The MCI currently sets standards for recognition;
inspects and licenses medical colleges; overseas Registration and Ethical Conduct of Doctors. It
now proposes to undertake accreditation as well. Such concentration of powers creates a serious
conflict of interest and provides a fertile ground for misuse of authority. The Committee, therefore,
favours bifurcation of the functions of MCI and recommends that different structures be created
for discharging different functions. (para 12.13)
The Committee also takes note of the allegations reported in the media report that the
former vigilance officer of MCI was harassed and had to quit for lack of cooperation from the
President and several officials of the MCI in his efforts to deal with corruption. The facts brought to
the notice of the Committee force the Committee to seek a thorough probe into the whole gamut of
issues due to which the said Vigilance Officer had to resign. (para 12.14)
The Committee wonders to find that certain persons were appointed as Advisors to the President
in transgression of law and the Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide
his letter dated the 4th  March, 2014 had to write to the President to cancel “all such appointments
which were not authorized by the Act.” The Committee takes serious note of such flouting of law
and would like the matter to be thoroughly probed and an action taken report furnished to the
Committee within three months from the presentation of this Report. (para 12.15)
The Committee observes that the current system of inspections is flawed and opaque in the
sense that there is no provision for constructive feedback and the whole procedure is oriented
towards penalizing rather than improving. The Committee also observes that though Section 17.3
of the IMC Act, 1956 requires to forward “a copy of any such report to the university or medical
institution concerned...” no such report is submitted to the university concerned. This opaqueness
means that these inspections give enormous scope for money to exchange hands. It is ironical that
the evaluation of quality of teaching and training and the final product, i.e. the doctor, does not
figure in inspection reports.     (para 12.20)
The Committee also observes that MCI regulations do not provide any clear-cut-criteria for
recruiting suitable evaluators. The obvious fallout of this is an arbitrary and partisan selection of
inspectors. The Committee is amazed to take note of media report titled “The murky word of
medical college inspections” that despite hundreds of faculty members from 183 Government medical
colleges being available, certain ‘serial inspectors’ were part of almost half the inspections conducted
in the year 2014 and of the 261 inspections done during 2014, inspectors from medical colleges in
Gujarat were involved in as many as 100 inspections and another 40 involved faculty from Bihar.
The Committee observes that this cannot be a mere coincidence but reeks of a serious scam. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to unravel the truth, an in-depth probe may be
conducted into the arbitrary appointment of inspectors in the year 2014 and an action taken note
furnished to the Committee within three months from the presentation of this report. (para 12.21)
The Committee has recommended the establishment of a robust and autonomous accreditation
mechanism separately. Since the existing system of inspections of medical colleges has not been

82
able to promote quality and resulted, instead, in slashing of thousands of medical seats on flimsy
grounds, the Committee recommends, even at the cost of repetition, that the current system of
annual inspection be scraped and an autonomous accreditation body on the lines of the National
Accreditation and Assessment Council which is an autonomous body established by the University
Grants Commission and is mandated to assess and accredit institutions of higher education, be
established in the domain of medical education to deal with issues of quality.    (para 12.22)
Concluding Comments
The Committee observes that the Medical Council of India as the regulator of medical education
in the country has repeatedly failed on all its mandates over the decades. The Committee in the
earlier part of this Report has dealt with these failures in some detail. In this section, the Committee
before suggesting remedy to the problem, would like to briefly touch upon the following prominent
failures of MCI in order to put things into proper perspective:-
(i) failure to create a curriculum that produces doctors suited to working in Indian
context especially in the rural health services and poor urban areas; this has created
a disconnect between medical education system and health system.
(ii) failure to maintain uniform standards of medical education, both under graduate and
post-graduate;
(iii) devaluation of merit in admission, particularly in private medical institutions due to
prevalence of capitation fees, which make medical education available only to the
rich and not necessarily to the most deserving;
(iv) failure to produce a competent basic doctor;
(v) non-involvement of the MCI in any standardized summative evaluation of the medical
graduates and post-graduates;
(vi) failure to put in place a robust quality assurance mechanism when a fresh graduate
enters the system and starts practicing;
(vii) very little oversight of PG medical education leading to huge variations in standards;
(viii) heavy focus on nitty-gritty of infrastructure and human staff during inspections but
no substantial evaluation of quality of teaching, training and imparting of skills;
(ix) Abysmal doctor-population ratio;
(x) failure to create a transparent system of medical college inspections and grant of
recognition or de-recognition;
(xi) failure to guide setting up of medical colleges in the country as per need, resulting
in geographical mal-distribution of medical colleges with clustering in some States
and absence in several other States and the disparity in healthcare services across
States;
(xii) acute shortage of medical teachers;
(xiii) failure to oversee and guide the Continuing Medical Education in the country, leaving
this important task in the hands of the commercial private industry;
(xiv) failure to instill respect for a professional code of ethics in the medical professionals
and take disciplinary action against doctors found violating the code of Ethics, etc.
(para 13.1)

83
The Committee simultaneously observes that the onus of failure of medical education system
cannot be laid exclusively on the Medical Council of India. The successive Governments have also
their share in it. The fact that there is imbalance in the distribution of medical colleges across
States is not so much MCI’s fault; it is the fault of the successive Governments that they have not
pushed the MCI in that direction. There is also failure on the part of State Governments.
(para 13.2)
The need for radical reforms in the regulatory framework of the medical profession has been
on the agenda for several years now. The National Commission for Human Resources for Health
Bill, 2011 which was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 22nd December, 2011 was reported upon
by this Committee and the 60th Report thereon presented to Parliament on the 23rd November,
2012. In its 60th Report, the Committee had recommended to the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare to re-examine the concerns expressed by it and bring forward a fresh Bill. Rather than
seizing the opportunity to come up with a better Bill, the Ministry remained apathetic to the state of
affairs and did not respond with vigorous corrective measures. (para 13.3)
Due to massive failures of the MCI and lack of initiatives on the part of the Government in
unleashing reforms, there is total system failure due to which the medical education system is fast
sliding downwards and quality has been hugely side-lined in the context of increasing
commercialization of medical education and practice. The situation has gone far beyond the point
where incremental tweaking of the existing system or piecemeal approach can give the contemplated
dividends. That is why the Committee is convinced that the MCI cannot be remedied according to
the existing provisions of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 which is certainly outdated. If we try
to amend or modify the existing Act, ten years down the line we will still be grappling with the same
problems that we are facing today. Nowhere in the world is there an educational process oversight,
especially, of medical education done by an elected body of the kind that MCI is. Managing everything
of more than 400 medical colleges is too humongous a task to be done by the MCI alone because the
challenges facing medical education of the 21st  century are truly gigantic and cannot be addressed
with an ossified and opaque body like MCI. Transformation will happen only if we change the
innards of the system. (para 13.4)
Game changer reforms of transformational nature are therefore the need of the hour and
they need to be carried out urgently and immediately. Because, if revamping of the regulatory
structure is delayed any further on any grounds including political expediency, it will be too late as
too much momentum will have been built to offset attempts at reversing the direction later, with
the result that our medical education system will fall into a bottomless pit and the country will have
to suffer great social, political and financial costs. (para 13.5)
Keeping all these facts in mind, the Committee is convinced that the much needed reforms
will have to be led by the Central Government. The MCI can no longer be entrusted with that
responsibility in view of its massive failures. The people of India  will  not  be  well-served  by letting
the modus-operandi of MCI continue unaltered to  the  detriment  of medical education and decay of
health system. The Government must therefore fulfill its commitment to preserve, protect and
promote the health of all Indians by leading the way for a radical  reform  which cleanses the
present ills and elevates medical education to contemporary global pedagogy and practices while
retaining focus on national relevance.  (para 13.6)

84
The  expert  committee  led  by  (late)   Prof.   Ranjit   Roy Chaudhury constituted by the
Government in July, 2014 to  suggest reforms in the  regulatory  framework  of  medical  profession
has submitted its report in February, 2015, a copy  of  which  has  been supplied  to  this Parliamentary
Committee. The expert committee has recommended major changes in the ethos of the regulatory
body and major structural reconfiguration of its functions. The expert committee has suggested the
formation of a National Medical Commission (NMC) through a new Act. The NMC will have four
verticals (i) UG Board of Medical Education and Training, (ii) PG Board of Medical Education and
Training (iii) National Assessment and Accreditation Board, and (iv) National Board for Medical
Registration. Besides these vertical heads, the expert committee has also recommended the formation
of a National Advisory Council which will consist of members from the State Governments, Union
Territories, State Medical Councils, Medical Universities and members of NMC. The Committee has
been informed that the creation of National Medical Commission and the structure (at Appendix)
envisaged has been endorsed by a group of eminent medical educationists, experts and public health
persons. (para 13.7)
The Committee has done a rigorous analysis of the suggested new regulatory structure and
found that several of its concerns have been addressed in the suggested new model of regulation of
medical education and practice. The Committee is therefore in general agreement with the suggested
regulatory structure, and recommends to the Government to examine the structure proposed by
the Ranjit Roy Chaudhury Committee subject to the recommendations made by this Committee in
this report. (para 13.8)
To sum up, the Committee observes, even at the risk of sounding repetitive, that the need for
major institutional changes in the regulatory oversight of the medical profession in the country is
so urgent that it cannot be deferred any longer. The Committee is, however, aware that any attempt
at overhauling the regulatory framework will face huge challenges from the deeply entrenched
vested interests who will try to stall and derail the entire exercise. But if the medical education
system has to be saved from total collapse, the Government can no longer look the other way and
has to exercise its constitutional authority and take decisive and exemplary action to restructure
and revamp India’s regulatory system of medical education and practice. The Committee, therefore,
exhorts the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to implement the recommendations made by it
in this report immediately and bring a new comprehensive Bill in Parliament for this purpose at the
earliest. (para 13.9)

85
APPENDIX
THE NEW REGULATORY STRUCTURE
AS PROPOSED BY THE RANJIT ROY CHAUDHARY COMMITTEE
The present proposal is to establish a National Medical Commission, with four separate, independent
bodies under it, each of which would solely focus on its area of influence, as shown below-
National Medical Commission (NMC)
     * Oversight of medical education and
professional practice through the Bodies under it
     * Evolve National Policy for medical workforce National Advisory Council
     * W ork on the directions of the Ministry on various
policies
UG Medical PG Medical Board for Board for Medical
Education and Education and Assessment Registration
Training Board Training Board and Accreditation
(UG -METB) (PG -METB)
Curriculum Curriculum Approval  of  Medical Charge of Licensing,
Teacher training Training and Schools, training Revalidation
Evolving standards Examination institutions faculty and Decisions  on
of Accreditation Evolving standards courses based on the regarding ethical
of Accreditation standards evolved practice of
in   conjunction with Medicine and
UG and PG Boards disciplinary action
2. The National Medical Commission (NMC) will be an umbrella body for supervision and facilitation of
medical education and oversight of medial professional practice. Under this umbrella Commission, four
independent bodies will be established to fulfill the functions, related to under-graduate and post-graduate
medical education, accreditation of teaching courses and Institutions and medical registration. This will
serve as the central Body providing oversight over medical professionals and their practice, with the overall
objective to protect the interest of the doctor, patient and the general public.
3. The National Medical Commission will have complete autonomy in all academic matters. The NMC
will:
(a) Assess the changing requirements of the health care scenario and develop roadmap for meeting
these requirements (the number of doctors, specialists, type of training etc.).
(b) Provide oversight and supervise the bodies under it.
(c) Provide a platform for appeal against the decision of the Registration Board on issues related to
registration and malpractice and ethical issues.
85

86
(d) Grant approvals for the establishment of medical educational institutions and make final
decisions on their accreditation, on the recommendations of the National Board of Assessment
and Accreditation.
Constitution
The Commission shall consist of:
(a) Full time Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence, integrity and administrative
capability with at least a post-graduate degree in the discipline of medicine and having not
less than twenty-five years experience in the field of medicine;
(b) Three full-time members, who shall be persons of eminence, integrity and administrative
capability with at least a post-graduate degree in the discipline of medicine and having not
less than twenty years’ experience in the field of medicine;
(c) One full-time member, who shall be a person of eminence, integrity and administrative
capability, not having a qualification in the discipline of medicine, but having not less than
twenty years’ experience in any of the fields of public health, health economics, health
sciences, higher education and accreditation, public administration, law or social sciences;
(d) One ex-officio member who shall be the nominee of the Ministry of Health, not below the
rank of Addl. Secretary;
(e) A representative of the State Governments or Union Territories elected by the National
Advisory Council, from amongst its members.
4. The members will be selected by a five member Selection Committee consisting of eminent medical
professionals, appointed by the Government. The term of office will be four years, except for the member
elected by the National Advisory Council, who will have a term of two years. A member may not have more
than two terms in office. The Chairman will function through its Secretariat. The positions to provide
assistance in administrative, scientific and legal matters will be created and financial outlay will be provided
to maintain the Secretariat. In such a large country, there will also be need to establish regional offices of the
Commission to make the oversight efficient and facilitate the interaction with the States. The Commission
shall make recommendations to the Government on the process of appointment of nominated members on
the various Boards.
Functions
5. The functions of the Commission will be to take measures to facilitate equitable access to services
provided by medical practitioners as well as access to medical education and training in accordance with
public need, to develop and maintain appropriate standards of medical education and training, and to protect
the public interest by enforcing the highest professional and ethical standards among medical practitioners.
The Commission shall:
(a) Carry out studies and collect data required to assess the need for medical practitioners,
including specialists in different medical disciplines, across the States and Union Territories;
(b) Assess the requirement, including the number, type and geographical location of educational
and training facilities in the field of medicine;
(c) Formulate strategic action plans to effectively maximize the utilization of available resources
for the purposes of medical education and training without compromising on its quality;

87
(d) Formulate strategic action plans to implement such policies and priorities of the Central
Government in relation to medical education and training and the medical profession that
may be framed from time to time;
(e) Facilitate coordination among the National Boards established under this Act, give binding
directions to them, and exercise supervisory functions over them;
(f) Grant and withdraw permission for the establishment of medical educational institutions, for
the introduction of new courses of study, or for the increase in admissions capacity of such
institutions, on the recommendations of the National Assessment and Accreditations Board;
(g) Confer grades on medical educational institutions on the recommendations of the National
Assessment and Accreditations Board;
(h) Approve curricula and standards for the conduct of examinations prescribed by the National
Undergraduate Board and National Postgraduate Board;
(i) Ensure that State Councils effectively enforce the highest professional and ethical standards
against medical practitioners and enforce such action itself, under appropriate sections of
this Act in case of inaction on the part of State Councils;
(j) Direct the National Registration Board and State Councils to remove a medical practitioner
from the National Register and applicable State Register respectively;
(k) Regulate, in accordance with the law, for the time being in force, the entry and operation
of foreign medical educational institutions in consultation with the National Undergraduate
Board, the National Postgraduate Board, the National Assessment and Accreditation Board
or such other authority as may be specified by the Central Government;
(l) Initiate programs to establish and promote international collaborations.
National Advisory Council
6. An Advisory Council will be constituted under the NMC with the following membership:
Chairman and members of NMC
Vice – Chancellor or his Representatives of all Medical Universities
One nominee from each State that does not have a Medical University, from amongst Universities
under which Medical colleges function
1 Nominee from amongst all Union Territories that do not have a Medical University
1 elected member of each State Medical Council
7. The Chairman of NAC will be elected by the Council from among its members, but will not be the
Chairperson and or one of the members of the NMC. The Council will be convened twice a year and will
discuss all major policy changes that are being considered. Its role will be advisory and decisions will not be
binding on the NMC. Any advice that is not accepted by the NMC will be explained in writing to the advisory
Council.
8. The term will be of 5 years and a member may not be nominated for more than two terms.

88
9. The National Advisory Council through its representation from the State Universities and State Medical
Council will provide a platform for the States to put forward their views and concerns before the National
Regulator and through the elected representation in the NMC, UG Board, PG Board and Board of Registration
allow their participation in the decision making processes of these Bodies.
10.     The Boards under the National Medical Commission
1. UG Board of Medical Education and Training (UGBET): will oversee all activities related to
under-graduate medical education. It will:-
Develop competency based curriculum (including assessment) in consultation with all stake
holders, such that the medical graduate has appropriate knowledge, skills and attitudes for
providing health care as per societal needs.
Develop modalities to encourage humane and ethical practice of medicine and develop a spirit
of enquiry.
Develop minimum requirement for implementing the curriculum with flexibility and optimal
utilization of available resources so as to reduce the cost of education without compromising
the quality of education.
Advice and collaborate with the Accreditation Council to establish the norms of Accreditation.
Develop faculty to effectively implement curriculum using technology and newer techniques
of teaching- learning.
Provide oversight to the selection process for the UG seats.
The UGBET shall consist of:
(a) A President, who shall be one of the full-time members of the Commission with medical
qualification, to be chosen by the Commission according to such procedure as it may
determine;
(b) Three part-time members, who shall be persons having at least a post graduate degree in
the discipline of medicine and having not less than twenty years’ experience in medical
teaching and training at the undergraduate level, including curriculum design and development
and the conduct of examinations.
(c) One member, elected by the National advisory Council from amongst its members.
11. The term of office will be for four years, except for the member elected by the National Advisory
Council, who will have a term of two years. No member may have more than have two terms in office.
The UG board will:---
(a) Determine, coordinate and maintain standard of medical education;
(b) Determine standards of proficiency at qualifying examination (student assessment) for
universities and institutions;
(c) Facilitate faculty development/ training;
(d) Facilitate and implement educational research, and international student exchange programs;
(e) Develop the essential and desired requirements for imparting this education.

89
12. The focus of the Board will be to expand the access to medical education by optimal utilization of the
training opportunities. It will evolve guidelines by which the health facilities outside the medical colleges will
be utilized for enhancing the training opportunities. Linkages of public sector hospitals, district hospitals and
other hospitals with medical colleges will be encouraged so that all experienced clinicians can participate in
training.
13. Establishing whether the standards of UG training are being met and verification of its implementation
and granting approval will be carried out by accreditation board. The Accreditation Board will have to
approve all ancillary training facilities that are co-opted.
14. The UG Board shall however, suggest ways to bridge the deficiency in faculty, and facilitate and
support faculty development programs in order to bridge this major deficiency in the current system. It will
also provide guidelines on utilizing maximally available resources (human, hospital, infrastructure and other)
for medical education so as to reduce cost of medical education. The board will work in co-ordination with
various professional bodies, health care providers and others and will give due attention to these suggestions
while formulating competencies, standards of proficiency and other matters relating to medical education.
15. The final exit examination will be conducted by the respective Universities and the Board will work in
close collaboration with them to ensure that assessment norms are being followed. The State Medical
Universities will be involved in identifying training sites, promoting linkages and taking the steps required to
expand UG education within the State. They will also play a leading role in teacher training and providing the
support for new organizations to meet the recommended standards.
16. To implement the program the Board will work through various Committees, and these will have
representation from various State medical Colleges, practicing medical professionals, voluntary agencies in
the health sector and other stake holders who can contribute to meaningful and relevant development of UG
medical education. The overall endeavor will be to attain a minimum standard for all graduates in the country,
through support and facilitation for underperforming Centers.
Highlights
The UG Board will replace the current centrally dictated, one curriculum formula with a more dynamic,
evolving educational process.
There will be no need of “essentiality certificate” from State Government for establishment of new
colleges.
The UG Board will evolve an integrated, dynamic learning environment, that is more skill based and
relevant for clinical practice at the primary level.
The Board will facilitate the change-over from the present structure by providing the hand holding
function, especially for faculty development.
Whereas it will set the standard, it will not be involved in assessing the colleges, the idea being to
separate the two functions, namely recommending what needs to be done from whether it is being
done.
Expected Outcomes
A more dynamic and modern, educational environment that will produce doctors with the skills and
ethos required for health care delivery across various sectors – primary, secondary, peripheral etc.

90
Wider use of training facilities (infrastructure and teachers) and decreasing the emphasis on physical
infrastructure, which in turn will decrease the cost of training, bring down the cost to the students.
2. PG Board of Medical Education and Training (PGBET): will oversee all matters related to post-
graduate medical education. It will:----
Develop standards for postgraduate education and training in each specialty/subspecialty.
Develop standards for essential and desirable requirements for the training institutions in terms of
infrastructure and faculty/trainers.
Advice and collaborate with the Accreditation Council to establish the norms of Accreditation.
Oversee the process of selection of candidates for postgraduate Education and Training, taking into
consideration National and Regional Policy decision for various affirmative actions through a National
test to be conducted immediately after the final MBBS examination.
Establish specialty curriculum with modern methods of learning and training processes in consultation
with the respective and concerned Professional Associations and Bodies, and will assess the competence
for fitness to practice through a common exit examination.
It will be legally empowered to grant degrees.
The PGBET will consist of:––
(a) A President, who shall be one of the full-time members of the Commission with medical
qualification, to be chosen by the Commission according to such procedure as it may
determine;
(b) Three part-time members, who shall be persons having at least a post graduate degree in
the discipline of medicine and having not less than twenty years’ experience in medical
teaching and training at the postgraduate level, including curriculum design and development
and the conduct of examination;
(c) One member, elected by the National Advisory Council from amongst its members;
(d) The term of office will be for four years, except for the member elected by the National
Advisory Council, who will have a term of two years. No member may have more than
have two terms in office.
The PG Board shall:––
(a) Determine, coordinate and maintain appropriate standards of medical education at the PG
level;
(b) Facilitate the efficient maximization of available resources to ensure equitable access to
medical education and ensure adequate availability of specialists in different disciplines
across the States and Union Territories;
(c) Establish competencies required for qualifications in the specialty, including knowledge,
advanced clinical and research skills, the capacity for self- education, professional attributes
and ethical values;
(d) Develop training processes that promote ethical practice with the well being of the patient
of prime concern;

91
(e) Lay down the curriculum to be imparted by medical educational institutions based on the
above competencies and assist medical educational institutions in the design of new courses
of study at the postgraduate level;
(f) Promote and encourage research as a component of medical education at the postgraduate
level;
(g) Lay down standards for the conduct of examinations in medical educational institutions;
(h) Lay down the standard of proficiency required from candidates at qualifying examinations;
(i) Conduct final qualifying exit examination for all postgraduates in conjunction with Universities;
(j) Frame guidelines for the minimum requirements for the conduct of postgraduate courses
in medical education in different specialized disciplines, including physical infrastructure,
faculty and clinical workload and on methods of instruction in postgraduate medical education,
taking into account the need for mentoring by faculty members and the application of
advancements in technology to modern medicine;
(k) Conduct workshops and seminars to promote the training and development of faculty of
postgraduate courses in medical education;
(l) Frame guidelines, for the effective maximization of available resources- physical infrastructure,
faculty and hospitals through linkages between Institutions in order to enhance the learning
experience;
(m) Endeavour to widen the scope of PG training without compromising on the quality, with
the objective of reducing the cost of PG medical education and removing regional imbalances
in the provision of postgraduate medical educational institutions.
17. The PG Board would be in charge of Policy decisions regarding the areas under its mandate. It would
facilitate the States and Medical and other Universities, to attain these standards by a variety of means. The
State and Medical and other Universities would identify new training facilities (various public and private
sector hospitals with capabilities to provide training), and help to develop linkages between various centers.
The Board in collaboration with the Universities will work towards filling in gaps in training requirements by
developing new paradigms such as rotational training in non-teaching hospitals, up-gradation of institutions
to achieve capability for accreditation for PG training both in infrastructure and faculty requirement. However,
while the PG Board would provide the inputs for establishing the standards, approval of all facilities for
fulfilling these standards would be with Accreditation Body.
Highlights
The PG Board would in effect, function as the current NBE does.
It will oversee the entrance and exit examinations for all PG training, thereby ensuring equitable
access to training and a uniform standard of training.
By shifting the entrance examination for PG to the beginning of internship, the emphasis on skill
acquisition during the period of internship will be restored.
It will provide logistic and training support for the change-over from the current system.

92
Whereas it will set the standards, it will not be involved in assessment of training centers, the idea
being to separate the two functions, namely recommending what needs to be done from whether it is
being done
Expected Outcomes
A single specialist certification, in line with rest of the world.
Uniform entrance with transparent admission process.
Rapid expansion in training opportunities and PG seats.
A more facilitative environment that will decrease cost of training.
As the demand supply gap will narrow the premiums placed on admissions will ease off.
The overall standard would be maintained by the common exit examination.
3. National Assessment and Accreditation Board (NAAB): The responsibilities of this Board in medical
education and training will include:
Setting national standards, requirements and outcomes for both Undergraduate (UG) and Postgraduate
(PG) Medical education, with inputs from the UG and PG Boards which includes accreditation of
institutions, undergraduate and postgraduate courses and programs.
Identifying where these are not being met through quality assurance and ensuring that those responsible
take appropriate action.
Driving improvement in standards in medical education and training across the country for uniform
standards in curriculum, assessment of competence.
The NAAB will consist of:––
(a) A President, who shall be one of the member of Commission;
(b) Two part-time members, who shall be persons having at least a post graduate degree in the discipline
of medicine and having not less than twenty years’ experience in medical teaching and training or the
accreditation of medical educational institutions, and
(c) Two part-time members, who shall be persons not having a qualification in the discipline of medicine
but having not less than twenty years’ experience in higher education, including teaching, training or
the accreditation of educational institutions.
18. The legal framework will secure the autonomy of the accreditation system and ensure the independence
of its quality assessment from Government, the medical schools and the profession. The Board will lay
down the by-laws specifying the procedure for accreditation, including the appointment of review or site-
visit teams. Furthermore, the legal framework should include rules regarding declaration of conflict of
interest and handling of complaints.
19. The accreditation agency will have an accreditation board, and an administrative staff or unit. All
main groups of stakeholders will be represented in the accreditation committees, such as academicians,
management of educational Institutions, members of the medical profession, including physicians in hospitals,
community clinics and general practice, and other stakeholders, such as Government authorities in charge
of medical education or of the health care system, regulatory bodies, students, related health professions,
the public, etc.

93
The Board will:––
(a) Develop and publish standards to be applied in carrying out the process of assessment and accreditation,
in a transparent process of consultation with all relevant stakeholders and taking into account the
guidelines framed by the National Undergraduate Board and the National Postgraduate Board;
(b) Make public the standards or criteria that will be applied to assess whether permission ought to be
granted for the establishment of a medical educational institution or for the introduction of a new
course of study or for an increase in the admissions capacity of an existing medical educational
institution;
(c) Submit a report and make recommendations to the Commission on whether permission for the
establishment of a medical educational institution ought to be refused or conditional permission or full
permission ought to be granted on the basis of assessment carried out for the purposes. All medical
educational institutions will need to have accreditation;
(d) Lay down standards for essential and desirable infrastructural requirements, including the extra
infrastructure required in existing hospitals and healthcare facilities. These will be used as the basis
for the accrediting process – for the self-evaluation, external evaluation, recommendations and final
decision on accreditation. The effort will be to work towards global standards for quality improvement
in basic medical education, with the necessary national and/or regional specifications or a comparable
set of standards;
(e) Set up such committees or appoint such staff in consultation with the Commission as it may consider
necessary to carry out assessment and accreditation;
(f) Regulate its own procedure in carrying out assessment and accreditation and levy fees and other
charges on medical educational institutions in relation to the process of assessment and accreditation;
(g) The main elements in the accreditation process will be self-assessment, site- visit, and Report. The
accreditation agency will support the medical schools by issuing instructions regarding the structure
and content of the self- evaluation report . Institution will receive either full accreditation for the
maximum period conferred, if all criteria or standards are fulfilled.
20. Conditional accreditation, to be reviewed after a shorter period to check fulfilment of the conditions.
Conditional accreditation can be used in cases where a few criteria or standards are only partly fulfilled or in
cases where more criteria or standards are not fulfilled.
21. In case of failure of any Institution to attain full accreditation, the students will be allowed to get
registration by alternate mechanisms, approved by the NMC, such as clearing the Qualifying examination
conducted for graduates from Foreign Medical Schools/Colleges.
Highlights
This is a new process, and is in keeping with global standards.
This system will operate in place of the current system of LOP, annual inspection and final recognition.
It will look beyond just physical infrastructure and will look at the teaching/learning process and the
quality of the graduates etc.
It will hand hold institutions, and facilitate the expansion of the educational opportunities.
It will work in close co-ordination with Universities.

94
Expected Outcomes
Dissociation of the laying of standards and approval of the standards (in consonance with global
norms).
A two way process with transparency, which will help Institutions to bridge gaps, improve quality.
Shifting of the emphasis from the essential physical/manpower based approvals of Institutions to a
more dynamic approval based on quality of teaching.
Over time achieve global standard of education by providing incentives for accreditation grades.
4. National Board for Medical Registration (NBMR): Their role will be to:
Provide Conditional License to Practice and License to Practice
Maintain a Dynamic Registry of Medical Practitioners under various categories: through an electronic
register with live updates (additions/deletions) from all State registers and compulsory re-registration
every 5 years. All registration will be with the State Councils and Central registration will only be for
foreign graduates.
Organize Continuing Medical Education (CME) and Continuing Professional Development (CPD)
programs and evolve mechanisms for making these available to all medical graduates through various
innovations, including the use of distance and online learning and evaluation with the overall target of
making CME and CPD mandatory for re-registration by 2020.
Evolve ethical guidelines for practice and professional conduct and take active measures to promote
these
Provide oversight over ethical practice; the mechanisms for registering violations will go beyond the
present practice of specific complaints against a specific doctor. Scope for third-party complaints
will be introduced and relationship between Central and State Councils will be clearly defined, in a
manner that while the profession is not unduly harassed, the public confidence in the process of
appeal is strong.
Allow for suo moto hearing of complaints that are not addressed within stipulated time frame of 90
days, by State Council.
Recommend appropriate actions with regards to complaints including fines and withdrawal of License;
processes for addressing complaints – such as constitution of the committee, time lines etc. will be
defined in the Act.
The Board will consist of:––
(a) A President, who shall be the non-medical full-time members of the Commission;
(b) Two part-time members, who shall be persons having at least a post graduate degree in the
discipline of medicine and having not less than twenty years’ experience in the field of
medicine;
(c) Two part-time members, who shall be persons not having a qualification in the discipline
of medicine, but having not less than twenty years’ experience in the fields of public
administration, law, or the social sciences;
(d) Two part-time members, elected by the National advisory Council from amongst its members.

95
22. The term of office will be for four years, except for the member elected by the National Advisory
Council, who will have a term of two years. No member may have more than have two terms in office.
23. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the National Registration Board shall maintain an exhaustive and
up-to-date record of the names of all persons in India who have recognized qualifications and are entitled to
practice medicine in the form of a National Register.
National Registration Board will: ––
(a) maintain and publish the National Register in electronic form;
(b) ensure that the names of medical practitioners are automatically entered in or removed from
the National Register as soon as such names are entered in or removed from the State
Registers;
(c) remove the names of medical practitioners from the National Register on the directions of
the Commission;
(d) enter or remove the names of medical practitioners from the National Register on any other
grounds that may be specified in this Act;
(e) levy fees or other charges to be paid by the persons seeking enrolment in the National
Register or persons already enrolled in it;
(f) Provide a mandatory framework for the conduct of Disciplinary Committees at all State
Medical Councils by which the Constitution of the Committee will be as per the guidelines
and will have strong representation of non-medical lay persons;
(g) Widen the scope of complaints and manner of redressal to ensure that while public grievances
are dealt to satisfaction, sufficient protection is provided to the medical professionals;
(h) Develop mechanisms to have continuous interaction with State Councils, through bi-annual
meetings and promote active dialogue between the councils and its members;
(i) Protect the interests of the doctors against undue harassment.
Highlights
A single National Register that will upload registrations from across the country.
More robust and time bound redressal of complaints, that will protect both doctors and patients.
Active promotion of ethical practices within the profession.
Provide continuing education and ensure that professional competence is upgraded and
maintained.
Expected outcomes
Development of a live register.
More robust grievance redressal system that will help to restore public faith.

MINUTES

*II
SECOND MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 18th September, 2014 in  Room No. ‘139’, First
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra    –– Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4.  Shri Vijay Goel
5. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
6. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
7. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
8. Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem
9. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Thangso Baite
11. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
12. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
13. Dr. K. Kamaraj
14. Shri Arjunlal Meena
15. Shri Chirag Paswan
16. Shri M.K. Raghavan
17. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
18. Shri Alok Sanjar
19. Dr. Mahesh Sharma
20. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
21. Shri Raj Kumar Singh
22. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
23. Shrimati Rita Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Pratap  Shenoy, Committee Officer
*Minutes of Ist Meeting relate to other matters.
99

100
WITNESSES
** *
I. Opening Remarks
2. ** *
3. The Chairman sought the views of the Members of the Committee on the subjects deliberated in the
last meeting. After some discussions, it was decided that the following subjects may be selected by the
Committee for examination and report––
(i) Functioning of   Medical Council of India, * * *
(ii) ** *
4. ** *
II. ** *
5. ** *
6. ** *
7. ** *
8. ** *
9. ** *
10. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 3.55 P.M to meet again on 25th September, 2014 to hear the views
of representatives of Ministry of Health and Family W elfare on the subject of ‘Functioning of  Medical
Council of India. * * *
*Relate to other matters.

101
III
THIRD MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 25th September, 2014 in   Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra –– Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Shri Vijay Goel
5. Shrimati B. Jayashree
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
7. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
8. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
9. Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Thangso Baite
11. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
12. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
13. Dr. K. Kamaraj
14. Shri Arjunlal Meena
15. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
16. Shri Chirag Paswan
17. Shri M.K. Raghavan
18. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
19. Dr. Mahesh Sharma
20. Shri Raj Kumar Singh
21. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
22. Shrimati Rita Tarai
23. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap  Shenoy, Committee Officer
101

102
WITNESSES
Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri Lov Verma, Secretary
2. Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary
Medical Council of India
1. Dr. Jayshree Mehta, President
2. Dr. Ved Prakash Mishra, Chairman, Academic Committee
3. Dr. D.J. Borah, Member, PG Committee
4. Dr. Reena Nayyar, Secretary In-charge
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear  the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare and the
representatives of the  Medical Council of India on the functioning of the Council.
3. ** *
4. ** *
II. Oral evidence on ‘Functioning of Medical Council of India, *     * *
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard views of the  Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare on
the Functioning of Medical Council of India. He  enumerated the following points viz. history of Indian
Medical Council Act; objectives and functions of the Council; further amendments to the Act; reconstitution
of the Council; steps taken for revamping the functions of the Council in pursuance of which a Group of
Experts  had been constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr. Ranjit Roy Choudhary to study the existing
IMC Act, 1956.  He informed that the group would submit its report by the end of October, 2014.
6. Dr. V ed Prakash Mishra, Chairman, Academic Committee, MCI then made a power point presentation
enumerating the following points viz.  composition and membership of the reconstituted Council, statutory
committees under the Council; sub committees under Section  9(1); inspections and visitations; ethics
related issues; appeals; legal and RTI cases  from April 2013 till date; notable initiatives like online monitoring
of  undergraduate and postgraduate  admissions and evoking transparency like day to day website updation,
putting up of inspection/visitation reports on website, display of minutes on website,  etc.
7. Members then raised queries which included––types/kinds of corruption prevailing in MCI and steps
being taken to curb the same; the reasons for denial of  recognition to Government Medical Colleges; need
to put in place the  criteria  for rejecting/approving medical colleges and putting the same online; State-wise
pendency details in respect of medical colleges  awaiting recognition; ratio of Undergraduate, Post Graduate
and post doctorate seats;  powers of the Central Government to intervene in the event of reported cases of
corruption in the Council; shortage of faculty and lack of infrastructure in private medical colleges; delay/
* Relate to other matters.

103
denial in sanction for enhancing seats in Government medical colleges; need to formulate guidelines and
framework for greater transparency in the Council; need for coordinated efforts for tackling corruption in
the Council; need for revamping the system for facilitating production of more doctors; the extent  of
autonomy to the Council; need to look into the possibility of easing norms for exams conducted for students
with foreign medical degrees for practising in India; need to ensure presence of  elected  representatives
from Parliament in MCI to ensure accountability and transparency; * * * reasons for delay in carrying out
amendments to the  Indian Medical Council Act; need to formulate a vision/roadmap for  setting up of new
medical colleges and increasing  seats in the existing medical colleges/institutes, etc.
8. The Chairman then raised certain questions regarding the functioning of MCI  and sought detailed
note for consideration of the Committee  within fifteen days on the issues raised by him and other Members
of the Committee.
9. The Secretary assured that a detailed note on the above mentioned issues  would be submitted for
consideration of the Committee. He further submitted that the major hurdle in setting up of Medical colleges
was fund constraint. With regard to steps being taken to curb corruption, the Secretary submitted that the
entire Act was under review by a Group of Experts under the Chairmanship of Dr. Ranjit Roy Choudhary.
10. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 4.10 P.M. to meet again at 2.30 P.M. on the 16th October, 2014.
* Relate to other matter

104
*X
TENTH MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on W ednesday, the 28th January, 2015 in Main Committee  Room ,
Ground Floor, Parliament House  Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.     Shri Satish Chandra Misra – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
6. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Thangso Baite
8. Dr. Subhash Bhamre
9. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
10. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
11. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
12. Dr. K. Kamaraj
13. Shri J. J.T. Natterjee
14. Shri Chirag Paswan
15. Shri M.K. Raghavan
16. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
17. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
18. Shri Raj Kumar Singh
19. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
20. Shrimati  Rita Tarai
21. Shri Manohar Untwal
22. Shri Akshay Yadav
23. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap  Shenoy, Committee Officer
* Minutes of IVth to IXth meetings relate to other matters.
104

105
WITNESSES
(I) Indian Medical Association (IMA)
(i) Prof. (Dr.) A. Marthanda Pillai, National President
(ii) Dr. K. K. Aggarwal, Secretary General
(iii) Dr. Ved Prakash Mishra, Advisor
(II) Dr. J. M. Kaul, Director Professor of Anatomy,
Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi
(III) Dr. Sita Naik, Former Dean, Sanjay Gandhi
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences &
former Member, Board of Governors, Medical
Council of India (MCI)
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear the above mentioned witnesses on the functioning of Medical Council of
India (MCI). * * *
II. Oral evidence on  the functioning of Medical Council of India (MCI)
3. The Committee thereafter took oral evidence of the representatives of Indian Medical Association
(IMA). Dr. V ed Prakash Mishra gave a brief outline on the functioning of MCI and flagged six areas of
concern which the Government should address so as to ensure that the Council attains real autonomy viz.
(i)  for the purpose of addressing quality concerns there was a need for creation of an autonomous  authority
for accreditation of medical schools by incorporating a suitable amendment to the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956, and vesting  the Council with the power, authority and jurisdiction to create an autonomous
authority for the purpose on the similar lines as the All India Council for Technical Education was statutorily
vested with the authority for the purposes of accrediting colleges of Engineering and Technology under its
ambit through the ‘National Accreditation Board’; (ii) need for provision of development grants to medical
schools to make them  quality based  and routing the same through the apical regulatory Council (i.e. MCI);
(iii) MCI should be vested, through an appropriate amendment to the governing Act with powers of prescribing
service conditions and also the pay scales for the medical teachers in various medical schools in the country
as was available with the University Grants Commission for prescribing service conditions and pay  scales
for teachers in higher education in the country; (iv) need to bring a  suitable amendment to section 33 of the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956  providing that regulations exclusively on academic matters for the purposes
of their timely implementation could be notified by the regulatory Council without any need for prior approval
by the Government of India which could facilitate the academic innovations being put into place in a timely
manner; (v) need to have a National Curriculum and National Eligibility Test to ensure merit based admissions;
(vi) need to  ensure linkage of entrance test to the exit test which would help to standardize and certify
undergraduate education and make it conform to global standards;  and (vii) need to ensure that Secretary of
the Medical Council of India as Ex-officio treasurer and Registrar  should  be a medical professional.
* Relates to other matter.

106
Prof. (Dr.) A. Marthanda Pillai,  during the course of his deposition, highlighted the following points viz.
(i) need to set up more medical colleges in deficient Northern States; (ii) need to undertake a study to assess
the actual requirements  of medical and paramedical manpower which would help in projecting the future
manpower requirements and consequently the number of medical colleges to be set up in the country in the
near future;(iii) need to set up more medical colleges in rural areas; (iv) need to increase the number of
nurses in the country; (v) need to put in place a  mechanism to ensure that the curriculum was revised/
revisited every five  years as it was last revised fifteen years ago;(vi) promoting use of new methodology of
teaching by use of IT tools  to minimize the shortage of teaching faculty in the country, (vii) rural posting of
doctors should be made compulsory, etc.  Dr. K.K. Aggarwal highlighted the  following points viz.
(i)  closure  of four ESI hospitals by 31st January, 2015 and closure of five more ESI Hospitals in the near
future; (ii) need to ensure difference and identify of different systems of medicine; (iii) MCI has powers to
suspend but has no powers to  grant compensation, therefore either it should be  given powers to grant
compensation or a separate tribunal for dealing with compensation matters may be set up; (iv)  need to
refrain ayurvedic doctors  from practicing  allopathic system of medicine; (v) need to simplify the process
required for registration of doctors  for which  a doctor requiring registration needs to comply with 44
statutory legislations; (vi) promotion of AYUSH; (vii) need for putting in place a system for educating
doctors regularly about drugs and updating their knowledge, etc.
4. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries covering issues like  bribing  of doctors by Pharmaceutical
companies to ensure prescription of their medicines; mandatory rural posting of doctors; need to ensure
counseling of doctors from time to time; emphasis on skill training of doctors; need to provide reservation
to rural students in medical colleges set up in the rural areas with the condition that such rural graduates
would serve in rural areas for five years; need to ensure security and livable working condition  of medical
graduates posted in rural areas; need to bring amendment in the present Act to ensure that Postgraduate
course  of study must immediately follow Undergraduate course of  study following which internship can
be  completed; need to provide more medical seats in Government colleges; etc.     The representatives of
IMA replied to some of the queries raised by Members of the Committee and assured to furnish written
replies of remaining queries within a fortnight.
5. Prof. J.M. Kaul, during  the course of her  deposition, highlighted the following points  on functioning
of MCI viz. (i) need to ensure flexibility in infrastructure for medical colleges keeping in view the changing
times; (ii) need to ensure  that the exercise of inspection by MCI was not straitjacketed  within the confines
of ‘physical inspection’ but also encompassed inspection of the curriculum and interface with the students;
(iii) need to shift  from teaching based  paradigm to learning based paradigm with emphasis on innovation;
(iv)need to shift from workshop based approach to competency based curriculum; (v) need to shift from
the sheltered mode of learning wherein the emphasis was on tertiary care to the secondary mode of learning
to ensure greater exposure  and experience at  least for a short period; (vi) need to ensure flexibility in
medical curriculum; (vii) role of MCI to manage 400 medical colleges was too large  to ensure functional
competency and, therefore, there was a need for setting up  four boards viz. Undergraduate Board, Post
Graduate Board, Registration Board and National Assessment and Accreditation Board; (viii) physical inspection
should  form only 30 to 40% of the  total assessment by MCI; (ix) Government should  shoulder the
responsibility of opening  more medical colleges;(x) need to tap talented doctors  as teachers from medical
professionals who could be designated as ‘adjunct faculty’; (xi) need to ensure electronic linkages between
medical colleges in a state with the apex  medical college in the state to ensure sharing of information;

107
(xii) creation of different template/ models of medical education instead of one-size-fits-all as the present
model was too centralized;  (xiii) need to put in place  a strong oversight mechanism with emphasis on re-
registration and revision of curriculum from time to time, etc.
6. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries regarding issues viz. corruption in elections to MCI; how
recognition was different from accreditation; measures which could be taken to strengthen the function of
oversight;   whether there was a need to separate the three functions of MCI, namely accreditation, syllabus
and regulation of medical practice;  quality assurance in medical education; steps taken to curb corruption in
MCI, etc. Dr. Kaul replied to some of the queries raised by Members of the Committee and assured to
furnish written replies of the remaining  queries within a fortnight.
7. Dr. Sita Naik, during  the course of her deposition, associated herself with the viewpoints of Prof.
Kaul and   then highlighted the following  additional points  on functioning of MCI viz. (i) need to ensure  a
mechanism for provision of  ‘developmental  grants’ for medical colleges on the lines of UGC grants to
other colleges;(ii)  need to restructure elections to MCI as the present model has created distortions; (iii) no
mechanism for name removal from the register of members and, therefore, the  need to create electronic
register of doctors and mechanism for its timely updation; (iv) need to have academicians of highest standard
in medical education; (v) the existing lopsided curriculum; mismatch in training of a doctor and needs of the
society; (vi) the increase in PG seats had compromised quality; (vii) need to look beyond rigid definition of
medical education;(ix) need to subject medical education to robust  scrutiny; (x) need for drastic reforms in
MCI; (xi) the present Indian Medical Council(IMC) Act was outdated; (xii) nowhere in the world ,  medical
education had an  oversight by an elected body, etc.
8. Thereafter, certain issues concerning MCI were raised and the representatives of IMA were asked to
furnish their written comments thereon viz. (i) whether the functions of MCI, as mandated in IMC Act,
were relevant in  present context;(ii)  whether functions of MCI should remain centralized or there was need
for decentralization;(iii) whether regulation of both  UG and PG education by MCI was relevant; (iv) what
should be the norms for physical infrastructure in the context of opening medical colleges; (v) what should
be the role and composition of Ethics Committee of MCI; (vi) justification for keeping the MCI an elected
body despite distortions that had crept in the functioning of MCI over the years; (vi) what should be the
structure of MCI;(vii) proportion of IMA representation in MCI, etc.
9. The Chairman then directed the witnesses to furnish replies to the questions raised by Members and
any additional information, for consideration of the Committee within a fortnight.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 4.26 P.M.

108
*XIX
NINTEENTH MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday the 12th May, 2015 in   Room No. ‘63’, First  Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.     Shri Satish Chandra Misra – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde
3. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
4. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
6. Dr. T.N. Seema
 LOK SABHA
7. Shri Thangso Baite
8. Dr. Subhash Bhamre
9. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chouhan (Nandu Bhaiya)
10. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
11. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
12. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
13. Dr. K. Kamaraj
14. Shri Arjunlal Meena
15. Shri Alok Sanjar
16. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
17. Shri Raj Kumar Singh
18. Shrimati  Rita Tarai
19. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committer Officer
*Minutes of XIth to XVIIIth meetings relate to other matters.
108

109
WITNESSES
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri B. P. Sharma, Secretary
2. Shri Arun Kumar Panda, Addl. Secretary
3. Shri Ali R. Rizvi, Joint Secretary
President of Medical Council of India (MCI)
1. Dr. Jayshree Mehta, President
2. Dr. V .P. Mishra, Member
** *
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and briefed them about the agenda
of the meeting i.e. to hear the views of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare  along with
the President* * * of the Medical Council of India (MCI) * * * on the functioning of
* * * the Council*       *     * .
3. ** *
II. Oral evidence on functioning of *    * * Medical Council of India (MCI)
4. ** *
5. Thereafter, Dr. V . P. Mishra, Member, Medical Council of India gave a power point presentation on
the functioning of MCI. The main issues covered were–– (i)  objectives and functioning of MCI i.e.
maintenance of uniform standards and prescribing minimum requirements for permission to start new
medical colleges/new course etc.; (ii) composition and membership of the MCI; (iii) Statutory Committees
i.e. Executive Committee (Section 10) and Postgraduate Medical Education Committee (Section 20);
(iv) inspection and visitations norms of the MCI for establishment of new medical colleges, increase of
MBBS seats, continuance of recognition for MBBS, specialties including super-specialties, etc.  The Members
raised certain queries like number of doctors who had gone to work in foreign countries, uneven distribution
of doctors in rural areas; rural posting of doctors, extent of shortage of doctors as compared to the
recommended globals norms. Some of the queries were replied to by the witnesses. The Chairman then
directed the witnesses to furnish replies to the remaining questions to the Secretariat within a week’s time.
III. Study visit
6. Thereafter, the Committee took note of the agenda before it and decided to undertake a study visit to
Ooty, Coimbatore and Bengaluru to interact with the stakeholders on (i)  *   *   *; (ii) the functioning of
Medical Council of India(MCI) ; *   *   * (iii) *   *   * so as to get first-hand information on the subject***
The Committee authorised its Chairman to finalise the dates of the study visit and the tour programme and
take necessary approval from the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the purpose.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30  
P.M.
* Relate to other matters.

110
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday the 25th  May, 2015 in  Committee  Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House  Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.     Shri Satish Chandra Misra – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde
5. Shrimati B. Jayashree
6. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
7. Chaudhary Munvaar Saleem
8. Dr. T.N. Seema
 LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Subhash Bhamre
10. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
11. Dr. K. Kamaraj
12. Shri Arjunlal Meena
13. Shri J. J. T. Natterjee
14. Shri Raj Kumar Singh
15 Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
16. Shrimati  Rita Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri B. P. Sharma, Secretary
2. Shri Ali R. Rizvi, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Devesh Daval, Deputy Secretary
110

111
Ministry of AYUSH
** * *
** *
Representative from Medical Council of India
Dr. V .P. Mishra, Advisor
** *
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and briefed them about the agenda
of the meeting i.e. to hear  (i) *** and (ii) the Secretary, Department of  Health and Family W elfare on the
action taken on  the recommendations made by Medical Council of India (MCI) for amendments in Minimum
Standard Requirements Regulations (MSR) and phase wise targets in MSR for 50/100/150/200/250 – annual
MBBS admissions.
II. ** *
3. ** *
4. ** *
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
on the action taken on the recommendations made by Medical Council of India (MCI) for amendments in
Minimum  Standard Requirements (MSR) Regulations and phase wise targets in MSR for 50/100/150/200/
250 – annual MBBS admissions who informed the Committee that the proposal of MCI had been submitted
for approval of the competent authority. He further stated that there has been no significant relaxation in the
proposals submitted by MCI either for the faculty or non-faculty requirements. The Chairman suggested to
the Secretary to consider the relaxed norms for the present and simultaneously take up proposals for further
relaxation of norms for setting up of Medical College with the MCI. On being asked about the action taken
on the Ranjit Roy Chaudhury Report, the Secretary submitted that the Report has been submitted to the
Government in the last week of February, 2015  and presentation had been made by Dr. Chaudhury before
him last week and the Report would be put up for consideration of the Minister. Some of the issues raised
by Members were answered by witnesses. The Chairman then asked the witnesses to furnish replies to the
remaining questions to the Secretariat within a week’s time.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.50  
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

112
*XXIII
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday the 27th July, 2015 in Room No. ‘63’, First   Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.     Shri Satish Chandra Misra – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde
3. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Thangso Baite
5. Dr. Subhash Bhamre
6. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
7. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
8. Dr. K. Kamaraj
9. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
10. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
11. Shri Alok Sanjar
12. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
13. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Pradeep  Chaturvedi, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
1. Dr. Ranjit Roy Choudhary, Former Member, Board of Governors,  MCI
2. Dr. Subhash Salunke, Public Health Foundation of India
3. Dr. Devi Shetty, Chairman, Narayana Hrudayalaya
4. Dr. S. K. Sarin, Director, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences
* Minutes of XXIst and XXIInd Minutes relate to other matters.
112

113
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman of the Committee made a reference to the demise of Shri Kalpataru Das, Member,
(Rajya Sabha) on 25th July, 2015.  The Committee observed one minute silence as a mark of respect to the
memory of the departed soul.
3. The Chairman then briefed the Members about the agenda of the meeting *   *   * and to hear the
views of  (i) Dr. Ranjit Roy Choudhary, Former Member, Board of Governors, MCI; (ii) Dr. Subhash
Salunke,  Public Health Foundation of India,  (iii) Dr. Devi Shetty , Chairman, Narayana Hrudayalaya; and
(iv) Dr. S.K. Sarin, Director, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences on the functioning of Medical Council of
India .
II. ** *
4. ** *
5. ** *
III. Oral evidence on the functioning of Medical Council of India (MCI).
6. The Committee first heard the views of Dr. Ranjit Roy Choudhary who stated that it may not possible
to reform the existing MCI according to the provisions of Indian Medical Council Act and therefore suggested
that a new structure for MCI  may be mooted based on three principles viz. (i) the three roles i.e, laying
down standards, formation of curriculum, recognization and approval of medical colleges cannot be vested
with one body. (ii) need to have a bottom-up approach dialogue and (iii) need to have a different  organization
for recognization and accreditation of the existing colleges. He therefore suggested that a National Medical
Commission may be created which will have following verticals i.e.  (i) UG Medical Board (ii) PG Medical
Board, (iii) Board of Assessment and Accreditation Board (iv) Board for Medical registration and (v) National
Advisory Council consisting of all State Councils.
7.      Dr. Devi Shetty highlighted the points (i) shortage of basic specialists like gynaecologists, anaesthetists
and paediatricians in the hospital; (ii) need to equalize UG and PG seats; need to ensure career progression
in nursing profession ; decentralize health care manpower planning  and building from the Centre  to the
State Governments; right to the State Governments to create own curriculum and conduct their own courses
without getting any clearance from the Central Government; need to provide statutory status to the National
Board of Examinations, etc.
8. Professor, Dr. S.K. Sarin gave his views on some of the highlights of the vision 2015 document
which had been prepared in 2010. He delineated four major issues i.e. quantity; quality; structure of governance
and attractiveness of medical profession; and other issues like health being a State subject, the responsibility
of having adequate number of doctors should be the State’s responsibility; need to start National Eligibility
Entry Test; need for providing autonomy with accountability; raising the retirement age from 65 to 70 years;
need to make infrastructural requirement for setting up medical colleges more rational, etc.
9. The Members sought some clarifications from the witnesses which were answered to by them. The
Chairman directed the witnesses that they may give  any additional submissions on the subject to the
Secretariat within a week.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.
* Relate to other matters.

114
*II
SECOND MEETING
(2015-16)
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 23rd September, 2015 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde
5. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
6. Shri Jairam Ramesh
7. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre
9. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
10. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
11. Shri Devendra alias Bhole Singh
12. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
13. Dr. K. Kamaraj
14. Shri Arjunlal Meena
15. Shri J. Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
16. Shri C. R. Patil
17. Shri M. K. Raghavan
18. Shri R.K. Singh
19. Shrimati Rita Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Pradeep  Chaturvedi, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint  Director
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
*Minutes of 1st meeting relate to other matter.
114

115
WITNESSES
** *
I. Opening Remarks
2. ** *
II. Selection of Subjects
3.  Before calling in the representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Chairman
informed the Committee that the following twelve subjects have been finalized for detailed examination and
report during the year 2015-16 and directed the Secretariat to notify the same in Parliamentary Bulletin
Part-II:––
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Functioning of Medical Council of India ( MCI), * * *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
Ministry of AYUSH
11.   * * *
12.   * * *
III. ** *
4.      * * *
5.      ** *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 1.19 
P.M.
* Relate to other matters.

116
III
THIRD MEETING
(2015-16)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 6th October, 2015 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Shri Ambeth Rajan
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
6. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Thangso Baite
8. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre
9. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
10. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
11. Shri Devendra alias Bhole Singh
12. Dr. K. Kamaraj
13. Shri Arjunlal Meena
14. Shri J.Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
15. Shri M.K. Raghavan
16. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
17. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
18. Shri Manohar Untwal
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Pradeep  Chaturvedi, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
116

117
WITNESSES
** *
II. Onthe Functioning of Medical Council of India
(i)    Dr. Srinath Reddy, President, Public Health Foundation of India
(ii)   Prof. Ritu Priya Mehrotra, Centre of Social Medicine and Community Heath, Jawaharlal Nehru
University on the functioning of Medical Council of India
I. Opening Remarks
** *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and briefed them about the agenda
of the meeting i.e. to hear (i) * *    * (iv) Dr. Srinath Reddy, President, Public Health Foundation of India
and (v) Prof. Ritu Priya Mehrotra, Centre of Social Medicine and Community Heath, Jawaharlal Nehru
University on the functioning of Medical Council of India.
II. ** *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
III. Oral evidence on the functioning of Medical Council of India
8. The Committee heard the views of Prof. Ritu Priya Mehrotra on the functioning of Medical Council
of India . She highlighted the failure of MCI in general on all the three mandates for which it has been set up
namely, setting the curriculum for medical education, the quality of running of the colleges and ensuring
ethical practice by the doctors once they are produced and in particular failure to (a)  create a curriculum
that produces doctors suited to working in the Indian context, especially in the rural health services and poor
urban areas; (b) guide the setting up of medical colleges in the country as per need, resulting in geographical
misdistributions, with clustering of large numbers in some states and in some metropolises with absence in
several other states and regions; (c) oversee and guide the Continuing Medical Education (CME) in the
country leaving this important task in a rapidly changing technological scenario entirely in the hands of the
commercial private industry; (d) create a transparent system of medical college inspection and grant of
recognition or de-recognition; (e) instill respect for a professional code of ethics in the medical professionals;
and (f) take disciplinary action against those doctors found violating the code of ethics.
* Relate to other matters.

118
9. Dr. Mehrotra, thereafter, suggested the following changes (i) alteration in the Composition of the
Council Members and Sub-committees (ii) Institutional Bifurcation of the Mandate of Regulating Medical
Education and Practice of Code of Ethics (iii) Mechanisms for Transparency and Accountability of MCI;
(iv) Activities for Promoting Practice of Code of Ethics; (v) Continuing Medical Education for health systems
strengthening; etc. She concluded by stating that in order to operationalise changes in structure and functioning
of the MCI, an Ombudsman be appointed for a period of two terms of the MCI , i.e. 10 years, to actively
engage in overseeing the process of  above said changes.
10.     Thereafter the Committee heard Dr. Srinath Reddy on the functioning of Medical Council of India. He
delineated the following points for consideration of the Committee, namely, (i)  Disconnect Between Medical
Education System and Health System (ii) Regulation and Reform of Undergraduate Education (iii) Regulation
of Postgraduate Medical Education (iv) Constitution of MCI: Election or Nomination (v) need for setting up
more medical colleges in eastern India; (vi) need to inculcate soft skills in medical graduates like ethics,
compassion; etc. (vii) need for shared classroom by using IT resources for overcoming the shortage of
faculty; (viii) need for rapid transformation of PG education; etc.
11.     Thereafter, the members sought clarifications on efficacy of system of election conducted by MCI
and whether alternative system to present election system can be put in place;  need to separate ethics and
regulations; need to have separate bodies for post graduate and undergraduate education;  measures that
may be taken to curb extreme  imbalances in allocation of seats by MCI; relevance of policy directives by
the Government to MCI; need to ensure representation of non-medical professionals in MCI; steps taken to
tide over the shortage of teaching faculty in various medical colleges; etc.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
13. The Committee then adjourned at 4.41 
P.M.

119
7*VII
SEVENTH MEETING
(2015-16)
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 1st March, 2016 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde
3. Dr. R.Lakshmanan
4. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
5. Shri Ambeth Rajan
6. Shri Jairam Ramesh
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre
8. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
9. Shri Devendra alias Bhole Singh
10. Dr. (Smt.) Heena Vijay Gavit
11. Dr. K. Kamaraj
12. Shri Chirag Paswan
13. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
14. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
15. Shrimati Rita Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Director
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt draft 92nd Report on the Functioning of Medical Council
of India (MCI).
* Minutes of IVth to VIth meetings relate to other matters.
119

120
3. The Committee then took up the draft 92nd Report on the Functioning of Medical Council of India
(MCI).  After some discussion, few changes were suggested by Members for incorporation in the Report.
The Committee authorised its Chairman to incorporate the changes in the report.  The Committee also
authorized its Chairman to carry out minor modifications in the Report so that repetitions, factual and
typographical errors, etc. can be corrected and minor additions/deletions made before presentation of the
Report. Thereafter, the Committee adopted the said Report with some modifications.
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Report may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on
the Table of the Lok Sabha on Tuesday, the 8th March, 2016. The Committee authorized its Chairman and
in his absence, Shri Jairam Ramesh and Shri Ambeth Rajan to present the Report in Rajya Sabha, and
Dr. Manoj Rajoria  and in his absence Dr. K. Kamaraj to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 P.M.

121
ANNEXURES

122

123
ANNEXURE-I
LIST OF OFFICIALS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
25th September, 2014
Department of Health And Family Welfare
(1) Shri Lov Verma, Secretary
(2) Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary
Medical Council Of India
(1) Dr. Jayshree Mehta, President
(2) Dr. Ved Prakash Mishra, Chairman, Academic Committee
(3) Dr. D.J. Borah, Member, PG Committee
(4) Dr. Reena Nayyar, Secretary In-charge
12th May, 2015
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(1) Shri B. P. Sharma, Secretary
(2) Shri Arun Kumar Panda, Addl. Secretary
(3) Shri Ali R. Rizvi, Joint Secretary
Medical Council of India (MCI)
(1) Dr. Jayshree Mehta, President
(2) Dr. V .P. Mishra, Member
25th  May, 2015
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(1) Shri B. P. Sharma, Secretary
(2) Shri Ali R. Rizvi, Joint Secretary
(3) Shri Devesh Daval, Deputy Secretary
Medical Council of India
(1) Dr. V .P. Mishra, Advisor
123

124
ANNEXURE-II
I. LIST OF EXPERTS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
28th January, 2015
(i)   Indian Medical Association(IMA)
(1) Prof. Dr. A. Marthanda Pillai, National President
(2) Dr. K. K. Aggarwal, Secretary General
(3) Dr. Ved Prakash Mishra, Advisor
(ii) Dr. J. M. Kaul, Director Professor of Anatomy, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi
(iii)  Dr. Sita Naik Former Dean, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences & former
Member, Board of Governors, Medical Council of India (MCI)
27th July, 2015
(1) Dr. Ranjit Roy Choudhury, Former Member, Board of Governors,  MCI.
(2) Dr. Subhash Salunke, Public Health Foundation of India.
(3) Dr. Devi Shetty, Chairman, Narayana Hrudayalaya.
(4) Dr. S. K. Sarin, Director, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences.
6th October, 2015
(1) Dr. Srinath Reddy, President, Public Health Foundation of India
(2) Prof. Ritu Priya Mehrotra, Centre of Social Medicine and Community Health, Jawaharlal Nehru
University.
II. Experts who made written submissions
(1) Dr. K. M. Shyamprasad Former Vice President, National Board of Examinations.
(2) Dr. Meenakshi Gautham Research Fellow with the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine,
based at the Public Health Foundation of India.
III. List of Experts/Stakeholders with whom the Committee interacted during its local/outside Delhi
       Study Visits.
List of Witnesses at Coimbatore
(1) Dr. J. Radhakrishnan, Secretary, Health and Family Welfare, Government of Tamil Nadu
(2) Dr. Geetalakshmi, Director of Medical Education, Government of Tamil Nadu
(3) Dr. Fathima, Joint Director of Health and Medical Service, Coimbatore
(4) Dr. Edwin Joe, Dean, Coimbatore Medical College, Coimbatore
(5) Shri A. Sugavanam, Deputy Secretary, Government of Tamil Nadu, Chennai
124

125
List of Witnesses at Ooty
(1) Dr. J. Radhakrishnan, Secretary, Health and Family Welfare,  Government of Tamil Nadu
(2) Dr. Geetalakshmi, Director of Medical Education, Government of Tamil Nadu
List of Witnesses at Mysore
(1) Dr. B. Suresh, Vice Chancellor, Jagadguru Sri Shivarathreeshwara University
(2) Dr. Manjunath B., Registrar, Jagadguru Sri Shivarathreeshwara University
(3) Dr. P.A. Kushalappa, Director (Academics), Jagadguru Sri Shivarathreeshwara University
(4) Dr. Latha. S. Deputy Director, Govt. of Karnataka
(5) Dr. Guruswamy M.,  Medical Superintendent, Jagadguru Sri Shivarathreeshwara College
(6) Dr. Balaraj B.M. Vice Principal (pre and para), Jagadguru Sri Shivarathreeshwara Medical College
List of Witnesses at Bengaluru
(1) Shri Atul Tiwari, Principal Secretary, Health and Family W elfare, Government of Karnataka
(2) Shri M. Laxmi Narain, Health Secretary, Medical Education, Government of Karnataka
(3) Dr. S.S. Harsur, Director, Medical Education, Government of Karnataka
List of witnesses from Shri Guru Govind Singh Tricentenary University, Gurgaon
(1) Prof. T. D. Doga, Pro Chancellor
(2) Shri M. M. Chawala, Chairman, MT
(3) Prof.S.S. Singla, Vice Chancellor
(4) Prof. Daleep Singh, PVC
(5) Dr. Kamlesh Kohle, Director
(6) Dr. Prem Singh, Registrar
(7) Dr. H. L. Kakaria, HOD
(8) Dr. Arun Saxena, HOD
(9) Dr. Mahender Neja, Dean
(10) Dr. Pardeep Singhal, HOD
11. Dr. Arun Jha, MS
List of witnesses at Vardhaman Mahavir Medical College, New Delhi.
(1) Dr. N. N. Mathur, Principal
(2) Dr. Supriya Gupta, Professor
(3) Dr. Deepthi Nair, Professor
125

126
ANNEXURE-III
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS/ ORGANISATIONS FROM WHOM MEMORANDA WERE RECEIVED
1. Prof. K. C. Saikia, Principal, Gauhati Medical College, Government of Assam, Gauhati.
2. Principal, Annasaheb Chudaman Patil Memorial Medical College, Dhule.
3. Dr. J.V. Chowti, Principal, Shri Dharmasthala Manjunatheshwara College of Medical Sciences and
Hospital, Karnataka.
4. Dr. Kisan Rajaramji Patond, Dean, and Director Professor, Department of Orthopeadics Mahatma
Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (MGIMS), Sevagram, Wardha.
5. Dr. B. Sanjeev Rai, Chief of Medical Services,Former Dean, Prof & HOD Pediatrics. Father Medical
College Medicare Centre, Mangalore.
6. Air Marshal (Dr.) G S Joneja, VM (Retd.), Dean, Sikkim Manipal Institute of Medical Science,
Gangtok.
7. Dr. A. V . Bhore, Dean, Smt. Kashibai Navale Medical College & General Hospital, Pune.
8. Prof. P.Murugesan, Founder and Chairman, P R Institutions, Tamil Nadu.
9. Dr. A Srinivasan, Dean, Velammal Medical College Hospital and Research Institute, Madurai.
10. Principal, Navodaya Medical College, Raichur, Karnataka.
11. Shri Chandulal Chandrakar, Individual, Durg.
12. Dr. G Surendar Reddy, Director, Academics Medi Citi Institute of Medical Sciences, Andhra Pradesh.
13. Mr. M .S. Sridhar, Principal, Shri Venkateswara Medical College, Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh
14. Dr.Dhileepan Selvarajan, Asstt. Professor, Vinayaka Mission Medical College, Puducherry.
15. Dr. A.K. Asthana, Principal, & Dean, Subharti Medical College, Meerut.
16. Dr. Lovesh Shukla, Officer-in-Charge-Academic Branch, Maharaja Agrasen Medical College, Agroha,
Hisar.
17. Dr. Pushpa Sarkar, Director, Mandya Institute of Medical Science, Mandya, Karnataka.
18. Dr. S.C. Mohapatra, Dean, SGT University, Gurgaon.
19. Dr. B. S. Nagoba, Assistant Dean and Dr. (Mrs) S. B. Mantri, Principal Maharashtra Institute of
Medical Science (Medical College), Latur, Maharashtra.
20. Regional Institute of Medical Science, Imphal.
21. Dr. K.R. Pravin Chandra, Associate Professor in Community Medicine, Member, Medical Education
Unit and Student W elfare Officer SDM Medical College, Dharwad.
22. Principal, Maharashtra Institute of Medical Education and Research, Pune, Maharashtra.
23. Principal, Vishwabharathi Medical College, Kurnool.
24. Dr. M .R. Chandran, Principal, Amala Institute of Medical Sciences, Kerala.
126

127
25. Dr. P. V . S  Prasad, Dean and Principal, Rajah Muthiah Medical College, Annamalai Unversity,
Annamalainagar.
26. Shri P. S. Godbole, Administrative Officer, B. K. L. Walawalkar Rural Medical College, Ratnagiri.
27. Prof. Madhusudan Chaudhury, Principal, IQ City Medical College, Durgapur, W est Bengal.
28. Dr. Geeta Niyogi, Dean, Administration, KJ Somaiya Institute of Management Studies and Research,
Mumbai
29. Principal, Government Medical College, Palakkad, Kerala.
30. Dr. V arinder Saini, Prof., Pulmonary Medicine, Chandigarh.
31. Director and Dean, Mysore College and Research Institute, Mysore.
32. Dr. Deepti Dongaonkar, Dean, Government Medical College and Hospital, Miraj, Maharashtra.
33. Dr. N. C Bhattacharyya, Principal-cum-Chief Superintendent, Tezpur Medical College & Hospital,
Government of Assam.
34. Professor Tapan Kumar Lahiri, Principal, Medical College, Kolkata
35. Prof. (Dr.) K. Jayapal, Dean, Vinayaka Mission’s Kirupananda Variyar  Medical College, Tamil Nadu
36. Dr. Raman M Hulinaykar, Medical Director, Shridevi Institute of Medical Sciences & Research Hospital,
Karnataka.
37. Prof. (Dr.) Debajit Hazarika, Principal cum Chief Superintendent, Government of Assam, Jorhat
Medical College and Hospital, Jorhat, Assam.
38. Dr. Srikumar Damodaram, Dean, ESIC Medical College and PGIMSR, Chennai.
39. Principal, BGS, Global Institute of Medical Science, Karnataka.
40. Shri Ravi Roy, Reform MCI Initiative.
41. Dr. Gopakumaran Kartha, Principal, PK Das Institute of Medical Sciences, Kerala.
42. Principal, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Government Medical College, Kangra at Tanda.
43. Dr. Sridhar Rao, President, National MSc Medical Teachers’ Association, Delhi.
44. Dr. A. Edwin Joe, Dean, Coimbatore Medical College, Coimbatore.
45. Dr. Anju Huria, Prof. and Head, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Government Medical
College & Hospital, Chandigarh.
46. Prof. (Dr.) Balvir T omar, Chairman and Chancellor, NIMS University, Jaipur.
*47. Dr. Amrita Patel, Charutar Arogya Mandal, Anand, Gujarat.
*Memoranda could not be forwarded to the Ministry for comments as it was received at a late stage.
127

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.