Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 20th November, 2013)
(Forwarded to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 20th November, 2013)
REPORT NO. 
74
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
The Mental Health Care Bill, 2013
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

167
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT
The Mental Health Care Bill, 2013
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 20th November, 2013)
(Forwarded to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 20th November, 2013)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—31
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ...................... 32—34
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 3 5—54
7. A NNEXURES .......................................................................................................................... 55—161
(i) Annexure I ........................................................................................................ 57—154
(ii) Annexure II ....................................................................................................... 155—156
(iii) Annexure III ..................................................................................................... 157—158
(iv) Annexure IV ...................................................................................................... 159—161
8. L IST OF R EPORTS PRESENTED EARLIER ............................................................................. 162—166

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
*3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri H. K. Dua
10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
@11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shri Kirti Azad
13. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
14. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
15. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
16. Shrimati Priya Dutt
17. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
18. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
19. Dr. Monazir Hassan
20. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
#31. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
(i)
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 9 th January, 2013.
# Nominated as a Member to the Committee w.e.f.  14 th December, 2012.

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shrimati B. Jayashree
4. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
*7. Shri Rasheed Masood
8. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
9. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
10. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
14. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
15. Shrimati Priya Dutt
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
18. Dr. Monazir Hassan
19. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
20. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
* Vacant vide disqualification as a member of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) w.e.f. 19 th September, 2013.

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
present this Seventy-fourth Report of the Committee on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013*.
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the
Council of States relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the
Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013  (Annexure-I)  to the
Committee on the 20
th August, 2013, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 19 th August , 2013
for examination and report within three months.
3. The Committee issued a Press Release inviting memoranda/views from individuals and other
stakeholders. ( Annexure-II) . In response thereto, 59 Memoranda from individuals and others
relevant to the Bill were received till the specified date. List of individuals from whom memoranda
were received is at Annexure-III .
4.  The Committee held seven sittings during the course of examination of the Bill, i.e.,
on 29
th August, 16 th September, 04 th October, 11 th October, 21 st October, 1 st November and
11th November, 2013. The list of witnesses heard by the Committee is at Annexure-IV.
5. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same on 11 th November, 2013.
6. The Committee has relied on the following documents in finalizing the Report:–
(i) Mental Health Care Bill, 2013;
(ii) Background Notes on the Bill received from the Department of Health and Family
Welfare;
(iii) Presentation, clarifications and Oral evidences of Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare;
(iv) Memoranda received on the Bill from various institutes/ bodies/associations/
organizations/experts and replies of the Ministry on the memoranda selected by the
Committee for examination;
(v) Oral evidences and written submissions by various stakeholders/experts on the Bill; and
(vi) Replies to the questions/queries raised by Members in the meetings on the Bill, received
from the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
7. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions
made by those who deposed before the Committee and also those who gave their valuable
suggestions to the Committee through written submissions.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2, dated 19 th August, 2013.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.51174, dated 20 th August, 2013.

8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
11th November, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Kartika 20, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare
(iv)

ACRONYMS
AD – Advance Directive
AIIMS – All India Institute of Medical Sciences
BOV – Board of Visitors
CIP – Central Institute of Psychiatry
CMHA – Central Mental Health Authority
CMHC – Central Mental Health Commission
CRPD – Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
CrPC – Code of Criminal Procedure
CRR – Central Rehabilitation Register
DMHP – District Mental Health Programme
ECT – Electro-Convulsive Therapy
GHPUs – General Health Psychiatric Units
IHBAS – Institute of Human Behaviour and Allied Sciences
IPC – Indian Penal Code
IRDA – Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
IPS – Indian Psychiatry Society
LGBRIMH – Lokopriya Gopinath Bordoloi Regional Institute of Mental Health, Tejpur
MHA – Mental Health Act
MHCB – Mental Health Care Bill
MHRC – Mental Health Review Commission
NIMHANS – National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences
NMHP – National Mental Health Programme
NR – Nominated Representative
PHC – Primary Health Centre
PG – Post-Graduate
PwD Act, 1995 – Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995
RCI – Rehabilitation Council of India
SMHA – S tate Mental Health Authority
SMHC – State Mental Health Commission
SOR – Statement of Objects and Reasons
UNCRPD – United Nations Conventions on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
UT – Union Territory
(v)

1
REPORT
The Mental Health Care Bill, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the Bill) was introduced in the
Rajya Sabha on the 19 th August,2013 and referred to the Department related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Health and Family Welfare on the 20 th August, 2013 for examination and report
thereon.
2. As per the information furnished by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare the Mental
Health Care Bill, 2013 seeks to consolidate the legislations related to mental illness and improve the
conditions in mental health facilities existing in the country while ensuring the process of appeal
by a person admitted to a psychiatry institution, rehabilitation, reintegration with families and
community in non-medical settings. The Bill addresses the issues of mental illness and capacity to
make mental health care and treatment decisions; advance directive; nominated representative; rights
of persons with mental illness; duties of appropriate government; central and state mental health
authorities; mental health establishments; mental health review commission; admission, treatment
and discharge. The Bill also consolidates the law regarding the responsibilities of other agencies,
restriction to discharge functions by professionals not covered by professional offences and
penalties.
3. According to the Statement of Objects and Reasons (SOR) of the Bill, the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which was ratified by the Government of
India in October, 2007, made it obligatory on the Government to align the policies and laws of the
country with the Convention. The need for amendments to the Mental Health Act, 1987 was felt
by the fact that the related law, i.e., the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection
of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 was also in the process of amendment. The Mental
Health Act, 1987 could not protect the rights of persons with mental illness and promote their
access to mental health care in the country. In the light of above it was proposed to repeal the
Mental Health Act (MHA), 1987 and bring in a new legislation.
4. The Statement of Objects and Reasons (SOR) of the Bill further states that the Bill proposes
to repeal the Mental Health Act, 1987. Its objectives are to: (i) protect and promote rights of the
persons with mental illness during the delivery of health care in institutions and in the community;
(ii) ensure that health care, treatment and rehabilitation of the persons with mental illness, is
provided in the least restrictive environment possible, and in a manner that does not intrude on their
rights and dignity; (iii) fulfil the obligations under the Constitution and the obligations under various
International Conventions ratified by India; (iv) regulate public and private mental health sectors
within a rights framework to achieve the greatest public health good; (v) improve accessibility to
mental health care by mandating sufficient provision of quality public mental health services and
non-discrimination in health insurance; (vi) establish a mental health system integrated into all levels
of general health care; and (vii) promote principles of equity, efficiency and active participation of
all stakeholders in decision making.
5. Keeping in view the objectives behind the proposed legislation and its impact on the people
who are mentally ill, the caregivers, the families and professionals associated with this health
sector, the Committee decided to have opinion of different stakeholders on the Bill, and issued a
Press Release, inviting views/suggestions from all the stakeholders. An overwhelming response to
the Press Release was received by the Committee. A considerable number of organizations/
stakeholders/ individuals/associations submitted memoranda containing their views. The Committee
held extensive interactions with representatives of associations/organizations/Councils/institutes as
well as renowned experts and professionals from the discipline of Psychiatry and care-givers/family
members and patients.

2
6. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in its background note made the following
submissions:–
“The Mental Health Act, 1987 (MHA,1987) was enacted to regulate the admission and
treatment of persons with mental illness to psychiatric institutions and for the management
of their property and affairs. Over the years, the MHA, 1987 has been criticized by many
stakeholders including persons with mental illness, families and caregivers, rights and
disability activists, user-survivors of psychiatric care and a segment of the professional
psychiatric community. The growing concern that the MHA, 1987 needed to be amended
gained urgency with the ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) by the Government of India in October, 2007 which
requires India to amend or replace laws not compliant with the CRPD. The demand for
amendments to Mental Health Act, 1987 was strengthened by the fact that the related Act,
The Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
Participation) Act, 1995 was also in the process of amendment. The MHA, 1987 could not
protect the rights of persons with mental illness and promote access to mental health care
in the country. Therefore it was proposed to repeal the MHA, 1987 and bring in a new
legislation.
Essential Features of the Mental Healthcare Bill 2013:
■ The Central and State Mental Health Authorities will continue as regulatory agencies.
■ Any person, with or without mental illness, can make an Advance Directive (AD)
stating how he/she wishes to be treated for a future mental illness and also how he
does not wish to be treated. Such an AD can also be challenged by families,
professionals etc. This provision is included to meet the CRPD’ s requirement for
protecting legal capacity of persons with mental illness.
■ A person with mental illness can appoint a Nominated Representative to take decisions
for him/her. This provision too is included to meet the CRPD’s requirement for
protecting legal capacity of persons with mental illness.
■ A person with mental illness has the right to live in, be part of, and not segregated
from society. Government has an obligation to provide for half way homes, community
caring centres etc.
■ The MHC Bill, 2013 makes a clear assertion that all persons have a right to access
mental healthcare and treatment from mental health services run or funded by the
Government. Such services should be affordable, of good quality and available
without discrimination.
■ A person with mental illness has the right to be protected from cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment. Some treatments currently being used will be prohibited, most
importantly, Electro-Convulsive Therapy given without anaesthesia and the practice of
chaining patients to their beds.
■ The Bill recognizes that the overwhelming majority of the mentally ill are in their
homes. Caring for a mentally ill person is financially and emotionally draining for any
family. A significant portion of the wandering homeless have mental illness. The Bill
therefore addresses the needs of families and caregivers and the needs of the homeless
mentally ill.
■ In some instances of advanced illness, when the person is not in a position to make
decisions for himself/herself, it may be necessary in the best interest of the health and

3
welfare of the person with mental illness to be admitted, to a treatment facility with
the support of their nominated representative. The Bill sets out in some detail the
measures established to ensure that all cases of supported admission are reviewed
without loss of time. This is well within the provisions of Article 12 of the UNCRPD.
■ All cases of such supported admissions will be reviewed by a Mental Health Review
Commission which will function through District Boards. The essential task of the
Commission/Boards is to ensure that admission of any person to a mental health
facility is the least restrictive care option under the circumstances .
■ The MHC Bill has provisions for Central and State Mental Health Authorities (CMHA
& SMHA) and a Mental Health Review Commission (MHRC). This is the structure
followed in all modern and progressive legislations. The CMHA and SMHA are largely
administrative bodies concerned with regulating/setting standards for mental health
facilities, maintaining registers of such facilities and of mental health professionals
and carry out training functions. The composition of these bodies reflects these
functions.
■ The MHRC is a quasi-judicial body to provide an independent oversight to the
functioning of mental health facilities and protect the rights of persons with mental
illness in these facilities. It thus meets the need for an independent review mechanism
as required under the CRPD. The composition of the MHRC reflects in quasi-judicial
function(headed by a retired High Court Judge and staffed with District Judges).
■ The direction and thrust of the MHC Bill, 2013 is that the State assumes the
responsibility for providing adequate health care, including support to caregiving
facilities. At present the District Mental Health Programme (DMHP) operates in 123
districts in the country though it must be recognized that delivery of healthcare services
is not optimal essentially for the reason that the DMHP requires every district to have
a full complement of appropriately trained professionals. Though the National Mental
Health Programme (NMHP) offers financial support to State Governments to increase
the number of seats in medical  colleges and nursing colleges in the appropriate
disciplines, progress has not been fast. The 11th Plan outlay for NMHP including
DMHP was Rs.623 cr ores. In a parallel exercise to the drafting of the MHC Bill 2013,
the DMHP has been substantially reworked with a focus on community and home
based care as required by the MHC Bill, 2013.”
7. During the course of his oral evidence before the Committee on the 29th August, 2013, the
Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare  apprised the Committee of the salient
features of the Bill. He pointed out that unlike the existing Act, which mixes healthcare and social
care issues, the present Bill seeks to isolate the purely healthcare-related aspects while not going
into the questions of guardianship and civic and political rights. He pointed out that the number
of psychiatrists in our country is very small; it is not more than 4,000. Further, the number in
public sector, amongst these 4,000, would be a small number. Many are in private practice. So,
this is one of the reasons that this Bill insists on various levels of community-based care and half-
way homes. It is because every person with illness is not going to have access to a qualified
psychiatrist. There may be one level of consultation, but on-going care and treatment will need to
be provided in the districts, sometimes at the PHC level, through care givers. Number of those
people is not adequate, but clearly, the onus is on the Department to create much larger number
of health professionals in this area who cannot all be psychiatrists.
8. Further elaborating on the present scenario on the mental health care facilities in the
country, the Secretary, submitted that the most exhaustive studies have been done by the National

4
Human Rights Commission, which after the Erwadi tragedy of 2001, undertook a very detailed
study. At that time, 36 mental health facilities were there in the country which is 38 now. The
study was very detailed and that report brought out many of the instances of cruel treatment and
people being chained, people being beaten, people being denied any kind of dignity. If there was
one question that has driven this whole process, it was on the voluntary versus involuntary
admission. It was presumed that all the time, a person with mental illness has the capacity to make
a decision unless the situation was so exceptionally otherwise that he could not take a decision.
Even in those situations, the quasi judicial process would come into play.
9. Apprising the Committee of the scenario of Post Graduation Education Dr. P.
Satishchandra, Director, NIMHANS, Bengaluru  during the course of his deposition before the
Committee on 11
th October, 2013 delineated on the brief history of the Acts enacted in the field
of mental health and the need for introduction of the present Bill. He also made the following
suggestions as regards the Bill: (i) need to exclude general hospitals from the licensing procedure
under the definition of ‘Mental Health Establishment’ in the Bill; (ii) need to exclude people with
alcohol and substance users (who do not have substance induced mental illness and mental
retardation/intellectual disability) in the definition of “Mental Ilness”; (iii) Electro Convulsive
Therapy should be done under Anaesthesia always; (iv) Need to have State Mental Health
Commission(SHMC) in each State and Union Territories and the said commission will be formed
in consultation with Central Mental Health Commission and the State. He further stated that Mental
Health Boards will be constituted by the SHMC after assessing the needs, etc. He also delineated
that the following rights need to be enlisted in the Bill: (a) Mental illness should not be a ground
for divorce;(b) disability due to mental illness is usually ignored or discriminated. Mental disability
need to be considered on par with physical disability for all disability benefits; (c) all general
hospitals(public and private) shall not refuse emergency psychiatry treatment.
10. He further submitted that Post Graduate Education in Psychiatry in the country is growing
very well now as compared to few years back. In the last five years, the number of seats have
been doubled. In all medical colleges now, the Psychiatry Department has been started. There are
many psychiatric departments running these courses. The Central Institutes like the National
Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bengaluru, the CIP (Ranchi) and Tejpur have doubled
the intake of the seats. However, the number of psychiatrists in this country still does not exceed
4,000, and that is why, there is a great need to add on the number of psychiatrists. He felt that
the only way of addition was to increase the Institutes as well as the courses at the level of post-
graduation in the medical colleges. According to him a serious attempt has been made by the
Government and it was expected that within the next two to three years’ time, there would be a
significant increase in the number of the post-graduates coming out of these institutions. But,
compared to the western world, the number of psychiatrists in this country was definitely very
low. The way to progress was to use the other mental health professionals in the form of
psychologists. The psychiatrist social workers as well as the psychiatrist nurses are also needed.
Their number is also significantly less. Thus , there is a dire need to increase the number of seats
in all these colleges. Apart from this, the post-graduates in medicine are being trained in psychiatry
now, and, a short-term training course has been given to many of the District Medical Officers.
They have all been provided with a short-term training in the institutions like Central Institutes of
Bangalore, Tejpur and Ranchi. He also stated that the physicians, general practitioners and the
doctors in the District Mental Hospitals are being trained under the National Mental Health
Programme as well as District Mental Health Programme, and, this short-term training helps them
to deal with the acute emergencies at the peripheral centers. Regarding the Electroconvulsive
Therapy with a modified variety, Dr. Satishchandra stated that the number of anaesthetists in the
country is 16,000 and the number of psychiatrists is 4,000. So, at every place, where the
psychiatrists were available, there were anaesthetists and that the Government has been requested

5
to provide these facilities of anaesthetists. Further this law will ensure that the facilities are
provided at all these places where ECT has to be given.
Views of the State Governments
11. To acquaint itself with the views of the State Governments, the Committee sought the
written comments of all the State/UT governments. However, only Delhi government responded. In
a written submission, the Government of Delhi furnished the following comments based on the
experience of Institute of Human Behabiour &Allied Sciences (IHBAS), Delhi and technical office
of State Mental Health Authority (SMHA), Delhi:
(i) Differentiation of “treatment order” versus “admission order” in the Bill as mandatory
admission for involuntary treatment is difficult to apply in the community setting and
is also not in the spirit of the government policy of promoting and providing
community based mental health services including rehabilitation.
(ii) Confidentiality of Psychiatric Case Records Related to Right to Information Act must
be ensured. Thus the clause related to right to access to medical records must be
finetuned accordingly.
(iii) Provision of Mobile Mental Health Service needs to be introduced in the Bill and
specially the provision of legal authorization for emergency medication in the field by
Mobile Mental Health Unit team should be mentioned in the draft Bill.
(iv) There should be separate provision in the draft Bill regarding foreign nationals with
clear clauses as problems in terms of admission/initiation of treatment/forced
treatment/discharge are faced when foreign national is being brought by Police/
Magistrate/Embassy.
(v) A provision for district-wise Board of Visitors should be made in the Bill and Board
of Visitors should be sectorised by making provision for district wise BOV .
(vi) Make it mandatory for all lincensed psychiatric hospitals/nursing homes to provide
emergency psychiatric services.
(vii) The provision of retired judge to be the Chairman of the proposed Mental Health
Review Commission may be reviewed as it would be better if some person from user/
carer/advocacy group can be given the charge of the Chairman of Mental Health
Review Commission.
(viii) Government Hospital Psychiatry Units should be brought under ambit of SMHA in the
Bill.
Views of Other Stakeholders/Experts
Some important issues raised by some of the other experts/stakeholders are discussed
briefly hereunder:–
12. During her presentation on 21
st October, 2013 before the Committee, Ms. Amita Dhanda,
Professor and Head, Centre for Disabilities Studies, NALSAR University of Law, Hyderabad
submitted that she was of the view that the said Bill was not in harmony with the United Nations
Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) in letter and spirit and was in
infringement of Part III of the Constitution. The said Bill gives no power to the affected person
to seek exit from the institution if he was not satisfied with the treatment. The Bill is also silent
on the right of the affected person to live independently and there was a need to bring an

6
amendment to the proposed legislation in this regard. Further there was a need to relook at clause
124 which says that all persons who attempt to commit suicide are presumed to be suffering from
mental illness unless proved otherwise. Further there was a need to relook at clause 114(2) of the
Bill in which “proof of Mental Illness” obtained from a Board would suffice for obtaining ‘divorce’
which was not fair to convert a legal dispute into a medical dispute. Therefore, there was a need
to delete this provision.
13. Dr. Vikram Patel from the Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI) during his deposition
before the Commitee on 11th October, 2013 supported the Bill and stated that the proposed Bill is
a vast improvement over the last enactment in 1987. He made the following points in support
of the Bill: (i) Constitution of Mental Health Review Board in the districts under Section 80 of
Chapter XI is a key step to safeguard the rights of persons with mental health conditions; (ii) the
Bill contains sufficient safeguards in regard to the provisions for ‘Advance Directive’ and
‘Nominated Representative’ (iii) unlike previous legislation where the entire onus to protect the
rights of the individual with mental condition was on the magistrate, the new Bill places this
responsibility on a five member district board on which it would be mandatory to have a
psychiatrist on board to review the clinical status of patient and the psychiatrist has major decision
making powers in the functioning of the Board.
14. He further stated that for the majority of Indians who suffer from a mental illness, and in
particular those who live in poor and rural circumstances, the unavailability of appropriate, evidence
based mental health care was a major impediment to their recovery. The quality of life of such
persons and their caregivers was abysmal, often initiating a downward spiral into further poverty,
hopelessness and even homelessness. Social exclusion, violent victimization and human rights abuse
were more prevalent in people with mental illness. The lack of access to evidence based treatment
and care for mental illness has reached a critical point and a concerted national effort was needed
to address this public health crisis.  
15. He also stated that the MHCB enshrines access to health care as a right and holds the
Government accountable for service delivery. The Bill proposes to foster a climate of reforms both
within Mental Hospitals and in the community by setting up a Mental Health Review Commission
that would regulate admission, discharge and deal with violation of rights.  
16. The Committee heard the views of Dr. S.K. Deuri, Director, Lokopriya Gopinath
Bordoloi Regional Institute of Mental Health (LGBRIMH), Tejpur, Assam  on the Bill on the
16
th December, 2013. Dr. Deuri submitted that entry point for treatment was given in the Bill but
the Bill was silent on the procedure for exit of patients after availing treatment. The Bill was also
silent on rehabilitation of the treated and recovered patients. He also raised the issues like criminals
being sent to Mental Institutions without availability or otherwise of beds in such institutions; no
proper definition of psychiatric nurse/psychiatric social worker; regressive provision for
transportation of patient from one State to another which would not be in the interest of the
patient. In a written submission, the Department of Psychiatric Social Work, LGBRIMH, Tezpur
Assam made the following submissions:
(i) The Mental Health Care Bill 2013 has changed its outlook from a medical model to
a social model by incorporating the rights based provisions of UNCRPD. Unlike the
earlier Mental Health Act, 1987 (Chapter VIII, Section 81), the current one has made
provision for detailed rights of the person with mental illness in the Chapter 5.
(ii) Chapter I, Clause 2 defines Mental Health Professionals and but the definitions put
forth are wrongly inserted. It has been put forth that due to absence of adequate
number of professional social workers with M Phil degree, a lower PG degree has
been proposed as the required qualification for Psychiatric Social Workers. This

7
similar justification should have also been applied for all the mental health professionals
(Psychiatrist, Clinical Psychologists and Psychiatric Nurse) as all are in the similar
status in terms of quantity.
(iii) Rules could be specified that in places where there are shortages of manpower with
M. Phil. degree, personnel with PG in Social Work could be trained under the NMHP
to augment the services as Psychiatric Social Worker Assistant, just as Medical
Officers with training and experience in Psychiatry were designated to take on the role
of Psychiatrists by the State authority. (Chapter 1, Clause 2, Section x)
(iv) In regard to Mental Health Review Commission (MHRC), the number of members
should be increased. A representative from the allied professions like psychiatric social
work, clinical psychology and psychiatric nursing should be considered to be a part
of the Commission. Sections 80 and 81 which deals with the Review Board at district
levels, should consider increasing the number of members. A representative from the
allied professions like psychiatric social work, clinical psychology and psychiatric
nursing should be considered to be a part of the commission.
(v) The proposed Bill still continues its link with the correctional system. The clause 101,
chapter XII, on ‘leave from the hospital’ requires a police officer to accost the person
with mental illness to return to treatment facility. This further serves to stigmatise the
person with mental illness. The section dealing with ‘leave’ should be repealed. It also
contradicts with person’s right to get discharged without any consent from officer in
charge/psychiatrist.
(vi) The Bill vests the right to transfer the person with mental illness from one mental
health establishment to another, within and outside a state to the State Authority and
this could go against the interest of the person and his right. This has the danger of
abandonment and alienation of the person. Treating personnel in Mental Health need
to move to Prisons as part of integration of services and community extension
initiatives. A prison set-up coming to a hospital is not a very practical move.
(vii) In Clause 109 under Chapter XIII, section 7 requires an FIR to be lodged for any
mentally ill homeless person. The matter of using the police measures like lodging FIR
further increases the stigma and the person could get lost in the system.
(viii) Clause 128 of protection for acts done in good faith does not include the mental health
professionals. Non-inclusion of mental health professional in this provision is
discriminatory.
(ix) The Bill is silent on issues of rehabilitation aspects for chronic mental illness. There
is no provision for protecting the rights of persons with mental illness who are
abandoned/disowned by their family members/who refuse to accept the person back
into the family. The Bill also could make a provision for addressing stigmatizing
behaviors in family, community and workplace. A provision should be inserted as a
penalty for indulgence in stigmatizing behavior and act as deterrence in the society.
17. Dr. Sudhir K. Khandelwal, Professor of Psychiatry, AIIMS, New Delhi;  during the
course of his deposition before the Committee on the 4th, October, 2013 stated that though the
Bill had addressed certain other concerns, there were certain concerns which needed to be
addressed viz. high level of qualification needed to qualify as a clinical psychiatrist would act as
a dampener as manpower needed to qualify for the post of clinical psychiatrists would be difficult
to find in practice; definition of mental illness is ill-conceived and is over inclusive; features like
‘causing distress or impairment’ would make practically whole of Indian population mentally ill at

8
some point of time; number of clauses in the ‘advance directive’ would make it a difficult and
lengthy process to actually implement the said directive in practice; it is not clear if the person with
the power of advance directive has power for making the treatment decisions of the patient only,
or if he could also make civil and property related decisions also; it had not been specified or
defined ‘serious mental harm’ or likelihood of harm, thus the provision regarding access to medical
records might be misused; it is not clear whether the Mental Health Review Commission (MHRC)
will function as an Authority or a Tribunal; functions of MHRC not clearly defined; the issues of
purview of State Mental Health Authority (SMHA), co-ordination among various SMHAs had not
been addressed; need for exemption in the provisions of the said Bill for the purpose of admission
and discharge of mentally ill persons in General Psychiatric care unit of the General Hospital; the
Bill is silent on provisions of care and services for mentally ill homeless people; civil rights and
property rights have been ignored in the Bill; process of drafting MHRC is neither clear, nor
transparent.. He further stated that the Bill should focus on governance and not the treatment
aspect and unmodified ECT treatment should be exempted from ban under this Bill.
18. At the meeting held on 4th, October, 2013, Ms. Vandana Gopikumar, Founder Trustee, The
Banyan Centre, Chennai submitted before the Committee that she was in favour of the Bill in the
present form. However, she suggested for need to reframe clause 124 of the Bill; and need to
include Primary Health Centres (PHCs) under the ambit of the said Bill.
19. During the course of the meeting held on 16th September, 2013, the Committee heard the
views of Dr. Indira Sharma, President, Indian Psychiatry Society (IPS)  along with fellows of
Indian Psychiatry. Dr. Sharma submitted before the Committee that as the Head of Indian
Psychiatry Society she was against the enactment of the said Bill in its present form. Delineating
the reasons for the same, she stated that the said Bill had been drafted without taking into
consideration the viewpoint of Indian Psychiatry Society (IPS). She stated that though the society
was a conglomeration of 5000 Members, it had been ignored while drafting the Bill. She was of
the view that the concepts incorporated in the Bill like use of terms Advance Directive, nominated
representatives; making willingness of the patient mandatory for availing treatment were alien to
Indian culture, which would be dangerous for the patient as well as his near and dear ones. She
emphasized focusing on the family model treatment in which the family members would be in a
position to give consent on the need for subjecting a patient to psychiatric treatment.
20. Dr. B.S Chavan, Chairman, IPS  submitted that the concept of parents of child having to
take permission of Mental Health Review Commission for treatment of mental illness was
dehumanizing for the parents and the child in question. Dr. T.V . Asokan, President-Elect, IPS
was of the view that the concept of nominated representative would lead to a tussle between the
family of the person suffering from mental illness and the nominated representative who may not
be a blood relation of the person suffering from mental illness and such nominated representative
could misuse the said provision for usurping the property or deriving other benefits which would
devolve upon the person suffering from mental illness. Dr. T.S.S. Rao, Editor in Chief, Indian
Journal of Psychiatry , IPS was of the view that the said Bill treats Psychiatric diseases as a
stigma which was not good from the patients’ as well as from doctor’s point of view. Dr. Dinesh
Kataria, Convenor, IPS  was of the view that the provisions of the said Bill would lead to the
exodus of doctors studying Psychiatry in India to foreign shores.
21. Dr. Nirmala Srinivasan, Director, Action for Mental Illness, Bengaluru;  during her
deposition before the Committee on 4
th October, 2013 stated that while supporting the Bill she
opined that the Bill needed to be nuanced in certain terms viz. proper definition of family care giver
needed to be included in the Bill; need to make family of the affected person inclusive in the said
Bill. She insisted on the need for more broader role for nominated representative in the said Bill
and need to include safeguards in the Right to manage property of the affected person.

9
22. Shri Amrit Kumar Bakshy, President, Schizophrenia Awareness Association,
Maharashtra; during his deposition on 4th, October, 2013 submitted the following that there was
a need for a complete ban on modified ECT. Further it was important to provide definitions of
family care giver and paid care giver separately in the said Bill. He submitted that nominated
representative appointed under section 14 should be deemed to be nominated representative to give
effect to advance directive when the need arises to avoid confusion and conflict; a hierarchy
among relatives may be given in the Advance Directive clause; “shall” in place of “shall endeavour
“in Section 21 (2) regarding medical insurance to make it more effective; “who has reason to
believe….” In sub-sections (1) and (2) of Sections 110 may be substituted with “who has some
evidence to the effect….” to protect the family caregivers from harassment.
23. Shri Akhileshwar Sahay, Whole Mind India Foundation, Pune;  during his deposition on
4th, October, 2013 submitted that he was a bipolar patient and undergoing psychiatric treatment
for the same in AIIMS and was completely in favour of the present Bill. He felt that the present
Bill should be passed by the Parliament into an Act and whatever infirmities which are presently
in the said Bill could always be taken care of in the future by way of an amendment to the present
Bill after it was passed. He was also thankful that the provision which decriminalized ‘suicide’ had
become a part of the said Bill.
24. The Committee heard the views of Dr. Shekhar Saxena, Director, Department of
Mental Health and Substance Abuse, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland  on
11th October, 2013. Dr Saxena delineated the following points on the said Bill: (i) the present Bill
laid emphasis on the quality aspect and encouraged transparency in the field of Mental Health unlike
previous Acts, (ii) laid emphasis on ECT treatment not to be given to children; (iii) the terms
‘Advance Directive’ and ‘Nominated Representative’ are in line with the United Nations Convention
on Rights of Persons with Disabilities(UNCRPD).
Clause-by-Clause Examination of the Bill
25. During the course of the examination of the Bill the Committee took note of concerns,
suggestions and amendments as expressed by various experts/stakeholders duly communicated them
to the Ministry for its response. Committee’s observations and recommendations contained in the
Report reflect an extensive scrutiny of all the viewpoints put forth before it. Upon scrutiny of the
replies received from the Ministry, various amendments to the said Bill have been suggested by the
Committee which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
26. Clause 1(3) and 1(4)
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mental Health Care Act, 2013.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
(3) The provisions of this Act, except the provisions of sections 33, 45 and 73, shall
come into force within a period of three months from the date on which it
receives the assent of the President.
(4) The provisions of sections 33, 45 and 73 shall come into force within a period
of nine months from the date on which it receives the assent of the President.
27. Suggestions
The provisions of this Act, except the provisions of sections 33, 45 and 73, shall come into force
within a period of three months from the date on which it receives the assent of the President.
The provisions of sections 33, 45 and 73 shall come into force within a period of nine months

10
from the date on which it receives the assent of the President. In this respect, it is important that
usage of the phrase ‘’within three months’’ may be confusing as the exact date is not fixed and could
be anytime within three months. Moreover, no procedure such as notification in the gazette by the
Central Government has been prescribed in the Bill as a means of notifying to the general public that
the Bill has become effective. Thus either there should be fixed/determinable date on which the Bill
comes into effect or the Bill should clearly provide that the date on which the Central Government
notifies in the gazette would be the date from which the law would be implemented.
28. Ministry’s Response
The Ministry has agreed and stated that this Bill shall come into force 9 months from the
date on which it receives the assent of the President, or any earlier date if so notified by
Government.
29. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee acknowledges that the Ministry has accepted the suggestion
regarding amendments to clause 1(3) and (4). The Committee is of the view that the new
provisions would lend greater clarity and coher ence to the operation of the proposed Act and
serve the intended purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposed
amendment may be incorporated in the Bill.
30. Clauses 2 (1)(f)
(f) “clinical psychologist” means a person––
(i) having a recognised qualification in Clinical Psychology from an institution
approved and recognised, by the Rehabilitation Council of India, constituted
under section 3 of the Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992; or
(ii) having a Post Graduate degree in Psychology or Applied Psychology and a
Master of Philosophy in Clinical Psychology or medical and social psychology or
Masters of Philosophy in mental health and social psychology obtained after
completion of a full time course of two years which includes supervised clinical
training or doctorate in clinical psychology which includes supervised clinical
training, from any university recognised by the University Grants Commission
established under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956;
31. Suggestions
Since Clinical Psychology professionals work with persons with Mental Illness (acute and
chronic), the “Clinical Psychologists” are brought under the purview of the RCI Act and their
registration with RCI has been made mandatory (In Clinical Rehabilitation Register, maintained by
the Council).
Currently, no university, department, hospital, association, partnership, NGO, or corporate
body without a valid recognition by the Council, under the provision of RCI Act, 1992, conduct,
offer or offer to conduct any of Clinical Psychology training courses, unless these entities are
approved by the Council for the function stated.
The RCI defines “Clinical Psychologists” as follows
(i) A Professional Qualification in Clinical Psychology recognized by the RCI, from time
to time, obtained from RCI approved institutions and granted by an University
recognized by University Grants Commission as per Section 11 and 12 of RCI Act, 1992.

11
(ii) Registration in the Central Rehabilitation Register (CRR) as per Section 13 of RCI
Act, 1992.
In defining “Clinical Psychologists” in the proposed Bill, the RCI Act, 1992 has been over
ruled by including degrees like ‘Master of Philosophy in Mental Health and Social Psychology’ of
‘Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology’ as qualification for Clinical Psychologists, whereas RCI, the apex
body does not recognize them. In view of this, it is suggested to remove this section 2(1)(f)(ii)
from the Bill. The terms in sub-clause (ii) of clause (f) which reads as “doctorate in clinical
psychology which includes supervised clinical training” in the current version of the Bill may be
omitted since Ph.D. in any branch of Psychology including so called “Clinical Psychology” is NOT
RECOGNISED by the Council as professional qualification on various counts. Thus, there is scope
of serious legal ramifications and a flawed legislation thus defeating the very purpose for which
the Bill is being prepared.
32. Response of the Ministry
The Government accepts the suggestion of RCI and section 2 (1) (f) will be amended
accordingly:
The amended section 2 (1) (f) shall read as follows :
Clinical psychologist means –
(i) having a recognized qualification in clinical psychology from an institution approved
and recognized by the Rehabilitation Council of India, constituted under Section 3 of
the Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992; or
(ii) having a Post Graduate degree in Psychology or Applied Psychology and a Master of
Philosophy or medical and social Psychology or Master of Philosophy in mental health
and social psychology obtained after completion of a full time course of two years
which includes supervised clinical training from any University recognized by the UGC
established under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and approved and
recognized by the Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992.
33. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may bring the suggested amendment in the
clause.
34. Clause 4 (1)
4. (1) Every person, including a person with mental illness shall be deemed to have
capacity to make decisions regarding his mental health care or treatment, if such person has ability
to,––
(a) understand the information relevant to the mental health care or treatment decision;
(b) retain that information;
(c) use or weigh that information as part of the process of making the mental health care
or treatment decision; and
(d) communicate his decision by any means (including talking, using sign language or any
other means).

12
35. Suggestions
The clause seeks to place onerous requirements on persons with mental illness to show that
they have the capacity to make decisions related to their mental health treatment and care. To be
deemed to have capacity, a person with mental illness is required to show that she/he is able to
understand information relevant to mental health or treatment decisions, retain that information, use
or weigh such information in decision-making and communicate her/his decision. If any of the four
mentioned criteria is not fulfilled then the person will not be ‘deemed’ to have capacity to make
mental health treatment and care related decisions. Despite the stated objective of the Bill to respect
the autonomy and promote active participation of persons with mental illness in decision-
making, section 4 creates a presumption in law against the capacity of person with mental illness.
Section 4, especially section 4(b) and (c), in their application, will exclude, amongst others,
persons with Alzheimer’s and dementia.
It is suggested that there be a presumption in favour of persons with mental illness and that
the section be altered as follows:
Every person, including a person with mental illness shall be deemed to have capacity to
make decisions regarding his mental health care or treatment unless it is proved that
(a) The person is unable to understand the information that is relevant to making a
decision about the treatment, admission or personal assistance service, and
(b) The person is unable to appreciate the reasonably foreseeable consequences of a
decision or lack of decision.
36. Ministry’s Response
The Ministry accepts this suggestion and suggests that Section 4 be changed as follows:
Section 4 (1) shall read as follows
Every person, including a person with mental illness shall be deemed to have capacity to
make decisions regarding his mental health care and/or treatment unless it is proved that
(a) The person is unable to understand the information that is relevant to making a
decision about the treatment, admission or personal assistance service, and
(b) The person is unable to appreciate the reasonably foreseeable consequences of a
decision or lack of decision.
(c) Unable to communicate his decision by any means (including talking, using sign
language or any other means)
Section 4 sub-sections (2), (3) and the Explanation remain the same.
37. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee observes that there is merit in the reservations expressed with
regard to Clause 4 and the Ministry, has agreed to incorporate the necessary changes and
thus, uphold the constitutional norm of equality. It also reflects the principle of self-
determination which gives right to a person with mental illness to make mental health
care and treatment decisions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the new/
alternate clause as proposed by the Ministry in respect of Clause 4(1), may be included
in the Bill.

13
38. Clause 11(1) and 11(2)
11. (1) Where a mental health professional or a relative or a care-giver of a person desires
not to follow an advance directive while treating a person with mental illness, such
mental health professional or the relative or the care-giver of the person may make an
application to the concerned Board to review, alter, modify or cancel the advance
directive.
(2) Upon receipt of the application under sub-section (1), the Board may, after giving
an opportunity of hearing to all concerned parties (including the person whose
advance directive is in question), either uphold, modify, alter or cancel the advance
directive after taking into consideration the following, namely:––
(a) whether the advance directive was made by the person out of his own free
will and free from force, undue influence or coercion; or
(b) whether the person intended the advance directive to apply to the present
circumstances, which may be different from those anticipated; or
(c) whether the person was sufficiently well informed to make the decision; or
(d) whether the person had capacity to make decisions relating to his mental
health care or treatment when such advanced directive was made; or
(e) whether the content of the advance directive is contrary to other laws or
constitutional provisions.
39. Suggestions
The proposed clause allows a mental health professional or relative or care-giver to override
an advance directive where they ‘desire’ not to follow it. Such a person may make an application
to the Board to review, or cancel the advance directive. It is suggested that it should be mandatory
to make an application to the Board to review the decision to not follow the advance directive. The
provision is too broad and vague, since nearly anybody can challenge an advance directive, merely
on a subjective ‘desire’. Though the decision to override the advance directive has to be reviewed
by a Board, the burden of proof regarding the validity of the advance directive as well as their
capacity lies on the person with mental illness. The provision overrides the right to autonomy and
consent of a person with mental illness. The right to autonomy stems from the right to dignity,
which is an inherent part of the right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
40. Ministry’s Response
The Ministry accepts this suggestion and proposes the following changes:
11 (1) Where a mental health professional or a relative or a care-giver of a person desires
not to follow an advance directive while treating a person with mental illness, such
mental health professional or the relative or the care-giver of the person shall  make an
application to the concerned Board to review, alter, modify or cancel the advance
directive.
11 (2) Upon receipt of the application under sub-section (1), the Board shall, after giving
an opportunity of hearing to all concerned parties (including the person whose advance
directive is in question), either uphold, modify, alter or cancel or otherwise determine
the applicability of the advance directive after taking into consideration the following,
namely:––

14
(a) whether the advance directive was made by the person out of his own free will
and free from force, undue influence or coercion; or
(b) whether the person intended the advance directive to apply to the present
circumstances, which may be different from those anticipated; or
(c) whether the person was sufficiently well informed to make the decision; or
(d) whether the person had capacity to make decisions relating to his mental health
care or treatment when such advanced directive was made; or
(e) whether the content of the advance directive is contrary to other laws or
constitutional provisions.
41. Recommendation of the Committee:
The Committee recognizes the fact that if Clause 11(1) and (2) is not amended, it
may become tool of exploitation of person with mental illness and dilute their rights. Thus,
the Committee endorses the proposed amendments to Clause 11(1) and (2) and recommends
that the changes may be suitably made in the Bill so that the Board be required to examine
the bonafides of the decision to override the advance directive in a holistic manner.
42. Clause 18(4)
18(4) Without prejudice to the generality of range of services under sub-section (3),such
services shall include ––
(a) provision of acute mental health care services such as outpatient and inpatient
services;
(b) provision of half-way homes, sheltered accommodation, supported accommodation;
(c) provision for mental health services to support family of person with mental illness or
home based rehabilitation;
(d) hospital and community based rehabilitation establishments and services;
(e) provision for child mental health services and old age mental health services.
43. Suggestions
In Clause 18(4)(b), the terms “half-way homes”, “sheltered accommodation” and “supported
accommodation” have been not defined in the Bill. Further, in Clause 18 (4)(d) the term
“community based rehabilitation establishments and services” too has not been defined. It will be
in order to either define these concepts under the Bill or instead allow the Central Authority or State
Authority to frame rules for establishment of these institutions. Therefore, sub-clause (4) of Clause
18 may be modified as follows:
“(4) Without prejudice to the generality of range of services under sub-section (3), such
services shall include-
(a) ........................
(b) Provision of half-way homes, sheltered accommodation, supported accommodation, as
may be prescribed:
(c) .........................

15
(d) Hospital and community based rehabilitation establishments and services, as may be
prescribed:
(e) ......................
44. Response of the Ministry
The Ministry has suggested that the words “as may be prescribed” may be inserted at the
end of Clause 18(4) (b) and (d).
45. Recommendation of the Committee
While endorsing the inclusion of the words “as may be prescribed” to Clause 18(4)
(b) and (d), as proposed by the Ministry, at the Committee’s behest, the Committee
recommends that the Government should carry out the proposed modifications in the Bill.
46. Clause 21(2)
21(2) The Insurance Regulatory Development Authority established under the Insurance
Regulatory Development Authority Act, 1999 shall endeavour to ensure that all insurers make
provisions for medical insurance for treatment of mental illness on the same basis as is available
for treatment of physical illness.
47. Suggestions
Clause 21 of the MHCB aims to obtain equality for persons with mental illness by treating
them at par with persons with physical illness. However this equality is only limited to equality in
emergency facilities; ambulance services; living conditions and health services. When it comes to
medical insurance which is one of the areas of discrimination, Clause 21(2) only mandates “IDRA
to endeavour to ensure that all insurers make provisions for medical insurance for treatment of
mental illness on the same basis as is available for treatment of physical illness.”
48. Ministry’s Response
The term “shall endeavour” was inserted on the insistence of the Dept of Financial Affairs.
However, change has been made as below:
The Insurance Regulatory Development Authority established under the Insurance
Regulatory Development Authority Act, 1999 shall (delete “endeavour to’’)  ensure that all insurers
make provisions for medical insurance for treatment of mental illness on the same basis as is
available for treatment of physical illness.
49. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee notes that Clause 21(2) which seeks to provide for acceptance of
medical insurance policies for persons with mental illness by the insurance companies
the same way as for physical illness is intended to eliminate the existing discriminatory
provisions and would provide a great relief to persons with mental illness and their
families. The effect is however, diluted by the word “shall endeavour”. The Committee,
therefore, endorses deletion of the word “endeavour” and recommends that as agreed to
by the Ministry, at the Committee’s behest, the word “shall” may be retained in the
Bill.

16
50. Clause 23(2)
23(2) All health professionals providing care or treatment to a person with mental illness
shall have a duty to keep all such information confidential which has been obtained during care
or treatment with the following exceptions, namely:––
(a) release of information to the nominated representative to enable him to fulfil his duties
under this Act;
(b) release of information to other mental health professionals and other health
professionals to enable them to provide care and treatment to the person with mental
illness;
(c) release of information if it is necessary to protect any other person from harm or
violence;
(d) only such information that is necessary to protect against the harm identified shall be
released;
(e) release of information in the case of life threatening emergencies where such
information is urgently needed to save lives;
(f) release of information upon an order by concerned Board or the Commission or High
Court or Supreme Court or any other statutory authority competent to do so; and
(g) release of information in the interests of public safety and security.
51. Suggestions
Clause 23(2)(e) is very vague and leaves scope for ambiguity and confusion in
implementation stage. It does not specify why, when and how much information is to be released.
It simply says that release of information in the case of life threatening emergencies where such
information is urgently needed to save lives.
52. Ministry’s Response
The Ministry has proposed the following changes in 23(2)(e)
“(e) release of information if it is necessary to protect any other person from harm or
violence provided that only such information that is necessary to protect against the harm
identified shall be released;”
53. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee observes that the clause 23(2) in the Bill deals with the right to
confidentiality in respect of a person with mental illness. Therefore, any scope of ambiguity
will defeat the purpose of this clause to keep all such information confidential which has
been obtained during care or treatment by health professionals providing care or treatment
to a person with mental illness. Any exception to such important clause should be carefully
framed with clear intentions so as to avoid conflict and confusion at the implementation
stage. The Committee therefore recommends that the proposed changes may be
incorporated in the Bill.
54. Clause 25
(1) All persons with mental illness shall have right to access their medical records.

17
(2) The psychiatrist in charge of such records may withhold specific information in the
medical records if disclosure would result in ,––
(a) serious mental harm to the person with mental illness; or
(b) likelihood of harm to other persons.
(3) When any information in the medical records is withheld from the person, the
psychiatrist shall inform the person with mental illness of his or her right to apply to
the concerned Board for an order to release such information.
55. Suggestions
The Clause does not specify or define ‘serious mental harm’ or ‘likelihood of harm’ and
in what form this access is to be provided. This provision is to be seriously reconsidered in view
of potential of it being misused.
56. Ministry’s Response
Serious mental harm or likelihood of harm is a judgement to be made by the psychiatrist
and will have to be justified by the psychiatrist if this decision is challenged by the person with
mental illness. The way this provision may be misused has not been specified.
57. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee recommends that the scope of misuse of medical records may be
relooked and suitably addressed before finalising the Bill.
58. Clause 27(2)
27(2) It shall be the duty of medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of a mental health
establishment to inform the person with mental illness that he is entitled to free legal
services under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 or other relevant laws or under any
order of the court if so ordered and provide the contact details of the availability of
services.
59. Suggestions
Clause 27 (2) is insufficient when read in relevance to Clauses 109 and 111 which brings
within its ambit persons who ‘may have a mental illness’. It imposes duty only on the medical
officer or psychiatrist in charge of a mental health establishment to inform the person with mental
illness that he is entitled to free legal services. The purpose of clause 111 is to divert people from
the criminal justice system into the health care system. Section 111 sub-section (1) clause (a)
mentions that the person shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this Act and
therefore all the rights protections in this Bill will become applicable. However, Clause 27 (2) does
not impose any responsibility on the magistrate or police officer to inform the person about his
right to legal aid with respect to Section 111. Thus, there is scope of arbitrariness application.
60. Ministry’s Response
Taking into account the concerns expressed here, the Ministry proposes the following:
It shall be the duty of the magistrate, the police officer, person in charge of a custodial
institution , medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of a mental health establishment to inform the

18
person with mental illness that he is entitled to free legal services under the Legal Services
Authorities Act, 1987 or other relevant laws or under any order of the court if so ordered and
provide the contact details of the availability of services.
61. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee observes that it is important to amend clause 27 (2) so that for want
of information or due to their ignorance people with mental illness are not deprived of legal
remedies and rights guaranteed to them through various provisions of the Bill. The
Committee is of the view that the suggested changes will address the concerns regarding
arbitrariness. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the amendments to Clause 27(2)
as agreed to by the Ministry, at the Committee’s behest, may be duly incorporated in the Bill.
62. Clause 65(4)
(4) Every mental health establishment shall, for the purpose of registration and
continuation of registration, fulfil––
(a) the minimum standards of facilities and services as may be specified by regulations
made by the Central Authority;
(b) the minimum qualifications for the personnel engaged in such establishments may be
specified by regulations made by the Central Authority;
(c) provisions for maintenance of records and reporting as may be specified by regulations
made by the Central Authority; and
(d) any other conditions as may be specified by regulations made by the Central Authority.
63. Suggestions
As per Clause 65 (4) of the Bill, Central Authority appears empowered to make regulations in
relation to, inter alia, minimum standards of facility and services, minimum qualification of personnel
engaged in such establishment, provisions regarding maintenance of records and reporting etc.
However, delegation of this power solely to Central Authority to the exclusion of the State
Authority militates against the concept of multi-layered regulation. This is also required as the local
exigencies play a major role in any public health planning and regulation. The State Authorities will
be in best position to understand the requirements and practical difficulties in their own state, and
the regulations made by them will be more suited to administration. This is even more important
as the implementation of the regulation will, in fact, be undertaken by the State Authorities. In view
of the same, it is only proper that any regulation made for regulating the mental health
establishment also involves the State Authorities. This may be achieved in various ways, such as:
(a) The regulations made by Central Authority must be made in consultation with State
Authorities. This may pose practical challenges as there will be numerous State
Authorities to be consulted, and consequently the regulation making process may get
unduly delayed.
(b) The regulations made by Central Authority may be modified by the State Authority with
its own local jurisdiction.
(c) The State Authority may be empowered to make regulations for mental health establishment
within the jurisdiction of its own state. This may pose difficulties of implementation as
many State Authorities may lag behind in framing their own regulations.

19
The power to the State Authority to modify the regulations for registration made by Central
Authority may be the most suitable via-media. While such amending regulations of the State
Authority will need to be placed before the State Legislature, a further level of scrutiny may be
built by requiring the Governor to ratify the regulations made by the State Authority for them to
be effective.
In view of the above, we suggest addition to the following proviso to Clause 65(4) of the
Bill:
“Provided that the State Authority may modify, alter or amend any regulation made by the
Central Authority in so far as such regulation applies to any mental health establishment
within the jurisdiction of the State Authority (not being a mental health establishment under
the Central Government).
Provided further that no regulation made by the State Authority modifying, altering or
amending the regulations made by the Central Authority shall be effective unless ratified
and approved by the Governor.”
64. Ministry’s Response
Every mental health establishment shall, for the purpose of registration and continuation of
registration, fulfil––
(a) the minimum standards of facilities and services as may be specified by regulations
made by the (word Central deleted)  Authority;
(b) the minimum qualifications for the personnel engaged in such establishment as may be
specified by regulations made by the (word Central deleted)  Authority;
(c) provisions for maintenance of records and reporting as may be specified by regulations
made by the (word Central deleted)  Authority; and
(d) any other conditions as may be specified by regulations made by the (word Central
deleted) Authority.
65. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee notes that the amendment suggested by the Ministry is not clearly
framed. There is scope of ambiguity in interpretation. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that while retaining the amendments proposed by the Ministry, the term
Authority may be explicitly defined.
66. Clause 81
Each Board shall consist of–
(a) a District Judge, or an officer of the State judicial services who is qualified to be
appointed as District Judge or a retired District Judge who shall be chairperson of the
Board;
(b) representative of the District Collector or District Magistrate or Deputy Commissioner
of the districts in which the Board is to be constituted;
(c) two members who shall be mental health professionals of whom at least one shall be
a psychiatrist;

20
(d) two members who shall be persons with mental illness or care-givers or persons
representing organisations of persons with mental illness or care-givers or non-
governmental organisations working in the field of mental health.
67. Suggestion
Both the members of the Mental Health Review Board proposed under the above clause
should be psychiatrists as a psychiatrist, being a specialist is better-equipped to protect the interests
of the patient.
68. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee notes that out of the two members proposed under Clause 81(c), at
least one shall be a psychiatrist. The Clause, however, does not clearly spell out who the
other “mental health professional” shall be. Keeping in view the fact that the Mental Health
Review Boards have been envisaged to play a critical role in protecting the interests of
persons with mental illness, the Committee feels that the second “mental health
Professional” proposed under Clause 81(c) needs to be a qualified medical practitioner so
that the two qualified medical professionals appointed under this Clause are able to share
their expertise with the rest of the Board and enable it to take appropriate decisions. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may make necessary amendments in
Clause 81(c).
69. Clause 99(11)
99(11) If a person with mental illness has made an advance directive, it shall be taken into
account before the commencement of treatment.
70. Suggestions
Mental illness is a chronic illness, the patient has to undergo treatment for a long time,
and insisting admission in a Government hospital for more than 90 days or more than 120 days
and waiting for a decision from the District Review Commission is definitely cumbersome
procedure. There are conditions where the patient does not want to get treated and has to be
forced to get treated. Secondly, there are certain legal situations. When the patient claims to be
unaware of what he had done, a different set of rules will govern him. Medical treatment without
the informed consent of the person amounts to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and is
a violation of the rights to dignity, consent, autonomy and bodily integrity under Article 21 of
the Constitution.
71. Ministry’s Response
For purposes of clarity in Section 99, the Ministry proposes the following amendment to
Section 99 sub-section 11 to read as follows
Every person with mental illness admitted under this section shall be provided treatment
after taking into account,–
(a) An Advance Directive if any; or
(b) informed consent of the patient with the support of his nominated representative
subject to the provisions of sub-section 12.

21
72. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee feels that for purposes of clarity in Section 99 it is important to
bring the amendment to Clause 99 (11) and remove the fallacies. The Committee, therefore,
endorses the changes suggested by the Ministry and recommends that the same may be
carried out in the Bill to remove the lacunae and make it in consonance with Article 21 of
the Constitution.
73. Clause 100(2) to (9)
(2) The leave referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be extended beyond the period of the
duration of admission permissible under section 96 or section 98 or section 99, as the
case may be.
(3) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment shall
obtain the consent of the nominated representative before taking a decision of granting
leave.
(4) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment may
in writing cancel the leave of absence of the person with mental illness admitted in
such establishment if he considers it appropriate to do so in the interest of such person.
(5) If the person with mental illness, on expiry of the period of his leave or on
cancellation of his leave of absence under sub-section (4) does not return to the
establishment, the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental health
establishment shall first contact the person on leave and his nominated representative.
(6) If the person with mental illness and his nominated representative feel that continued
admission in the mental health establishment is not necessary, then, such person and
his nominated representative shall communicate the same to the medical officer or
psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment, who shall formally discharge
such person from the mental health establishment.
(7) If the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment has
reason to believe that the person requires ongoing admission to a mental health
establishment and the nominated representative agrees with the assessment of such medical
officer or psychiatrist, and such person with mental illness refuses to return to the hospital
on expiry of leave or cancellation of his leave of absence, the medical officer or the
psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment shall report to the Police Officer
in charge of the police station within the limits of whose jurisdiction the mental health
establishment is situated, to convey the person to the mental health establishment.
(8) If the person with mental illness referred to in sub-section (7), is not conveyed by the
Police Officer for any reasons, to the mental health establishment within one month
of the expiry of his leave or cancellation of his leave of absence, as the case may be,
such person shall be deemed to have been discharged from such mental health
establishment.
(9) The provisions of sub-section (8) shall not preclude readmission of the person with
mental illness in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
74. Suggestions
The section perpetuates the perception of people in mental health establishments as
dangerous to society and continues to stigmatize them. Requiring a police officer to forcibly convey

22
the person back to the mental health establishment against his will take away all the fundamental
rights of a person guaranteed under the Constitution.
75. Ministry’s Response
The Ministry agrees with this suggestion and therefore, recommends the following changes :
Section 100 (1) is retained. All sub-sequent subsections from (2) to (9) are deleted.
76. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee appreciates the changes proposed by the Ministry at the Committee’s
behest and recommends that necessary changes may be carried out in the Bill.
77. Clause 101
If a person with mental illness admitted to a mental health establishment under this Act
absents himself without leave or without discharge from the mental health establishment, he shall
be taken into protection by any Police Officer at the request of the medical officer or psychiatrist
in charge of the mental health establishment and taken back to the mental health establishment
immediately:
Provided that in the case of a person with mental illness not admitted under section 112,
the provisions of this section shall not apply after the expiry of a period of one month from
the date of such absence of such person from the mental health establishment.
78. Suggestions
The proposed Bill still continues its link with the correctional system. The clause 101,
chapter XII, on ‘leave from the hospital’ requires a police officer to accost the person with mental
illness to return to treatment facility. This further serves to stigmatise the person with mental
illness. The section dealing with ‘leave’ should be repealed . It also contradicts with person’s right
to get discharged without any consent from officer in charge/psychiatrist.
79. Ministry’s Response
The Ministry has proposed following changes:
If a person with mental illness whom section 112 applies absents himself without leave or
without discharge from the mental health establishment, he shall be taken into protection by
any Police Officer at the request of the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the
mental health establishment and taken back to the Mental health establishment immediately .
Delete the proviso to Section 101.
80. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee agrees to the changes proposed by the Ministry and recommends that
required modifications may be made in the Bill.
81. Clause 104 (2)
104(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if, in the opinion of
psychiatrist in charge of a minor’s treatment, electro-convulsive therapy is required, then, such
treatment shall be done with the consent of the guardian and prior permission of the concerned
Board.

23
82. Suggestions
Although the Bill prohibits ECT for minors, it may be used if in the opinion of the
psychiatrist in charge of treatment ECT is required. Currently, consent of the guardian and prior
permission of the Board are pre-requisites for ECT for minors. There is no requirement for
informed consent of the guardian before administering ECT. It is suggested that in granting
permission for ECT, the Board should make an enquiry into the maturity of the minor to understand
the nature and consequence of the treatment. Especially in cases where the minor disagrees with
the decision of the guardian. International best practice suggests that ECT should be done only
after the opinion of a non-treating psychiatrist is sought which is also absent from the section. It
is submitted that, if at all allowed, there should be an accompanying provision prohibiting the use
of ECT on minors below a certain age, as is done in many countries. However, due to its extreme
side effects and its controversial practice in the treatment of mental illness in minors, a blanket ban
on ECT for minors is suggested as is recommended by the World Health Organisation.
83. Ministry’s Response
This provision has been made in consultation with the medical professionals as there may be
rare emergencies when a minor may require this for life saving purposes. Hence the Bill provides for
this in exceptional circumstances with adequate protection of the Board. Indian legal system does not
recognize the concept of maturity of minors. The opinion of a non-treating psychiatrist before
administering ECT will happen automatically as a non-treating psychiatrist will be a member of the
District Board which has to give its approval before administering the procedure. However, it is
agreed that the word “informed” is missing in Section 104 sub-section 2. Thus, clause 104 (2) will
read as: Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if, in the opinion of psychiatrist in
charge of a minor’s treatment, electro-convulsive therapy is required, then, such treatment shall be
done with the informed  consent of the guardian and prior permission of the concerned Board.
84. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee is of the opinion that Clause 104 prohibiting certain treatments, such
as unmodified ECT and sterilisation and restrain on chaining are highly desirable pro
human right provisions. The Committee however has reservations on ECT for minors and
recommends that the Ministry must ensure that all treatments are to be done with
informed consent by bringing in proposed necessary changes in the Bill. Appropriate changes
may be made in the Bill accordingly.
85. Clause 106
(1) The physical restraint or seclusion may only be used when,––
(a) it is the only means available to prevent imminent and immediate harm to person
concerned or to others;
(b) it is authorised by the psychiatrist in charge of the person’ s treatment at the
mental health establishment.
(2) Physical restraint or seclusion shall not be used for a period longer than it is
absolutely necessary to prevent the immediate risk of significant harm.
(3) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment shall
be responsible for ensuring that the method, nature of restraint or seclusion,
justification for its imposition and the duration of the restraint or seclusion are
immediately recorded in the person’ s medical notes.

24
(4) The restraint or seclusion shall not be used as a form of punishment or deterrent in
any circumstance and the mental health establishment shall not use restraint or
seclusion merely on the ground of shortage of staff in such establishment.
(5) The nominated representative of the person with mental illness shall be informed about
every instance of seclusion or restraint within a period of twenty-four hours.
(6) A person who is placed under restraint or seclusion shall be kept in a place where he
can cause no harm to himself or others and under regular ongoing supervision of the
medical personnel at the mental health establishment.
(7) The mental health establishment shall include all instances of restraint and seclusion,
in the report to be sent to the concerned Board on a monthly basis.
(8) The Commission may make regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions
of this section.
(9) The Board may order a mental health establishment to desist from applying restraint
and seclusion if the Board is of the opinion that the mental health establishment is
persistently and wilfully ignoring the provisions of this section.
86. Suggestions
Seclusion might be used widely on the grounds of shortage of staff. There is no evidence
for efficacy of seclusion. Thus, seclusion should be banned.
87. Ministry’s Response
Seclusion or solitary confinement of a person with mental illness is banned. Physical
restraint may only be used when, –
(a) it is the only means available to prevent imminent and immediate harm to person
concerned or to others;
(b) it is authorised by the psychiatrist in charge of the person’s treatment at the mental
health establishment.
(2) Physical restraint ( word ‘or seclusion’ deleted ) shall not be used for a period longer
than it is absolutely necessary to prevent the immediate risk of significant harm.
(3) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment shall
be responsible for ensuring that the method, nature of restraint (word ‘or seclusion’
deleted), justification for its imposition and the duration of the restraint or seclusion
are immediately recorded in the person’s medical notes.
(4) restraint (word ‘or seclusion’ deleted) shall not be used as a form of punishment or
deterrent in any circumstance and the mental health establishment shall not use
restraint (word ‘or seclusion’ deleted)  merely on the ground of shortage of staff in
such establishment.
(5) The nominated representative of the person with mental illness shall be informed about
every instance of (word ‘seclusion’ deleted)  or restraint within a period of twenty-
four hours.
(6) A person who is placed under restraint (word ‘or seclusion’ deleted)  shall be kept in
a place where he can cause no harm to himself or others and under regular ongoing
supervision of the medical personnel at the mental health establishment.

25
(7) The mental health establishment shall include all instances of restraint (word ‘and
seclusion’ deleted),  in the report to be sent to the concerned Board on a monthly
basis.
(8) The Commission may make regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions
of this section.
(9) The Board may order a mental health establishment to desist from applying restraint
(word ‘and seclusion’ deleted)  if the Board is of the opinion that the mental health
establishment is persistently and wilfully ignoring the provisions of this section.
88. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee accepts the deletion of the word “seclusion” from Clause 106 (2) (3)
(4) (5) (6) (7) and (9) and hopes that it would bring more clarity in the said Clause with
regard to the rights of persons with mental illness to dignity and liberty. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the deletions as proposed by the Ministry may be carried out
in the Bill.
89. Clause 108
(1) The professionals conducting research shall obtain free and informed consent from all
persons with mental illness for participation in any research involving interviewing the
person or psychological, physical, chemical or medicinal interventions.
(2) In case of research involving any psychological, physical, chemical or medicinal
interventions to be conducted on person who is unable to give free and informed
consent but does not resist participation in such research, permission to conduct such
research shall be obtained from concerned State Authority.
(3) The State Authority may allow the research to proceed based on informed consent being
obtained from the nominated representative of persons with mental illness, if the State
Authority is satisfied that––
(a) the proposed research cannot be performed on persons who are capable of giving
free and informed consent;
(b) the proposed research is necessary to promote the health of the population
represented by the person;
(c) the purpose of the proposed research is to obtain knowledge relevant to the
particular health needs of persons with mental illness;
(d) a full disclosure of the interests of persons and organisations conducting the
proposed research is made and there is no conflict of interest involved; and
(e) the proposed research follows all the national and international guidelines and
regulations concerning the conduct of such research and ethical approval has been
obtained from the institutional ethics committee where such research is to be
conducted.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not restrict research based study of the case notes
of a person who is unable to give informed consent, so long as the anonymity of the
persons is secured.

26
90. Suggestions
Persons participating in such research must also be given the right to withdraw their
consent during any stage of the research to give meaning to their rights to dignity, autonomy,
consent and bodily integrity. Similarly, the nominated representative should also have the right to
withdraw their consent during any stage of the research.
It is submitted that the current guidelines for the State Authority to permit research and
medical intervention are not sufficient. The State Authority should make an inquiry into the potential
harm and benefits that may be caused to the concerned person.
91. Ministry’s Response
The Ministry has proposed amendments as under:
(b) the proposed research is necessary to promote the mental health of the
population represented by the person;
(c) the purpose of the proposed research is to obtain knowledge relevant to the
particular mental health needs of persons with mental illness;
(5) Persons participating in research shall have the right to withdraw their consent at any
stage of the research. In circumstances mentioned under sub-section (3), if a nominated
representative has given informed consent for the person with mental illness to participate
in research, the nominated representative shall have the right to withdraw this consent at
any stage of the research.
92. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has accepted the suggestions and
proposed amendments in the Bill. The proposed amendments may be incorporated in the Bill
93. Clause 112
(1) An order under section 30 of the Prisoners Act, 1900 or under section 144 of the Air
Force Act, 1950, or under section 145 of the Army Act, 1950, or under section 143
or section 144 of the Navy Act, 1957, or under section 330 or section 335 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, directing the admission of a prisoner with mental illness
into any suitable mental health establishment, shall be sufficient authority for the
admission of such person in such establishment to which such person may be lawfully
transferred for care and treatment therein.
(2) The medical officer of a prison or jail shall send a quarterly report to the concerned
Board certifying therein that there are no prisoners with mental illness in the prison
or jail.
(3) The Board may visit the prison or jail and ask the medical officer as to why the
prisoner with mental illness, if any, has been kept in the prison or jail and not
transferred for treatment to a mental health establishment.
(4) The medical officer in charge of a mental health establishment wherein any person
referred to in sub-section (1) is detained, shall once in every six months, make a
special report regarding the mental and physical condition of such person to the
authority under whose order such person is detained.

27
94. Suggestions
Under clause 112, Chapter XIII, Prisoners with mental illness needs to be guarded by the
State authorities. Since prisons have all facilities, all prisoners with mental illness could be treated
in the hospital section of jails. Treating personnel in Mental Health need to move to Prisons as part
of integration of services and community extension initiatives. A prison set-up coming to a hospital
is not a very practical move.
95. Ministry’s Response
Section 112 does not require that persons should be moved out of the prison compound to
access mental health care. There can be mental health establishments in the medical wing of
prisons and persons with mental illness are cared for in these areas.
96. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee feels that the reply of the Ministry does not address the concern in
an explicit manner and there is need to ensure that there is no ambiguity whatsoever in
the clause. The Clause should spell out details in a more explicit manner so as to avoid
confusion and conflict in the implementation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry may re-examine the concern raised with regard to Clause 112 and address the
same appropriately.
97. Clause 113
If it appears to the person in charge of a State run custodial institution (including beggars
homes, orphanages, women’ s protection homes and children homes) that any resident of the
institution has, or is likely to have, a mental illness, then, he shall take such resident of the
institution to the nearest mental health establishment run or funded by the appropriate Government
for assessment and treatment, as necessary.
98. Suggestions
Apart from those sections relating to transfer, the Mental Health Care Bill does not apply
in custodial care institutions including prisons. Individuals with mental illness in prisons and other
State run custodial institution (e.g. beggars homes, orphanages, women’s protection homes and
children homes), should be monitored under the Act.
99. Ministry’s Response
The Ministry has suggested following changes:
If it appears to the person in charge of a State run custodial institution (including beggars
homes, orphanages, women’s protection homes and children homes) that any resident of the
institution has, or is likely to have, a mental illness, then, he shall take such resident of the
institution to the nearest mental health establishment run or funded by the appropriate
Government for assessment and treatment, as necessary. The medical officer in charge of
the mental health establishment shall be responsible for assessment of the person and the
treatment needs of the person with mental illness shall be addressed in accordance with the
provisions of this Act as applicable in the particular circumstances.
100. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee is of the opinion that people in custodial institutions are very
vulnerable to abuse of their rights. Thus, keeping in view their special circumstances,

28
proposed amendments are very much warranted. The Ministry has accepted the suggestions
and come out with the amendment and the Committee accepts it. The Committee,
recommends that the addition in Clause 113 as agreed to by the Ministry, at the
Committee’s behest, may be suitably incorporated in the Bill.
101. Clause 114(1)
114. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
a person’ s current or past admission to a mental health establishment or a person’ s current or past
treatment for mental illness shall not by itself, without prejudice to the provisions of any law for
the time being in force or custom or usage governing personnel laws of such person, be a ground
for divorce.
102. Suggestions
Sub-clause (1) of Clause 114 starts as a ‘notwithstanding’ clause, however, towards the end
it turns into a clause which does not prejudice other laws for the time being in force. This creates
confusion as to the status of this provision. If this provision is to operate notwithstanding other
laws for the time being in force, there is no need for a without prejudice clause, and if this law
is not intended to prejudice any other law for the time being in force, this provision is not required.
The right to divorce flows from other laws and these laws have their own intricacies. At a time
when divorce laws are being liberalized to ensure that unhappy and unworkable marital relations are
allowed to end, if this provision is intended to close a right to divorce available under divorce laws,
it may have other unintended consequences. It is best that any change to marital laws be
undertaken as separate exercise and only after its consequences have been sufficiently analysed.
Further, certain forms of mental illness are grounds for divorce under the respective personal laws.
Therefore, an amendment to such legislations may be required to give full effect to this provision,
if it is decided to retain the same.
103. Ministry’s Response
The Ministry proposes an amendment to Clause 114 by deleting sub-clause(1).
104. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee accepts the suggestion of the Ministry to delete sub- clause 1 of
Clause 114 from the Bill. The Committee recommends that this amendment may be carried
out in the Bill.
105. Clause 123
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall, taking
into consideration the communication, travel and transportation difficulties, apply to
the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland, Arunachal
Pradesh and Sikkim, with following modifications, namely:—
(a) under sub-section (3) of section 80, the president of the Commission may
constitute a single Board for all the States;
(b) in sub-section (2) of section 88, reference to the period of “seven days”, and in
sub-section (3) of that section, reference to the period of “twenty-one days” shall
be construed as “ten days” and “thirty days”, respectively;

29
(c) in sub-section (9) of section 96, reference to the period of “seventy-two hours”
shall be construed as “one hundred twenty hours”, and in sub-sections (3) and
(12) of that section, reference to a period of “seven days” shall be construed as
“ten days”;
(d) in sub-section (3) of section 97, reference to the period of “twenty-four hours”
shall be construed as “seventy-two hours”;
(e) in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (9) of section 98, reference to the period
of “three days” and “seven days” shall be construed as “seven days” and “ten
days” respectively;
(f) in sub-section (3) of section 99, reference to the period of “seven days” and in
sub-section (4) of that section, reference to the period of “twenty-one days” shall
be construed as “ten days” and “thirty days” respectively;
(g) in sub-section (4) of section 103, reference to the period of “seventy-two hours”
shall be construed as “one hundred twenty hours”.
(2) The provisions of clauses (b) to (g) of sub-section (1) shall also apply to the States
of Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territories
of Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
106. Suggestions
Chapter XVI section 123 makes provision for a single Board for 8 North Eastern States.
Keeping in view the difficulties of connectivity and terrain a single board would never be able to
take on this onerous responsibility. It is not understandable for whose convenience one Review
Board (NE region) has been proposed for an area spreading across 262,230 sq kms. It is proposed
that this provision for a single board for NER be discontinued. In States like Assam every district
should have a board like in other parts of the country. As an alternative, all districts having District
Mental Health Program should have a Mental Health Review Board in the rest of the States of
North East Region if district level board are not possible.
107. Ministry’s Response
This is only an enabling provision which was made on the basis of suggestions from
stakeholders at the regional meeting held in the North-East. It is not compulsory that there is only
one Board for the North Eastern States and it is possible to have separate District Boards for the
North Eastern States as well as all districts in Assam.
108. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee feels that ambiguity in this regard should be removed. The
Committee recommends that necessary drafting modifications may be made in the clause so
that the intent behind the clause that this is only enabling provision and it is possible to
have separate district boards for the North-Eastern States including Assam, is reflected in
the Bill.
109. Clause 124
Presumption of mental illness in case of attempt to commit suicide by person.
124. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 309 of the Indian Penal Code, any
person who attempts to commit suicide shall be presumed, unless proved otherwise, to

30
be suffering from mental illness at the time of attempting sucide and shall not be
liable to punishment under the said section.
(2) The appropriate Government shall have a duty to provide care, treatment and
rehabilitation to a person, having mental illness and who attempted to commit suicide,
to reduce the risk of recurrence of attempt to commit suicide.
110. Suggestions
The decriminalization of persons attempting to commit suicide is a welcome step. However,
the lack of criteria for what may constitute ‘an attempt to commit suicide’ is vague and ambiguous.
As opined by the Supreme Court of India in P. Rathinam v. Union of India [1994 AIR1844] people
may attempt suicide for a number of reasons, which may not necessarily be related to their mental
health. The section therefore becomes open to arbitrariness and is in violation of article 14 of the
Constitution.
Three issues which we feel will arise with the enactment of Section 124:
(A) The unintended consequence of the law creating this presumption of mental illness is
that a person who has attempted suicide will now be subject to ‘mental health
treatment’.
(B) There are serious concerns with regard to the issue of abetment of suicide, which is
punishable under Section 306 IPC.
(C) There are concerns with regard to the role played by institutionalization in silencing
victims of domestic violence.
111. Ministry’s Response
The Ministry has proposed following amendments
Title of the Section : Presumption of severe stress in case of attempt to commit suicide
(1) Not withstanding anything contained in Section 309 of the Indian Penal Code and the
Code of Criminal Procedure , any person who attempts to commit suicide shall be presumed,
unless proved otherwise, to have severe stress at the time of attempting suicide and shall
no be liable to prosecution and punishment.
(2) The appropriate Government shall have a duty to provide care, treatment and
rehabilitation to a person having severe stress and  who attempted to commit suicide, to
reduce the risk of recurrence of attempt to commit suicide.
112. Recommendation of the Committee
Though section 124 of the Bill seeks to make a presumption vis-à-vis mental illness,
the stage at which such a presumption operates is unclear. It is necessary to avoid any
scope of ambiguity in both enforcement as well as interpretation of the clause. The
Committee, therefore, accepts the modifications proposed by the Ministry and recommends
that they may be duly incorporated in the Bill.
113. Clause 126
The Central Government may, if it considers so necessary in the interest of persons with
mental illness being governed by the Mental Health Act, 1987, take appropriate interim measures
by making scheme for the smooth implementation of the provisions of this Act.

31
114. Suggestions
Clause 126 of the MHCB only allows for the Central Government if it considers it necessary
in the interest of persons with mental illness being governed by the MHA to take appropriate interim
measures by making a scheme for the smooth implementation of the provisions of MHCB. Insofar
as MHCB does not address the issues undertaken by Chapter VI of MHA, this clause is of little
assistance.
It is therefore submitted that the MHA cannot be repealed until the question of property
management by persons with mental illness is settled. There is an inextricable relationship between
the economic status of persons with mental illness and their care and treatment. It is important to
ensure that these connections are duly appreciated before a statute on mental health care is enacted.
Such an examination is especially required because the present Bill, as this memorandum has
attempted to show is neither in harmony with the CRPD nor with the Indian Constitution.
115. Ministry’s Response
The Central Government may, if it considers so necessary in the interest of persons with
mental illness being governed by the Mental Health Act, 1987, take appropriate interim measures
by making necessary transitory schemes (words “for the smooth implementation of the provisions
of this Act” deleted).
116. Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee feels that precautionary measures are to be taken before totally
repealing the Mental Health Act, 1987 and accepts the suggestion of the Ministry.
117. The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any changes. The
Bill may be passed incorporating the suggestions made by the Committee.
Miscellaneous
118. The Committee notes that there are as many as 18 clauses of the Bill which will
become sections after enactment which involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India and Financial Memorandum appended to the Bill states that it is not possible to
estimate the financial burden at this stage but at the same time the Financial Memorandum
does not assure that necessary allocation shall be made when the provision of the Bill will
be implemented. States will have to implement its provisions, health being a State subject.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that as most of the States are facing resource
crunch it is the duty of the Centre to ensure funds for implementing the provisions of the
Bill and it should be reflected in the Demands for Grants.

32
32
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee acknowledges that the Ministry has accepted the suggestion
regarding amendments to clause 1(3) and (4). The Committee is of the view that the new
provisions would lend greater clarity and coher ence to the operation of the proposed Act and
serve the intended purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposed
amendment may be incorporated in the Bill. (Para 29)
2. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may bring the suggested amendment
in the clause. (Para 33)
3. The Committee observes that there is merit in the reservations expressed with
regard to Clause 4 and the Ministry, has agreed to incorporate the necessary changes and
thus, uphold the constitutional norm of equality. It also reflects the principle of self-
determination which gives right to a person with mental illness to make mental health care
and treatment decisions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the new/alternate
clause as proposed by the Ministry in respect of Clause 4(1), may be included in the Bill.
(Para 37)
4. The Committee recognizes the fact that if Clause 11(1) and (2) is not amended, it
may become tool of exploitation of person with mental illness and dilute their rights. Thus,
the Committee endorses the proposed amendments to Clause 11(1) and (2) and recommends
that the changes may be suitably made in the Bill so that the Board be required to examine
the bonafides of the decision to override the advance directive in a holistic manner.
(Para 41)
5. While endorsing the inclusion of the words “as may be prescribed” to Clause 18(4) (b)
and (d), as proposed by the Ministry, at the Committee’s behest, the Committee
recommends that the Government should carry out the proposed modifications in the Bill.
(Para 45)
6. The Committee notes that Clause 21(2) which seeks to provide for acceptance of
medical insurance policies for persons with mental illness by the insurance companies the
same way as for physical illness is intended to eliminate the existing discriminatory
provisions and would provide a great relief to persons with mental illness and their families.
The effect is however, diluted by the word “shall endeavour”. The Committee, therefore,
endorses deletion of the word “endeavour” and recommends that as agreed to by the
Ministry, at the Committee’s behest, the word “shall” may be retained in the Bill.
(Para 49)
7. The Committee observes that the clause 23(2) in the Bill deals with the right to
confidentiality in respect of a person with mental illness. Therefore, any scope of ambiguity
will defeat the purpose of this clause to keep all such information confidential which has
been obtained during care or treatment by health professionals providing care or treatment
to a person with mental illness. Any exception to such important clause should be carefully
framed with clear intentions so as to avoid conflict and confusion at the implementation
stage. The Committee therefore recommends that the proposed changes may be
incorporated in the Bill. (Para 53)

33
8. The Committee recommends that the scope of misuse of medical records may be
relooked and suitably addressed before finalising the Bill. (Para 57)
9. The Committee observes that it is important to amend clause 27 (2) so that for want
of information or due to their ignorance people with mental illness are not deprived of legal
remedies and rights guaranteed to them through various provisions of the Bill. The
Committee is of the view that the suggested changes will address the concerns regarding
arbitrariness. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the amendments to Clause 27(2)
as agreed to by the Ministry, at the Committee’s behest, may be duly incorporated in the
Bill. (Para 61)
10.  The Committee notes that the amendment suggested by the Ministry is not clearly
framed. There is scope of ambiguity in interpretation. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that while retaining the amendments proposed by the Ministry, the term
Authority may be explicitly defined. (Para 65)
11. The Committee notes that out of the two members proposed under Clause 81(c), at
least one shall be a psychiatrist. The Clause, however, does not clearly spell out who the
other “mental health professional” shall be. Keeping in view the fact that the Mental Health
Review Boards have been envisaged to play a critical role in protecting the interests of
persons with mental illness, the Committee feels that the second “mental health
Professional” proposed under Clause 81(c) needs to be a qualified medical practitioner so
that the two qualified medical professionals appointed under this Clause are able to share
their expertise with the rest of the Board and enable it to take appropriate decisions. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may make necessary amendments in
Clause 81(c). (Para 68)
12. The Committee feels that for purposes of clarity in Section 99 it is important to
bring the amendment to Clause 99 (11) and remove the fallacies. The Committee, therefore,
endorses the changes suggested by the Ministry and recommends that the same may be
carried out in the Bill to remove the lacunae and make it in consonance with Article 21 of
the Constitution. (Para 72)
13. The Committee appreciates the changes proposed by the Ministry at the Committee’s
behest and recommends that necessary changes may be carried out in the Bill. (Para 76)
14. The Committee agrees to the changes proposed by the Ministry and recommends that
required modifications may be made in the Bill. (Para 80)
15. The Committee is of the opinion that Clause 104 prohibiting certain treatments, such
as unmodified ECT and sterilisation and restrain on chaining are highly desirable pro
human right provisions. The Committee however has reservations on ECT for minors and
recommends that the Ministry must ensure that all treatments are to be done with
informed consent by bringing in proposed necessary changes in the Bill. Appropriate changes
may be made in the Bill accordingly. (Para 84)
16. The Committee accepts the deletion of the word “seclusion” from Clause 106 (2) (3)
(4) (5) (6) (7) and (9) and hopes that it would bring more clarity in the said Clause with
regard to the rights of persons with mental illness to dignity and liberty. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the deletions as proposed by the Ministry may be carried out
in the Bill. (Para 88)
17. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has accepted the suggestions and
proposed amendments in the Bill. The proposed amendments may be incorporated in the
Bill. (Para 92)

34
18. The Committee feels that the reply of the Ministry does not address the concern in
an explicit manner and there is need to ensure that there is no ambiguity whatsoever in
the clause. The Clause should spell out details in a more explicit manner so as to avoid
confusion and conflict in the implementation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry may re-examine the concern raised with regard to Clause 112 and address the
same appropriately. (Para 96)
19. The Committee is of the opinion that people in custodial institutions are very
vulnerable to abuse of their rights. Thus, keeping in view their special circumstances,
proposed amendments are very much warranted. The Ministry has accepted the suggestions
and come out with the amendment and the Committee accepts it. The Committee,
recommends that the addition in Clause 113 as agreed to by the Ministry, at the
Committee’s behest, may be suitably incorporated in the Bill. (Para 100)
20. The Committee accepts the suggestion of the Ministry to delete sub-clause 1 of
Clause 114 from the Bill. The Committee recommends that this amendment may be carried
out in the Bill. (Para 104)
21. The Committee feels that ambiguity in this regard should be removed. The
Committee recommends that necessary drafting modifications may be made in the clause so
that the intent behind the clause that this is only enabling provision and it is possible to
have separate district boards for the North-Eastern States including Assam, is reflected in
the Bill. (Para 108)
22. Though section 124 of the Bill seeks to make a presumption vis-à-vis mental illness,
the stage at which such a presumption operates is unclear. It is necessary to avoid any
scope of ambiguity in both enforcement as well as interpretation of the clause. The
Committee, therefore, accepts the modifications proposed by the Ministry and recommends
that they may be duly incorporated in the Bill. (Para 112)
23. The Committee feels that precautionary measures are to be taken before totally
repealing the Mental Health Act, 1987 and accepts the suggestion of the Ministry. (Para 116)
24. The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any changes. The
Bill may be passed incorporating the suggestions made by the Committee. (Para 117)
25. The Committee notes that there are as many as 18 clauses of the Bill which will
become sections after enactment which involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India and Financial Memorandum appended to the Bill states that it is not possible to
estimate the financial burden at this stage but at the same time the Financial Memorandum
does not assure that necessary allocation shall be made when the provision of the Bill will
be implemented. States will have to implement its provisions, health being a State subject.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that as most of the States are facing resource
crunch it is the duty of the Centre to ensure funds for implementing the provisions of the
Bill and it should be reflected in the Demands for Grants. (Para 118)

35
MINUTES

36

37
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 29 th August, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
3. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
4. Shri H.K. Dua
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
6. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
7. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
10. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
11. Shri P.T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health and Family Welfare)
1. Shri Keshav Desiraju, Secretary
2. Ms. Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Udaya Kumara, Additional Legislative Counsel
NIMHANS, Bengaluru
Dr. Satish Chandra, Director
37

38
*** Relates to other matter.
Indian Law Society, Pune
1. Dr. Soumitra Pathare, Co-ordinator
2. Dr. Jaya Sagade, Vice Principal
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them
of the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear the views of the Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013; ** *
II. ***
3. * * *
4. ***
III. Oral evidence on  the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013
3. The Committee then heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family
Welfare along with other representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of
Law and Justice (Legislative Department), NIMHANS, Bengaluru and Indian Law Society, Pune on
the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013. The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare made
a power-point presentation. During the course of power-point presentation, the Secretary
highlighted certain inadequacies from which the Mental Health Act, 1987 suffers which necessitated
bringing up of the present bill. For example, the Mental Health Act, 1987 is no different from the
Indian Lunacy Act, 1912 and views persons with Mental illness as dangerous and needing
institutionalization; it is open to abuse as its sections 19 and 20 give tremendous powers to families
and professionals of the mentally sick person; there is no process of appeal and review of
involuntary admissions; it mixes health care and social care issues; it is not in line with the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities which was ratified by India on
1
st October, 2007. The said Act also has no provision for specific protection for rights of persons
with mental illness when receiving care and treatment from mental health services etc. The
Secretary, informed that the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013 aims at rectifying the shortcomings of
the MHA, 1987. Highlighting the essential features of the Bill, the Secretary pointed out that the
Bill makes provisions for Central and State Mental Health Authorities; advance directive; nominated
representative, right to live in the community; right to access to mental health care; right to
protection from cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment; addressing the needs of families, care-
givers and homeless mentally ill persons. He further stated that the Bill also makes voluntary
admission to hospital the norm and supported admission only in exceptional cases. The Bill provides
for a Mental Health Review Commission, a quasi-judicial body which will review all the cases of
involuntary admission. The Bill, proposes to decriminalize attempt to suicide and distinguishes
between mental illness and mental disability and proposes for separate laws to cover disability and
health issues.
4. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries viz.  percentage of mentally ill people
undiagnosed and not receiving treatment; steps taken for advanced research in genetics to identify
factors responsible for suicide; problem of lack of mental health care and isolating health care
issues from social issues; the extent to which the Bill address the national problem of mental health
care; actual number of hospitals providing mental health care, number of doctors in this field
vis-à-vis their requirement; social workers involved; condition of female mentally ill patients; cases of

39
property disputes linked with mentally ill persons; criminal cases involved with such patients; role
of doctors, law and governance; census of mentally ill persons; dignity of mentally ill people; the
status of the report of the study headed by Shrimati Kapila Hingorani under the direction of the
Supreme Court; etc. Some of the queries were answered. The Chairman directed the witnesses to
send comprehensive written replies to the queries which remained unanswered, within a week’s
time.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.

40
II
SECOND MEETING
 (2013-14)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 16 th September, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Harin Pathak — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Raj Kumar Dhoot
3. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
8. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
9. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
10. Dr. Monazir Hassan
11. Dr. Tarun Mandal
12. Dr. Mahabal Mishra
13. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
14. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
15. Dr.  Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Indian Psychiatry Society(IPS)
1. Dr. Indira Sharma, President, IPS and Professor, Institute of Medical Sciences,
Banaras Hindu University
2. Dr. T.V Asokan, President Elect, IPS
40

41
3. Dr. B.S. Chavan, Chairman, Task Force on Mental Health Legislation, IPS
4. Dr. T.S. Satyanarain Rao, Editor in Chief, Indian Journal of  Psychiatry, IPS
5. Dr. Dinesh Kataria, Convenor, Task Force on Mental Health Legislation, IPS
II. Lokopriya Gopinath Bordoloi Regional Institute of Mental Health, Assam
Dr. S.K. Deuri, Director
I. Opening Remarks
2. Shri Harin Pathak, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them that due to certain
urgent work, the Chairman could not attend the meeting. The Committee, elected Shri Pathak to
preside over the meeting. He apprised Members about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the
views of the stakeholders/experts on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013.
3. * * *
4. The Committee decided that (i) Press Release may be issued on *      *        *  and
(ii) permission of the Hon’ble Chairman may be sought to seek written comments of the State
Governments/Union Territories and if necessary to hear the views of representatives of State
Governments/UTs on (a) The Mental Health Care Bill, 2013,  * * * .
5. * * *
II. Oral evidence on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013
6. The Committee then heard the views of Dr. Indira Sharma, President, Indian Psychiatry
Society (IPS) on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013 along with fellows of Indian Psychiatry.
Dr. Sharma submitted before the Committee that as the Head of Indian Psychiatry Society she was
against the enactment of the said Bill in its present form. Delineating the reasons for the same, she
stated that the said Bill had been drafted without taking into consideration the viewpoint of Indian
Psychiatry Society (IPS). She stated that though the society is a conglomeration of 5000 Members,
it had been ignored while drafting the Bill. She was of the view that the concepts incorporated in
the Bill like use of terms Advance Directive, nominated representatives, Mental Health Review
Commissions and Boards instead of focusing on treatment of persons with mental illness with the
consent of deemed nominated representatives, usually being the legal guardian of the patient;
making willingness of the patient mandatory for availing treatment are alien to Indian Culture,
which would be dangerous for the patient as well as his near and dear ones. She emphasized
focusing on the family model treatment in which the family Members would be in a position to
give consent on the need for subjecting a patient to psychiatric treatment. Dr B.S Chavan,
Chairman, submitted that the concept of parents of child having to take permission of Mental
Health Review Commission for treatment of mental illness was dehumanizing for the parents and
the child in question. Dr. T.V . Asokan was of the view that the concept of nominated representative
would lead to a tussle between the family of the person suffering from Mental illness and the
nominated representative who may not be a blood relation of the person suffering from mental
illness and such nominated representative could misuse the said provision for usurping the property
or deriving other benefits which would devolve upon the person suffering from mental illness. Dr.
T.S.S. Rao was of the view that the said Bill treats Psychiatric diseases as a stigma which was
not good from the patients’ as well as from doctor’s point of view. Dr. Dinesh Kataria was of
the view that the provisions of the said Bill would lead to the exodus of doctors studying
Psychiatry in India to foreign shores.
*** Relates to other matter.

42
7. The Committee then heard views of Dr. S.K. Deuri, Director, Lokopriya Gopinath Bordoloi
Regional Institute of Mental Health, Assam on the said Bill. While supporting the stand of the IPS
on the said Bill he submitted certain other points which were lacking in the Bill viz. entry point
for treatment given but the Bill is silent on the procedure for exit of patients after availing
treatment; rehabilitation of the treated and recovered patients. He also raised the issues like
criminals being sent to Mental Institutions without availability or otherwise of beds in such
institutions; no proper definition of psychiatric nurse/psychiatric social worker; regressive provision
for transportation of patient from one State to another which would not be in the interest of the
patient.
8. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries viz. reasons for exclusion of professionals from
the Mental Health Review Commissions and Boards; lack of safeguards in the form of declaring
criminals as persons with mental illness and using them for criminal activities; treatment of patients
with mental illness by means of ECT without resorting to anesthesia, etc. The representatives
responded to some queries. The Chairman requested the witnesses to send written comments on
the points not answered orally.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 4.25 
P.M.

43
IV
FOURTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 04 th October, 2013 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Harin Pathak — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
3. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Kirti Azad
5. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
6. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
7. Dr. Monazir Hassan
8. Dr. Tarun Mandal
9. Shri Mahabal Mishra
10. Shri Ramkishun
11. Shri P.T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Department of Psychiatry, AIIMS
1. Dr. Sudhir K. Khandelwal, Professor, Department of Psychiatry, AIIMS
2. Dr. Rakesh Chadda, Professor, Department of Psychiatry, AIIMS
3. Dr. Pratap Sharan, Professor, Department of Psychiatry, AIIMS
II. Schizophrenia Awareness Association, Maharashtra
Shri Amrit Kumar Bakshy, President
III. Action for Mental Illness, Bangalore
Dr. Nirmala Srinivasan, Director
43

44
IV. Whole Mind India Foundation, Pune
Shri Akhileshwar Sahay
V . The Banyan Centre, Chennai
Ms. Vandana Gopikumar
VI. ** *
VII. ** *
VIII. ** *
IX. Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Ms. Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary
***
X. Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Dr.  G.N. Raju, Joint Secretary
I. Opening Remarks
2. Shri Harin Pathak, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them that due to certain
urgent work, the Chairman could not attend the meeting. The Committee, elected Shri Pathak to
preside over the meeting. He apprised Members about the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear views
of (a) Dr. Sudhir K. Khandelwal, Professor of Psychiatry, AIIMS, New Delhi; (b) Shri Amrit
Kumar Bakshy, President, Schizophrenia Awareness Association, Maharashtra; (c) Dr. Nirmala
Srinivasan, Director, Action for Mental Illness, Bangalore; (d) Shri Akhileshwar Sahay, Whole Mind
India Formulation, Pune; and (e) Ms. Vandana Gopikumar,The Banyan Centre, Chennai on the
Mental Health Care Bill, 2013; and *  * *
II. Oral evidence on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013
3. The Committee then heard the views of Dr. Sudhir K. Khandelwal, Professor of Psychiatry,
AIIMS, New Delhi. Dr. Khandelwal gave a brief account on the need for introduction of the Mental
Health Care Bill, 2013 as the previous Act (known as The Mental Health Act, 1987) had over the
years become inconsistent with the developments taking place in the domain of Mental Health both
nationally and in the international arena. He felt that though the Bill had addressed certain other
concerns, there were certain concerns which needed to be addressed viz. high level of qualification
needed to qualify as a clinical psychiatrists would act as a dampener as manpower needed to
qualify for the post of clinical psychiatrists would be difficult to find in practice; number of
clauses in the ‘advance directive’ would make it a difficult and lengthy process to actually
implement the said directive in practice; need for exemption in the provisions of the said Bill for
the purpose of admission and discharge of mentally ill persons in General Psychiatric care unit of
the General Hospital. He further state that the Bill should focus on governance and not the
treatment aspect and unmodified ECT treatment should be exempted from ban under this Bill, etc.
Dr. Nirmala Srinivasan, Director, Action for Mental Illness, Bangalore supported the Bill but opined
that the Bill needed to be nuanced in certain terms viz. proper definition of family care giver needed
to be included in the Bill; need to make family of the affected person inclusive in the said Bill; need
for more broader role for nominated representative in the said Bill; need to include safeguards in
the Right to manage property of the affected person; etc. Shri Amrit Kumar Bakshy, President,
Schizophrenia Awareness Association, Maharashtra submitted the following points viz. need for a
*** Relates to other matter.

45
complete ban on modified ECT; need to include the definition of family care giver in the said Bill;
need to include provision of one or more Nominated representative with hierarchy in the Advance
Directive clause, etc. Ms. Vandana Gopikumar ,The Banyan Centre, Chennai, submitted before the
Committee that she was in favour of the Bill in the present form. However she suggested that the
following points needed consideration of the Committee viz. need to reframe clause 124 of the
Bill; need to include Primary Health Centres (PHCs) under the ambit of the said Bill, etc.
Shri Akhileshwar Sahay, Pune submitted that he was a bipolar patient and undergoing psychiatric
treatment for the same in AIIMS and was completely in favour of the present Bill. He felt that the
present Bill should be passed by the Parliament into an Act and whatever infirmities which were
presently in the said Bill can always be taken care of in the coming times by way of an amendment
to the present Bill after it was passed. He was also thankful that the provision which decriminalized
‘suicide’ had become a part of the said Bill. Thereafter, members raised certain queries on the said
Bill. The Chair directed the witnesses to furnish comprehensive written replies to the queries which
remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
II. Oral evidence on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
4. * * *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee adjourned at 5.20 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

46
V
FIFTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Friday, the 11 th October, 2013 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Harin Pathak — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
3. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Kirti Azad
5. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
6. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
7. Dr. Monazir Hassan
8. Dr. Tarun Mandal
9. Shri Mahabal Mishra
10. Shri Ramkishun
11. Shri P.T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. ** *
II. National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru
1. Dr. P. Satishchandra, Vice-Chancellor
2. Prof. S.K. Chaturvedi, Professor of Psychiatry
III. W orld Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland
Dr. Shekhar Saxena, Director, Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse
46
*** Relates to other matter.

47
*** Relates to other matter.
IV. Public Health Foundation of India, New Delhi
1. Prof. Vikram Patel
2. Dr. Rahul Shidhaye
V . Department of Health and Family Welfare
** *
2. Shrimati Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary, Welfare
VI. Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Udaya Kumara, Addl. Legislative Counsel
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
I. Opening Remarks
2. Shri Harin Pathak, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them that due to certain
urgent work, the Chairman could not attend the meeting. The Committee, elected Shri Pathak to
preside over the meeting. He apprised Members about the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear views
of * *    *  (a) Dr. P. Satishchandra, Vice-Chancellor, National Institute of Mental Health and
Neuro Sciences  (NIMHANS), Banglore; (b) Dr. Shekhar Saxena, Director, Department of Mental
Health and Substance Abuse, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland; and (c) Prof. Vikram
Patel, Public Health Foundation of India, New Delhi on  the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013.
II. ***
III. Oral evidence on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013
4. The Committee then heard the views of Dr. Shekhar Saxena, Director, Department of
Mental Health and Substance Abuse, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. Dr Saxena
delineated the following points on the said Bill: (i) the present Bill made emphasis on the quality
aspect and encouraged transparency in the field of Mental Health unlike previous Acts in the field
of Mental health (ii) laid emphasis on ECT treatment not to be given to children; (iii) the terms
‘Advance Directive’ and ‘Nominated Representative’ was in line with the United NUNCRPD.
Dr. Vikram Patel from the Pubic Health Foundation of India (PHFI) supported the Bill and stated
that the proposed Bill is a vast improvement over the last enactment in 1987. He mad the following
points in his support of the Bill: (i) Constitution of Mental Health Review Board in the districts
under Section 80 of Chapter XI is a key step to safeguard the rights of persons with mental health
conditions; (ii) sufficient safeguards in regard to the provisions ‘Advance Directive’ and
‘Nominated Representative’ (iii) unlike previous legislation where the entire onus to protect the
rights of the individual with mental condition was on the magistrate, the new Bill places this
responsibility on a five member district board on which it would to mandatory to have a
psychiatrist on board to review the clinical status of patient and the psychiatrist has a major
decision making powers in the functioning of the board, etc. Dr. P. Satishchandra, Vice-Chancellor,
National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru, lineated on the
brief history of the Acts enacted in the field of mental health and the need for introduction of the
present Bill. He also submitted the following points: (i) need to exclude general hospitals from the
licensing procedure under the definition of ‘Mental Health Establishment’ in the Bill; (ii) need to

48
exclude people with alcohol and substance users (who do not have substance induced mental illness
and mental retardation/intellectual disability in the definition of “Mental Ilness”; (iii) Electro
Conculsive Therapy should be done under Anaesthesia always; (iv) Need to have State Mental
Health Commission (SHMC) in each State and Union Territories and the said commission will be
formed in consultation with Central Mental Health Commission and the State. The Mental Health
Boards will be constituted by the SHMC after assessing the needs, etc. He also delineated that the
following rights need to be enlisted in the Bill: (a) Mental illness should not be a ground for
divorce;(b) disability due to mental illness is usually ignored or discriminated. Mental disability need
to be considered on par with physical disability for all disability benefits; (c) all general
hospitas(public and private) shall not refuse emergency psychiatry treatment. Thereafter, members
raised certain queries on the said Bill. The Chair directed the witnesses to furnish comprehensive
written replies to the queries which remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee adjourned at 3.20 
P.M.

49
VI
SIXTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 21 st October, 2013 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati B. Jayashree
3. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
4. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
5. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
6. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
8. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
9. Dr. Monazir Hassan
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
11. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
12. Dr. Tarun Mandal
13. Shri Mahabal Mishra
14. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
15. Shri Harin Pathak
16. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
(i) * * *
(ii) * * *
49
*** Relates to other matter.

50
(iii) Prof. Amita Dhanda, Professor and Head, Centre for Disabilities Studies, NALSAR
University of Law, Hyderabad.
(iv) * * *
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Representatives from Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shrimati Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary,
2. *  * *
Ministry of Law and Justice
Representative from Legislative Department
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
Representative from Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them
about the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear the views of *  *  *  Prof. Amita Dhanda, Professor
and Head, Centre for Disabilities Studies, NALSAR University of Law, Hyderabad *   *  * on
the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013.
II. Oral Evidence on the * * *Mental Health Care Bill, 2013.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. Prof. Amita Dhanda, Professor and Head, Centre for Disabilities Studies, NALSAR
University of Law, Hyderabad welcomed the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013. However, she was of
the view that the said Bill was not in harmony with the United Nations Convention on Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) in letter and spirit and was in infringement of Part III of the
Constitution. The said Bill gives no power to the affected person to seek exit from the institution
if he was not satisfied with the treatment. The Bill is also silent on the right of the affected person
to live independently and there was a need to bring an amendment to the proposed legislation in
this regard. Further there was a need to relook clause 124 which says that all persons who attempt
to commit suicide are presumed to be suffering from mental illness unless proved otherwise.
Further there was a need to relook at clause 114(2) of the Bill in which “proof of Mental Illness”
obtained from a Board would suffice for obtaining ‘divorce’ which is not fair to convert a legal
dispute into a medical dispute. Therefore, there was a need to delete this provision.
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 4.50 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

51
IX
NINTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 01 st November, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
3. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Kirti Azad
5. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
6. Dr. Monazir Hassan
7. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
8. Dr. Tarun Mandal
9. Shri Ramkishun
10. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
11. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
(I) Representatives from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(i) Shri Keshav Desiraju, Secretary
(ii) Ms. Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary
(II) Representative from Legislative Department
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
(III) Representative from Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
51

52
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them
of the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear  the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
in connection with the Clause-by-Clause consideration of the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013.
II. Oral evidence on Mental Health Care Bill, 2013
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the  Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013. He submitted Department’s clarifications in
the light of the points for discussion and supplementary points on the apprehensions raised by
Members on the said points. He informed that the Department regarded the said Bill as a rights
based legislation which gives primacy to the rights of persons with illness with the awareness that
such rights place obligations on the Government and further these rights might clash with the
perceived notions of the rights of persons with mental illness. The Bill seeks to protect and
enhance the rights of persons with illness over the perceived rights of families and caregivers.
Further United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD), to which
India was a signatory was the starting point of the process which culminated in the introduction
of the said Bill in the Parliament. He also stated that the contention that the said Bill equates Mental
Illness with disability was not true and the present Bill was based on the assumption that persons
enjoy full capacity at all times except in situations to be specified. On the issue of Advance
Directive(AD), he submitted that it was not a compulsory provision and had inbuilt safeguards like
AD was to be registered with the District Board , though in the interest of person with illness,
an AD which had not followed the procedure could be held valid by the relevant Board. Likewise,
the provision of Nominated Representative (NR) was a safeguard to protect the rights of the person
with illness but only with reference to health care issues. NR could be changed by the person
concerned at any time or challenged before a District Board which had the authority to change the
NR if the NR was not acting in the best interests of the person. On the issue of Electro Convulsive
Therapy (ECT), it was submitted that the Bill did not ban ECT given with anesthesia and with
proper safeguards. Further the Bill ensures greater responsibility on the Government to put in place
a protocol where without institutionalization, persons with illness were still able to receive the kind
of support that they may require, even in the absence of their caregivers, in order to lead a regular
life. The Secretary admitted that Section 124 of the Bill which regarded that any person who
attempted suicide was suffering from mental illness and given appropriate treatment was
stigmatizing and therefore an amendment to this effect has been proposed which the Department
feels would be appropriate. Finally, the Secretary stated that the Government saw in the Mental
Health Care Bill, 2013, possibility of establishing a strong and robust legal backing to a protocol
of treatment and care that would assure persons with mental illness of their rights not only to their
personal dignity and liberty but also to appropriate health care and to the possibility of a life which
is both wholesome and worthwhile.
4. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries on the said Bill. The Chairman directed the
Health Secretary to furnish comprehensive written replies to the queries which remained
unanswered, within three days time.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee adjourned at 11.50 
A.M.

53
X
TENTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday the 11 th November, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati B. Jayashree
3. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
6. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Kirti Azad
8. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
9. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
10. Dr. Tarun Mandal
11. Shri Mahabal Mishra
12. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
13. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
14. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy,  Committee Officer
II . Opening Remarks
2. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, at the outset, welcomed Members of the Committee and informed them
that due to certain urgent work, the Chairman could not attend the meeting. The Committee,
elected Shri Jaiswal to preside over the meeting. He then apprised the Members about the agenda
of the meeting, i.e., to consider and adopt draft Reports on *   *   * (ii) the Mental Health Care
Bill, 2013.
53
*** Relates to other matter.

54
III. Adoption of the Draft Reports on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
and the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the draft Seventy-third and Seventy-fourth
Reports. The Chairman invited Members to share their specific suggestions, if any, for
incorporation in the Draft Reports on * * * the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013.
** *
4. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft Report on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013.
After some discussions, the Committee adopted the Report on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013
with some minor modifications in respect of clause 81(c) relating to composition of Board.
IV. ***
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.10 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

55
ANNEXURES

57
ANNEXURE-I
26
 Aug AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
9 AUG., 2013
Bill No. LIV of 2013
THE MENTAL HEALTH CARE BILL, 2013
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
MENTAL ILLNESS  AND CAPACITY TO MAKE MENTAL HEALTH CARE AND TREATMENT DECISIONS
3. Determination of mental illness.
4. Capacity to make mental health care and treatment decisions.
CHAPTER III
ADV ANCE DIRECTIVE
5. Advance directive.
6. Manner of making advance directive.
7. Maintenance of online register.
8. Revocation, amendment or cancellation of advance directive.
9. Advance directive not to apply to emergency treatment.
10. Duty to follow advance directive.
11. Power to review, alter, modify or cancel advance directive.
12. Review of advance directives.
13. Liability of medical health professional in relation to advance directive.
CHAPTER IV
N
OMINATED  REPRESENTATIVE
14. Appointment and revocation of nominated representative.
15. Nominated representative of minor.
16. Revocation, alteration, etc., of nominated representative by Board.
17. Duties of nominated representative.
CHAPTER V
RIGHTS  OF PERSONS  WITH MENTAL ILLNESS
18. Right to access mental health care.
19. Right to community living.

58
CLAUSES
20. Right to protection from cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment.
21. Right to equality and non-discrimination.
22. Right to information.
23. Right to confidentiality.
24. Restriction on release of information in respect of mental illness.
25. Right to access medical records.
26. Right to personal contacts and communication.
27. Right to legal aid.
28. Right to make complaints about deficiencies in provision of services.
CHAPTER VI
D
UTIES  OF APPROPRIATE  GOVERNMENT
29. Promotion of mental health and preventive programmes.
30. Creating awareness about mental health and illness and reducing stigma associated
with mental illness.
31. Appropriate Government to take measures as regard to human resource development
and training, etc.
32. Co-ordination within appropriate Government.
CHAPTER VII
CENTRAL  MENTAL HEALTH AUTHORITY
33. Establishment of Central Authority.
34. Composition of Central Authority.
35. Term of office, salaries and allowances of chairperson and members.
36. Resignation.
37. Filling of vacancies.
38. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Central Authority.
39. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases.
40. Officers and other employees of Central Authority.
41. Functions of chief executive officer of Central Authority.
42. Transfer of assets, liabilities of Central Authority.
43. Functions of Central Authority.
44. Meetings of Central Authority.
CHAPTER VIII
S
TATE MENTAL HEALTH AUTHORITY
45. Establishment of State Authority.
46. Composition of State Authority.
47. Term of office, salaries and allowances of chairperson and other members.
48. Resignation.
49. Filling of vacancies.
50. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of State Authority.
51. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases.
52. Officers and other employees of State Authority.
53. Functions of chief executive officer of State Authority.

59
CLAUSES
54. Transfer of assets, liabilities of State Authority.
55. Functions of State Authority.
56. Meetings of State Authority.
CHAPTER IX
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
57. Grants by Central Government to Central Authority.
58. Central Mental Health Authority Fund.
59. Accounts and audit of Central Authority.
60. Annual report of Central Authority.
61. Grants by State Government.
62. State Mental Health Authority Fund.
63. Accounts and audit of State Authority.
64. Annual report of State Authority.
CHAPTER X
M
ENTAL HEALTH  ESTABLISHMENTS
65. Registration of mental health establishment.
66. Procedure for registration, inspection and inquiry of mental health establishments.
67. Audit of mental health establishment.
68. Inspection and inquiry.
69. Appeal to High Court against order of Authority.
70. Certificates, fees and register of mental health establishments.
71. Maintenance of register of mental health establishment in digital format.
72. Duty of mental health establishment to display information.
CHAPTER XI
M
ENTAL HEALTH REVIEW  COMMISSION
73. Constitution of Mental Health Review Commission
74. Composition of Commission.
75. Qualifications for appointment of president and members of Commission.
76. Selection Committee.
77. Term of office, salaries and allowances of president and other members.
78. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission.
79. Staff of Commission.
80. Constitution of Mental Health Review Boards.
81. Composition of Board.
82. Disqualification and removal.
83. Terms and conditions of service of chairperson and members of Board.
84. Decisions of Commission and Board.
85. Applications to Board.
86. Proceedings before Commission and Board to be judicial proceedings.
87. Meetings.

60
CLAUSES
88. Proceedings before Board.
89. Powers and functions of Commission.
90. Commission to appoint Expert Committee to prepare guidance document.
91. Powers and functions of Board.
92. Appeal to High Court against order of Commission or Board.
93. Grants by Central Government to Commission.
CHAPTER XII
A
DMISSION , TREATMENT  AND DISCHARGE
94. Admission of person with mental illness as independent patient in mental health establishment.
95. Independent admission and treatment.
96. Admission of minor.
97. Discharge of independent patients.
98. Admission and treatment of persons with mental illness, with high support needs, in
mental health establishment, up to thirty days (supported admission).
99. Admission and treatment of persons with mental illness, with high support needs, in
mental health establishment, beyond thirty days (supported admission beyond thirty
days).
100. Leave of absence.
101. Absence without leave or discharge.
102. Transfer of persons with mental illness from one mental health establishment to
another mental health establishment.
103. Emergency treatment.
104. Prohibited procedures.
105. Restriction on psychosurgery for persons with mental illness.
106. Restraints and seclusion.
107. Discharge planning.
108. Research.
CHAPTER XIII
R
ESPONSIBILITIES  OF OTHER  AGENCIES
109. Duties of Police officers in respect of persons with mental illness.
110. Report to Magistrate of person with mental illness in private residence who is ill-
treated or neglected.
111. Conveying or admitting person with mental illness to mental health establishment by
Magistrate.
112. Prisoners with mental illness.
113. Persons in custodial institutions.
114. Question of mental illness in judicial process.
CHAPTER XIV
R
ESTRICTION  TO DISCHARGE  FUNCTIONS  BY PROFESSIONALS  NOT COVERED  BY PROFESSION
115. Restriction to discharge functions by professionals not covered by profession.

61
CHAPTER XV
OFFENCES  AND PENALTIES
CLAUSES
116. Penalties for establishing or maintaining mental health establishment in contravention
of provisions of this Act.
117. Punishment for contravention of provisions of the Act or rules or regulations made
thereunder.
118. Offences by companies.
CHAPTER XVI
MISCELLANEOUS
119. Power to call for information.
120. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
121. Power of Central Government to supersede Central Authority.
122. Power of State Government to supersede State Authority.
123. Special provisions for States in north east and hill States.
124. Presumption of mental illness in case of attempt to commit suicide by person.
125. Bar of jurisdiction.
126. Transitory provisions.
127. Chairperson, members and staff of Authority, Commission and Board to be public
servants.
128. Protection of action taken in good faith.
129. Act to have overriding effect.
130. Power to make rules.
131. Power of Central Authority to make regulations.
132. Power of Commission to make regulations.
133. Power of State Authority to make regulations.
134. Laying of rules and regulations.
135. Power to remove difficulties.
136. Repeal and saving.

AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
07 May, 2012
Bill No. LIV of 2013
THE MENTAL HEALTH CARE BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for mental health care and services for persons with
mental illness and to protect, promote and fulfil the rights of
such persons during delivery of mental health care and
services and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
W
HEREAS  the Convention on Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and its Optional Protocol was adopted on the 13th
December, 2006 at United Nations Headq uarters in New York and
came into force on the 3rd May, 2008;
A
ND WHEREAS India has signed and ratified the said Convention
on the 1st day of October, 2007;
AND WHEREAS  it is necessary to align and harmonise the
existing laws with the said Convention.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mental Health Care Act, 2013.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
63
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

64
(3) The provisions of this Act, except the provisions of sections
33, 45 and 73, shall come into force within a period of three months
from the date on which it receives the assent of the President.
(4) The provisions of sections 33, 45 and 73 shall come into
force within a period of nine months from the date on which it
receives the assent of the President.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(a) “advance directive” means an advance directive
made by a person under section 5;
(b) “appropriate Government” means,––
(i) in relation to a mental health establishment
established, owned or controlled by the Central
Government or the Administrator of a Union territory
having no legislature, the Central Government;
(ii) in relation to a mental health establishment,
other than an establishment referred to in sub-
clause ( i), established, owned or controlled within the
territory of—
(A) a State, the State Government;
(B) a Union territory having legislature, the
Government of that Union territory;
(c) “Board” means the Mental Health Review Board
constituted by the Commission under sub-section ( 1) of
section 80;
(d) “care-giver ” means a person who resides with a
person with mental illness and is responsible for providing
care to that person and includes a relative or any other person
who performs this function, either free or with remuneration;
(e) “Central Authority” means the Central Mental Health
Authority constituted under section 33;
(f) “clinical psychologist” means a person––
(i) having a recognised qualification in Clinical
Psychology from an institution approved and recognised,
by the Rehabilitation Council of India, constituted under
section 3 of the Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992;
or
(ii) having a Post Graduate degree in Psychology
or Applied Psychology and a Master of Philosophy in
Clinical Psychology or medical and social psychology
or Masters of Philosophy in mental health and social
psychology obtained after completion of a full time
course of two years which includes supervised clinical
training or doctorate in clinical psychology which
includes supervised clinical training,
Definitions.
34 of 1992.

65
from any university recognised by the University Grants
Commission established under the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956;
(g) “Commission” means the Mental Health Review
Commission constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 73;
(h) “family” means a group of persons related by blood,
adoption or marriage;
(i) “informed consent ” means consent given for a
specific intervention, without any force, undue influence,
fraud, threat, mistake or misrepresentation, and obtained after
disclosing to a person adequate information including risks
and benefits of, and alternatives to, the specific intervention in
a language and manner understood by the person;
(j) “least restrictive alternative” or “least restrictive
environment” or “less restrictive option” means offering an
option for treatment or a setting for treatment which––
(i) meets the person’s treatment needs; and
(ii) imposes the least restriction on the person’s
rights;
(k) “local authority” means a Municipal Corporation or
Municipal Council, or Zilla Parishad, or Nagar Panchayat, or
Panchayat, by whatever name called, and includes such other
authority or body having administrative control over the
mental health establishment or empowered under any law for
the time being in force, to function as a local authority in any
city or town or village;
(l) “Magistrate” means––
(i) in relation to a metropolitan area within the
meaning of clause ( k) of section 2 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, a Metropolitan Magistrate;
(ii) in relation to any other area, the Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Sub-divisional Judicial Magistrate or
such other Judicial Magistrate of the first class as the
State Government may, by notification, empower to
perform the functions of a Magistrate under this Act;
(m) “medical officer in charge” in relation to any mental
health establishment means the psychiatrist or medical
practitioner who, for the time being, is in charge of that
mental health establishment;
(n) “medical practitioner” means a person who possesses
a recognised medical qualification––
(i) as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, and whose name has
been entered in the State Medical Register, as defined in
clause ( k) of that section; or
3 of 1956.
2 of 1974.
102 of 1956.

66
(ii) as defined in clause ( h) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 2 of the Indian Medicine Central Council
Act, 1970, and whose name has been entered in a State
Register of Indian Medicine, as defined in clause ( j) of
sub-section ( 1) of that section; or
(iii) as defined in clause ( g) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 2 of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973,
and whose name has been entered in a State Register of
Homeopathy, as defined in clause ( i) of sub-section ( 1)
of that section;
(o) “mental health establishment” means any health
establishment, including Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy,
Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy establishment, by whatever
name called, either wholly or partly, meant for the care of
persons with mental illness, established, owned, controlled or
maintained by the appropriate Government, local authority,
trust, whether private or public, corporation, co-operative
society, organisation or any other entity or person, where
persons with mental illness are admitted and reside at, or kept
in, for care, treatment, convalescence and rehabilitation, either
temporarily or otherwise; and includes any general hospital or
general nursing home established or maintained by the
appropriate Government, local authority, trust, whether private
or public, corporation, co-operative society, organisation or
any other entity or person; but does not include a family
residential place where a person with mental illness resides
with his relatives or friends;
(p) “mental health nurse” means a person with a
diploma or degree in general nursing or diploma or degree in
psychiatric nursing recognised by the Nursing Council of
India established under the Nursing Council of India
Act, 1947 and registered as such with the relevant nursing
council in the State;
(q) “mental health professional” means—
(i) a psychiatrist as defined in clause ( x); or
(ii) a professional registered with the concerned
State Authority under section 55; or
(iii) a professional with Doctorate of Medicine
(Ayurveda) in ‘Mano Vigyan Avum Manas Roga’ or
Doctorate of Medicine (Homoeopathy) in psychiatry;
(r) “mental illness” means a substantial disorder of
thinking, mood, perception, orientation or memory that
grossly impairs judgment, behaviour, capacity to recognise
reality or ability to meet the ordinary demands of life, mental
conditions associated with the abuse of alcohol and drugs, but
38 of 1947.
48 of 1970.
59 of 1973.

67
does not include mental retardation which is a condition of
arrested or incomplete development of mind of a person,
specially characterised by subnormality of intelligence;
(s) “minor” means a person who has not completed the
age of eighteen years;
(t) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette and the expression “notify” shall be construed
accordingly;
(u) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(v) “prisoner with mental illness” means a person with
mental illness who is an under-trial or convicted of an offence
and detained in a jail or prison;
(w) “psychiatric social worker” means a person having
post-graduate degree awarded after completion of course of
study of minimum two year s in mental health or psychiatric
social work, or doctorate in mental health or psychiatric
social work, from an university recognised by the University
Grants Commission established under the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956;
(x) “psychiatrist” means a medical practitioner
possessing a post-graduate degree or diploma in psychiatry
awarded by an university recognised by the University Grants
Commission established under the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956 , or awarded or recognised by the
National Board of Examinations and included in the First
Schedule of Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 , or recognised
by the Medical Council of India, constituted under the Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956 , and includes, in relation to any
State, any medical officer who having regard to his
knowledge and experience in psychiatry, has been declared by
the Government of that State to be a psychiatrist for the
purposes of this Act;
(y) “regulations” means regulations made under this Act;
(z) “relative” means any person related to the person
with mental illness by blood, marriage or adoption;
(za) “State Authority” means the State Mental Health
Authority established under section 45.
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this
Act but defined in the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 or the
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 and not inconsistent with
this Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in
those Acts.
3 of 1956.
3 of 1956.
102 of 1956.
102 of 1956.
48 of 1970.

68
CHAPTER II
MENTAL ILLNESS AND CAPACITY TO MAKE MENTAL HEALTH CARE AND
TREATMENT  DECISIONS
3. ( 1) Mental illness shall be determined in accordance with
such nationally or internationally accepted medical standards
(including the latest edition of the International Classification of
Disease of the World Health Organisation) as may be notified by the
Central Government.
(2) No person or authority shall classify a person as a person
with mental illness, except for purposes directly relating to the
treatment of the mental illness or in other matters as covered under
this Act or any other law for the time being in force.
(3) Mental illness of a person shall not be determined on the
basis of,––
(a) political, economic or social status or membership
of a cultural, racial or religious group, or for any other reason
not directly relevant to mental health status of the person;
(b) non-conformity with moral, social, cultural, work
or political values or religious beliefs prevailing in a person’s
community.
(4) Past treatment or hospitalisation in a mental health
establishment though relevant, shall not by itself justify any present
or future determination of the person’s mental illness.
(5) The determination of a person’s mental illness shall alone
not imply or be taken to mean that the person is of unsound mind
unless he has been declared as such by a competent court.
4. ( 1) Every person, including a person with mental illness
shall be deemed to have capacity to make decisions regarding his
mental health care or treatment, if such person has ability to,––
(a) understand the information relevant to the mental
health care or treatment decision;
(b) retain that information;
(c) use or weigh that information as part of the process
of making the mental health care or treatment decision; and
(d) communicate his decision by any means (including
talking, using sign language or any other means).
(2) The information referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be
given to a person using simple language, which such person
understands or in sign language or visual aids or any other means
to enable him to understand the information.
Determination
of mental
illness.
Capacity to
make mental
health care
and treatment
decisions.

69
(3) Where a person makes a decision regarding his mental
health care or treatment which is perceived by others as
inappropriate or wrong, that by itself, shall not mean that the person
does not have the capacity to make mental health care or treatment
decision, so long as the person has the capacity to make mental
health care or treatment decision under sub-section( 1).
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, the expression
“information relevant to the mental health care or treatment
decision” means information about the consequences of making the
decision and information about the consequences of not making the
decision.
CHAPTER III
A
DV ANCE D IRECTIVE
5. (1) Every person, who is not a minor, shall have a right
to make an advance directive in writing, specifying any or all of the
following, namely:––
(a) the way the person wishes to be cared for and
treated for a mental illness;
(b) the way the person wishes not to be cared for and
treated for a mental illness;
(c) the individual or individuals, in order of precedence,
he wants to appoint as his nominated representative as
provided under section 14.
(2) An advance directive under sub-section ( 1) may be made
by a person irrespective of his past mental illness or treatment for
the same.
(3) An advance directive made under sub-section ( 1), shall be
invoked only when such person ceases to have capacity to make
mental health care or treatment decisions and shall remain effective
until such person regains capacity to make mental health care or
treatment decisions.
(4) Any decision made by a person while he has the capacity
to make mental health care and treatment decisions shall over-ride
any previously written advance directive by such person.
(5) Any advance directive made contrary to any law for the
time being in force shall be ab initio void.
6. (1) An advance directive shall be made in writing on a plain
paper with the person’s signature or thumb impression on it and
attested by two witnesses and be,––
(a) registered with the Board in the district where the
person is ordinarily resident; or
Advance
directive.
Manner of
making advance
directive.

70
(b) signed by a medical practitioner certifying that the
person has capacity to make mental health care and treatment
decisions at the time of making the advance directive and that
the person has made the advance directive of his own free
will:
Provided that where the advance directive,––
(a) has been made in accordance with the procedure
laid down in this sub-section; and
(b) contains a refusal for all future medical treatment
for mental illness,
such advance directive shall be valid only after it has been submitted
to the relevant Board and the Board following a hearing, has
certified the validity of the advance directive:
Provided further that in case a person has written an advance
directive which has not been registered with the Board or signed by
a medical practitioner as referred to in the first proviso, the Board
may decide the validity of such advance directive as and when
required to do so.
(2) No fee shall be charged for registering the advance
directive with the concerned Board or signing by a medical
practitioner as required under sub-section ( 1).
7. Subject to the provisions contained in clause ( a) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 91 , every Board shall maintain an online
register of all advance directives registered with it and make them
available to the concerned mental health professionals as and when
required.
8. (1) An advance directive made under sub-section ( 1) of
section 6 may be revoked, amended or cancelled by the person who
made it at any time.
(2) The procedure for revoking, amending or cancelling an
advance directive shall be the same as for making an advance
directive under sub-section ( 1) of section 6.
9. The advance directive shall not apply to the emergency
treatment given under section 103 to a person who made the
advance directive.
10. It shall be the duty of every medical officer in charge of
a mental health establishment and the psychiatrist in charge of a
person’s treatment to propose or give treatment to a person with
mental illness, in accordance with his valid advance directive,
subject to section 11.
11. (1) Where a mental health professional or a relative or a
care-giver of a person desires not to follow an advance directive
while treating a person with mental illness, such mental health
Maintenance
of online
register.
Revocation,
amendment
or cancellation
of advance
directive.
Advance
directive not
to apply to
emergency
treatment.
Duty to follow
advance
directive.
Power to review,
alter, modify or
cancel advance
directive.

71
professional or the relative or the care-giver of the person may
make an application to the concerned Board to review, alter, modify
or cancel the advance directive.
(2) Upon receipt of the application under sub-section ( 1), the
Board may, after giving an opportunity of hearing to all concerned
parties (including the person whose advance directive is in
question), either uphold, modify, alter or cancel the advance
directive after taking into consideration the following, namely:––
(a) whether the advance directive was made by the
person out of his own free will and free from force, undue
influence or coercion; or
(b) whether the person intended the advance directive
to apply to the present circumstances, which may be different
from those anticipated; or
(c) whether the person was sufficiently well informed
to make the decision; or
(d) whether the person had capacity to make decisions
relating to his mental health care or treatment when such
advanced directive was made; or
(e) whether the content of the advance directive is
contrary to other laws or constitutional provisions.
(3) The person writing the advance directive and his
nominated representative shall have a duty to ensure that the medical
officer in charge of a mental health establishment or a medical
practitioner or a mental health professional, as the case may be, has
access to the advance directive when required.
(4) The legal guardian shall have right to make an advance
directive in writing in respect of a minor and all the provisions
relating to advance directive, mutatis mutandis , shall apply to such
minor till such time he attains majority.
12. ( 1) The Commission shall regularly and periodically
review the use of advance directives and make recommendations in
respect thereof.
(2) The Commission in its review under sub-section ( 1) shall
give specific consideration to the procedure for making an advance
directive and also examine whether the existing procedure protects
the rights of persons with mental illness.
(3) The Commission may modify the procedure for making an
advance directive or make additional regulations regarding the
procedure for advance directive to protect the rights of persons
with mental illness.
13. ( 1) A medical practitioner or a mental health professional
shall not be held liable for any unforeseen consequences on
following a valid advance directive.
Review of
advance
directives.
Liability of
medical health
professional in
relation to
advance directive.

72
(2) The medical practitioner or mental health professional shall
not be held liable for not following a valid advance directive, if he
has not been given a copy of the valid advance directive.
CHAPTER IV
N
OMINATED  REPRESENTA TIVE
14. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( c) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 5, every person who is not a minor, shall
have a right to appoint a nominated representative.
(2) The nomination under sub-section ( 1) shall be made in
writing on plain paper with the person’s signature or thumb
impression of the person referred to in that sub-section.
(3) The person appointed as the nominated representative shall
not be a minor, be competent to discharge the duties or perform the
functions assigned to him under this Act, and give his consent in
writing to the mental health professional to discharge his duties and
perform the functions assigned to him under this Act.
(4) Where no nominated representative is appointed by a
person under sub-section ( 1), the following persons for the
purposes of this Act in the order of precedence shall be deemed to
be the nominated representative of a person with mental illness,
namely:––
(a) the individual appointed as the nominated
representative in the advance directive under clause ( c) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 5 ; or
(b) a relative, or if not available or not willing to be the
nominated representative of such person; or
(c) a care-giver, or if not available or not willing to be
the nominated representative of such person; or
(d) a suitable person appointed as such by the
concerned Board; or
(e) if no such person is available to be appointed as a
nominated representative, the Board shall appoint the Director,
Department of Social Welfare, or his designated representative,
as the nominated representative of the person with mental
illness:
Provided that a person representing an organisation registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or any other law for the
time being in force, working for persons with mental illness, may
temporarily be engaged by the mental health professional to
discharge the duties of a nominated representative pending
appointment of a nominated representative by the concerned Board.
Appointment
and revocation
of nominated
representative.
21 of 1860.

73
(5) The representative of the organisation, referred to in the
proviso to sub-section ( 4), may make a written application to the
medical officer in charge of the mental health establishment or the
psychiatrist in charge of the person’s treatment, and such medical
officer or psychiatrist, as the case may be, shall accept him as the
temporary nominated representative, pending appointment of a
nominated representative by the concerned Board.
(6) A person who has appointed any person as his nominated
representative under this section may revoke or alter such
appointment at any time in accordance with the procedure laid down
for making an appointment of nominated representative under sub-
section ( 1).
(7) The Board may, if it is of the opinion that it is in the
interest of the person with mental illness to do so, revoke an
appointment made by it under this section, and appoint a different
representative under this section.
(8) The appointment of a nominated representative, or the
inability of a person with mental illness to appoint a nominated
representative, shall not be construed as the lack of capacity of the
person to take decision s about his mental health care or treatment.
(9) All persons with mental illness shall have capacity to make
mental health care or treatment decisions but may require varying
levels of support from their nominated representative to make
decisions.
15. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 14, in
case of minors, the legal guardian shall be their nominated
representative, unless the concerned Board orders otherwise under
sub-section ( 2).
(2) Where on an application made to the concerned Board, by
a mental health professional or any other person acting in the best
interest of the minor, and on evidence presented before it, the
concerned Board is of the opinion that,––
(a) the legal guardian is not acting in the best interests
of the minor; or
(b) the legal guardian is otherwise not fit to act as the
nominated representative of the minor,
it may appoint, any suitable individual who is willing to act as such,
the nominated representative of the minor with mental illness:
Provided that in case no individual is available for appointment
as a nominated representative, the Board shall appoint the Director
in the Department of Social Welfare of the State in which such
Board is located, or his nominee, as the nominated representative of
the minor with mental illness.
Nominated
representative
of minor.

74
16. The Board, on an application made to it by the person
with mental illness, or by a relative of such person, or by the
psychiatrist responsible for the care of such person, or by the
medical officer in charge of the mental health establishment where
the individual is admitted or proposed to be admitted, may revoke,
alter or modify the order made under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 4)
of section 14 or under sub-section ( 2) of section 15.
17. While fulfilling his duties under this Act, the nominated
representative shall––
(a) consider the current and past wishes, the life
history, values, cultural background and the best interests of
the person with mental illness;
(b) give particular credence to the views of the person
with mental illness to the extent that the person understands
the nature of the decisions under consideration;
(c) provide support to the person with mental illness in
making treatment decisions under section 98 or section 99;
(d) have right to seek information on diagnosis and
treatment to provide adequate support to the person with
mental illness;
(e) have access to the family or home based
rehabilitation services as provided under clause ( c) of sub-
section ( 4) of section 18 on behalf of and for the benefit of
the person with mental illness;
(f) be involved in discharge planning under section 107;
(g) apply to the mental health establishment for
admission under section 96 or section 98 or section 99;
(h) apply to the concerned Board on behalf of the
person with mental illness for discharge under section 96 or
section 98 or section 99;
(i) apply to the concerned Board against violation of
rights of the person with mental illness in a mental health
establishment;
(j) appoint a suitable attendant under sub-section ( 5) of
section 96 or sub-section ( 6) of section 96;
(k) have the right to give or withhold consent for
research under circumstances mentioned under sub-section ( 3)
of section 108.
CHAPTER V
R
IGHTS OF PERSONS WITH MENTAL ILLNESS
18. (1) Every person shall have a right to access mental
health care and treatment from mental health services run or funded
by the appropriate Government.
Revocation,
alteration, etc.,
of nominated
representative
by Board.
Duties of
nominated
representative.
Right to access
mental health
care.

75
(2) The right to access mental health care and treatment shall
mean mental health services of affordable cost, of good quality,
available in sufficient quantity, accessible geographically, without
discrimination on the basis of gender, sex, sexual orientation,
religion, culture, caste, social or political beliefs, class, disability or
any other basis and provided in a manner that is acceptable to
persons with mental illness and their families and care-givers.
(3) The appropriate Government shall make sufficient
provision as may be necessary, for a range of services required by
persons with mental illness.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of range of services
under sub-section ( 3), such services shall include––
(a) provision of acute mental health care services such
as outpatient and inpatient services;
(b) provision of half-way homes, sheltered accommodation,
supported accommodation;
(c) provision for mental health services to support
family of person with mental illness or home based rehabilitation;
(d) hospital and community based rehabilitation
establishments and services;
(e) provision for child mental health services and old
age mental health services.
(5) The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) integrate mental health services into general health
care services at all levels of health care including primary,
secondary and tertiary health care and in all health
programmes run by the appropriate Government;
(b) provide treatment in a manner, which supports
persons with mental illness to live in the community and with
their families;
(c) ensure that the long term care in a mental health
establishment for treatment of mental illness shall be used
only in exceptional circumstances, for as short a duration as
possible, and only as a last resort when appropriate
community based treatment has been tried and shown to have
failed;
(d) ensure that no person with mental illness (including
children and older persons) shall be required to travel long
distances to access mental health services and such services
shall be available close to a place where a person with mental
illness resides;
(e) ensure that as a minimum, mental health services
run or funded by Government shall be available in each district;

76
(f) ensure, if minimum mental health services specified
under sub-clause ( e) of sub-section ( 4) are not available in the
district where a person with mental illness resides, that the
person with mental illness is entitled to access any other
mental health service in the district and the costs of treatment
at such establishments in that district will be borne by the
appropriate Government:
Provided that till such time the services under this sub-section
are made available in a health establishment run or funded by the
appropriate Government, the appropriate Government shall make
rules regarding reimbursement of costs of treatment at such mental
health establishment.
(6) The appropriate Government shall make available a range
of appropriate mental health services specified under sub-section ( 4)
of section 18 at all general hospitals run or funded by such
Government and basic and emergency mental health care services
shall be available at all community health centres and upwards in the
public health system run or funded by such Government.
(7) Persons with mental illness living below the poverty line
whether or not in possession of a below poverty line card, or who
are destitute or homeless shall be entitled to mental health treatment
and services free of any charge and at no financial cost at all mental
health establishments run or funded by the appropriate Government
and at other mental health establishments designated by it.
(8) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the mental
health services shall be of equal quality to other general health
services and no discrimination be made in quality of services
provided to persons with mental illness.
(9) The minimum quality standards of mental health services
shall be as specified by regulations made by the State Authority.
(10) Without prejudice to the generality of range of services
under sub-section ( 3) of section 18, the appropriate Government
shall notify Essential Drug List and all medicines on the Essential
Drug List shall be made available free of cost to all persons with
mental illness at all times at health establishments run or funded by
the appropriate Government starting from Community Health Centres
and upwards in the public health system:
Provided that where the health professional of ayurveda,
yoga, unani, siddha, homoeopathy or naturopathy systems
recognised by the Central Government are available in any health
establishment, the essential medicines from any similar list relating
to the appropriate ayurvada, yoga, unani, siddha, homoeopathy or
naturopathy systems shall also be made available free of cost to all
persons with mental illness.
(11) The appropriate Government shall take measures to
ensure that necessary budgetary provisions in terms of adequacy,

77
priority, progress and equity are made for effective implementation
of the provisions of this section.
(12) The Central Government shall lay an annual report before
the Parliament and the State Governments shall lay an annual report
before the State Legislature giving therein the details regarding the
progress made towards achieving access to mental health care in the
country.
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub-section ( 11), the
expressions––
(i) “adequacy” means in terms of how much is enough
to offset inflation;
(ii) “priority” means in terms of compared to other
budget heads;
(iii ) “equity” means in terms of fair allocation of
resources taking into account the health, social and economic
burden of mental illness on individuals, their families and care-
givers;
(iv) “progress” means in terms of indicating an
improvement in the State’s response.
19. (1) Every person with mental illness shall,––
(a) have a right to live in, be part of and not be
segregated from society; and
(b) not continue to remain in a mental health
establishment merely because he does not have a family or is
not accepted by his family or is homeless or due to absence
of community based facilities.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, within a reasonable
period, provide for or support the establishment of less restrictive
community based establishments including halfway homes, group
homes and the like for persons who no longer require treatment in
more restrictive mental health establishments such as long stay
mental hospitals.
20. (1) Every person with mental illness shall have a right to
live with dignity.
(2) Every person with mental illness shall be protected from
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment in any mental health
establishment and shall have the following rights, namely:—
(a) to live in safe and hygienic environment;
(b) to have adequate sanitary conditions;
(c) to have reasonable facilities for leisure, recreation,
education and religious practices;
(d) to privacy;
Right to
community
living.
Right to
protection
from cruel,
inhuman and
degrading
treatment.

78
(e) for proper clothing so as to protect such person
from exposure of his body to maintain his dignity;
(f) to not be forced to undertake work in a mental
health establishment and to receive appropriate remuneration
for work when undertaken;
(g) to have adequate provision for preparing for living
in the community;
(h) to have adequate provision for wholesome food,
sanitation, space and access to articles of personal hygiene, in
particular, women’s personal hygiene be adequately addressed
by providing access to items that may be required during
menstruation;
(i) to not be subject to compulsory tonsuring (shaving
of head hair);
(j) to wear own personal clothes if so wished and to
not be forced to wear uniforms provided by the establishment;
and
(k) to be protected from all forms of physical, verbal,
emotional and sexual abuse.
21. (1) Every person with mental illness shall be treated as
equal to persons with physical illness in the provision of all health
care which shall include the following, namely:–
(a) there shall be no discrimination on any basis
including gender, sex, sexual orientation, religion, culture,
caste, social or political beliefs, class or disability;
(b) emergency facilities and emergency services for
mental illness shall be of the same quality and availability as
those provided to persons with physical illness;
(c) persons with mental health services shall be entitled
to the use of ambulance services in the same manner, extent
and quality as provided to persons with physical illness;
(d) living conditions in health establishments shall be of
the same manner, extent and quality as provided to persons
with physical illness; and
(e) any other health services provided to persons with
physical illness shall be provided in same manner, extent and
quality to persons with mental illness.
(2) The Insurance Regulatory Development Authority
established under the Insurance Regulatory Development Authority
Act, 1999 shall endeavour to ensure that all insurers make
provisions for medical insurance for treatment of mental illness on
the same basis as is available for treatment of physical illness.
Right to
equality
and non-
discrimination.
41 of 1999.

79
22. (1) A person with mental illness and his nominated
representative shall have the rights to the following information,
namely:––
(a) the provision of this Act or any other law for the
time being in force under which he has been admitted, if he
is being admitted, and the criteria for admission under that
provision;
(b) of his right to make an application to the concerned
Board for a review of the admission;
(c) the nature of the person’s mental illness and the
proposed treatment plan which includes information about
treatment proposed and the known side effects of the
proposed treatment;
(d) receive the information in a language and form that
such person receiving the information can understand.
(2) In case complete information cannot be given to the
person with mental illness at the time of the admission or the start
of treatment, it shall be the duty of the medical officer or
psychiatrist in charge of the person’s care to ensure that full
information is provided promptly when the individual is in a position
to receive it:
Provided that where the information has not been given to the
person with mental illness at the time of the admission or the start
of treatment, the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the
person’s care shall give the information to the nominated
representative immediately.
23. (1) A person with mental illness shall have the right to
confidentiality in respect of his mental health, mental health care,
treatment and physical health care.
(2) All health professionals providing care or treatment to a
person with mental illness shall have a duty to keep all such
information confidential which has been obtained during care or
treatment with the following exceptions, namely:––
(a) release of information to the nominated
representative to enable him to fulfil his duties under this Act;
(b) release of information to other mental health
professionals and other health professionals to enable them to
provide care and treatment to the person with mental illness;
(c) release of information if it is necessary to protect
any other person from harm or violence;
(d) only such information that is necessary to protect
against the harm identified shall be released;
(e) release of information in the case of life threatening
emergencies where such information is urgently needed to
save lives;
Right to
information.
Right to
confidentiality.

80
(f) release of information upon an order by concerned
Board or the Commission or High Court or Supreme Court or
any other statutory authority competent to do so; and
(g) release of information in the interests of public
safety and security.
24. (1) No photograph or any other information relating to a
person with mental illness undergoing treatment at a mental health
establishment shall be released to the media without the consent of
the person with mental illness.
(2) The right to confidentiality of person with mental illness
shall also apply to all information stored in electronic or digital
format in real or virtual space.
25. (1) All persons with mental illness shall have right to
access their medical records.
(2) The psychiatrist in charge of such records may withhold
specific information in the medical records if disclosure would result
in,––
(a) serious mental harm to the person with mental
illness; or
(b) likelihood of harm to other persons.
(3) When any information in the medical records is withheld
from the person, the psychiatrist shall inform the person with
mental illness of his or her right to apply to the concerned Board
for an order to release such information.
26. (1) A person with mental illness admitted to a mental
health establishment shall have the right to refuse or receive visitors
and to refuse or receive and make telephone or mobile phone calls
at reasonable times of the day subject to the rules of such mental
health establishment.
(2) A person with mental illness admitted in a mental health
establishment may send and receive mail through electronic mode
including through email.
(3) Where a person with mental illness informs the medical
officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment
that he does not want to receive mail or email from any named
person in the community, the medical officer or psychiatrist in
charge may restrict such communication by the named person with
the person with mental illness.
(4) Nothing contained in sub-sections ( 1) to ( 3) shall apply to
visits from, telephone calls to, and from and mail or email to, and
from individuals, specified under clauses ( a) to ( f) under any
circumstances, namely:––
(a) any Judge or officer authorised by a competent
court; or
Restriction on
release of
information
in respect of
mental illness.
Right to
access
medical
records.
Right to
personal
contacts and
communication.

81
(b) members of the concerned Board or the Central
Authority or the State Authority;
(c) any member of the Parliament or a Member of State
Legislature;
(d) nominated representative, lawyer or legal
representative of the person;
(e) medical practitioner in charge of the person’s
treatment;
(f) any other person authorised by the appropriate
Government.
27. (1) A person with mental illness shall be entitled to receive
free legal services to exercise any of his rights given under this Act.
(2) It shall be the duty of medical officer or psychiatrist in
charge of a mental health establishment to inform the person with
mental illness that he is entitled to free legal services under the
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 or other relevant laws or under
any order of the court if so ordered and provide the contact details
of the availability of services.
28. (1) Any person with mental illness or his or her nominated
representative, shall have the right to complain regarding deficiencies
in provision of care, treatment and services in a mental health
establishment to,—
(a) the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the
establishment and if not satisfied with the response;
(b) the State Authority and if not satisfied with the
response;
(c) the concerned Board.
(2) The provisions for making complaint in sub-section ( 1), is
without prejudice to the rights of the person to seek any judicial
remedy for violation of his rights in a mental health establishment or
by any mental health professional either under this Act or any other
law for the time being in force.
CHAPTER VI
DUTIES OF APPROPRIATE  G OVERNMENT
29. (1) The appropriate Government shall have a duty to plan,
design and implement programmes for the promotion of mental
health and prevention of mental illness in the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions
contained in sub-section ( 1), the appropriate Government shall, in
particular, plan, design and implement public health programmes to
reduce suicides and attempted suicides in the country.
Right to legal
aid.
Right to make
complaints
about deficiencies
in provision of
services.
39 of 1987.
Promotion of
mental health
and preventive
programmes.

82
30. The appropriate Government shall take all measures to
ensure that,—
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity
through public media, including television, radio, print and
online media at regular intervals;
(b) the programmes to reduce stigma associated with
mental illness are planned, designed, funded and implemented
in an effective manner;
(c) the appropriate Government officials including police
officers and other officers of the appropriate Government are
given periodic sensitisation and awareness training on the
issues under this Act.
31. (1) The appropriate Government shall take measures to
address the human resource requirements of mental health services
in the country by planning, developing and implementing educational
and training programmes in collaboration with institutions of higher
education and training, to increase the human resources available to
deliver mental health interventions and to improve the skills of the
available human resources to better address the needs of persons
with mental illness.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, at the minimum, train
all medical officers in public health care establishments and all
medical officers in the prisons or jails to provide basic and
emergency mental health care.
(3) The appropriate Government shall make efforts to meet
internationally accepted guidelines for number of mental health
professionals on the basis of population, within ten years from the
commencement of this Act.
(4) The appropriate Government shall include in its annual
report referred to in sub-section ( 12) of section 18 the information
about progress made in improving the human resource under this
section.
32. The appropriate Government shall take all measures to
ensure effective co-ordination between services provided by
concerned Ministries and Departments such as those dealing with
health, law, home affairs, human resources, social justice,
employment, education, women and child development, medical
education to address issues of mental health care.
CHAPTER VII
CENTRAL M ENTAL H EALTH A UTHORITY
33. The Central Government shall, within a period of
nine months from the date on which this Act receives the
assent of the President, by notification, establish, for the
purposes of this Act, an Authority to be known as the Central
Mental Health Authority.
Creating
awareness
about mental
health and
illness and
reducing
stigma
associated
with mental
illness.
Appropriate
Government
to take
measures as
regard to
human
resource
development
and training,
etc.
Co-ordination
within
appropriate
Government.
Establishment
of Central
Authority.

83
34. ( 1) The Central Authority shall consist of the following,
namely:––
(a) Secretary or Additional Secretary to the Government
of India in the Department of Health and Family Welfare––
chairperson ex officio ;
(b) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the
Department of Health and Family Welfare, in charge of mental
health–– member ex officio ;
(c) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the
Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani,
Siddha and Homeopathy— member ex officio;
(d) Director General of Health Services––member ex-
officio ;
(e) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the
Department of Disability Affairs of the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment–– member ex officio;
(f) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the
Ministry of Women and Child Development–– member ex-
officio;
(g) Directors of the Central Institutions for Mental
Health–– members ex officio;
(h) one mental health professional as defined in item
(iii) of clause ( q) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 having at
least fifteen years experience in the field, to be nominated by
the Central Government—member;
(i) one psychiatric social worker having at least fifteen
years experience in the field, to be nominated by the Central
Government––member;
(j) one clinical psychologist having at least fifteen years
experience in the field, to be nominated by the Central
Government––member;
(k) one mental health nurse having at least fifteen years
experience in the field of mental health, to be nominated by
the Central Government––member;
(l) two persons representing persons who have or have
had mental illness, to be nominated by the Central
Government––members;
(m) two persons representing care-givers of persons
with mental illness or organisations representing care-givers,
to be nominated by the Central Government—members;
(n) two persons representing non-governmental
organisations which provide services to persons with mental
illness, to be nominated by the Central Government––members.
Composition
of Central
Authority.

84
(2) The members referred to in clauses ( h) to ( n) of sub-
section ( 1), shall be nominated by the Central Government in such
manner as may be prescribed.
35. (1) The members of the Central Authority referred to in
clauses ( h) to ( n) of sub-section ( 1) of section 34 shall hold office
as such for a term of three years from the date of nomination and
shall be eligible for re-appointment:
Provided that a member shall not hold office as such after he has
attained the age of seventy years.
(2) The chairperson and other ex officio members of the
Authority shall hold office as such chairperson or member, as the
case may be, so long as he holds the office by virtue of which he
is nominated.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the chairperson and other
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
36. A member of the Central Authority may, by notice in
writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign
his office:
Provided that a member shall, unless he is permitted by the
Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of
such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters
upon the office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever
is the earliest.
37. The Central Government shall, within two months from
the date of occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death,
resignation or removal of a member of the Authority and three
months before the superannuation or completion of the term of
office of any member of that Authority, make nomination for filling
up of the vacancy.
38. No act or proceeding of the Central Authority shall be
invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of,
the Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a
member of the Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not
affecting the merits of the case.
39. Any member having any direct or indirect interest,
whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter coming up for
consideration at a meeting of the Central Authority, shall, as soon as
possible after the relevant circumstances have come to his
knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and
Term of office,
salaries and
allowances of
chairperson
and members.
Resignation.
Filling of
vacancies.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Central
Authority.
Member not
to participate
in meetings in
certain cases.

85
such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Central
Authority, and the member shall not take any part in any deliberation
or decision of the Authority with respect to that matter.
40. (1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the
Authority, not below the rank of the Director to the Government of
India, to be appointed by the Central Government.
(2) The Authority may, with the approval of the Central
Government, determine the number, nature and categories of other
officers and employees required by the Central Authority in the
discharge of its functions.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service (including the qualifications,
experience and manner of appointment) of, the chief executive
officer and other officers and employees of the Central Authority
shall be such as may be specified by regulations with the approval
of the Central Government.
41. (1) The chief executive officer shall be the legal
representative of the Central Authority and shall be responsible for—
(a) the day-to-day administration of the Central Authority;
(b) implementing the work programmes and decisions
adopted by the Central Authority;
(c) drawing up of proposal for the Central Authority’s
work programmes;
(d) the preparation of the statement of revenue and
expenditure and the execution of the budget of the Central
Authority.
(2) Every year, the chief executive officer shall submit to the
Central Authority for approval—
(a) a general report covering all the activities of the
Central Authority in the previous year;
(b) programmes of work;
(c) the annual accounts for the previous year; and
(d) the budget for the coming year.
(3) The chief executive officer shall have administrative control
over the officers and other employees of the Central Authority.
42. On the establishment of the Central Authority—
(a) all the assets and liabilities of the Central Authority
for Mental Health Services constituted under sub-section ( 1)
of section 3 of the Mental Health Act, 1987 shall stand
transferred to, and vested in, the Central Authority.
Officers and
other employees
of Central
Authority.
Functions of
chief executive
officer of
Central
Authority.
Transfer of
assets,
liabilities of
Central
Authority.
14 of 1987.

86
Explanation.— The assets of such Central Authority for
Mental Health Services shall be deemed to include all rights
and powers, and all properties, whether movable or
immovable, including, in particular, cash balances, deposits
and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of, such
properties as may be in the possession of such Unique
Identification Authority of India and all books of account and
other documents relating to the same; and liabilities shall be
deemed to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of
whatever kind;
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( a), all
data and information collected during enrolment, all details of
authentication performed, debts, obligations and liabilities
incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things
engaged to be done by, with or for such Central Authority for
Mental Health Services immediately before that day, for or in
connection with the purpose of the said Central Authority for
Mental Health Services, shall be deemed to have been
incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for,
the Central Authority;
(c) all sums of money due to the Central Authority for
Mental Health Services immediately before that day shall be
deemed to be due to the Central Authority; and
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or
which could have been instituted by or against such Central
Authority for Mental Health Services immediately before that
day may be continued or may be instituted by or against the
Central Authority.
43. (1) The Central Authority shall––
(a) register all mental health establishments under the
control of the Central Government and maintain a register of
all mental health establishments in the country based on
information provided by all State Mental Health Authorities of
registered establishments and compile update and publish
(including online on the internet) a register of such establishments;
(b) develop quality and service provision norms for
different types of mental health establishments under the
Central Government;
(c) supervise all mental health establishments under the
Central Government and receive complaints about deficiencies
in provision of services;
(d) maintain a national register of clinical psychologists,
mental health nurses and psychiatric social workers based on
information provided by all State Authorities of persons
registered to work as mental health professionals for the
purpose of this Act and publish the list (including online on
the internet) of such registered mental health professionals;
Functions of
Central
Authority.

87
(e) train all persons including law enforcement officials,
mental health professionals and other health professionals
about the provisions and implementation of this Act;
(f) advise the Central Government on all matters
relating to mental health care and services;
(g) discharge such other functions with respect to
matters relating to mental health as the Central Government
may decide:
Provided that the mental health establishments under the
control of the Central Government, before the commencement of
this Act, registered under the Mental Health Act, 1987 or any other
law for the time being in force, shall be deemed to have been
registered under the provisions of this Act and copy of such
registration shall be furnished to the Central Authority.
(2) The procedure for registration (including the fees to be
levied for such registration) of the mental health establishments
under this section shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
44. (1) The Central Authority shall meet at such times (not
less than twice in a year) and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including quorum at such meetings) as may be specified by
regulations made by the Central Authority.
(2) If the chairperson, for any reason, is unable to attend a
meeting of the Central Authority, the senior most member shall
preside over the meeting of the Authority.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the
Authority shall be decided by a majority of votes by the members
present and voting and in the event of an equality of votes, the
chairperson or in his absence the member presiding over shall have
a second or casting vote.
(4) All decisions of the Central Authority shall be authenticated
by the signature of the chairperson or any other member authorised
by the Central Authority in this behalf.
(5) If any member, who is a director of a company and who
as such director, has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any
manner coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Central
Authority, he shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances
have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at
such meeting and such disclosure shall be recorded in the
proceedings of the Authority, and the member shall not take part in
any deliberation or decision of the Authority with respect to that
matter.
Meetings of
Central
Authority.
14 of 1987.

88
CHAPTER VIII
STATE M ENTAL H EALTH A UTHORITY
45. Every State Government shall, within a period of nine
months from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the
President, by notification, establish, for the purposes of this Act,
an Authority to be known as the State Mental Health Authority.
46. ( 1) The State Authority shall consist of the following
chairperson and members:—
(a) Secretary or Principal Secretary in the Department
of Health of State Government—chairperson ex officio ;
(b) Joint Secretary in the Department of Health of the
State Government, in charge of mental health—member ex-
officio ;
(c) Director of Health Services or Medical Education—
member ex officio ;
(d) Joint Secretary in the Department of Social Welfare
of the State Government—member ex officio;
(e) Superintendent of any of the Mental Hospitals in the
State or Head of Department of Psychiatry at any Government
Medical College, to be nominated by the State Government––
member;
(f) one eminent psychiatrist from the State not in
Government service to be nominated by the State
Government—member;
(g) one mental health professional as defined in item
(iii) of clause ( q) of sub-section ( 1) of section ( 2) having of
least fifteen years experience in the field, to be nominated by
the State Government—member;
(h) one psychiatric social worker having at least fifteen
years experience in the field, to be nominated by the State
Government––member;
(i) one clinical psychologist having at least fifteen years
experience in the field, to be nominated by the State
Government––member;
(j) one mental health nurse having at least fifteen years
experience in the field of mental health, to be nominated by
the State Government––member;
(k) two persons representing persons who have or have
had mental illness, to be nominated by the State Government—
member;
(l) two persons representing care-givers of persons
with mental illness or organisations representing care-givers,
to be nominated by the State Government—members;
Establishment
of State
Authority.
Composition
of State
Authority.

89
(m) two persons representing non-governmental
organisations which provide services to persons with mental
illness, to be nominated by the State Government—members.
(2) The members referred to in clauses ( e) to ( m) of sub-
section ( 1), shall be nominated by the State Government in such
manner as may be prescribed.
47. (1) The members of the State Authority referred to in
clauses ( e) to ( m) of sub-section ( 1) of section 46 shall hold office
as such for a term of three years from the date of nomination and
shall be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that a member shall not hold office as such after he
has attained the age of seventy years.
(2) The chairperson and other ex officio members of the
State Authority shall hold office as such chairperson or member, as
the case may be, so long as he holds the office by virtue of which
he is nominated.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the chairperson and other
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
48. A member of the State Authority may, by notice in writing
under his hand addressed to the State Government, resign his office:
Provided that a member shall, unless he is permitted by the
State Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of
such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters
upon office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is
the earliest.
49. The State Government shall, within two months from the
date of occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death, resignation
or removal of a member of the Authority and three months before
the superannuation or completion of the term of office of any
member of that Authority, make nomination for filling up of the
vacancy.
50. No act or proceeding of the State Authority shall be
invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of,
the State Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a
member of the State Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not
affecting the merits of the case.
Term of office,
salaries and
allowances of
chairperson
and other
members.
Resignation.
Filling of
vacancies.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of State
Authority.

90
51. Any member having any direct or indirect interest,
whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter coming up for
consideration at a meeting of the State Authority, shall, as soon as
possible after the relevant circumstances have come to his
knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and
such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of the State
Authority, and the member shall not take any part in any deliberation
or decision of the State Authority with respect to that matter.
52. (1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the State
Authority, not below the rank of the Director to the State
Government, to be appointed by the State Government.
(2) The State Authority may, with the approval of the State
Government, determine the number, nature and categories of other
officers and employees required by the State Authority in the
discharge of its functions.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service (including the qualifications,
experience and manner of appointment) of, the chief executive
officer and other officers and employees of the State Authority shall
be such as may be specified by regulations with the approval of the
State Government.
53. (1) The chief executive officer shall be the legal
representative of the State Authority and shall be responsible for—
(a) the day-to-day administration of the State Authority;
(b) implementing the work programmes and decisions
adopted by the State Authority;
(c) drawing up of proposal for the State Authority’s
work programmes;
(d) the preparation of the statement of revenue and
expenditure and the execution of the budget of the State
Authority.
(2) Every year, the chief executive officer shall submit to the
State Authority for approval—
(a) a general report covering all the activities of the
Authority in the previous year;
(b) programmes of work;
(c) the annual accounts for the previous year; and
(d) the budget for the coming year.
(3) The chief executive officer shall have administrative
control over the officers and other employees of the State Authority.
Member not to
participate in
meetings in
certain cases.
Officers and
other employees
of State
Authority.
Functions of
chief
executive
officer of
State
Authority.

91
54. On and from the establishment of the State Authority—
(a) all the assets and liabilities of the State Authority for
Mental Health Services constituted under sub-section ( 1) of
section 4 of the Mental Health Act, 1987 shall stand
transferred to, and vested in, the State Authority.
Explanation.— The assets of such State Authority for
Mental Health Services shall be deemed to include all rights
and powers, and all properties, whether movable or
immovable, including, in particular, cash balances, deposits
and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of, such
properties as may be in the possession of such State
Authority for Mental Health Services and all books of account
and other documents relating to the same; and liabilities shall
be deemed to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of
whatever kind;
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( a), all
data and information collected during enrolment, all details of
authentication performed, debts, obligations and liabilities
incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things
engaged to be done by, with or for such State Authority for
Mental Health Services immediately before that day, for or in
connection with the purpose of the said State Authority for
Mental Health Services, shall be deemed to have been
incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for,
the State Authority;
(c) all sums of money due to the State Authority for
Mental Health Services immediately before that day shall be
deemed to be due to the State Authority; and
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or
which could have been instituted by or against such State
Authority for Mental Health Services immediately before that
day may be continued or may be instituted by or against the
State Authority.
55. (1) The State Authority shall––
(a) register all mental health establishments in the State
except those referred to in section 43 and maintain and publish
(including online on the internet) a register of such establishments;
(b) develop quality and service provision norms for
different types of mental health establishments in the State;
(c) supervise all mental health establishments in the
State and receive complaints about deficiencies in provision of
services;
(d) register clinical psychologists, mental health nurses
and psychiatric social workers in the State to work as mental
Transfer of
assets,
liabilities of
State
Authority.
14 of 1987.
Functions of
State
Authority.

92
health professionals, and publish the list of such registered
mental health professionals in such manner as may be
specified by regulations by the State Authority;
(e) train all relevant persons including law enforcement
officials, mental health professionals and other health
professionals about the provisions and implementation of this
Act;
(f) discharge such other functions with respect to
matters relating to mental health as the State Government may
decide:
Provided that the mental health establishments in the State
(except those referred to in section 43), registered, before the
commencement of this Act, under the Mental Health Act, 1987 or
any other law for the time being in force, shall be deemed to have
been registered under the provisions of this Act and copy of such
registration shall be furnished to the State Authority.
(2) The procedure for registration (including the fees to be
levied for such registration) of the mental health establishments
under this section shall be such as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
56. (1) The State Authority shall meet at such times (not less
than four times in a year) and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including quorum at such meetings) as may be specified by
regulations made by the State Authority.
(2) If the chairperson, for any reason, is unable to attend a
meeting of the State Authority, the senior most member shall preside
over the meetings of the Authority.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the
State Authority shall be decided by a majority of votes by the
members present and voting and in the event of an equality of
votes, the chairperson or in his absence the member presiding over
shall have a second or casting vote.
(4) All decisions of the State Authority shall be authenticated
by the signature of the chairperson or any other member authorised
by the State Authority in this behalf.
(5) If any member, who is a director of a company and who
as such director, has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any
manner coming up for consideration at a meeting of the State
Authority, he shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances
have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at
such meeting and such disclosure shall be recorded in the
proceedings of the Authority, and the member shall not take part in
any deliberation or decision of the State Authority with respect to
that matter.
Meetings of
State Authority.
14 of 1987.

93
CHAPTER IX
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
57. The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Central
Authority grants of such sums of money as the Central Government
may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
58. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the
Central Mental Health Authority Fund and there shall be credited
thereto—
(i) any grants and loans made to the Authority by the
Central Government;
(ii) all fees and charges received by the Authority under
this Act; and
(iii) all sums received by the Authority from such other
sources as may be decided upon by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be applied
for meeting the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the
chairperson, other members, chief executive officer, other officers
and employees of the Authority and the expenses of the Authority
incurred in the discharge of its functions and for purposes of this
Act.
59. (1) The Central Authority shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in
such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government, in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may
be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with
such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any
other person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the
accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and privileges
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of the
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and
other documents and papers and to inspect any of the office of the
Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person
appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by
the Authority and the Central Government shall cause the same to
be laid before each House of Parliament.
Grants by
Central
Government to
Central
Authority.
Central
Mental Health
Authority
Fund.
Accounts and
audit of Central
Authority.

94
60. The Central Authority shall prepare in every year, in such
form and at such time as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, an annual report giving a full account of its activities
during the previous year, and copies thereof along with copies of its
annual accounts and auditor’s report shall be forwarded to the
Central Government and the Central Government shall cause the
same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
61. The State Government may, after due appropriation made
by State Legislature by law in this behalf, make to the State
Authority grants of such sums of money as the State Government
may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
62. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the
State Mental Health Authority Fund and there shall be credited
thereto—
(i) any grants and loans made to the State Authority by
the State Government;
(ii) all fees and charges received by the Authority under
this Act; and
(iii) all sums received by the State Authority from such
other sources as may be decided upon by the State
Government.
(2) The Fund referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be applied
for meeting the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the
chairperson, other members, chief executive officer, other officers
and employees of the State Authority and the expenses of the State
Authority incurred in the discharge of its functions and for purposes
of this Act.
63. (1) The State Authority shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts
in such form as may be prescribed by the State Government, in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the State Authority shall be audited by
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as
may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection
with such audit shall be payable by the State Authority to the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any
other person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the
accounts of the State Authority shall have the same rights and
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with
the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have
the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the
office of the State Authority.
Annual report
of Central
Authority.
Grants by
State
Government.
State Mental
Health
Authority
Fund.
Accounts and
audit of State
Authority.

95
(4) The accounts of the State Authority as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person
appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by
the Authority and the Central Government shall cause the same to
be laid before each House of Parliament.
64. The State Authority shall prepare in every year, in such
form and at such time as may be prescribed by the State
Government, an annual report giving a full account of its activities
during the previous year, and copies thereof along with copies of its
annual accounts and auditor’s report shall be forwarded to the State
Government and the Government shall cause the same to be laid
before the State Legislature.
CHAPTER X
M
ENTAL HEALTH E STABLISHMENTS
65. (1) No person or organisation shall establish or run a
mental health establishment unless it has been registered with the
Authority under the provisions of this Act.
Explanation .–– For the purposes of this Chapter, the
expression “Authority” means—
(a) in respect of the mental health establishments under the
control of the Central Government, the Central Authority;
(b) in respect of the mental health establishments in the State
[not being the health establishments referred to in clause ( a)], the
State Authority.
(2) Every person or organisation who proposes to establish or
run a mental health establishment shall register the said
establishment with the Authority under the provisions of this Act.
Explanation.–– In case a mental health establishment has been
registered under the Clinical Establishments (Registration and
Regulation) Act, 2010 or any other law for the time being in force
in a State, such mental health establishment shall submit a copy of
the said registration along with an application in such form as may
be prescribed to the Authority with an undertaking that the mental
health establishment fulfils the minimum standards, if any, specified
by the Authority for the specific category of mental health
establishment.
(3) The Authority shall, on receipt of application under sub-
section ( 2), on being satisfied that such mental health establishment
fulfils the standards specified by the Authority, issue a certificate of
registration in such form as may be prescribed:
Provided that till the period the Authority specifies the
minimum standards for different categories of mental health
establishments, it shall issue a provisional certificate of registration
to the mental health establishment:
Annual report
of State
Authority.
Registration of
mental health
establishment.
23 of 2010.

96
Provided further that on specifying the minimum standards
for different categories of mental health establishments, the mental
health establishment referred to in the first proviso shall, within a
period of six months from the date such standards are specified,
submit to the Authority an undertaking stating therein that such
establishment fulfils the specified minimum standards and on being
satisfied that such establishment fulfils the minimum standards, the
Authority shall issue a certificate of registration to such mental
health establishment.
(4) Every mental health establishment shall, for the purpose of
registration and continuation of registration, fulfil––
(a) the minimum standards of facilities and services as
may be specified by regulations made by the Central Authority;
(b) the minimum qualifications for the personnel
engaged in such establishment as may be specified by
regulations made by the Central Authority;
(c) provisions for maintenance of records and reporting
as may be specified by regulations made by the Central
Authority; and
(d) any other conditions as may be specified by
regulations made by the Central Authority.
(5) The Authority may––
(a) classify mental health establishments into such
different categories, as may be specified by regulations made
by the Central Authority;
(b) specify different standards for different categories
of mental health establishments;
(c) while specifying the minimum standards for mental
health establishments, have regard to local conditions.
(6) Notwithstanding anything in this section, the Authority
shall, within a period of eighteen months from the commencement
of this Act, by notification, specify the minimum standards for
different categories of mental health establishments.
66. (1) The mental health establishment shall, for the purpose
of registration, submit an application, in such form, accompanied
with such details and fees, as may be prescribed, to the Authority.
(2) The mental health establishment may submit the
application in person or by post or online.
(3) Every mental health establishment, existing on the date of
commencement of this Act, shall, wi thin a period of six months
from the date of constitution of the Authority, submit an application
for its provisional registration to the Authority.
Procedure for
registration,
inspection
and inquiry of
mental health
establishments.

97
(4) The Authority shall, within a period of ten days from the
date of receipt of such application, issue to the mental health
establishment a certificate of provisional registration in such form
and containing such particulars and information as may be
prescribed.
(5) The Authority shall not be required to conduct any inquiry
prior to issue of provisional registration.
(6) The Authority shall, within a period of forty-five days
from the date of provisional registration, publish in print and in
digital form online, all particulars of the mental health establishment.
(7) A provisional registration shall be valid for a period of
twelve months from the date of its issue and be renewable.
(8) Where standards for particular categories of mental health
establishments have been specified under this Act, the mental health
establishments in that category shall, within a period of six months
from date of notifying such standards, apply for that category and
obtain permanent registration.
(9) The Authority shall publish the standards in print and
online in digital format.
(10) Until standards for particular categories of mental health
establishments are specified under this Act, every mental health
establishment shall, within thirty days before the expiry of the
validity of certificate of provisional registration, apply for a renewal
of provisional registration
(11) If the application is made after the expiry of provisional
registration, the Authority shall allow renewal of registration on
payment of such fees, as may be prescribed.
(12) A mental health establishment shall make an application
for permanent registration to the Authority in such form and
accompanied with such fees as may be specified by regulations.
(13) The mental health establishment shall submit evidence
that the establishment has complied with the specified minimum
standards in such manner as may be specified by regulations by the
Authority.
(14) As soon as the mental health establishment submits the
required evidence of the mental health establishment having complied
with the specified minimum standards, the Authority shall give
public notice and display the same on its website for a period of
thirty days, for filing objections, if any, in such manner as may be
specified by regulations.
(15) The Authority shall, communicate the objections, if any,
received within the period referred to in sub-section ( 14), to the
mental health establishment for response within such period as the
Authority may determine.

98
(16) The mental health establishment shall submit evidence of
compliance with the standards with reference to the objections
communicated to such establishment under sub-section ( 15), to the
Authority within the specified period.
(17) The Authority shall on being satisfied that the mental
health establishment fulfils the specified minimum standards for
registration, grant permanent certificate of registration to such
establishment.
(18) The Authority shall, within a period of thirty days after
the expiry of the period specified under this section, pass an order,
either––
(a) grant permanent certificate of registration; or
(b) reject the application after recording the reasons
thereof:
Provided that in case the Authority rejects the application
under clause ( b), it shall grant such period not exceeding six
months, to the mental health establishment for rectification of the
deficiencies which have led to rejection of the application and such
establishment may apply afresh for registration.
(19) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if the
Authority has not communicated any objections received by it to the
mental health establishment under sub-section ( 15), nor has passed
an order under sub-section ( 18), it shall be deemed that the
Authority has granted permanent certificate of registration to the
applicant.
67. (1) The Authority shall cause to be conducted an audit of
all registered mental health establishments by such person or
persons (including representatives of the local community) as may
be prescribed, every three years, so as to ensure that such mental
health establishment s comply with the requirements of minimum
standards for registration as a mental health establishment.
(2) The Authority may charge the mental health establishment
such fee as may be prescribed, for conducting the audit under this
section.
(3) The Authority may issue a show cause notice to a mental
health establishment as to why its registration under this Act not be
cancelled, if the Authority is satisfied that––
(a) the mental health establishment has failed to
maintain the minimum standards specified by the Authority; or
(b) the person or persons or entities entrusted with the
management of the mental health establishment have been
convicted of an offence under this Act; or
(c) the mental health establishment violates the rights of
any person with mental illness.
Audit of mental
health
establishment.

99
(4) The Authority may, after giving a reasonable opportunity
to the mental health establishment, if satisfied that the mental health
establishment falls under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of
sub-section ( 3), without prejudice to any other action which it may
take against the mental health establishment, cancel its registration.
(5) Every order made under sub-section ( 4) shall take effect–
(a) where no appeal has been preferred against such
order, immediately on the expiry of the period specified for
preferring of appeal; and
(b) where the appeal has been preferred against such an
order and the appeal has been dismissed, from the date of the
order of dismissal.
(6) The Authority shall, on cancellation of the registration for
reasons to be recorded in writing, restrain immediately the mental
health establishment from carrying on its operations, if there is
imminent danger to the health and safety of the persons admitted in
the mental health establishment.
(7) The Authority may cancel the registration of a mental
health establishment if so directed by the Mental Health Review
Commission or a Board to do so.
68. (1) The Authority may, suo motu or on a complaint
received from any person with respect to non adherence of
minimum standards specified by or under this Act or contravention
of any provision thereof, order an inspection or inquiry of any
mental health establishment, to be made by such person as may be
prescribed.
(2) The mental health establishment shall be entitled to be
represented at such inspection or inquiry.
(3) The Authority shall communicate to the mental health
establishment the results of such inspection or inquiry and may after
ascertaining the opinion of the mental health establishment, order the
establishment to make necessary changes within such period as may
be specified by it.
(4) The mental health establishment shall comply with the
order of the Authority made under sub-section ( 3).
(5) If the mental health establishment fails to comply with the
order of the Authority made under sub-section ( 3), the Authority
may cancel the registration of the mental health establishment.
(6) The Authority or any person authorised by it may, if there
is any reason to suspect that any person is operating a mental health
establishment without registration, enter and search in such manner
as may be prescribed, and the mental health establishment shall co-
operate with such inspection or inquiry and be entitled to be
represented at such inspection or inquiry.
Inspection and
inquiry.

100
69. Any mental health establishment aggrieved by an order of
the Authority refusing to grant registration or renewal of registration
or cancellation of registration, may, within a period of thirty days
from such order, prefer an appeal to the High Court in the State:
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the
appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within
the period of thirty days.
70. (1) Every mental health establishment shall display the
certificate of registration in a conspicuous place in the mental health
establishment in such manner so as to be visible to everyone visiting
the mental health establishment.
(2) In case the certificate is destroyed or lost or mutilated or
damaged, the Authority may issue a duplicate certificate on the
request of the mental health establishment and on the payment of
such fees as may be prescribed.
(3) The certificate of registration shall be non-transferable and
valid in case of change of ownership of the establishment.
(4) In the event of change of category of the mental health
establishment, such establishment shall surrender the certificate of
registration to the Authority and the mental health establishment shall
apply afresh for grant of certificate of registration in that category.
71. The Authority shall maintain in digital format a register of
mental health establishments, registered by the Authority, to be
called the Register of Mental Health Establishments and shall enter
the particulars of the certificate of registration so granted in a
separate register to be maintained in such form and manner as may
be prescribed.
72. (1) Every mental health establishment shall display within
the establishment at conspicuous place (including on its website),
the contact details including address and telephone numbers of the
concerned Board.
(2) Every mental health establishment shall provide the person
with necessary forms to apply to the concerned Board and also give
free access to make telephone calls to the Board to apply for a
review of the admission.
CHAPTER XI
M
EANTAL HEALTH REVIEW COMMISSION
73. (1) The Central Government shall, within nine months
from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the
President, constitute the Mental Health Review Commission to
exercise the powers conferred upon and to perform the functions
assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The head office of the Commission shall be at Mumbai.
Appeal to
High Court
against order
of Authority.
Certificates,
fees and register
of mental
health
establishments.
Maintenance
of register of
mental health
establishment
in digital
format.
Duty of mental
health
establishment
to
display
information.
Constitution
of Mental
Health Review
Commission.

101
74. (1) The Commission shall consist of a president and four
members.
(2) The president and members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the President of India on recommendation of the
Selection Committee referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 76:
Provided that in case a serving Chief Justice of a High Court
or a Judge of the High Court with five years experience is appointed
as the president of the Commission, he shall be appointed in
consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
75. (1) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as the
president of the Commission, if he is a serving or retired Chief
Justice of a High Court or a Judge of the High Court with five
years experience.
(2) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as a member,
if such person has ability, integrity and standing, and adequate
knowledge and experience in mental health.
(3) Out of the four members referred to in section 74, one
each shall be chosen from amongst—
(a) psychiatrists having at least fifteen years experience
in the field;
(b) persons with mental illness or representatives of
persons with mental illness;
(c) representatives of families and care-givers to person
with mental illness or of non-Governmental organisations
working in the field of mental health;
(d) persons having at least fifteen years of experience
in public administration.
76. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of
selection of the president and members of the Commission,
constitute a Selection Committee consisting of—
(a) Chief Justice of India ––chairperson;
(b) Secretary of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as the
convener––member;
(c) Secretary of the Department of Disability Affairs in
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment––member;
(d) Secretary of the Ministry of Women and Child
Development––member;
(e) Secretary, Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy in the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare—member;
Composition
of Commission.
Qualifications
for appointment
of president
and members
of Commission.
Selection
Committee.

102
(f) an eminant person working in the field of mental
health—member.
(2) The Central Government shall, within two months from
the date of occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death,
resignation or removal of the president or a member of the
Commission and three months before the superannuation or
completion of the term of office of the president or any member of
that Commission, make a reference to the Selection Committee for
filling up of the vacancy.
(3) The Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the
president and members of the Commission within two months from
the date on which the reference is made to it.
(4) The Selection Committee shall issue a public advertisement
seeking applications from persons for recommendation of names in
respect of categories mentioned under clauses ( a), ( b), ( c) and ( d)
of sub-section ( 3) of section 75.
(5) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two
names for every vacancy referred to it.
(6) Before recommending any person for appointment as a
president or other member of the Commission, the Selection
Committee shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any
financial or other interest, which is likely to affect prejudicially his
functions as a member.
(7) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 1) to ( 6), the
Selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure.
(8) No appointment of the president or other member of the
Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the
Selection Committee.
77. (1) The president of the Commission shall be appointed
on whole time basis and the members of the Commission shall be
appointed on the whole time or part-time basis as the Central
Government may decide.
(2) The president and the other members of the Commission
shall hold office as such for a term of five years from the date on
which he enters upon his office and shall not be eligible for
reappointment:
Provided that the president or the member shall not hold
office as such after he has attained the age of seventy years.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the president and other
members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the
other terms and conditions of service of the president and
Term of
office, salaries
and allowances
of President
and other
members.

103
other members of the Commission shall be varied to their
disadvantage after their appointment.
78. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid
merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of,
the Commission; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as
a member of the Commission; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission
not affecting the merits of the case.
79. (1) The Central Government shall determine the nature
and categories of the officers and other employees required to assist
the Commission in the discharge of its functions and provide the
Commission with such officers and other employees as it may think
fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the Commission shall
discharge their functions under the general superintendence of the
president.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the officers and other
employees of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
80. (1) The Commission shall, with the prior concurrence of
the concerned State Government, constitute Boards to be called as
Mental Health Review Board in the districts of that State.
(2) The number, location and jurisdiction of the Boards shall
be decided by the Commission in consultation with the concerned
State Government.
(3) While constituting the Boards under sub-section ( 1), the
Commission shall have regard to the followings, namely:––
(a) the expected or actual workload of the Board in the
State in which such Board is to be constituted;
(b) number of mental health establishments existing in
the State;
(c) the number of persons with mental illness;
(d) population in the district in which the Board is to be
constituted;
(e) geographical and climatic conditions of the district
in which the Board is to be constituted.
81. Each Board shall consist of––
(a) a District Judge, or an officer of the State
judicial services who is qualified to be appointed as
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Commission.
Staff of
Commission.
Constitution of
Mental Health
Review Boards.
Composition
of Board.

104
District Judge or a retired District Judge who shall be
chairperson of the Board;
(b) representative of the District Collector or
District Magistrate or Deputy Commissioner of the
districts in which the Board is to be constituted;
(c) two members who shall be mental health
professionals of whom at least one shall be a psychiatrist;
(d) two members who shall be persons with
mental illness or care-givers or persons representing
organisations of persons with mental illness or care-
givers or non-governmental organisations working in
the field of mental health.
82. (1) A person shall be disqualified to be appointed as the
president or a member of the Commission or be removed by the
President of India on the recommendation of the Central
Government, if he––
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment
for an offence which involves moral turpitude; or
(b) has been removed or dismissed from the service of
the Government or a body corporate owned or controlled by
the Government; or
(c) is adjudged as an insolvent; or
(d) has such financial or other interest as is likely to
prejudice the discharge by him or her functions as a member;
or
(e) has such other disqualifications as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) A person shall be disqualified to be appointed as the
chairperson or a member of a Board or be removed by the
Commission, if he––
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment
for an offence which involves moral turpitude; or
(b) is adjudged as an insolvent; or
(c) has been removed or dismissed from the service of
the Government or a body corporate owned or controlled by
the Government; or
(d) has such financial or other interest as is likely to
prejudice the discharge by him or her functions as a member;
or
(e) has such other disqualifications as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
Disqualification
and removal.

105
(3) The president or a member of the Commission may resign
from the office by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the
President of India and on such resignation being accepted, the
vacancy shall be filled by appointment of a person, belonging to the
category under sub-section ( 3) of section 75.
(4) A chairperson or member of a Board may resign his office
by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the President of the
Commission and on such resignation being accepted, the vacancy
shall be filled by appointment of a person, belonging to the category
under sub-section ( 1) of section 81.
83. (1) The chairperson and members of the Board shall hold
office for a term of five years or up to the age of seventy years,
whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for reappointment for
another term of five years or up to the age of seventy years
whichever is earlier.
(2) The appointment of chairperson and members of every
Board shall be made by the president of the Commission.
(3) The honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the
other terms and conditions of service of, the chairperson and
members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
84. (1) The decisions of the Commission or the Board, as the
case may be, shall be by consensus, failing which by a majority of
votes of members present and voting and in the event of equality of
votes, the president or the chairperson, as the case may be, shall
have a second or casting vote.
(2) The quorum of a meeting of the Commission or the
Board, as the case may be, shall be three members.
85. (1) Any person with mental illness or his nominated
representative or a representative of a registered non-governmental
organisation, with the consent of such a person, being aggrieved by
the decision of any of the mental health establishment or whose
rights under this Act have been violated, may make an application to
the Board seeking redressal or appropriate relief.
(2) There shall be no fee or charge levied for making such an
application.
(3) Every application referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall
contain the name of applicant, his contact details, the details of the
violation of his rights, the mental health establishment or any other
place where such violation took place and the redressal sought from
the Board.
(4) In exceptional circumstances, the Board may accept an
application made orally or over telephone from a person admitted to
a mental health establishment.
Terms and
conditions of
service of
chairperson
and members
of Board.
Decisions of
Commission
and Board.
Applications
to Board.

106
86. All proceedings before the Commission and the Board,
shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of
sections 193, 219 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code.
87. The Commission and the Board shall meet at such times
and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to
the transaction of business at its meetings as may be specified by
regulations made by the Commission.
88. (1) The Board, on receipt of an application under sub-
section ( 1) of section 85, shall, subject to the provisions of this
section, endeavour to hear and dispose of the same within a period
of ninety days.
(2) The Board shall dispose of an application––
(a) for appointment of nominated representative under
clause ( d) of sub-section ( 4) of section 14;
(b) challenging admission of a minor under section 96;
(c) challenging supported admission under sub-
section ( 10) or sub-section ( 11) of section 98, within a
period of seven days from the date of receipt of such
applications.
(3) The Board shall dispose of an application challenging
supported admission under section 99 within a period of twenty-one
days from date of receipt of the application.
(4) The Board shall dispose of an application, other than an
application referred to in sub-section ( 3), within a period of ninety
days from the date of filing of the application.
(5) The proceeding of the Board shall be held in camera .
(6) The Board shall not ordinarily grant an adjournment for
the hearing.
(7) The parties to an application may appear in person or be
represented by a counsel or a representative of their choice.
(8) In respect of any application concerning a person with
mental illness, the Board shall hold the hearings and conduct the
proceedings at the mental health establishment where such person is
admitted.
(9) The Board may allow any persons other than those
directly interested with the application, with the permission of the
person with mental illness and the chairperson of the Board, to
attend the hearing.
Proceedings
before
Commission
and Board to
be judicial
proceedings.
Meetings.
Proceedings
before Board.
45 of 1860.

107
(10) The person with mental illness whose matter is being
heard shall have the right to give oral evidence to the Board, if such
person desires to do so.
(11) The Board shall have the power to require the attendance
and testimony of such other witnesses as it deems appropriate.
(12) The parties to a matter shall have the right to inspect any
document relied upon by any other party in its submissions to the
Board and may obtain copies of the same.
(13) The Board shall, within five days of the completion of
the hearing, communicate its decision to the parties in writing.
(14) Any member who is directly or indirectly involved in a
particular case, shall not sit on the Board during the hearings with
respect to that case.
89. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the powers and
functions of the Commission shall, inter alia , include all or any of
the following matters, namely:––
(a) appoint and remove members of the Board;
(b) give guidance to the Board on interpretation of the
provisions of this Act and the procedures to be followed by
the Board;
(c) review periodically the use of advance directives
and make regulations with regard to the procedure for
advance directive;
(d) advise the Central Government on matters relating
to the promotion and protection of rights of persons with
mental illness.
90. (1) The Commission shall appoint an Expert Committee to
prepare a guidance document for medical practitioners and mental
health professionals, containing procedures for assessing, when
necessary or the capacity of persons to make mental health care or
treatment decisions.
(2) Every medical practitioner and mental health professional
shall, while assessing capacity of a person to make mental health
care or treatment decisions, comply with the guidance document
referred to in sub-section ( 1) and follow the procedure specified
therein.
91. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the powers and
functions of the Board shall, include all or any of the following
matters, namely:––
(a) to register, review, alter, modify or cancel an
advance directive;
(b) to appoint a nominated representative;
Powers and
functions of
Commission.
Commission
to appoint
Expert
Committee to
prepare
guidance
document.
Powers and
functions of
Board.

108
(c) to receive and decide application from a person with
mental illness or his nominated representative or any other
interested person against the decision of medical officer or
psychiatrists in charge of mental health establishment or
mental health establishment under section 96 or section 98 or
section 99;
(d) to receive and decide applications in respect non-
disclosure of information specified under sub-section ( 3) of
section 25;
(e) to adjudicate complaints regarding deficiencies in
care and services specified under section 28;
(f) to visit and inspect prison or jails and seek
clarifications from the medical officer in charge of health
services in such prison or jail.
(2) Where it is brought to the notice of a Board or to the
Commission, that a mental health establishment violates the rights of
persons with mental illness, the Board or the Commission, as the
case may be, shall direct the Central Authority or the State Authority
to conduct an inspection and inquiry and submit a report of such
inspection and inquiry to the Board or the Commission, as the case
may be, containing the action taken or proposed to be taken by the
Central Authority or the State Authority to protect the rights of
persons with mental illness in the said mental health establishment.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Board,
in consultation with the Commission, may take measures to protect
the rights of persons with mental illness as it considers appropriate.
(4) If the mental health establishment does not comply with
the orders or directions of the Commission or the Board or wilfully
neglects such order or direction, the Commission or the Board, as
the case may be, may impose monetary penalty which may extend
up to five lakh rupees on such mental health establishment or order
the Central Authority or the State Authority to cancel the registration
of such mental health establishment.
92. Any person or establishment aggrieved by the decision of
the Commission or a Board may, within a period of thirty days from
such decision, prefer an appeal to the High Court of the State in
which the Board is situated:
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the
appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within
the period of thirty days.
93. (1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Commission
grants of such sums of money as the Central Government may
think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
Appeal to
High Court
against order
of
Commission
or Board.
Grants by
Central
Government
to
Commission.

109
(2) The grants referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be applied
for,—
(a) meeting the salary, allowances and other
remuneration of the president, members, officers and other
employees of the Commission;
(b) meeting the salary, allowances and other
remuneration of the chairperson, members, officers and other
employees of the Boards; and
(c) the expenses of the Commission and the Boards
incurred in the discharge of their functions and for the
purposes of this Act.
CHAPTER XII
A
DMISSION, TREATMENT AND DISCHARGE
94. (1) For the purposes of this Act, “independent patient or
an independent admission” refers to the admission of person with
mental illness, to a mental health establishment, who has the
capacity to make mental health care and treatment decisions or
requires minimal support in making decisions.
(2) All admissions in the mental health establishment shall, as
far as possible, be independent admissions except when such
conditions exist as make supported admission unavoidable.
95. ( 1) Any person, who is not a minor and who considers
himself to have a mental illness and desires to be admitted to any
mental health establishment for treatment may request the medical
officer or psychiatrist in charge of the establishment to be admitted
as an independent patient.
(2) On receipt of such request under sub-section ( 1), the
medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the establishment shall
admit the person to the establishment if the medical officer or
psychiatrist is satisfied that––
(a) the person has a mental illness of a severity
requiring admission to a mental health establishment;
(b) the person with mental illness is likely to benefit
from admission and treatment to the mental health establishment;
(c) the person has understood the nature and purpose
of admission to the mental health establishment, and has made
the request for admission of his own free will, without any
duress or undue influence and has the capacity to make
mental health care and treatment decisions without support or
requires minimal support from others in making such decisions.
(3) If a person is unable to understand the purpose, nature,
likely effects of proposed treatment and of the probable result of
not accepting the treatment or requires a very high level of support
Admission of
person with
mental illness
as independent
patient in
mental health
establishment.
Independent
admission and
treatment.

110
approaching hundred per cent support in making decisions, he or
she shall be deemed unable to understand the purpose of the
admission and therefore shall not be admitted as independent patient
under this section.
(4) A person admitted as an independent patient to a mental
health establishment shall be bound to abide by order and
instructions or bye laws of the mental health establishment.
(5) An independent patient shall not be given treatment
without his informed consent.
(6) The mental health establishment shall admit an independent
patient on his own request, and shall not require the consent or
presence of a nominated representative or a relative or care-giver for
admitting the person to the mental health establishment.
(7) Subject to the provisions contained in section 97 an
independent patient may get himself discharged from the mental
health establishment without the consent of the medical officer or
psychiatrist in charge of such establishment.
96. ( 1) A minor may be admitted to a mental health
establishment only after following the procedure laid down in this
section.
(2) The nominated representative of the minor shall apply to
the medical officer in charge of a mental health establishment for
admission of the minor to the establishment.
(3) Upon receipt of such an application, the medical officer or
psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment may admit
such a minor to the establishment, if two psychiatrists, or one
psychiatrist and one mental health professional or one psychiatrist
and one medical practitioner, have independently examined the minor
on the day of admission or in the preceding seven days and both
independently conclude based on the examination and, if appropriate,
on information provided by others, that,—
(a) the minor has a mental illness of a severity requiring
admission to a mental health establishment;
(b) admission shall be in the best interests of the minor,
with regard to his or her health, well-being or safety, taking
into account the wishes of the minor if ascertainable and the
reasons for reaching this decision;
(c) the mental health care needs of the minor cannot be
fulfilled unless he is admitted; and
(d) all community based alternatives to admission have
been shown to have failed or are demonstrably unsuitable for
the needs of the minor.
(4) A minor so admitted shall be accommodated separately
from adults, in an environment that takes into account his age and
Admission of
minor.

111
developmental needs and is at least of the same quality as is
provided to other minors admitted to hospitals for other medical
treatments.
(5) The nominated representative or an attendant appointed by
the nominated representative shall under all circumstances stay with
the minor in the mental health establishment for the entire duration
of the admission of the minor to the mental health establishment.
(6) In the case of minor girls, where the nominated
representative is male, a female attendant shall be appointed by the
nominated representative and under all circumstances shall stay with
the minor girl in the mental health establishment for the entire
duration of her admission.
(7) A minor shall be given treatment with the informed
consent of his nominated representative.
(8) If the nominated representative no longer supports
admission of the minor under this section or requests discharge of
the minor from the mental health establishment, the minor shall be
discharged by the mental health establishment.
(9) Any admission of a minor to a mental health establishment
shall be informed by the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of
the mental health establishment to the concerned Board within a
period of seventy-two hours.
(10) The concerned Board shall have the right to visit and
interview the minor or review the medical records if the Board
desires to do so.
(11) Any admission of a minor which continues for a period
of thirty days shall be immediately informed to the concerned Board.
(12) The concerned Board shall carry out a mandatory review
within a period of seven days of being informed, of all admissions
of minors continuing beyond thirty days and every subsequent thirty
days.
(13) The concerned Board shall at minimum, review the
clinical records of the minor and may interview the minor if
necessary.
97. ( 1) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of a
mental health establishment shall discharge from the mental health
establishment any person admitted under section 95 as an
independent patient immediately on request made by such person or
if the person disagrees with his admission under section 95 subject
to the provisions of sub-section ( 3).
(2) Where a minor has been admitted to a mental health
establishment under section 96 and attains the age of eighteen years
during his stay in the mental health establishment, the medical
officer in charge of the mental health establishment shall classify
Discharge of
independent
patients.

112
him as an independent patient under section 95 and all provisions of
this Act as applicable to independent patient who is not minor, shall
apply to such person.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a mental
health professional may prevent discharge of a person admitted as
an independent person under section 95 for a period of twenty-four
hours so as to allow his assessment necessary for admission under
section 98 if the mental health professional is of the opinion that–
(a) such person is unable to understand the nature and
purpose of his decisions and requires substantial or very high
support from his or her nominated representative; or
(b) has recently threatened or attempted or is
threatening or attempting to cause bodily harm to himself; or
(c) has recently behaved or is behaving violently
towards another person or has caused or is causing another
person to fear bodily harm from him; or
(d) has recently shown or is showing an inability to
care for himself to a degree that places the individual at risk
of harm to himself.
(4) The person referred to in sub-section ( 3) shall be either
admitted as a supported patient under section 98, or discharged
from the establishment within a period of twenty-four hours or on
completion of assessments for admission for a supported patient
under section 98, whichever is earlier.
98. ( 1) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of a
mental health establishment shall admit every such person to the
establishment, upon application by the nominated representative of
the person, under this section, if––
(a) the person has been independently examined on the
day of admission or in the preceding seven days, by one
psychiatrist and the other being a mental health professional
or a medical practitioner, and both independently conclude
based on the examination and, if appropriate, on information
provided by others, that the person has a mental illness of
such severity that the person,––
(i) has recently threatened or attempted or is
threatening or attempting to cause bodily harm to
himself; or
(ii) has recently behaved or is behaving violently
towards another person or has caused or is causing
another person to fear bodily harm from him; or
(iii) has recently shown or is showing an inability
to care for himself to a degree that places the individual
at risk of harm to himself;
Admission and
treatment of
persons with
mental illness,
with high
support needs,
in mental
health
establishment,
up to thirty
days
(supported
admission).

113
(b) the psychiatrist or the mental health professionals or
the medical practitioner, as the case may be, certify, after
taking into account an advance directive, if any, that
admission to the mental health establishment is the least
restrictive care option possible in the circumstances; and
(c) the person is ineligible to receive care and treatment
as an independent patient because the person is unable to
make mental health care and treatment decisions independently
and needs very high support from his nominated
representative in making decisions.
(2) The admission of a person with mental illness to a mental
health establishment under this section shall be limited to a period of
thirty days.
(3) At the end of the period mentioned under sub-section ( 2),
or earlier, if the person no longer meets the criteria for admission
as stated in sub-section ( 1), the patient shall no longer remain in the
establishment under this section.
(4) On the expiry of the period of thirty days referred to in
sub-section ( 2), the person may continue to remain admitted in the
mental health establishment in accordance with the provisions of
section 99.
(5) If the conditions under section 99 are not met, the person
may continue to remain in the mental health establishment as an
independent patient under section 95 and the medical officer or
psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment shall inform
the person of his admission status under this Act, including his right
to leave the mental health establishment.
(6) Every person with mental illness admitted under this
section shall be provided treatment after taking into account,––
(a) an advance directive if any; or
(b) informed consent of the patient with the support of
his nominated representative subject to the provisions of sub-
section ( 7).
(7) If a person with the mental illness admitted under this
section requires nearly hundred per cent. support from his
nominated representative in making a decision in respect of his
treatment, the nominated representative may temporarily consent to
the treatment plan of such person on his behalf.
(8) In case where consent has been given under sub-
section ( 7), the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the
mental health establishment shall record such consent in the medical
records and review the capacity of the patient to give consent every
seven days.

114
(9) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental
health establishment shall report the concerned Board,––
(a) within three days the admissions of a woman or a
minor;
(b) within seven days the admission of any person not
being a woman or minor.
(10) A person admitted under this section or his nominated
representative or a representative of a registered non-governmental
organisation with the consent of the person, may apply to the
concerned Board for review of the decision of the medical officer
or psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment to admit
the person to the mental health establishment under this section.
(11) The concerned Board shall review the decision of the
medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental health
establishment and give its findings thereon within seven days of
receipt of request for such review which shall be binding on all the
concerned parties.
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, it shall
be the duty of the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the
mental health establishment to keep the condition of the person with
mental illness admitted under this section on going review.
(13) If the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the
mental health establishment is of the opinion that the conditions
specified under sub-section ( 1) are no longer applicable, he shall
terminate the admission under this section, and inform the person
and his nominated representative accordingly.
(14) Non applicability of conditions referred to in sub-
section ( 13) shall not preclude the person with mental illness
remaining as an independent patient.
(15) In a case, a person with the mental illness admitted
under this section has been discharged, such person shall not be
readmitted under this section within a period of seven days from the
date of his discharge.
(16) In case a person referred to in sub-section ( 15) requires
readmission within a period of seven days referred to in that sub-
section, such person shall be considered for readmission in
accordance with the provisions of section 99.
(17) If the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the
mental health establishment is of the opinion that the person with
mental illness admitted under this section in the mental health
establishment requires or is likely to require further treatment
beyond the period of thirty days, then such medical officer or
psychiatrist shall be duty bound to refer the matter to be examined
by two psychiatrists for his admission beyond thirty days.

115
99. (1) If a person with mental illness admitted under
section 98 requires continuous admission and treatment beyond
thirty days or a person with mental illness discharged under sub-
section ( 15) of that section requires readmission within seven days
of such discharge, he shall be admitted in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(2) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of a mental
health establishment, upon application by the nominated
representative of a person with mental illness, shall continue
admission of such person with mental illness, if—
(a) two psychiatrists have independently examined the
person with mental illness in the preceding seven days and
both independently conclude based on the examination and, on
information provided by others that the person has a mental
illness of a severity that the person––
(i) has consistently over time threatened or
attempted to cause bodily harm to himself; or
(ii) has consistently over time behaved violently
towards another person or has consistently over time
caused another person to fear bodily harm from him; or
(iii) has consistently over time shown an inability
to care for himself to a degree that places the individual
at risk of harm to himself;
(b) both psychiatrists, after taking into account an
advance directive, if any, certify that admission to a mental
health establishment is the least restrictive care option possible
under the circumstances; and
(c) the person continues to remain ineligible to receive
care and treatment as a independent patient as the person
cannot make mental health care and treatment decisions
independently and needs very high support from his
nominated representative, in making decisions.
(3) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental
health establishment shall report all admissions or readmission under
this section, within a period of seven days of such admission or
readmission, to the concerned Board.
(4) The Board shall, within a period of twenty-one days from
the date of last admission or readmission of person with mental
illness under this section, permit such admission or readmission or
order discharge of such person.
(5) While permitting admission or readmission or ordering
discharge of such person under sub-section ( 4), the Board shall
examine––
(a) the need for institutional care to such person;
(b) whether such care cannot be provided in less
restrictive settings based in the community.
Admission and
treatment of
persons with
mental
illness, with
high support
needs, in
mental
health
establishment,
beyond
thirty days
(supported
admission
beyond
thirty days).

116
(6) In all cases of application for readmission or continuance
of admission of a person with mental illness in the mental health
establishment under this section, the Board may require the medical
officer or psychiatrist in charge of treatment of such person with
mental illness to submit a plan for community based treatment and
the progress made, or likely to be made, towards realising this plan.
(7) The person referred to in sub-section ( 4) shall not be
permitted to continue in the mental health establishment in which he
had been admitted or his readmission in such establishment merely
on the ground of non-existence of community based services at the
place where such person ordinarily resides.
(8) The admission of a person with mental illness to a mental
health establishment under this section shall be limited to a period up
to ninety days in the first instance.
(9) The admission of a person with mental illness to a mental
health establishment under this section beyond the period of ninety
days may be extended for a period of one hundred and twenty days
at the first instance and thereafter for a period of one hundred and
eighty days each time after complying with the provisions of sub-
sections ( 1) to ( 7).
(10) If the Board refuses to permit admission or continuation
thereof or readmission under sub-section (9), or on the expiry of
the periods referred to in sub-section ( 9) or earlier if such person
no longer falls within the criteria for admission under sub-
section ( 1), such person shall be discharged from such mental
health establishment.
(11) If a person with mental illness has made an advance
directive, it shall be taken into account before the commencement
of treatment.
(12) If a person with mental illness admitted under this
section, requires nearly hundred per cent. support from his
nominated representative, in making decision in respect of his
treatment, the nominated representative may temporarily consent to
the treatment plan of such person on his behalf.
(13) In a case where consent has been given under sub-
section ( 12), the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the
mental health establishment shall record such consent in the medical
records of such person with mental illness and review on the expiry
of every fortnight, the capacity of such person to give consent.
(14) A person with mental illness admitted under this section,
or his or her nominated representative or a representative of a
registered non-governmental organisation with the consent of the
person, may apply to the concerned Board for review of the
decision of the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of medical
health establishment to admit such person in such establishment and
the decision of the Board thereon shall be binding on all parties.

117
(15) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the
medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental health
establishment is of the opinion that the conditions under sub-section
(1) are no longer applicable, such medical officer or psychiatrist
shall discharge such person from such establishment and inform
such person and his nominated representative accordingly.
(16) The person with mental illness referred to in sub-
section ( 15) may continue to remain in the mental health
establishment as an independent patient.
100. ( 1) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the
mental health establishment may grant leave to any person with
mental illness admitted under section 96 or section 98 or section 99,
to be absent from the establishment subject to such conditions, if
any, and for such duration as such medical officer or psychiatrist
may consider necessary.
(2) The leave referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall not be
extended beyond the period of the duration of admission permissible
under section 96 or section 98 or section 99, as the case may be.
(3) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental
health establishment shall obtain the consent of the nominated
representative before taking a decision of granting leave.
(4) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental
health establishment may in writing cancel the leave of absence of
the person with mental illness admitted in such establishment if he
considers it appropriate to do so in the interest of such person.
(5) If the person with mental illness, on expiry of the period
of his leave or on cancellation of his leave of absence under sub-
section ( 4) does not return to the establishment, the medical officer
or psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment shall
first contact the person on leave and his nominated representative.
(6) If the person with mental illness and his nominated
representative feel that continued admission in the mental health
establishment is not necessary, then, such person and his nominated
representative shall communicate the same to the medical officer or
psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment, who shall
formally discharge such person from the mental health establishment.
(7) If the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the
mental health establishment has reason to believe that the person
requires ongoing admission to a mental health establishment and the
nominated representative agrees with the assessment of such
medical officer or psychiatrist, and such person with mental illness
refuses to return to the hospital on expiry of leave or cancellation
of his leave of absence, the medical officer or the psychiatrist in
charge of the mental health establishment shall report to the Police
Officer in charge of the police station within the limits of whose
jurisdiction the mental health establishment is situated, to convey the
person to the mental health establishment.
Leave of
absence.

118
(8) If the person with mental illness referred to in sub-
section ( 7), is not conveyed by the Police Officer for any reasons,
to the mental health establishment within one month of the expiry of
his leave or cancellation of his leave of absence, as the case may
be, such person shall be deemed to have been discharged from such
mental health establishment.
(9) The provisions of sub-section ( 8) shall not preclude
readmission of the person with mental illness in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.
101. If a person with mental illness admitted to a mental
health establishment under this Act absents himself without leave or
without discharge from the mental health establishment, he shall be
taken into protection by any Police Officer at the request of the
medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental health
establishment and taken back to the mental health establishment
immediately:
Provided that in the case of a person with mental illness not
admitted under section 112, the provisions of this section shall not
apply after the expiry of a period of one month from the date of
such absence of such person from the mental health establishment.
102. (1) A person with mental illness admitted to a mental
health establishment under section 96 or section 98 or section 99 or
section 112, as the case may be, may subject to any general or
special order of the Board be removed from such mental health
establishment and admitted to another mental health establishment
within the State or with the consent of the Commission to any
mental health establishment in any other State:
Provided that no person with mental illness admitted to a
mental health establishment under an order made in pursuance of an
application made under this Act shall be so removed unless
intimation and reasons for the transfer have been given to the
person with mental illness and his nominated representative.
(2) The State Government may make such general or special
order as it thinks fit directing the removal of any prisoner with
mental illness from the place where he is for the time being
detained, to any mental health establishment or other place of safe
custody in the State or to any mental health establishment or other
place of safe custody in any other State with the consent of the
Government of that other State.
103. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any
medical treatment, including treatment for mental illness, may be
provided by any registered medical practitioner to a person with
mental illness either at a health establishment or in the community,
subject to the informed consent of the nominated representative,
where the nominated representative is available, and where it is
immediately necessary to prevent—
Absence with-
out leave or
discharge.
Transfer of
persons with
mental
illness from
one mental
health
establishment
to
another
mental
health
establishment.
Emergency
treatment.

119
(a) death or irreversible harm to the health of the
person; or
(b) the person inflicting serious harm to himself or
herself or to others; or
(c) the person causing serious damage to property
belonging to himself or herself or to others where such
behaviour is believed to flow directly from the person’s
mental illness.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,
“emergency treatment” includes transportation of the person
with mental illness to a nearest mental health establishment for
assessment.
(2) Nothing in this section shall allow any medical officer or
psychiatrist to give to the person with mental illness medical
treatment which is not directly related to the emergency treatment
specified under sub-section ( 1).
(3) Nothing in this section shall allow any medical officer or
psychiatrist to use electroconvulsive therapy as a form of treatment.
(4) The emergency treatment referred to in this section shall
be limited to seventy-two hours or till the person with mental illness
has been assessed at a mental health establishment, whichever is
earlier:
Provided that during a disaster or emergency declared by the
appropriate Government, the period of emergency treatment referred
to in this sub-section may extend up to seven days.
104. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the
following treatments shall not be performed on any person with
mental illness–
(a) electro-convulsive therapy without the use of
muscle relaxants and anaesthesia;
(b) electro-convulsive therapy for minors;
(c) sterilisation of men or women, when such
sterilisation is intended as a treatment for mental illness;
(d) chained in any manner or form whatsoever.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), if,
in the opinion of psychiatrist in charge of a minor’s treatment,
electro-convulsive therapy is required, then, such treatment shall be
done with the consent of the guardian and prior permission of the
concerned Board.
105. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,
psychosurgery shall not be performed as a treatment for mental
illness unless—
Prohibited
procedures.
Restriction on
psychosurgery
for persons
with mental
illness.

120
(a) the informed consent of the person on whom the
surgery is being performed; and
(b) approval from the concerned Board to perform the
surgery, has been obtained.
(2) The Commission may make regulations for the purpose of
carrying out the provisions of this section.
106. (1) The physical restraint or seclusion may only be used
when,––
(a) it is the only means available to prevent imminent
and immediate harm to person concerned or to others;
(b) it is authorised by the psychiatrist in charge of the
person’s treatment at the mental health establishment.
(2) Physical restraint or seclusion shall not be used for a
period longer than it is absolutely necessary to prevent the
immediate risk of significant harm.
(3) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the mental
health establishment shall be responsible for ensuring that the
method, nature of restraint or seclusion, justification for its
imposition and the duration of the restraint or seclusion are
immediately recorded in the person’s medical notes.
(4) The restraint or seclusion shall not be used as a form of
punishment or deterrent in any circumstance and the mental health
establishment shall not use restraint or seclusion merely on the
ground of shortage of staff in such establishment.
(5) The nominated representative of the person with mental
illness shall be informed about every instance of seclusion or
restraint within a period of twenty-four hours.
(6) A person who is placed under restraint or seclusion shall
be kept in a place where he can cause no harm to himself or others
and under regular ongoing supervision of the medical personnel at
the mental health establishment.
(7) The mental health establishment shall include all instances
of restraint and seclusion, in the report to be sent to the concerned
Board on a monthly basis.
(8) The Commission may make regulations for the purpose of
carrying out the provisions of this section.
(9) The Board may order a mental health establishment to
desist from applying restraint and seclusion if the Board is of the
opinion that the mental health establishment is persistently and
wilfully ignoring the provisions of this section.
107. (1) Whenever a person undergoing treatment for mental
illness in a mental health establishment is to be discharged into the
community or to a different mental health establishment or where a
Restraints and
seclusion.
Discharge
planning.

121
new psychiatrist is to take responsibility of the person’s care and
treatment, the psychiatrist who has been responsible for the
person’s care and treatment shall consult with the person with
mental illness, the nominated representative, the family member or
care-giver with whom the person with mental illness shall reside on
discharge from the hospital, the psychiatrist expected to be
responsible for the person’s care and treatment in the future, and
such other persons as may be appropriate, as to what treatment or
services would be appropriate for the person.
(2) The psychiatrist responsible for the person’s care shall in
consultation with the persons referred to in sub-section ( 1) ensure
that a plan is developed as to how treatment or services shall be
provided to the person with mental illness.
(3) The discharge planning under this section shall apply to all
discharges from a mental health establishment.
108. (1) The professionals conducting research shall obtain
free and informed consent from all persons with mental illness for
participation in any research involving interviewing the person or
psychological, physical, chemical or medicinal interventions.
(2) In case of research involving any psychological, physical,
chemical or medicinal interventions to be conducted on person who
is unable to give free and informed consent but does not resist
participation in such research, permission to conduct such research
shall be obtained from concerned State Authority.
(3) The State Authority may allow the research to proceed
based on informed consent being obtained from the nominated
representative of persons with mental illness, if the State Authority
is satisfied that––
(a) the proposed research cannot be performed on
persons who are capable of giving free and informed consent;
(b) the proposed research is necessary to promote the
health of the population represented by the person;
(c) the purpose of the proposed research is to obtain
knowledge relevant to the particular health needs of persons
with mental illness;
(d) a full disclosure of the interests of persons and
organisations conducting the proposed research is made and
there is no conflict of interest involved; and
(e) the proposed research follows all the national and
international guidelines and regulations concerning the conduct
of such research and ethical approval has been obtained from
the institutional ethics committee where such research is to be
conducted.
Research.

122
(4) The provisions of this section shall not restrict research
based study of the case notes of a person who is unable to give
informed consent, so long as the anonymity of the persons is
secured.
CHAPTER XIII
R
ESPONSIBILITIES  OF OTHER AGENCIES
109. (1) Every officer in charge of a police station shall have
a duty––
(a) to take under protection any person found
wandering at large within the limits of the police station
whom the officer has reason to believe has mental illness and
is incapable of taking care of himself; or
(b) to take under protection any person within the limits
of the police station whom the officer has reason to believe
to be a risk to himself or others by reason of mental illness.
(2) The officer in charge of a police station shall inform the
person who has been taken into protection under sub-section ( 1),
the grounds for taking him into such protection or his nominated
representative, if in the opinion of the officer such person has
difficulty in understanding those grounds.
(3) Every person taken into protection under sub-section ( 1)
shall be taken to the nearest public health establishment as soon as
possible but not later than twenty-four hours from the time of being
taken into protection, for assessment of the person’s health care
needs.
(4) No person taken into protection under sub-section ( 1)
shall be detained in the police lock up or prison in any
circumstances.
(5) The medical officer in charge of the public health
establishment shall be responsible for arranging the assessment of
the person and the needs of the person with mental illness will be
addressed as per other provisions of this Act as applicable in the
particular circumstances.
(6) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the public
mental health establishment if on assessment of the person finds that
such person does not have a mental illness of a nature or degree
requiring admission to the mental health establishment, he shall
inform his assessment to the police officer who had taken the
person into protection and the police officer shall take the person to
the person’s residence or in case of homeless persons, to a
Government establishment for homeless persons.
(7) In case of a person with mental illness who is homeless
or found wandering in the community , a First Information Report of
a missing person shall be lodged at the concerned police station and
Duties of
police officers
in respect of
persons with
mental illness.

123
the station house officer shall have a duty to trace the family of
such person and inform the family about the whereabouts of the
person.
110. (1) Every officer in charge of a police station, who has
reason to believe that any person residing within the limits of the
police station has a mental illness and is being illtreated or neglected,
shall forthwith report the fact to the Magistrate within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction the person with mental illness resides.
(2) Any person who has reason to believe that a person has
mental illness and is being ill-treated or neglected by any person
having responsibility for care of such person, shall report the fact
to the police officer in charge of the police station within whose
jurisdiction the person with mental illness resides.
(3) If the Magistrate has reason to believe based on the report
of a police officer or otherwise, that any person with mental illness
within the local limits of his jurisdiction is being ill-treated or
neglected, the Magistrate may cause the person with mental illness
to be produced before him and pass an order in accordance with
the provisions of section 111.
111. (1) When any person with mental illness or who may
have a mental illness appears or is brought before a Magistrate, the
Magistrate may, order in writing––
(a) that the person is conveyed to a public mental
health establishment for assessment and treatment, if
necessary and the mental health establishment shall deal with
such person in accordance with the provisions of the Act; or
(b) to authorise the admission of the person with
mental illness in a mental health establishment for such period
not exceeding ten days to enable the medical officer or
psychiatrist in charge of the mental health establishment to
carry out an assessment of the person and to plan for
necessary treatment, if any.
(2) On completion of the period of assessment referred to in
sub-section ( 1), the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the
mental health establishment shall submit a report to the Magistrate
and the person shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.
112. (1) An order under section 30 of the Prisoners Act, 1900
or under section 144 of the Air Force Act, 1950, or under
section 145 of the Army Act, 1950, or under section 143 or section
144 of the Navy Act, 1957, or under section 330 or section 335 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, directing the admission of a
prisoner with mental illness into any suitable mental health
establishment, shall be sufficient authority for the admission of such
person in such establishment to which such person may be lawfully
transferred for care and treatment therein.
Report to
Magistrate of
person with
mental illness
in private
residence who
is ill-treated
or neglected.
Conveying or
admitting person
with mental
illness to mental
health
establishment by
Magistrate.
Prisoners with
mental illness.
3 of 1900.
45 of 1950.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
2 of 1974.

124
(2) The medical officer of a prison or jail shall send a
quarterly report to the concerned Board certifying therein that there
are no prisoners with mental illness in the prison or jail.
(3) The Board may visit the prison or jail and ask the medical
officer as to why the prisoner with mental illness, if any, has been
kept in the prison or jail and not transferred for treatment to a
mental health establishment.
(4) The medical officer in charge of a mental health
establishment wherein any person referred to in sub-section ( 1) is
detained, shall once in every six months, make a special report
regarding the mental and physical condition of such person to the
authority under whose order such person is detained.
113. If it appears to the person in charge of a State run
custodial institution (including beggars homes, orphanages, women’s
protection homes and children homes) that any resident of the
institution has, or is likely to have, a mental illness, then, he shall
take such resident of the institution to the nearest mental health
establishment run or funded by the appropriate Government for
assessment and treatment, as necessary.
114. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, a person’s current or past admission to
a mental health establishment or a person’s current or past treatment
for mental illness shall not by itself, without prejudice to the
provisions of any law for the time being force or custom or usage
governing personnel laws of such person, be a ground for divorce.
(2) If during any judicial process before any competent court,
proof of mental illness is produced and is challenged by the other
party, the court shall refer the same for further scrutiny to the
concerned Board and the Board shall, after examination of the
person alleged to have a mental illness, either by itself or through
a committee of experts, submit its opinion to the court.
CHAPTER XIV
R
ESTRICTION  TO DISCHARGE  FUNCTIONS  BY PROFESSIONALS  NOT
COVERED  BY PROFESSION
115. No mental health professional or medical practitioner
shall discharge any duty or perform any function not authorised by
this Act or specify or recommend any medicine or treatment not
authorised by the field of his profession.
CHAPTER XV
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
116. (1) Whoever carries on a mental health establishment
without registration shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be
less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees for first contravention or a penalty which shall not
be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two
lakh rupees for a second contravention or a penalty which shall not
Persons in
custodial
institutions.
Question of
mental illness
in judicial
process.
Restriction to
discharge
functions by
professionals
not covered
by profession.
Penalties for
establishing
or maintaining
mental health
establishment
in contraven-
tion of provisions
of this Act.

125
be less than two lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh
rupees for every subsequent contravention.
(2 ) Whoever knowingly serves in a mental health
establishment which is not registered under this Act, shall be liable
to a penalty which may extend to twenty five thousand rupees.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the penalty under
this section shall be adjudicated by the State Authority.
(4) Whoever fails to pay the amount of penalty, the State
Authority may forward the order to the Collector of the district in
which such person owns any property or resides or carries on his
business or profession or where the mental health establishment is
situated, and the Collector shall recover from such persons or
mental health establishment the amount specified thereunder, as if it
were an arrear of land revenue.
(5) All sums realised by way of penalties under this Chapter
shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
117. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of
this Act, or of any rule or regulation made thereunder shall for first
contravention be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months, or with a fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees or with both, and for any subsequent contravention
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or
with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but
which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
118. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by a company, every person who at the time the offence was
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company
for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this
Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the
part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
Punishment for
contravention
of provisions of
the Act or rules
or regulations
made thereunder.
Offences by
companies.

126
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes
a firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in
the firm.
CHAPTER XVI
MISCELLANEOUS
119. (1) The Central Government may, by a general or special
order, call upon the Authority or the Commission or the Board to
furnish, periodically or as and when required any information
concerning the activities carried on by the Authority or the
Commission or the Board, as the case may be, in such form as may
be prescribed, to enable that Government, to carry out the purposes
of this Act.
(2) The State Government may, by a general or special order,
call upon the Authority to furnish, periodically or as and when
required any information concerning the activities carried on by the
Authority in such form as may be prescribed, to enable that
Government, to carry out the purposes of this Act.
120. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this
Act, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the
performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such
directions on questions of policy, other than those relating to
technical and administrative matters, as the Central Government may
give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be
given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is
given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a
question is one of policy or not shall be final.
121. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of the
opinion—
(a) that on account of circumstances beyond the
control of the Central Authority, it is unable to discharge the
functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the Central Authority has persistently defaulted
in complying with any direction given by the Central
Government under this Act or in the discharge of the
functions or performance of the duties imposed on it by or
under the provisions of this Act; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary
in the public interest so to do,
the Central Government may, by notification and for reasons to be
specified therein, supersede the Central Authority for such period,
not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:
Power to call
for informa-
tion.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Central
Authority.

127
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Central
Authority to make representations against the proposed supersession
and shall consider representations, if any, of the Central Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-
section ( 1), superseding the Central Authority,—
(a) the chairperson and other members shall, as from
the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by
or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or
discharged by or on behalf of the Central Authority shall, until
the Central Authority is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3),
be exercised and discharged by the Central Government or
such authority as the Central Government may specify in this
behalf;
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Central
Authority shall, until the Central Authority is reconstituted
under sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession
specified in the notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government shall reconstitute the Central Authority by a fresh
appointment of its chairperson and other members and in such case
any person who had vacated his office under clause ( a) of sub-
section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for re-
appointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued
under sub-section ( 1) and a full report of any action taken under
this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid
before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
122. (1) If at any time the State Government is of the
opinion—
(a) that on account of circumstances beyond the
control of the State Authority, it is unable to discharge the
functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the State Authority has persistently defaulted in
complying with any direction given by the State Government
under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or
performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary
in the public interest so to do,
the State Government may, by notification and for reasons to be
specified therein, supersede the State Authority for such period, not
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:
Power of
State
Government
to supersede
State
Authority.

128
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the State
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the State
Authority to make representations against the proposed supersession
and shall consider representations, if any, of the State Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-
section ( 1) superseding the State Authority,—
(a) the chairperson and other members shall, as from
the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by
or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or
discharged by or on behalf of the State Authority shall, until
the State Authority is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), be
exercised and discharged by the State Government or such
authority as the State Government may specify in this behalf;
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the State
Authority shall, until the State Authority is reconstituted under
sub-section ( 3), vest in the State Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession
specified in the notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the State
Government shall reconstitute the State Authority by a fresh
appointment of its chairperson and other members and in such case
any person who had vacated his office under clause ( a) of sub-
section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for re-
appointment.
(4) The State Government shall cause a notification issued
under sub-section ( 1) and a full report of any action taken under
this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid
before the State Legislature at the earliest.
123. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the
provisions of this Act shall, taking into consideration the
communication, travel and transportation difficulties, apply to the
States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland,
Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim, with following modifications,
namely:—
(a) under sub-section ( 3) of section 80, the president of
the Commission may constitute a single Board for all the
States;
(b) in sub-section ( 2) of section 88, reference to the
period of “seven days”, and in sub-section ( 3) of that section,
reference to the period of “twenty-one days” shall be
construed as “ten days” and “thirty days”, respectively;
(c) in sub-section ( 9) of section 96, reference to the
period of “seventy-two hours” shall be construed as “one
hundred twenty hours”, and in sub-sections ( 3) and ( 12) of
that section, reference to a period of “seven days” shall be
construed as “ten days”;
Special
provisions for
States in
north-east
and hill
States.

129
(d) in sub-section ( 3) of section 97, reference to the
period of “twenty-four hours” shall be construed as “seventy-
two hours”;
(e) in clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub-section ( 9) of
section 98, reference to the period of “three days” and “seven
days” shall be construed as “seven days” and “ten days”
respectively;
(f) in sub-section ( 3) of section 99, reference to the
period of “seven days” and in sub-section ( 4) of that section,
reference to the period of “twenty-one days” shall be
construed as “ten days” and “thirty days” respectively;
(g) in sub-section ( 4) of section 103, reference to the
period of “seventy-two hours” shall be construed as “one
hundred twenty hours”.
(2) The provisions of clauses ( b) to ( g) of sub-section ( 1)
shall also apply to the States of Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and
Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territories of Lakshadweep and
Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
(3) The provisions of this section shall cease to have effect
on the expiry of a period of ten years from the commencement of
this Act, except as respects things done or omitted to be done
before such cesser, and upon such cesser section 6 of the General
Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply as if this Act had then been repealed
by a Central Act.
124. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 309 of
the Indian Penal Code, any person who attempts to commit suicide
shall be presumed, unless proved otherwise, to be suffering from
mental illness at the time of attempting sucide and shall not be liable
to punishment under the said section.
(2) The appropriate Government shall have a duty to provide
care, treatment and rehabilitation to a person, having mental illness
and who attempted to commit suicide, to reduce the risk of
recurrence of attempt to commit suicide.
125. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit
or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Commission or the
Board is empowered by or under this Act to determine, and no
injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect
of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power
conferred by or under this Act.
126. The Central Government may, if it considers so
necessary in the interest of persons with mental illness being
governed by the Mental Health Act, 1987, take appropriate interim
measures by making scheme for the smooth implementation of the
provisions of this Act.
Presumption
of mental
illness in case
of attempt to
commit
suicide by
person.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
10 of 1897.
45 of 1860.
Transitory
provisions.
14 of 1987.

130
127. The chairperson, president and other members and the
officers and other employees of the Authority, Commission and
Board shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
128. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the appropriate Government or against the Chairperson or
President or any other Member of the Central Authority or the State
Authority or the Commission or the Board, as the case may be, for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in
pursuance of this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder in
the discharge of official duties.
129. The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any
other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
130. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification,
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of nomination of members of the
Central Authority under sub-section ( 2) of section 34;
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the chairperson and other
members of the Central Authority under sub-section ( 3) of
section 35;
(c) the procedure for registration (including the fees to
be levied for such registration) of the mental health
establishments under sub-section ( 2) of section 43;
(d) the manner of nomination of members of the State
Authority under sub-section ( 2) of section 46;
(e) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the chairperson and other
members of the State Authority under sub-section ( 3) of
section 47;
(f) the procedure for registration (including the fees to
be levied for such registration) of the mental health
establishments under sub-section ( 2) of section 55;
(g) the form of accounts and other relevant records and
annual statement of accounts under sub-section ( 1) of section 59;
(h) the form in, and the time within which an annual
report shall be prepared under section 60;
Chairperson,
members and
staff of
Authority
Commission
and Board to
be public
servants.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
45 of 1860.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.

131
(i) the form of accounts and other relevant records and
annual statement of accounts under sub-section ( 1) of section 63;
(j) the form in, and the time within which an annual
report shall be prepared under section 64;
(k) the form of application to be submitted by the
mental health establishment with an undertaking that the
mental health establishment fulfils the minimum standards, if
any, specified by the Authority, under the Explanation to sub-
section ( 2) of section 65;
(l) the form of certificate of registration under sub-
section ( 3) of section 65;
(m) the form of application, the detail and fees to be
accompanied with it under sub-section ( 1) of section 66;
(n) the form of certificate of provisional registration
containing particulars and information under sub-section ( 4)
of section 66;
(o) the fees for renewal of registration under sub-
section ( 11) of section 66;
(p) the person or persons (including representatives of
the local community) for the purpose of conducting an audit
of the registered mental health establishments under sub-
section ( 1) and fees to be charged by the Authority for
conducting such audit under sub-section ( 2) of section 67;
(q) the person or persons for the purpose of
conducting an inspection or inquiry of the mental health
establishments under sub-section ( 1) of section 68;
(r) the manner of enter and search of a mental health
establishment operating without registration under sub-
section ( 6) of section 68;
(s) the fees for issuing a duplicate certificate under sub-
section ( 2) of section 70;
(t) the form and manner in which the Authority shall
maintain in digital format a register of mental health
establishments, the particulars of the certificate of registration
so granted in a separate register to be maintained under
section 71;
(u) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the president and other
members of the Commission under sub-section ( 3) of section 77;
(v) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the officers and other
employees of the Commission under sub-section ( 3) of
section 79;

132
(w) other disqualifications of president or members of
the Commission under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 82;
(x) other disqualifications of chairperson or members of
the Board under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 2) of section 82;
(y) the honorarium and other allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of, the chairperson
and members of the Board under sub-section ( 3) of section 83;
(z) the form for furnishing periodical information under
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of section 119;
(za) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by rules or in respect of which provision is to
be made by rules.
131. (1) The Central Authority may, by notification, make
regulations, consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service (including the qualifications,
experience and manner of appointment) of, the chief
executive officer and other officers and employees of the
Central Authority under sub-section ( 3) of section 40;
(b) the times and places of meetings of the Central
Authority and rules of procedure in regard to the transaction
of business at its meetings (including quorum at such
meetings) under sub-section ( 1) of section 44;
(c) the minimum standards of facilities and services
under clause ( a); the minimum qualifications for the personnel
engaged in mental health establishment under clause
(b); provisions for maintenance of records and reporting
under clause ( c); and other conditions under clause ( d), of
sub-section ( 4) of section 65;
(d) categories of different mental health establishments
under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 5) of section 65;
(e) the form of application to be made by the mental
health establishment and the fees to be accompanied with it
under sub-section ( 12) of section 66;
(f) the manner of filing objections under sub-
section ( 14) of section 66;
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by regulations or in respect of which provision
is to be made by regulations.
Power of
Central
Authority to
make
regulations.

133
132. (1) The Commission may, by notification, make
regulations, consistent with the provisions of the Act and the rules
made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) additional regulations, regarding the procedure of
advance directive to protect the rights of persons with mental
illness under sub-section ( 3) of section 12;
(b) the times and places and rules of procedure in
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings to be
observed by the Commission and the Board under section 87;
(c) the procedure for advance directive under clause ( c)
of section 89;
(d) regulations for the purposes of carrying out the
provisions of sections 105 and 106;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by regulations or in respect of which provision
is to be made by regulations.
133. (1) The State Authority may, by notification, make
regulations, consistent with the provision of this Act and the rules
made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the minimum quality standards of mental health
services under sub-section ( 9) of section 18;
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service (including the qualifications,
experience and manner of appointment) of the chief executive
officer and other officers and employees of the State
Authority under sub-section ( 3) of section 52;
(c) the manner in which the State Authority shall
publish the list of registered mental health professionals under
clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 55;
(d) the times and places of meetings of the State
Authority and rules of procedure in regard to the transaction
of business at its meetings (including quorum at such
meetings) under sub-section ( 1) of section 56;
(e) the form of application to be made by the mental
health establishment and the fees to be accompanied with it
under sub-section ( 12) of section 66;
Power of
Commission
to make
regulations.
Power of
State
Authority to
make
regulations.

134
(f) the manner of filing objections under sub-
section ( 14) of section 66;
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by regulations or in respect of which provision
is to be made by regulations.
134. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government and
every regulation made by the Central Authority and the Commission
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or regulation, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule
or regulation, as the case may be, should not be made, the rule or
regulation, as the case may be, shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule
or regulation, as the case may be.
(2) Every rule made by the State Government and every
regulation made by the State Authority under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State
Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
135. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order,
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after
the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of this
Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may
be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
136. (1) The Mental Health Act, 1987 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,––
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to
have been done or taken (including any rule, notification,
inspection, order or declaration made or any document or
instrument executed or any direction given or any proceedings
taken or any penalty or fine imposed) under the repealed Act
shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of this Act;
Laying of
rules and
regulations.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Repeal and
saving.
14 of 1987.

135
(b) the Central Authority for Mental Health Services,
and the State Authority for Mental Health Services established
under the repealed Act shall, continue to function under the
corresponding provisions of this Act, unless and until the
Central Authority and the State Authority are constituted under
this Act;
(c) any person appointed in the Central Authority for
Mental Health Services, or the State Authority for Mental
Health Services or any person appointed as the visitor under
the repealed Act and holding office as such immediately
before the commencement of this Act, shall, on such
commencement continue to hold their respective offices under
the corresponding provisions of this Act, unless they are
removed or until superannuated;
(d) any person appointed under the provisions of the
repealed Act and holding office as such immediately before
the commencement of this Act, shall, on such commencement
continue to hold his office under the corresponding provisions
of this Act, unless they are removed or until superannuated;
(e) any licence granted under the provisions of the
repealed Act, shall be deemed to have been granted under the
corresponding provisions of this Act unless the same are
cancelled or modified under this Act;
(f) any proceeding pending in any court under the
repealed Act on the commencement of this Act may be
continued in that court as if this Act had not been enacted;
(g) any appeal preferred from the order of a Magistrate
under the repealed Act but not disposed of before the
commencement of this Act may be disposed of by the court
as if this Act had not been enacted.
(3) The mention of the particular matters in sub-section ( 2)
shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect
of repeal.
10 of 1897.

136
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, which was ratified by the Government of India in
October, 2007, made it obligatory on the Government to align the
policies and laws of the country with the Convention. The need for
amendments to the Mental Health Act, 1987 was felt by the fact that
the related law, i.e. , the Persons with Disabilities (Equal
Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995
was also in the process of amendment. The Mental Health Act, 1987
could not protect the rights of persons with mental illness and
promote their access to mental health care in the country.
2. In light of above, it is proposed to bring in a new
legislation by repealing the Mental Health Act, 1987, and—
(a) Recognising that:
(i) Persons with mental illness constitute a vulnerable
section of society and are subject to discrimination in our
society;
(ii) Families bear financial hardship, emotional and
social burden of providing treatment and care for their
relatives with mental illness;
(iii) Persons with mental illness should be treated like
other persons with health problems and the environment
around them should be made conducive to facilitate recovery,
rehabilitation and full participation in society;
(iv) The Mental Health Act, 1987 was insufficient to
protect the rights of persons with mental illness and promote
their access to mental health care in the country;
(b) And in order to:
(i) Protect and promote the rights of persons with
mental illness during the delivery of health care in institutions
and in the community;
(ii) Ensure health care, treatment and rehabilitation of
persons with mental illness, is provided in the least restrictive
environment possible, and in a manner that does not intrude
on their rights and dignity. Community-based solutions, in the
vicinity of the person’s usual place of residence, are preferred
to institutional solutions;
(iii ) Provide treatment, care and rehabilitation to
improve the capacity of the person to develop his or her full
potential and to facilitate his or her integration into community
life;
136

137
(iv) Fulfil the obligations under the Constitution and the
obligations under various International Conventions ratified by
India;
(v) Regulate the public and private mental health sectors
within a rights framework to achieve the greatest public
health good;
(vi) Improve accessibility to mental health care by
mandating sufficient provision of quality public mental health
services and non-discrimination in health insurance;
(vii) Establish a mental health system integrated into all
levels of general health care; and
(viii) Promote principles of equity, efficiency and active
participation of all stakeholders in decision making.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW DELHI; GHULAM NABI AZAD
The 7th August, 2013.

138
138
Notes on Clauses
Clause 1.—This clause seeks to provide for short title, extent
and commencement of the proposed legislation.
Clause 2.—This clause seeks to provide the definitions of
certain words and expressions used in various provisions of the Bill.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to provide for determination of
mental illness.
Clause 4.—This clause seeks to provide for the provisions
regarding capacity to make mental health care decisions.
Clause 5.—This clause seeks to provide for the provision of
advance directive.
Clause 6.—This clause seeks to provide for the manner of
making advance directive.
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to provide for the duty of every
Board to maintain an online register of all advance directives
registered with it and make them available to the concerned mental
health professionals as and when required.
Clause 8.—This clause provides for the revocation,
amendment or cancellation of advance directive.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to provide that the advance
directive shall not apply to the emergency treatment given under
section 103 to a person who made the advance directive.
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to provide for the duty of
every medical officer in charge of a mental health establishment and
the psychiatrist in charge of a person’s treatment to propose or give
treatment to a person with mental illness, in accordance with his
valid advance directive.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to provide for power to
review, alter, modify or cancel advance directive.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to provide for the review of
advance directives.
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to provide for the liability of
medical health professional in relation to advance directive.
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to provide for the appointment
and revocation of nominated representative.
Clause 15.—This clause makes provision for a nominated
representative of a minor.

139
Clause 16.—This clause seeks to provide for the revocation,
alteration, etc., of nominated representative by Board.
Clause 17.—This clause seeks to provide for the duties of
nominated representative.
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to provide for the right to
access mental health care and treatment from mental health services
run or funded by the appropriate Government.
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to provide for the right to
community living.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to provide for the right to
protection from cruel, inhuman  and degrading treatment.
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to provide for the right to
equality and non-discrimination.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to provide for the right to
information.
Clause 23.—This clause seeks to provide that a person with
mental illness shall have the right to confidentiality in respect of his
mental health, mental health care , treatment and physical health care.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to provide for the restriction
on release of information in respect of mental illness.
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to provide for the right to
access medical records.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to provide for the right to
personal contacts and communication.
Clause 27.—This clause seeks to provide for the right to legal
aid.
Clause 28.—This clause seeks to provide for the right to
make complaints about deficiencies in provision of services.
Clause 29.—This clause seeks to provide for the promotion
of mental health and preventive programmes.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to provide for the creating
awareness about mental health and illness and reducing stigma
associated with mental illness.
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to provide that the appropriate
Government shall take measures as regard to human resource
development and training, etc.
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to provide for the co-
ordination within appropriate Government.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to provide for the
establishment of Central Mental Health Authority.

140
Clause 34.—This clause seeks to provide for the composition
of the Central Authority.
Clause 35.—This clause seeks to provide for the term of
office, salaries and allowances of chairperson and members of the
Central Authority.
Clause 36.—This clause seeks to provide for the resignation
from office by a member of the Central Authority.
Clause 37.—This clause seeks to provide for the filling up of
vacancies resulting by reason of death, resignation, removal,
superannuation or completion of the term of office of any member
of the Central Authority.
Clause 38.—This clause seeks to provide that vacancies etc.
shall not invalidate proceedings of the Central Authority.
Clause 39.—This clause seeks to prevent the participation of
a member of the Central Authority in a meeting of the Authority in
case the member has any direct or indirect interest, whether
pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter coming up for consideration
at a meeting of the Central Authority.
Clause 40.—This clause seeks to provide for the officers and
other employees of the Central Authority.
Clause 41.—This clause seeks to provide for the functions of
chief executive officer of the Central Authority.
Clause 42.—This clause seeks to provide for the transfer of
assets, liabilities of the Central Authority for Mental Health Services
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Mental Health
Act, 1987
Clause 43.—This clause seeks to provide for the functions of
the Central Authority.
Clause 44.—This clause seeks to provide for the meetings of
the Central Authority.
Clause 45.—This clause seeks to provide for the
establishment of the State Mental Health authority
Clause 46.—This clause seeks to provide for the composition
of the State Authority
Clause 47.—This clause seeks to provide for the term of
office, salaries and allowances of the chairperson and other
members.
Clause 48.—This clause seeks to provide for the resignation
from office of a member of the State Authority.
Clause 49.—This clause seeks to provide for the filling up of
vacancies occurring by reason of death, resignation, removal,
superannuation or completion of the term of office of any member
of the State Authority.

141
Clause 50.—This clause seeks to provide that vacancies, etc.,
shall not invalidate proceedings of the State Authority.
Clause 51.—This clause seeks to prevent the participation of
a member of the State Authority in a meeting of the Authority in
case the member has any direct or indirect interest, whether
pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter coming up for consideration
at a meeting of the State Authority.
Clause 52.—This clause seeks to provide for the officers and
other employees of the State Authority.
Clause 53.—This clause seeks to provide for the functions of
chief executive officer of the State Authority.
Clause 54.—This clause seeks to provide for the transfer of
assets, liabilities of the State Authority for Mental Health Services
constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 4 of the Mental Health
Act, 1987.
Clause 55.—This clause seeks to provide for the functions of
the State Authority.
Clause 56.—This clause seeks to provide for the meetings of
the State Authority.
Clause 57.—This clause seeks to provide for the grants by
the Central Government to the Central Authority.
Clause 58.—This clause seeks to provide for the Central
Mental Health Authority Fund.
Clause 59.—This clause seeks to provide that the Central
Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may
be prescribed by the Central Government, in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Clause 60.—This clause seeks to provide for the Central
Authority to prepare an annual report giving a full account of its
activities during the previous year and laying of the same by the
Central Government before both Houses of Parliament.
Clause 61.—This clause seeks to provide for the grants by
the State Government to the State Authority.
Clause 62.—This clause seeks to provide for the State Mental
Health Authority Fund.
Clause 63.—This clause seeks to provide that the State
Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may
be prescribed by the State Government, in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Clause 64.—This clause seeks to provide for the State
Authority to prepare an annual report giving a full account of its

142
activities during the previous year and laying of the same by the
State Government before the State Legislature.
Clause 65.—This clause seeks to provide for the registration
of mental health establishment.
Clause 66.—This clause seeks to provide for the procedure
for registration, inspection and inquiry of mental health
establishments
Clause 67.—This clause seeks to provide for the audit of
mental health establishment
Clause 68.—This clause seeks to provide for the Authority to
order an inspection or inquiry of any mental health establishment,
suo moto or on a complaint received from any person with respect
to non adherence of minimum standards specified by or under the
proposed legislation or contravention of any provision thereof, to be
made by such person as may be prescribed.
Clause 69.—This clause seeks to provide for the appeal to
High Court against order of the State Authority refusing to grant
registration or renewal of registration or cancellation of registration.
Clause 70.—This clause seeks to provide for the certificates,
fees and register of mental health establishments.
Clause 71.—This clause seeks to provide for the maintenance
of register of mental health establishment in digital format.
Clause 72.—This clause seeks to provide for the duty of
mental health establishment to display information.
Clause 73.—This clause seeks to provide for the constitution
of Mental Health Review Commission.
Clause 74.—This clause seeks to provide for the composition
of Commission.
Clause 75.—This clause seeks to provide for the qualifications
for appointment of president and members of Commission.
Clause 76.—This clause seeks to provide for the Selection
Committee for the purpose of selection of the president and
members of the Commission.
Clause 77.—This clause seeks to provide for the term of
office, salaries and allowances of the president and other members
of the Commission.
Clause 78.—This clause seeks to provide that the vacancies,
etc., shall not invalidate proceedings of the Commission.
Clause 79.—This clause seeks to provide for the staff of the
Commission.
Clause 80.—This clause seeks to provide for the constitution
of Mental Health Review Boards.

143
Clause 81.—This clause seeks to provide for composition of
the Board.
Clause 82.—This clause seeks to provide for disqualification
and removal as the president or a member of the Commission.
Clause 83.—This clause seeks to provide for terms and
conditions of service of the chairperson and members of the Board.
Clause 84.—This clause seeks to provide that the decisions of
the Commission or the Board shall be by consensus, failing which
by a majority of votes of members present and voting and in the
event of equality of votes, the president or the chairperson, as the
case may be, shall have a second or casting vote and that the
quorum of a meeting of the Commission or the Board, as the case
may be, shall be three members.
Clause 85.—This clause seeks to provide that any person
with mental illness or his nominated representative or a
representative of a registered non-governmental organisation, with
the consent of such a person, being aggrieved by the decision of
any of the mental health establishment or whose rights under the
proposed legislation have been violated, may make an application to
the Board seeking redressal or appropriate relief.
Clause 86.—This clause seeks to provide that the proceedings
before the Commission and the Board shall be deemed to be judicial
proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of the
Indian Penal Code.
Clause 87.—This clause seeks to provide for the meetings of
the Commission and the Board.
Clause 88.—This clause seeks to provide for the proceedings
before a Board.
Clause 89.—This clause seeks to provide for the powers and
functions of the Commission.
Clause 90.—This clause seeks to provide for the Commission
to appoint an Expert Committee to prepare a guidance document for
medical practitioners and mental health professionals, containing
procedures for assessing, when necessary or the capacity of
persons to make mental health care or treatment decisions.
Clause 91.—This clause seeks to provide for powers and
functions of the Board.
Clause 92.—This clause seeks to provide for appeal to High
Court against order of Commission or Board by any person or
establishment aggrieved by the decision of the Commission or a
Board may, within a period of thirty days from such decision.
Clause 93.—This clause seeks to provide for grants by
Central Government to the Commission.

144
Clause 94.—This clause seeks to provide for admission of a
person with mental illness as independent patient in a mental health
establishment.
Clause 95.—This clause seeks to provide for independent
admission and treatment.
Clause 96.—This clause seeks to provide for admission of a
minor.
Clause 97.—This clause seeks to provide for the discharge of
independent patients.
Clause 98.—This clause seeks to provide for admission and
treatment of persons with mental illness, with high support needs,
in a mental health establishment, up to thirty days (supported
admission).
Clause 99.—This clause seeks to provide for admission and
treatment of persons with mental illness, with high support needs,
in a mental health establishment, beyond thirty days (supported
admission beyond thirty days).
Clause 100.—This clause seeks to provide for leave of
absence from the mental health establishment.
Clause 101.—This clause seeks to provide for a person with
mental illness admitted to a mental health establishment under the
proposed legislation, to be taken into protection by any Police
Officer at the request of the medical officer or psychiatrist in
charge of the mental health establishment and taken back to the
mental health establishment immediately if he absents himself
without leave or without discharge from the mental health
establishment.
Clause 102.—This clause seeks to provide for transfer of
persons with mental illness from one mental health establishment to
another mental health establishment.
Clause 103.—This clause seeks to provide for emergency
treatment.
Clause 104.—This clause seeks to provide for prohibited
procedures.
Clause 105.—This clause seeks to provide for restriction on
psychosurgery for persons with mental illness.
Clause 106.—This clause seeks to provide for restrictions and
seclusions.
Clause 107.—This clause seeks to provide for discharge
planning.
Clause 108.—This clause seeks to provide that the
professionals conducting research shall obtain free and informed
consent from all persons with mental illness for participation in any

145
research involving interviewing the person or psychological,
physical, chemical or medicinal interventions.
Clause 109.—This clause seeks to provide for duties of police
officers in respect of persons with mental illness.
Clause 110.—This clause seeks to provide for report, by the
officer in charge of a police station to the Magistrate or by any
person to the officer in charge of a police station within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction the person with mental illness resides, of
a person with mental illness in a private residence who is ill treated
or neglected.
Clause 111.—This clause seeks to provide for conveying or
admitting a person with mental illness to a mental health
establishment by a Magistrate.
Clause 112.—This clause seeks to provide for provisions
regarding prisoners with mental illness.
Clause 113.—This clause seeks to provide for the person in
charge of a State run custodial institution (including beggars homes,
orphanages, women’s protection homes and children homes) to take
such resident of the institution, who appears to have or is likely to
have a mental illness, to the nearest mental health establishment run
or funded by the appropriate Government for assessment and
treatment, as necessary.
Clause 114.—This clause seeks to provide for question of
mental illness in judicial process.
Clause 115.—This clause seeks to provide for restriction to
discharge functions by professionals not covered by profession.
Clause 116.—This clause seeks to provide for penalties for
establishing or maintaining a mental health establishment in
contravention of provisions of the proposed legislation Act.
Clause 117.—This clause seeks to provide for punishment for
contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation or rules
or regulations made thereunder.
Clause 118.—This clause seeks to provide for offences by
companies.
Clause 119.—This clause seeks to provide for power of the
Central Government to call upon the Authority or the Commission or
the Board to furnish, periodically or as and when required any
information concerning the activities carried on by the Authority or
the Commission or the Board, as the case may be, in such form as
may be prescribed, to enable that Government, to carry out the
purposes of the Bill.
Clause 120.—This clause seeks to provide for power of the
Central Government to issue directions in writing from time to time
to the Authority on questions of policy, other than those relating to
technical and administrative matters.

146
Clause 121.—This clause seeks to provide for power of the
Central Government to supersede the Central Authority.
Clause 122.—This clause seeks to provide for power of State
Government to supersede the State Authority.
Clause 123.—This clause seeks to provide for special
provisions for States in northeast and hill States taking into
consideration the communication, travel and transportation
difficulties.
Clause 124.—This clause seeks to provide for presumption of
mental illness in case of attempt to commit suicide by a person.
Clause 125.—This clause seeks to provide for bar of
jurisdiction of civil courts to entertain any suit or proceeding in
respect of any matter which the Commission or the Board is
empowered by or under the proposed legislation to determine, and
also that no injunction shall be granted by any court or other
authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance
of any power conferred by or under proposed legislation.
Clause 126.—This clause seeks to provide for transitory
provisions.
Clause 127.—This clause seeks to provide that the
chairperson, members and staff of the Authority, Commission and
Board shall be deemed to be public servants.
Clause 128.—This clause seeks to provide for protection of
action taken in good faith.
Clause 129.—This clause seeks to provide that the proposed
legislation shall have over-riding effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being
in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law
other than the proposed legislation.
Clause 130.—This clause seeks to empower the appropriate
Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of the said
legislation.
Clause 131.—This clause seeks to empower the Central
Authority to make regulations.
Clause 132.—This clause seeks to empower the Commission
to make regulations.
Clause 133.—This clause seeks to empower the State
Authority to make regulations.
Clause 134.—This clause seeks to provide for laying of every
rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made by
the Central Authority and the Commission under the proposed
legislation, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House
of Parliament. This clause also seeks to provide for laying of every

147
rule made by the State Government and every regulation made by
the State Authority under the proposed legislation, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists
of one House, before that House.
Clause 135.—This clause seeks to provide for the power to
remove difficulties.
Clause 136.—This clause seeks to provide for repeal of the
Mental Health Act, 1987 and saving the actions taken thereunder.

148
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clauses (3) and (6) of clause 18 of the Bill provides that
the appropriate Government shall make sufficient provisions, as may
be necessary, for a range of services required by persons with
mental illness at all general hospitals run or funded by such
Government and basic and emergency mental health care services at
all community health centres and upwards in the public health
system run or funded by such Government. Sub-clause (7) of
clause 18 provides that the persons with mental illness living below
the poverty line whether or not in possession of a below poverty
line card, or who are destitute or homeless shall be entitled to
mental health treatment and services free of any charge and at no
financial cost at all mental health establishments run or funded by
the appropriate Government and at other mental health
establishments designated by it. Sub-clause (11) of clause 18
provides for the appropriate Government to take measures to ensure
that necessary budgetary provisions in terms of adequacy, priority,
progress, and equity are made for effective implementation of the
provisions of this clause.
2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 19 of the Bill provides that the
appropriate Government shall, within a reasonable period, provide
for or support the establishment of less restrictive community based
establishments including halfway homes, group homes and the like
for persons who no longer require treatment in more restrictive
mental health establishments such as long stay mental hospitals.
3. Sub-clause (a) of clause 30 of the Bill provides for the
appropriate Government to ensure that the provisions of the
proposed legislation are given wide publicity through public media,
including television, radio, print and online media at regular intervals.
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 31 of the Bill provides that the
appropriate Government shall take measures to address the human
resource requirements of mental health services in the country by
planning, developing and implementing educational and training
programmes in collaboration with institutions of higher education
and training, to increase the human resources available to deliver
mental health interventions and to improve the skills of the available
human resources to better address the needs of persons with mental
illness. Sub-clause (2) of clause 31 provides that the appropriate
Government shall train all medical officers in public health care
establishments and all medical officers in the prisons or jails to
provide basic and emergency mental health care.
5. Clause 33 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a
Central Mental Health Authority.
148

149
6. Sub-clause (3) of clause 35 of the Bill provides for the
salaries and allowances payable to the chairperson and other
members of the Central Authority.
7. Item (e) of sub-clause (1) of clause 43 of the Bill makes
provisions for training all persons including law enforcement
officials, mental health professionals and other health professionals
about the provisions and implementation of the proposed legislation.
8. Clause 45 of the Bill provides for the establishment of State
Mental Health Authority.
9. Sub-clause (3) of clause 47 of the Bill provides for the
salaries and allowances payable to the chairperson and other
members of the State Authority.
10. Item (e) of sub-clause (1) of clause 55 of the Bill makes
provisions for training all persons including law enforcement
officials, mental health professionals and other health professionals
about the provisions and implementation of the proposed legislation.
11. Clause 57 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this
behalf, make to the Central Mental Health Authority grants of such
sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being
utilised for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
12. Sub-clause (2) of clause 58 of the Bill provides for the
Central Mental Health Authority Fund to be applied for meeting the
salary, allowances and other remuneration of the chairperson, other
members, chief executive officer, other officers and employees of
the Central Mental Health Authority and the expenses of the Central
Mental Health Authority incurred in the discharge of its functions
and for purposes of the proposed legislation.
13. Clause 61 of the Bill provides that the State Government
may, after due appropriation made by State Legislature by law in
this behalf, make to the State Authority grants of such sums of
money as the State Government may think fit for being utilised for
the purposes of the proposed legislation.
14. Sub-clause (2) of clause 62 of the Bill provides for the
State Mental Health Authority Fund to be applied for meeting the
salary, allowances and other remuneration of the chairperson, other
members, chief executive officer, other officers and employees of
the State Authority and the expenses of the State Authority incurred
in the discharge of its functions and for purposes of the proposed
legislation.
15. Clause 73 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the
Mental Health Review Commission.
16. Sub-clause (3) of clause 77 of the Bill provides for the
salaries and allowances payable to the president and other members
of the Mental Health Review Commission.

150
17. Clause 80 of the Bill provides for the constitution of
Mental Health Review Boards by the Mental Health Review
Commission, with prior concurrence of the concerned State
Government in the districts of that State.
18. Sub-clause (3) of clause 83 of the Bill provides for
honorarium and other allowances payable to the chairperson and
members of the Mental Health Review Board.
There is no easy way of estimating the full financial burden
likely to be incurred if all the provisions of the proposed legislation
if enacted were implemented in such a manner that all persons
requiring such services were to be covered. However, some of
these tasks are currently funded through approved plan schemes in
selected districts which the Central Government intends to extend to
the entire country in the XIIth Plan period. Some tasks which are
currently not funded by the Central Government and which would
be necessary should the proposed legislation be enacted, are also
proposed to be funded through Plan schemes. Funding through Plan
schemes for the implementation of the proposed legislation would
need to continue in subsequent Plan periods also. Provisioning for
health is not a one-time activity. Since health is a State subject
under the Constitution, it is also expected that over time, the States
will also contribute substantially to the implementation of
programmes for the promotion of mental health and care and
treatment of persons with mental illness, thereby, contributing to the
implementation of the provisions of the Bill. However, the
expenditure, whether recurring or non recurring, will be met out of
the Consolidated Fund of India or Consolidated Fund of the
concerned State.

151
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 130 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government
to make rules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the matters with respect to
which rules may be made under this clause. These matters inter
alia, relate to - (a) the manner of nomination of members of the
Central Authority under sub-clause (2) of clause 34 ; (b) the salaries
and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the chairperson and other members of the Central
Authority under sub-clause (3) of clause 35; (c) the procedure for
registration (including the fees to be levied for such registration) of
the mental health establishments under sub-clause (2) of clause 43;
(d) the manner of nomination of members of the State Authority
under sub-clause (2) of clause 46; (e) the salaries and allowances
payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the
chairperson and other members of the State Authority under sub-
clause (3) of clause 47; (f) the procedure for registration (including
the fees to be levied for such registration) of the mental health
establishments under sub-clause (2) of clause 55; (g) the form of
accounts and other relevant records and annual statement of
accounts under sub-clause (1) of clause 59; (h) the form in which
and the time within which an annual report shall be prepared under
clause 60; (i) the form of accounts and other relevant records and
annual statement of accounts under sub-clause (1) of clause 63;
(j) the form in which and the time within which an annual report
shall be prepared under clause 64; (k) the form of application to be
submitted by the mental health establishment with an undertaking
that the mental health establishment fulfils the minimum standards,
if any, specified by the Authority, under the Explanation to sub-
clause (2) of clause 65; (l) the form of certificate of registration
under sub-clause (3) of clause 65; (m) the form of application, the
detail and fees to be accompanied with it under sub-clause (1) of
clause 66; (n) the form of certificate of provisional registration
containing particulars and information under sub-clause (4) of
clause 66; (o) the fees for renewal of registration under sub-clause
(11) of clause 66; (p) the person or persons (including
representatives of the local community) for the purpose of
conducting an audit of the registered mental health establishments
under sub-clause (1) and fees to be charged by the Authority for
conducting such audit under sub-clause (2) of clause 67; (q) the
person or persons for the purpose of conducting an inspection or
inquiry of the mental health establishments under sub-clause (1) of
clause 68; (r) the manner of entry and search of a mental health
establishment operating without registration under sub-clause (6) of
clause 68; (s) the fees for issuing a duplicate certificate under sub-
151

152
clause (2) of clause 70; (t) the form and manner in which the
Authority shall maintain in digital format a register of mental health
establishments, the particulars of the certificate of registration so
granted in a separate register to be maintained under clause 71;
(u) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the president and other members of the
Commission under sub-clause (3) of clause 77; (v) the salaries and
allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service
of, the officers and other employees of the Commission under sub-
clause (3) of clause 79; (w) other disqualifications of president or
members of the Commission under item (e) of sub-clause (1) of
clause 82; (x) other disqualifications of chairperson or members of
the Board under item (e) of sub-clause (2) of clause 82; (y) the
honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms
and conditions of service of, the chairperson and members of the
Board under sub-clause (3) of clause 83; (z) the form for furnishing
periodical information under sub-clause (1) or sub-clause (2) of
clause 119; (za) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by rules or in respect of which provision is to be made
by rules.
Clause 131 of the Bill empowers the Central Authority to
make regulations, consistent with the provisions of the proposed
legislation and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions
of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates
the matters with respect to which regulations may be made under
this clause. These matters, inter alia, relate to —(a) the salaries and
allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service
(including the qualifications, experience and manner of appointment)
of, the chief executive officer and other officers and employees of
the Central Authority under sub-clause (3) of clause 40; (b) the
times and places of meetings of the Central Authority and rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including quorum at such meetings) under sub-clause (1) of
clause 44; (c) the minimum standards of facilities and services
under clause (a); the minimum qualifications for the personnel
engaged in mental health establishment under clause (b); provisions
for maintenance of records and reporting under clause (c) and other
conditions under clause (d), of sub-clause (4) of clause 65;
(d) categories of different mental health establishments under item
(a) of sub-clause (5) of clause 65; (e) the form of application to be
made by the mental health establishment and the fees to be
accompanied with it under sub-clause (12) of clause 66; (f) the
manner of filing objections under sub-clause (14) of clause 66;
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified
by regulations or in respect of which provision is to be made by
regulations.
Clause 132 of the Bill empowers the Commission to make
regulations, consistent with the provisions of the proposed
legislation and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions
of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates

153
the matters with respect to which regulations may be made under
this clause. These matters, inter alia, relate to — (a) additional
regulations regarding the procedure of advance directive to protect
the rights of persons with mental illness under sub-clause (3) of
clause 12; (b) the times and places and rules of procedure in regard
to the transaction of business at its meetings to be observed by the
Commission and the Board under clause 87; (c) the procedure for
advance directive under clause (c) of clause 89; (d) regulations for
the purposes of carrying out the provisions of clauses 105 and 106;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified
by regulations or in respect of which provision is to be made by
regulations.
Clause 133 of the Bill empowers the State Authority to make
regulations, consistent with the provision of the proposed legislation
and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of the
proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the
matters with respect to which regulations may be made under this
clause. These matters, inter alia, relate to — (a) the minimum
quality standards of mental health services under sub-clause (9) of
clause 18; (b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service (including the qualifications,
experience and manner of appointment) of, the chief executive
officer and other officers and employees of the State Authority
under sub-clause (3) of clause 52; (c) the manner in which the
State Authority shall publish the list of registered mental health
professionals under item (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 55; (d) the
times and places of meetings of the State Authority and rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including quorum at such meetings) under sub-clause (1) of
clause 56; (e) the form of application to be made by the mental
health establishment and the fees to be accompanied with it under
sub-clause (12) of clause 66; (f) the manner of filing objections
under sub-clause (14) of clause 66; (g) any other matter which is
required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect of
which provision is to be made by regulations.
Clause 134 of the Bill provides that every rule made by the
Central Government and every regulation made by the Central
Authority and the Commission under the proposed legislation are
required to be laid before each House of the Parliament. It also
provides that every rule made by the State Government and every
regulation made by the State Authority under the proposed legislation
shall be laid before each House of the State Legislature where it
consists of two Houses, or where such legislation consist of one
House, before that House.
The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be
made under the aforesaid provisions are matters of procedure and
administrative details and it is not practical to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.

154
154
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for mental health care and services for persons with mental illness
and to protect, promote and fulfil the rights of such persons during delivery
of mental health care and services and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto
(Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, Minister of Health and Family Welfare )

155
155
ANNEXURE-II
çsl foKfIr
PRESS RELEASE
jkT; lHkk lfpoky;
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE INVITES SUGGESTIONS ON THE
MENTAL HEALTH CARE BILL, 2013
The Mental Health Care Bill, 2013, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 19th August,
2013 and pending therein, has been referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Health and Family Welfare headed by Shri Brajesh Pathak, M.P., Rajya Sabha for
examination and report thereon within a period of three months.
2. The Mental Health Care Bill, 2013 proposes to repeal the Mental Health Act, 1987. Its
objectives are to: (i) protect and promote rights of the persons with mental illness during the
delivery of health care in institutions and in the community; (ii) ensure that health care, treatment
and rehabilitation of the persons with mental illness, is provided in the least restrictive environment
possible, and in a manner that does not intrude on their rights and dignity; (iii) fulfil the obligations
under the Constitution and the obligations under various International Conventions ratified by India;
(iv) regulate public and private mental health sectors within a rights framework to achieve the
greatest public health good; (v) improve accessibility to mental health care by mandating sufficient
provision of quality public mental health services and non-discrimination in health insurance;
(vi) establish a mental health system integrated into all levels of general health care; and
(vii) promote principle of equity, efficiency and active participation of all stakeholders in decision
making.
3. In order to have wider consultations, the Committee has decided to invite written
memoranda containing suggestions/views/comments of individuals/institutions/organizations
interested in the subject matter of the Bill.
4. Those desirous of submitting memoranda to the Committee may send two copies thereof,
either in English or Hindi, to Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director, Room No. 222, Rajya
Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi - 110001 [Tel: 23035428 (O),
Fax: 23012007] within 30 days of publication of the advertisement. Besides, those who are also
desirous of giving oral evidence before the Committee on the Bill are requested to indicate so, for
consideration of the Committee.
5. Copies of the Bill may be obtained on requisition from Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy
Director, Room No. 218, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House Annexe, Sansad Marg,
New Delhi-110001 or downloaded from the Rajya Sabha website 
rajyasabha.nic.in under the head
‘Committees’ – sub-head – ‘Bills with the Committee and Press release seeking opinions/
suggestions from public’.
Hkkjrh; laln
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

156
6. The memoranda submitted to the Committee will form part of the records of the Committee
and would be treated as strictly confidential and may not be made public as such an act would
constitute breach of privilege of the Committee.
Website: – rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

157
157
ANNEXURE-III
list of individuals/organisation from whom memoranda were received
Sl. No. Individual/Association
12
1. Dr. Madhu Shukla Memorial Clinic, Palwal, Haryana
2. Shri Susai Raj, Individual
3. Shri Vandana Gopikumar, Founder, Banyan Tree, Chennai
4. Shri Boban Joseph, Banglore
5. Shri Amrit Bakhshy, Schizophrenia Awareness Association, Pune
6. Shri D. Mamatha, Scientist ‘SF’, Communication Systems Group, ISRO Satellite
Centre, Bangalore
7. Dr. Rajeev Jain, Madhya Pradesh
8. Dr. R. Thara, Director, Schizophrenia Research Foundation, Chennai
9. Dr. Nirmala Srinivasan (Ashoka Fellow), ACMI, Action for Mental Illness, Bangalore
10. Shri Mukul Goswami, ASHADEEP (A Mental Health Society), Guwahati
11. Dr. Kamal Narayan Kalita, Assam
12. Dr. Deepanjali Medhi, Associate Professor of Psychiatry, Gauhati Medical College,
Guwahati, Assam
13. Dr. Sudhir K. Khandelwal, Professor of Psychiatry, AIIMS, New Delhi
14. Shri Bornali Das, Department of Psychiatry, Gauhati Medical College and Hospital,
Guwahati
15. Prof. Dr. U. Gauthamadas, Professor and Head, Department of Psychiatry, MAP
Institute of Medical Sciences and Research, Chennai
16. Department of Psychiatric Social Work, Central Institute of Psychiatry, Kanke, Ranchi,
Jharkhand
17. Dr. Sonia Pereira Deuri, Head/Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatric Social
Worker, Tezpur
18. Shrimati Amba Salekar, Inclusive Planet Centre for Disability Law and Policy, Chennai
19. Shrimati Rukmini Pillai, Kerala
20. Dr. Masroor Jahan, Additional Professor of Cinical Psychology, Ranchi Institute of
Neuro-Pshyciatry and Allied Sciences, Jharkhand
21. Shri Anand Grover, Senior Advocate, Director, Lawyers Collective, New Delhi
22. Shri Ratna Chibber, President, AASHA (An Alliance for the mentally ill), Chennai
23. Dr. Indira Sharma, President, Indian Psychiatric Society, Gurgaon, Haryana
24. Shri Vini K.K., Kerala

158
12
25. Prof. (Dr) Faizan Mustafa, Vice-Chancellor, NALSAR University of Law, Hyderabad
26. LGB Regional Institute of Mental Health, Tezpur, Assam
27. Shri Vikram Pate, Public Health Foundation of India, New Delhi
28. Prof. (Dr.) Amool Ranjan Singh, Director, Ranchi Institute of Neuro-Psychiatry and
Allied Sciences (RINPAS), Kanke, Ranchi
29. Dr. Nirmal Jain, Ratlam
30. Dr. Lakshmana G, Assistant Professor, Department of Social Work, School of Social
and Behavioral Sciences, Gulbarga
31. Prof. B.S. Chavan, Secretary General, Indian Association for Social Psychiatry, Chandigarh
32. Dr. Anirudh Kala, Clinical Director, The Mind Plus, Ludhiana
33. Shri Rajiv Boolchand Jain, New Delhi
34. Shrimati Nandita Puar, Individual
35. Dr. Anita Priyadarshini, Reader in Distance Education, Staff Training and Research
Institute of Distance Education (STRIDE), New Delhi
36. Dr. Lalit Verma, Secretary, Central Council of Homoeopathy, New Delhi
37. Shri Akhileshwar Sahay, Whole Mind India Foundation, Pune
38. Bhargavi Venkatasubramaniam Davar, Bapu T rust for Research on Mind and Discourse, Pune
39. Shri Vimal Kumar Aameta, Rajasthan
40. Shri Priyam Gandhi, Fellow, Observer Research Foundation, Mumbai
41. Shri S.P.K. Jena, Associate Professor, Former Editor, Indian Journal of Clinical
Psychology, Department of Applied Psychology, New Delhi
42. Col A.K. Menhdiratta (Retd), PRAYATAN (A Mental Health Movement for Rehabilitation
of Mentally Sick), Chandigarh
43. Dr. Shekhar Saxena, Director, Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse,
WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
44. Dr. Nirmala Srinivasan (Ashoka Fellow), ACMI, Action for Mental Illness, Bangalore
45. Dr. Lakshmana G, Assistant Professor, Department of Social Work, School of Social
and Behavioral Sciences, Gulbarga
46. Ratnaboli Ray, Maitree, West Bengal
47. Shri Mani Gupta, Partner, Sarthak Advocates and Solicitors, New Delhi
48. Prof. Dr. Nirmal Kanti Chakrabarti, Director, Shayan Ghosh, Debangshu Dinda,
Mandobi Chowdhury, Student, KIIT School of Law, Odisha
49. Shri Chandrashikhar, Member, Ayush Medical Association
50. Dr. P. Satishchandra, Director/Vice-Chancellor, National Institute of Mental Health and
Neuro Sciences, Bangalore
51. Dr. Rahul Shidhaye, Centre for Mental Health, Public Health Foundation of India, New
Delhi
52. Maj. Gen. Ian Cardozo (Retd.), Chairman, Rehabilitation Council of India, New Delhi

159
159
ANNEXURE-IV
List of Witnesses heard by the Committee
29th August, 2013
WITNESSES
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health and Family Welfare)
1. Shri Keshav Desiraju, Secretary
2. Ms. Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Udaya Kumara, Additional Legislative Counsel
NIMHANS, Bengaluru
Dr. Satish Chandra, Vice-Chancellor
Indian Law Society, Pune
1. Dr. Soumitra Pathare, Coordinator
2. Dr. Jaya Sagade, Vice-Principal
16th September, 2013
WITNESSES
Indian Psychiatry Society (IPS)
1. Dr. Indira Sharma, President, IPS and Professor, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras
Hindu University
2. Dr. T.V . Asokan, President Elect, IPS
3. Dr. B.S Chavan, Chairman, Task Force on Mental Health Legislation, IPS
4. Dr. T.S Satyanarain Rao, Editor in Chief, Indian Journal of Psychiatry, IPS
5. Dr. Dinesh Kataria, Convenor, Task Force on Mental Health Legislation, IPS
Lokopriya Gopinath Bordoloi Regional Institute of Mental Health, Assam
Dr. S.K. Deuri, Director

160
4th October, 2013
WITNESSES
Department of Psychiatry, AIIMS, New Delhi
1. Dr. Sudhir K. Khandelwal, Professor, Department of Psychiatry, AIIMS
2. Dr. Rakesh Chadda, Professor, Department of Psychiatry, AIIMS
3. Dr. Pratap Sharan, Professor, Department of Psychiatry, AIIMS
Schizophrenia Awareness Association, Maharashtra
Shri Amrit Kumar Bakshy, President
Action for Mental Illness, Bangalore
Dr. Nirmala Srinivasan, Director
Whole Mind India Foundation, Pune
Shri Akhileshwar Sahay
The Banyan Centre, Chennai
Ms. Vandana Gopikumar
Department of Health and Family Welfare
Ms. Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
Dr.  G.N. Raju, Joint Secretary
11
TH October, 2013
WITNESSES
National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru
1. Dr. P. Satishchandra, Vice-Chancellor
2. Prof. S.K. Chaturvedi, Professor of Psychiatry
World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland
Dr. Shekhar Saxena, Director, Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse
Public Health Foundation of India, New Delhi
1. Prof. Vikram Patel
2. Dr. Rahul Shidhaye

161
Department of Health and Family Welfare
Shrimati Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary
Ministry of Law and Justice, Legislative Department
1 Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
2 Shri Udaya Kumara, Addl. Legislative Counsel
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
21ST October, 2013
WITNESSES
Prof. Amita Dhanda, Professor and Head, Centre for Disabilities Studies, NALSAR
University of Law, Hyderabad.
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Representatives from Department of Health and Family Welfare
Shrimati Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Law and Justice, Representatives from Legislative Department
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
Representative from Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
01st November, 2013
WITNESSES
Representatives from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(i) Shri Keshav Desiraju, Secretary
(ii) Ms. Sujaya Krishnan, Joint Secretary,
Representative from Legislative Department
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Additional Secretary
Representative from Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor

162
162
LIST OF REPORTS PRESENTED EARLIER
Report Subject
No.
12
1. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Health (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
2. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Family Welfare (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
3. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
4. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2004-05) of the Department of Health. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
5. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Second Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Family Welfare. (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
6. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Third Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2004-05) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
7. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
8. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Family Welfare (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
9. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
10. Report on the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
11. Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
12. Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2005
13. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Family Welfare. (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
14. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2005-06) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

163
12
15. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2005-06) of the Department of Health. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
16. Report on Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
17. Report on Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
18. Report on the Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy Pharmacy Bill, 2005
19. Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
20. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
21. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
observations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2006-07) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
22. Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
23. Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
24. Report on Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research
Puducherry Bill, 2007
25. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-second Report of the
Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare, (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
26. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Twenty-third Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
27. Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
28. Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
29 Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health Research (Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare)
30 Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007
31. Report on the Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill-2007

164
12
32. Report on the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007
33. Report on the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
34. Report on the functioning of the three Vaccine Producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
35. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
36. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty eighth report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
37. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty ninth report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
38. Report on Major Issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, Namely the
Central Research Institute(CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor,
and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai
39. Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
40. Report on Demand for Grants 2010-11 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
41. Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of Department of Health Research
42. Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of Department of AIDS Control (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
43. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Thirty-Eighth Report
on major issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of india (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai
44. Report on the Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009
45. Report on Issues Relating to Availability of Generic, Generic-branded and Branded
Medicines, Their Formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy and Effectiveness
46. Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill 2010
47. Report on the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research,
Puducherry (Amendment) Bill 2010
48. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Forty-First Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 (Demand No. 48)
of the Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

165
12
49. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Forty-Second Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of the
Department of AIDS Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
50. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Fortieth Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 (Demand No. 47) of
the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
51. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Thirty-Ninth Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 (Demand
No. 46) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare
52. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health And Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its 43rd Report on
Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in it’s 38th Report on
major issues concerning the three Vaccine Producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai
53. Report on the National Institute of Mental Health And Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore
Bill, 2010
54. Report on Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
55. Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of
AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
56. Report on Demands For Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of Health
Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
57. Report on Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of AIDS
Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
58. Report on Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Forty-Fifth Report on issues relating to availability of Generic,
Generic-Branded and Branded Medicines, their formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy
and Effectiveness
59. Report on the Functioning of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
(CDSCO)
60. Report on the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011
61. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 47)
of the Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
62. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand
No. 49) of the Department of AIDS Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

166
12
63. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 48)
of the Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
64. Report on Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fourth report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46)
of the Department of Health and Family Welfare; (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
65. Report on the Proposal to Introduce the Bachelor of Science (Community Health)
Course
66. Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Ninth Report on the functioning of Central Drugs Standards
Control Organisation (CDSCO)
67. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
68. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of
AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
69. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of Health
Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
70. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50) of the Department of AIDS
Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
71. Report on the Functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)
72. Report on Alleged irregularities in the Conduct of Studies Using Human Papilloma Virus
(HPV) Vaccine by Path in India
73. Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.