 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA       51 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE  
 
 
  
FIFTY-FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ 
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-NINTH REPORT ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS 2010-2011 (DEMAND NO. 46) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4 
TH  MARCH, 2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4 TH  MARCH, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in     

    
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE  
 
  
 
FIFTY-FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ 
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-NINTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS 2010-2011 (DEMAND NO. 46) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND 
FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4 TH  MARCH, 2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4 TH  MARCH, 2011)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS  
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. P REFACE ....................................................................................................................... (iii) 
3. REPORT PART - A ......................................................................................................... 1-74 
 C HAPTER I Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
  which replies of the Government have been  
  accepted by the Committee........................ ................................................. 2 -8 
 C HAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which the  
  Committee does not desire to pursue in view  
  of the Government's replies ..................... .................................................... 9-30 
 C HAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
  which replies of the Government have not been  
  accepted by the Committee........................ ................................................. 3 1-73 
 C HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  the final replies of the Government are  
  still a waited .................................. ............................................................ 74 
 REPORT PART - B ......................................................................................................... 75-155 
 C HAPTER I Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
  which replies of the Government have been  
  accepted by the Committee........................ ................................................. 7 6-80 
 C HAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which the  
  Committee does not desire to pursue in view  
  of the Government's replies ..................... ................................................... 81-120 
 C HAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
  which replies of the Government have not been  
  accepted by the Committee........................ ................................................ 12 1-154 
 C HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  the final replies of the Government are  
  still awaited ................................... ............................................................ 155 
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS /O BSERVATIONS ––  AT A GLANCE ............................................................. 156-174 
5. M INUTES (P ART - A  AND PART - B COMBINED ) .................................................................... 175-178 
6. A NNEXURES (P ART - A  AND PART - B COMBINED ) ................................................................. 179-258 
 P ART - A  (H EALTH SECTOR ) ........................................................................................... 181-219 
 P ART - B  (NRHM)  ....................................................................................................... 220-258  

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-2011)  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1.  Shri Brajesh Pathak      ––   Chairman  
 2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi  
 3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur  
 4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho  
 5. Shri Balbir Punj 
 6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore  
 7. Shrimati Brinda Karat  
 8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley  
 9. Shri Rasheed Masood  
 *10. Shrimati B. Jayashree 
  LOK SABHA  
 11.  Shri Ashok Argal 
 12.  Shrimati Sarika Devendra Baghel Singh  
 13.  Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
 14.  Shrimati Tabassum Hasan 
 15.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
 16.  Shri S. R. Jeyadurai 
 17.  Dr. Kruparani Killi 
 18.  Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
 19.  Dr. Tarun Mandal 
 20.  Shri Datta Meghe 
 21.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
 22.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 23.  Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
 24.  Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
 25.  Shri M. K. Raghavan 
 26.  Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid 
 27.  Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
 28.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 29.  Shrimati Meena Singh 
 30.  Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
 31.  Shri Ratan Singh 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Committee Officer 

 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliam entary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report o n its behalf, do hereby present this Fifty-first Re port of the Committee on 
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations c ontained in the Thirty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand 
No.46) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2010-2011. 
2.  The Thirty-ninth Report of the Department-relat ed Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare was 
presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of L ok Sabha on 28th April, 2010. Replies of the Govern ment on the 
recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare were considered by the 
Committee at its meeting held on the 27th January, 2011. 
3.   The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on the 27th January, 2011. 
 
 
  BRAJESH PATHAK 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
27 th 
 
January , 2011 Department-related Parliamentary  
Magha 7, 1932  (Saka)  Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
REPORT  
Part - A 
(Health Sector)  
  The Report of the Committee deals with the Action  Taken by the Government on the recommendations con tained in its 
Thirty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand N o. 46) of the Department of Health and Family Welfa re for the year 
2010-11. 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. 
They have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of whic h replies of the Government have been accepted by t he 
Committee: Para Nos.- 2.10, 2.13, 4.2, 4.12, 6.10, 7.3, 10.7, 13.6, 13.10, 13.15, 13.16, 14.5, 14.7, 1 4.14, 14.16, 
17.7, 18.4, 18.7 
 Total- 18   (Chapter I) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee does not desire to pursue in view of the Governm ent’s 
replies: Para No. 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.8, 2.9, 2.12, 2. 16, 2.17, 3.3, 3.5, 3.12, 3.14, 3.16, 3.21, 3.23, 3 .25, 3.26, 5.5, 6.7, 
6.18, 7.5, 7.6, 8.3, 8.6, 9.5, 10.4, 10.5, 12.4, 13.4, 13.12, 13.13, 13.14, 14.6, 15.3, 15.4, 15.5, 15.8, 15.12, 16.8, 17.2, 
17.9, 20.2, 21.4  
 Total-43   (Chapter II) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich replies of the Government have not been accepte d by the 
Committee: 2.7, 2.15, 2.18, 3.6, 3.7, 3.9, 3.11, 3.17, 3.28, 3.30, 4.4, 4.5, 4.7, 4.10, 5.4, 5.7, 6.5, 6.9, 6.12, 6.16, 6.19, 
7.7, 7.9, 9.6, 11.1, 11.2, 13.19, 14.8, 14.9, 14.12 , 15.6, 15.9, 15.11, 16.3, 16.4, 16.5, 16.6, 16.7, 16.9, 16.10, 16.11, 
17.3, 17.5, 18.2, 19.4, 19.5, 19.7, 20.1, 21.2, 21.5, 21.7, 21.8 
 Total-52   (Chapter III) 
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the Government are still awaited:  
 - NiI-    (Chapter-IV) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-I
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
II.  BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.10   Committee’s attention has also been drawn by  unspent balances lying with a number of Institutio ns. As on 1st 
December, 2009, maximum unspent balances amounting to Rs. 28.79 crore, Rs. 36.52 crore and Rs. 80.43 c rore were reported 
against the North-Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical Sciences, Shillong, LGB Regional Institute of 
Mental Health, Tezpur, Assam and AIIMS, New Delhi. Except AIIMS, the other two Institutes had unspent balances as on 1st 
April, 2009. Reasons for availability of such a hug e amount of unspent balances are not known to the C ommittee. However, 
such a state of affairs in national level institute s is indeed a cause  of concern for the Committee. This clearly shows that some 
major activities both ongoing/proposed might be adv ersely affected. The Committee would appreciate if the matter is taken up 
with the concerned authorities without further delay. 
Action Taken  
  The Department shares the concern of the Hon’ble Committee and has made it clear to the Institutions  concerned that 
further fund releases will depend on the pace of liquidation of their unspent balances. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.13   The Committee notes that as a further effort  to maximize liquidation of UCs, a communication has been sent by the 
Secretary (Health) to the Principal Health Secretaries of all the States. If need be, this exercise ne eds to be pursued further with 
higher authorities. 
Action Taken  
  A D.O. letter at the level of Secretary (Health) is being issued to all the Chief Secretaries of the  States concerned after 
compilation of State-wise data pertaining to the grants released upto 31.03.2009. 
IV.   SAFDARJUNG  HOSPITAL  AND VARDHMAN MAHAVEER M EDICAL COLLEGE, NEW DELHI 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.2   The Committee notes that against projected Pl an requirement of Rs. 180.60 crore for 2010-11 for the Hospital, allocation 
of Rs. 118.60 crore has been made. Given the fact t hat out of the RE plan allocation of Rs. 129.92 cro re for 2009-10, the 
Hospital was able to spend Rs. 112.76 crore upto 28th February, 2010, with every possibility of full utilization by the end of the 
year, the Committee is unable to comprehend the rea sons behind a huge gap of Rs. 62.00 crore between t he projected and 
budgeted funds for 2010-11. The Committee, therefor e, recommends that additional funds be allocated fo r the Hospital at RE 
stage so that lack of funds should not hamper the re-developmental activities undertaken by the Hospital. 
Action Taken  
  Noted for compliance. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.12   The Committee is constrained to observe that  the allocated funds for 2009-10 could not be utili zed even after steep 
reduction at the RE stage. To add to this the Depar tment’s reply that the reduction was due to realist ic assessment of the needs 
of the Institute, proves that the earlier estimate,  at the BE stage was not proper. Moreover, the fact  that the College could not 
utilize this reduced amount also makes it clear tha t there is some element of improper planning at som e stage. The Committee, 

accordingly, recommends to the Department to have a realistic assessment of the fund requirement for t he College at the outset 
itself. 
Action Taken  
  The suggestions of the Committee will be complied  with. 
VI.  ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS ) 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.10  Committee’s attention has been drawn by a ver y disturbing trend of utilization of allocated fund s by AIIMS. Director, 
AIIMS during his deposition before the Committee, informed that during 2008-09 and 2009-10 some Plan Funds were diverted 
to Non-plan for paying the Sixth Pay commission’s a rrears and various other allowances to AIIMS employ ees. As a result, 
development projects could not be taken up. Frequen t changes in the plan projects also had a negative impact. The Committee 
would like to point out that diversion of plan fund s to non-plan side is in direct contravention of fi scal norms. The Committee 
deplores such a development at the premier Institute of the country. It seems that this trend has been  continuing since long. The 
Committee wonders about the role of Internal Audit Wing and Financial Adviser of the Department. The C ommittee is also 
very unhappy with the non-provision of required non-plan funds meant for payment of arrears and allowances to the employees 
which are anticipated beforehand. The Committee wou ld appreciate if fiscal management at AIIMS is brou ght to order. The 
Committee cannot accept the diversion of plan funds  meant for development projects to non-plan side. U rgent action needs to 
be, taken in this crucial matter so that this trend is not allowed to continue any further. 
Action Taken  
  The Institute was allocated Rs.566.00 crore (Non- Plan) and Rs.320.51 crore (Plan) against the requir ement of Rs.636.88 
crore (Non-Plan) and Rs.270.00 crore (Plan). Since there was requirement of Rs.636.88 crore (Non-Plan)  to meet the essential 
requirements of the Institute and to make payment o f arrear according to Sixth Pay Commission and fund  beyond Rs.566.00 
crore could not be provided by the Ministry under Non-Plan, Rs.70.00 crore were re-appropriated by the Ministry from the Plan 
fund. As desired by the Committee, every effort will be made to follow the fiscal discipline. 
VII.   POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION  AND RESEARCH (PGIMER),  
  CHANDIGARH  
Recommendations/Observations  
7.3  The Committee is happy to note that during the  first three years of the Eleventh Plan, there has not been a reduction in the 
Plan funds at the RE stage. This is an indication t hat the allocated funds are being fully utilized by  the Institute for its 
developmental activities. 
Action Taken  
  Efforts will continue to be made in this regard. 
X.   LADY HARDINGE MEDICAL COLLEGE AND SMT. SUCHETA  KRIPALANI HOSPITAL,  
  NEW DELHI 
Recommendations/Observations  
10.7  The Committee is very disturbed with the pers isting shortage of staff in the college/hospital un der the Department. The 
Committee recommends to the Department to make all conceivable efforts for an early filling up of the vacant posts so that the 
high standards of patient care are maintained. 
Action Taken  
  The shortage of staff is mainly in the category o f Safai Karmacharis (Group ‘D’ staff)/Clerks. To me et the shortage of 
Safai Karmacharis, the sanitation services are part ially outsourced. Since the appointments against th e Group ‘D’ posts cannot 
be made subsequent to the implementation of the 6th  Pay Commission recommendations, the proposal to pr ovide additional 

Safai Karmacharis by outsourcing is already under c onsideration in consultation with DGHS/the Institut ion concerned. As 
regards Clerks, the Institution has already taken up the matter with the Staff Selection Commission for filling up these posts. 
XIII. PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJNA (PMSSY) 
Recommendations/Observations  
13.6   After an assessment of the progress of vario us components under the Scheme, the Committee in its 27th Report had 
made its apprehensions very clear that with the way  things were moving, it would take at least another  Plan period before the 
six AIIMS like Institutions would actually start fu nctioning. After a gap of two years, the Committee finds that its 
apprehensions have proved to be correct. It is stil l a distant dream to see these Institutions functio ning. The reason is that even 
after the completion of infrastructure related work , the Department has to concentrate on a whole lot of issues including 
manpower. The Committee would like to point out tha t this ambitious project is of critical importance for creating much 
required tertiary health care facilities in the cou ntry. Under funding of the project should not be al lowed to come in the way of 
access to quality and affordable health care for al l. The Committee, therefore, recommends that higher  level of funds, as 
required, be allocated under this head at RE stage during 2010-11.  
Action Taken  
  The concern of the Committee has been noted by th e Ministry. It is informed that in addition to the action taken as stated 
in Para 13.4, action for manpower planning and finalization of equipments for the six AIIMS-like institutions has been initiated. 
Manpower Committee constituted for finalization of manpower requirement has submitted its report and f urther follow-up 
action like identifying functions/duties, framing recruitment rules etc. is being taken. 
  Considering commencement of work at six AIIMS-lik e institutions, ongoing upgradation projects in the  first phase and 
likely start of second phase upgradation projects, Committee has rightly felt that the allocation of Rs.750 crore for 2010-11 will 
not be sufficient to meet the requirements of vario us activities under the PMSSY and therefore, the fu nd allocation should be 
enhanced to Rs.1500 crore. Steps will be taken at the appropriate time to propose enhanced outlay in RE 2010-11. 
Recommendations/Observations  
13.10   In the opinion of the Committee, the reason s cited for the delay are very flimsy in nature and  indicative of 
ineffectiveness of monitoring and coordination mech anism. The Committee is of the firm opinion that ha d proper coordination 
been done with the concerned agencies of the States  and if the Department had pursued the project vigo rously towards 
achieving the set targets, it could have approached  the State Governments at an appropriately higher l evel to thrash out State 
specific problems. The same is apparently lacking on the part of the Department. 
Action Taken  
  Noted. State Governments have constituted a Proje ct Monitoring Committee under the chairmanship of C hief Secretary, 
comprising of Secretary (Health/Medical Education),  representatives of local bodies/municipal authorit ies, civil works/forest 
departments, District Collector/Police Superintendent etc. in order to monitor the progress of work at  each of the AIIMS sites 
and also to resolve local/site specific issues. Regular meetings of the Committee are being held. 
Recommendations/Observations  
13.15  The Committee also recommends to the Departm ent to start ground work in respect of the issues l ike requirement of 
manpower, machines and equipments etc. so that once  the construction work is complete, no further dela y is caused in the 
operationalisation of the Institutes. 
Action Taken  
  Action for manpower planning for all the six AIIM S-like institutions has been initiated. Technical Committee constituted 
under the chairmanship of Director, PGIMER, Chandig arh worked out requirement of manpower to be recrui ted in phases. 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is in the pro cess of identifying functions and duties and also f raming of recruitment 
rules for each of the posts recommended by the Technical Committee. 
Recommendations/Observations  

13.16 The Committee takes a very serious view of th e persistent non-compliance of an assurance given b y the then Secretary 
during his presentation before the Committee during  examination of Demand for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry to furnish a 
status report to the Committee regarding implementa tion of PMSSY project after every two months. The p roject is one of the 
landmark initiatives to enable the people of this c ountry across States to have access to quality heal thcare. Further, it involves 
enormous amount of precious tax payer’s money. Ther efore the Committee needs to keep a close watch on the progress of the 
Scheme. The Committee therefore reminds the Departm ent to be careful and keep its assurance given befo re a Parliamentary 
Committee mandated to scrutinize its work. 
Action Taken  
  Noted for compliance. A detailed Note in reply to  para 11.5 of the 27th Report of the Committee for 2008-09 was sent in 
March, 2010. A status report was also sent on 12.5.2010. 
XIV.  DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES  
Recommendations/Observations  
14.5   The Committee is not happy with the abnormal  delays in bureaucratic procedures of seeking appro val. However, 
now that the new scheme has got the requisite appro val of the Cabinet, the Committee would recommend t o the Department to 
pursue the various components under the scheme vigo rously. The Committee also recommends to the Depart ment to make a 
realistic assessment of funds requirement for various components and seek more funds at the RE stage.  
Action Taken  
  Noted for compliance. As regards the realistic as sessment of funds, it is stated that the requiremen t is being worked out 
with the involvement of the concerned States and a total of Rs.17.70 crores has been released under va rious components of the 
scheme so far. Necessary funds would also be sought at the RE stage based on requirement. 
Recommendations/Observations  
14.7  The Committee is not prepared to accept the s tand of the Department that for both training and s trengthening of 
institutions proposals have to come from the States . When the Department has started the scheme, and r ightly so as per 
requirement of the profession, it has to take lead and responsibility to make it successful. It should  motivate the nursing 
institutions to come up with proposals to avail the  benefits under the scheme. Mere formal requests do  not make any scheme 
successful. Concerted efforts need to be made by the Department in this regard. 
Action Taken  
  Noted for compliance. Action is being taken. Conc erted efforts are being made for initiating the proposal from States. 
Recommendations/Observations  
14.14  The Committee is of the considered opinion t hat maintaining a Live Register of nurses would be of great help in 
formulating the various policies w. r. t.  the nursing personnel. Accordingly, the Department  needs to take up the issue with all 
the State Councils with some sense of urgency. The Department may also think of some kind of framework  whereby the State 
Councils are persuaded to start maintaining a live register of nurses as also share the details with t he Department to facilitate 
better policy formulation. 
Action Taken  
  Noted for compliance. 
Recommendations/Observations  
14.16  The Committee is very concerned with the sho cking findings of the nursing training programmes i n Bihar, Orissa, 
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh that ca me into light after the rapid assessment made by WH O, in collaboration 
with Indian Nursing Council. The picture of other States is also stated to be no better. While appreciating the initiative taken by 
the Department, the Committee recommends that a strategy needs to be chalked out whereby institutions getting grants from the 

Department are brought under some kind of regular t raining quality assessment schedule. This would not only help in plugging 
the loopholes but also help in devising better strategy for achieving desired training standards. 
 
Action Taken  
  Noted for compliance. As desired, a strategy will  be worked out. 
XVII. NATIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMME (NTCP)  
Recommendations/Observations  
17.7  The Committee is happy to note that the Depar tment is focusing on Mass Media/IEC campaign to gen erate awareness 
among the common people about the harmful effects of tobacco products. Awareness among the common masses, especially the 
younger generation, is the key to success of the wh ole Programme. The Committee would recommend that e vents like coming 
Commonwealth Games, venues of cricket and other mat ches being played in India, public gathering like t he kumbh melas etc. 
may also be utilized to generate awareness among people with Mass Media/ IEC campaign at the sites. 
Action Taken  
  Mass Media/IEC campaign through Prasar Bharti (Do ordarshan and All India Radio), NFDC and DAVP are b eing aired 
for creating awareness among the common people abou t the harmful effects of tobacco products. During t he Kumbh mela at 
Haridwar, special activities were undertaken for sensitizing about Tobacco Control in collaboration with NGOs. The Ministry is 
also developing “Guideline for Tobacco-free Commonwealth Games” in collaboration with Government of NCT of Delhi. 
XVIII. MEDICAL EDUCATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
18.4  The Committee is not inclined to agree with t he Department’s view that all is well with the exis ting procedure for 
recognition of MBBS degree colleges. The Department  cannot escape from its responsibility by citing th at it is the 
responsibility of the individual colleges to seek r ecognition. The Committee opines that the Departmen t needs to have into 
consideration the psychological impact of such a si tuation on the final year students who in its opini on would be more anxious 
to see their college getting recognition rather than taking their examinations seriously. The Committee is of the considered view 
that the whole procedure of recognition should be c omplete well before the final year students take th eir examinations. The 
Committee therefore recommends to the Department to  revisit its stand on the issue and come up with so me concrete steps. A 
status note on the issue of recognition to 15 medic al colleges where the first batches of MBBS student s have appeared for final 
examination in the academic year 2010 may be furnished. 
Action Taken  
  As per the provisions of MCI Regulations on Estab lishment of medical colleges, permission to establish a medical college 
and admit students is granted initially for a perio d of one year and is renewed on yearly basis subjec t to verification of 
achievements of annual targets. It is the responsibility of the person to apply to the MCI for purpose of renewal six months prior 
to the expiry of the initial permission. The MCI ca rries out inspections for annual renewal of permiss ion till such time the 
establishment of the Medical College and expansion of the hospital facilities are complete and a forma l recognition of the 
medical qualification of the college is granted. 
  The Committee’s view to complete whole procedure of recognition well before the final year student t ake their 
examination is appreciated. It will take some time to review the procedure of recognition as it requir es consultation with 
Medical Council of India. 
  Present status of 15 medical colleges where first  batch of MBBS students has appeared for final examination but are yet to 
be recognized in the academic year 2010 as on 14.5.2010 is at Annexure-XII . 
Recommendations/Observations  

18.7   The Committee is in full agreement with the initiatives proposed by the Dental Council of India (DCI) especially in 
view of the fact that so many seats are lying vacant year after year. Further, the Committee is of the firm opinion that education 
and accordingly the number of seats should be need based and keeping in view the demand and supply sce nario. Here, by the 
figures available with the Committee, it is amply clear that there is an urgent need for intervention to balance the same. In view 
of the above, the Committee recommends to the Depar tment to take some urgent steps in consultation wit h the DCI and the 
various State Governments, so that this unwanted trend is arrested at the earliest and precious resources are utilized purposefully 
in other areas of medical education. The Committee also recommends to the Department to actively consi der the proposal 
submitted to it by the DCI regarding making norms of opening new college more stringent. 
Action Taken  
  The DCI Regulations governing the establishment o f new dental colleges are made stringent and are be ing changed 
suitably viz . 
a.  Essentiality certificate from the State Governm ent with a statement that in case the applicant fai ls to create 
infrastructure for the dental college, fresh admiss ion will be stopped and the State Government shall take over the 
responsibility of the students already admitted in the college with the permission of the Central Government. 
b.  University affiliation from the concerned Unive rsity. 
c.  Attachment with own 100 bedded General Hospital / Government General Hospital/Medical College with a radius 
of 10 kms. 
d.  Accreditation of dental colleges by the externa l agency. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
II   BUDGETARY  ALLOCATION  
Recommendations/Observations  
2.4   With this trend of allocation of funds and ut ilization thereof, the Committee does not have much  hope about optimum 
release of funds out of the approved outlay of Rs. 41092.92 crore in the remaining two years of the El eventh Plan. The 
Department will have to make concerted efforts so a s to ensure optimum utilization of plan allocation of Rs. 5560.00 crore in 
2010-11. Only then, there are chances of enhanced provision being made in 2011-12, the last year of the Eleventh Plan.  
Action Taken  
  The Department notes the concerns of the Committe e and submits that major hurdles like poor absorpti ve capacity under 
the NRHM and lack of approval of many major schemes  having been removed, there are very good prospects  of larger fund 
utilization during the last two years of the Plan. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.5   The Committee in its 27th Report on Demands f or Grants (2008-09) had commented on the Department ’s inability to 
project its budgetary requirements in an effective way for the simple reason that the utilization of f unds during the Tenth Plan 
was far from satisfactory. The Committee finds that  the same trend continues in the Eleventh Plan peri od also. During 2007-08 
and 2009-10, keeping in view the pace of expenditure, allocated funds were substantially reduced at the RE stage. What is more 
worrisome is that the Department could not achieve optimum utilization of this reduced allocation duri ng these two years. 
Enhanced Plan allocation of Rs. 4450.00 in 2009-10 failed to serve the purpose as it had to be brought  down to Rs. 3825.25 
crore, marginally higher than the 2008-09 allocation of Rs. 3650.00 crore. Utilization status in 2009-10 was more disappointing. 
As on 28th February, 2010, expenditure reported was Rs. 2559.61 crore which is less than the utilization of Rs. 3008.40 crore in 
the previous year. The Committee also takes note of the fact that expenditure reported upto 31st January, 2010 under Plan head 
was only Rs. 2034.06 crore. This clearly points to the fact that major utilization is taking place in the last quarter of the financial 
year, thus indicating non-adherence to fiscal discipline.  
Action Taken  
  As per the guidelines issued by the Ministry of F inance, monthly expenditure plan is drawn up each year and is appended 
to the Detailed Demand for Grants. Sincere efforts are made to adhere to this fiscal discipline. Howev er, sometimes procedural 
delays in obtaining necessary approvals for incurring the expenditure leads to major utilization of funds during the last quarter. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.6   The Committee’s examination of the following major heads of account has revealed recurrent and p ersistent sub-optimal 
utilization of budgetary provisions (Plan) during the Eleventh Plan period:– 
(Rs. in crores ) 
Sl. No. Major Heads  2007-08   2008-09   2009-10  
           
  BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Exp. 
          Upto 
          28-2- 

          2010 
1. Hospitals and 88.70 126.00 118.42 139.20 216.47 214.28 181.30 270.36 230.83 
 Dispensaries          
2. Medical 1016.95 891.81 872.31 1254.61  1512.91 1175.62 2279.52 1659.03 1123.01 
 Education          
 Training and          
 Research          
3. Public Health 1829.85 1258.63 1144.09 2187.80  1837.51 1550.99 1919.79 1806.95 1157.12 
 
Action Taken  
  Matter of Record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.8   The Committee desires to be apprised of the n ecessary action initiated and pursued by the Depart ment to streamline the 
formulation of budgetary requirements in a realisti c fashion and also to expedite necessary approvals for operationalization of 
various formulated schemes/projects. 
Action Taken  
  More than 20 EFC/SFC proposals pertaining to new Schemes have been finalised in the recent past. The  Departmental 
Secretary is undertaking almost weekly review of the progress of formulation and finalisation of Schemes. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.9   The Committee is specially concerned with the  slow pace of implementation of schemes like Pradha n Mantri Swasthya 
Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY), Cancer Research, National Mental Health Programme, Assistance for Capacity Bu ilding for 
Trauma Centers, Oversight Committee, Upgradation/st rengthening of Nursing Services, Strengthening/Upgr adation of 
Pharmacy schools/colleges, Strengthening/creation of paramedical institutions as well as underutilizat ion of allocated funds by 
some of the Hospitals/institutions. The Committee o bserves that this recurrent and persistent trend of  underutilization is 
indicative of ineffectiveness of monitoring of impl ementation of schemes and utilization of funds. The  Committee therefore 
recommends to the department to keep the activities  of these schemes/institutions under constant scrut iny/monitoring and take 
urgent remedial steps so that the stumbling blocks in the optimum utilization of allocated/sanctioned funds are removed. 
Action Taken  
  The major bottlenecks in the implementation of th e major components of PMSSY were non-finalisation o f tenders for 
construction of hospital and medical colleges for A IIMS-type institutions. This process has been compl eted and the Scheme is 
due to gather momentum. Similarly, major approvals under Oversight Committee pertaining to PGIMER, Cha ndigarh and 
AIIMS have been finalised/ are nearing finalization . In the light of the concerns of the Committee, th e Health Secretary has 
carried out a special review of the Schemes for Development of Trauma Centres, Nursing Services and Development of Human 
Resources. It has been decided to assist the States to prepare suitable proposals under these Schemes. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.12   The Committee takes note of the fact that th e Department has taken remedial measures like for n on-recurring 
grants, no fresh releases are being authorized unless audited Utilization Certificate for grant released in the year prior to the last 
year ( i.e.  with a ‘grace period’ of one year) has been received, subject to the condition that the sanction for the earlier grant does 
not permit a longer period of utilization. Further,  the provisions of the General Financial Rules, whi ch require that in case of 
recurring grants, funds for the same purpose beyond  75% of the next year’s provision will not be relea sed unless audited 
Utilization Certificate for the grants released in the previous year is received, are being strictly i mplemented. Impact of such 

measures does not seem to be very effective as numb er of pending UCs continues to remain very high. No t only this, such a 
trend also indicates that schemes are not being implemented as envisaged. 
 
Action Taken  
  Instructions are being issued to all Divisional h eads from time-to-time to review the position of ou tstanding UCs and to 
maximize their efforts in liquidation of pending UC s. A D.O. has also been issued at the level of Secr etary (Health) to all 
Principal Health Secretaries. Recently an O.M. has been issued at the level of AS & FA on 14-05-2010 t o all the Joint 
Secretaries vide  which the need for settlement of UCs in respect of  grants released upto 31-03-2009 in terms of GFR, 2 005 has 
been emphasized. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.16   The Committee notes that the irregularities pointed out by the Internal Audit Wing in its audit  paras concerning 
NVBDCP, Delhi, NIMHANS, Bangalore, ICMR, New Delhi and V.P. Chest Institute, Delhi University (for two  paras 24 and 
28) are yet to be settled. The Committee would like to be apprised of the updated status in this regard. 
Action Taken  
  Present status of Audit Paras is as under: 
NVBDCP, New Delhi Paras are still outstanding. Seri ous concern has been conveyed to the relevant organisation. 
NIMHANS, Bangalore Compliance received and para dro pped. 
ICMR, New Delhi  Paras are still outstanding. 
PGI, Chandigarh  Para No.2 dropped and Para No.1 ou tstanding. 
VPCI, New Delhi Compliance received for para 24 and  para 28, para droped. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.17   The Committee has been keeping a close watch  on the level of pendency of Audit paras contained in CAG Report 
on matters relating to the Department. The Committe e observes that around 60 paras are under various s tages of pendency and 
some of them date back to the period 1998-2000. Com mittee’s attention has been especially drawn by the  following pending 
Audit paras: 
Period of Report Para No. Gist of CAG para 
2 of 1998 7.2 Loss due to expired medicine -GMSD 
2 of 2002 2 (chapter II) Working of Government Medi cal Store  
  Department, Kolkata 
3 of 2002 Chapter 1 All India Review on Prevention and Control of 
 (Section 2) Diseases-National TB Control Programme  
3 of 2004 Entire Report National AIDS Control Progr amme 
3 of 2006 1.1.2 Annual Accounts of Autonomous Bodie s-  
  NIMHANS/PGIMER/CNKI 
20 of 2007 Entire Report Performance Audit: Procure ment of medicines  

  and medical equipment 
  
  The Committee would appreciate if matter of recon ciliation of all the pending CAG Audit Paras is tak en up with the 
concerned authorities on an urgent basis. The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard. 
Action Taken  
  The present status in this regard is at Annexure-IV  
III.   CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  HEALTH  SCHEME  (CGHS)  
Recommendations/Observations  
3.3   The Committee is unhappy to note the continuo us underutilization of Plan funds during the first three financial years of 
the Eleventh Plan, more so when the Department had sought an increase of funds during the RE stage during 2008-09 and 2009-
10 and it could not even utilize the funds provided  to it at the BE stage. The Committee, therefore, s trongly feels that the 
Department has to justify the need for additional f unds by ensuring optimum utilization thereof and be  careful in 
placing/proposing its revised estimate so that funds are not unnecessarily blocked and go unspent. 
Action Taken  
  Kind attention of the Committee is invited to the  replies to Paragraphs 2.4 and 2.8. For reasons sta ted therein, much 
improvement is expected during the last two years of the current Plan. The details of utilisation of budget allocation, under Plan, 
by the CGHS during 2009-10, are given below: 
(Rs. in crores ) 
Head of account Allocation Spent Unspent balance 
CGHS 44.68 43.07 1.61 
NER 7.25 7.21 0.04 
Capital Works 13.96 9.86 4.10 
TOTAL : 65.89 60.14 5.75 
 
  Under Minor Works (of Capital Work), sanctions fo r a total of Rs.11.60 crores were issued during the  year, but the 
CPWD could utilize only to the extent of Rs. 8.86 crores, resulting in an unspent balance of Rs. 2.74 crores. 
  Under the sub-head Motor Vehicles in CW (Plan), C GHS Delhi could not utilize an amount of Rs. l.70 crores, due to ban 
on purchase of vehicles. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.5   The Committee does not find any logic for und er provisioning for CGHS under Materials and Suppli es as also for IT 
activities Head which are bound to affect the quali ty of services available to the CGHS beneficiaries.  The Committee also 
observes that total tentative pendency with regard to medical claims of pensioners as on January, 2010  is Rs. 200 crore, 
including bills pertaining to 2008-09. In such a sc enario, allocation of Rs. 377.87 crore for pensione rs against the projected 
requirement of Rs. 627.00 crore for 2010-11 is boun d to increase the pendency further. The Committee i s of the view that full 
allocation of required funds has to be there so that pensioners are not made to face uncalled for hardships. 
Action Taken  

  Budget head “PORB” meant for debiting of bills of  hospitals and diagnostic centres in connection with treatment given to 
pensioner CGHS beneficiaries now stands transferred  to the demands for grants of the Ministry of Healt h and Family Welfare 
from the Ministry of Finance. It is, therefore, pos sible, at short notice, for the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to re-
appropriate funds from other heads of accounts with in the budget allocation of the Ministry, which was  not possible earlier 
when the funds were allotted by the Ministry of Finance. 
  Requirement of funds for “PORB” head of account i s being reviewed from time to time and additional allocation of funds 
under this head would be arranged by re-appropriati on from other heads of accounts with the concurrenc e of Internal Finance 
Division. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.12  The process of computerization under the CGHS which was initiated during 2005 is continuing. The Committee notes that 
finally the Department has been able to finish the work of computerization in six cities i.e.  Delhi, Kolkata, Nagpur, Pune, 
Chennai and Ranchi and it is nearing completion in Hyderabad, Mumbai and Patna. However, the Committee  is constrained to 
note that the Department has not been able to add m omentum to the computerization work even after the expiry of about five 
years as 15 cities still remain to be covered. The Committee therefore recommends that the computeriza tion work in the 
remaining cities be completed in a mission mode by the end of the Eleventh Plan.  
Action Taken  
  The computerisation of functioning of CGHS in all  cities, in so far as allopathy stream is concerned, has been completed. 
Computerisation process of AYUSH stream has been st arted in Delhi and will be gradually extended to ot her cities as the 
software required for operating AYUSH wellness centres is different from the one required for allopathy stream of medicines. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.14   The Committee appreciates the steps taken by  the Department to neutralize the teething problems  afflicting the 
smooth implementation of the computerization. Howev er, the ground realities are not much encouraging. The Committee is 
informed that there is shortage of computer operato rs and the doctors have to first see the patients a nd then feed the relevant 
data in the computer system leading to delays and the resultant long queues. This way the computerization has only been able to 
help keep a check on the inventory in the store roo m and save time in putting up request for local pur chases wherever required. 
However, it has not been able to obviate the problems faced by the beneficiaries particularly the old age pensioners who have to 
stand for long hours in queue. The Committee, there fore, recommends that adequate trained manpower may  be made available 
at the earliest. 
Action Taken  
  The services of data entry operators have been ma de available in wellness centres till such time the  doctors acquaint 
themselves of the computerised functioning of the C GHS. It needs to be appreciated that doctors in dev eloped countries and in 
major hospitals in India themselves operate computer while attending to patients. At the click of the mouse the doctors are able 
to see the entire medical history of the patient. D octors will necessarily have to look at the monitors for finding out the medical 
history of the patient if the data entry were to be done only by data entry operators. This will only delay the diagnosis process. It 
is only the doctor who would know the module for th e prescription of medicines, which a data entry ope rator would have no 
knowledge of. The general feedback received from th e doctors is that though they were initially appreh ensive about working / 
operating on a computer, now they feel confident and easy to handle and are comfortable with the system. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.16   The Committee is happy to note that after mu ch delay the Department has finally been able to op en a dispensary 
each in NOIDA and Dwarka. However, as the number of  CGHS beneficiaries is very large in that area, the  Committee 
recommends to the Department to put all its acts to gether to start the three dispensaries for which pl ots have been purchased in 
Dwarka and one dispensary at Gurgaon. 

Action Taken  
  Dwarka:  Recently another wellness centre has been sanction ed for Sector 23, Dwarka, for which a plot of land is 
available. However, till such time the construction  at the said plot is started/completed, an advertis ement was released in 
newspapers for hiring suitable accommodation there.  Against this advertisement an offer of an accommod ation has been 
received at Dwarka at Sector 14, 15. CGHS is actively pursuing the matter for hiring the accommodation there. 
  Gurgaon:  Central Design Bureau, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, has prepared the plan for .construction on plot 
in possession of the CGHS at Sector 5. CPWD has sub mitted an estimate. Funds to the tune of Rs.5,62,61 ,000/- have been 
sanctioned during financial year 2010-11. These fun ds are being placed at disposal of CPWD under Minis try of Urban 
Development for the construction. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.21   The Committee is not very happy with the ele ment of adhocism in such a crucial area. The Committee would like to 
point out that the number of vacancies in a particu lar grade are bound to put pressure on the existing  workforce thereby 
compromising with the quality of services provided to the beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, rec ommends to the 
Department to urgently chalk out a strategy to fill up the vacant positions in all grades under CGHS in a time-bound manner. 
Action Taken  
  In General Duty Medical Officers (GMDO) sub-cadre  of CHS, against the sanctioned strength of 667 in CGHS, Delhi, 
606 have been filled up (including 45 retired GDMOs , who have been appointed on contract basis). Again st the 61 vacancies, 
45 candidates from Combined Medical Service Examination (CMSE) 2008 were proposed for posting (issue of offer) in CGHS, 
Delhi, out of which 24 candidates, whose pre-appoin tment formalities have been completed, have been is sued offer of 
appointment in CGHS, Delhi and 4 posting / transfer  orders are in standby. For filling up of the remai ning vacancies and those 
posts against which retired GDMOs are working on co ntractual basis, offers of appointment will be issu ed from the candidates 
of forthcoming CMSE 2009. 
  Posts at SAG level, with the extension of Dynamic  Assured Career Progression Scheme (DACP) from CMO (NFSG) to 
SAG level in GMDO sub-cadre, which grants time-boun d promotion irrespective of vacancy, all vacant pos ts at SAG level all 
over India would be filled up by promotion of CMO ( NFSG) officers. The proposal for promotion is at an  advanced stage of 
consideration. 
  Requisition for filling up of vacancies of 45 Spe cialists, including 24 in CGHS of non-teaching sub- cadre have been sent 
to the UPSC. The matter is being pursued with the UPSC. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.23   The Committee has noticed substantial variat ion in approved rates of investigations / treatment  procedures in various 
metro cities. The Committee does not find much meri t in the argument of the Department that rates offe red by the private 
hospitals and diagnostic centres depend upon the pr evailing market rates, number and business volume f rom CGHS 
beneficiaries likely to be derived by eligible inst itutions/private institutions, which vary from city  to city. The Committee is of 
the opinion that substantial variation of 50 to 100  per cent in approved rates and that too in cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai 
and Kolkata cannot be considered commensurate with the variation in economic dynamics. The Committee a ccordingly, 
recommends to the Department to come up with a stra tegy to counter this variation of rates by having m inimum disparities in 
the rates.  
Action Taken  
  CGHS has initiated the process for revision of ra tes and for fresh empanelment of hospitals and diag nostic centres in all 
the cities in which it is operating. It has been de cided that since CGHS Delhi accounts for roughly ha lf of the beneficiary base 
of CGHS, for purposes of arriving at rates for different procedures/ tests/imaging services, etc., there will be an upper cap on the 
rates, in that the rates in cities other than Delhi cannot have rates higher than that in Delhi. 

  The above process was adopted in the empanelment procedure initiated during 2004-07, which resulted in hospitals in 
Mumbai not accepting the rates and refusing to acce pt CGHS beneficiaries. Instructions had, therefore,  to be issued to, permit 
CGHS beneficiaries to take treatment in any hospital and claim reimbursement as per 2001-02 rates. 
  Pensioner beneficiaries in Mumbai sought relief f rom the High Court of Mumbai, against which the Hig h Court has 
ordered that the reimbursement be made to beneficia ries after adding certain percentage to the higher of either 2001 or 2007 
rates, pending finalisation of the process of revision of rates initiated by the CGHS. 
  No hospital participated in the tender floated by  CGHS, Mumbai for revision of rates and for fresh e mpanelment of 
private hospitals. CGHS, Mumbai has issued advertis ement for re-tendering the process of fresh empanel ment and revision of 
package rates for CGHS, Delhi. The High Court of Mumbai has directed hospitals to participate in the tender process. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.25   Though the Committee appreciates Department’ s initiative for ensuring quality service to CGHS b eneficiaries and 
has no doubts over the professionalism of NABH/NABL , yet it does not find much merit in making it comp ulsory as a 
precondition for empanelment under CGHS. The NABL/N ABH lay down certain norms and standards to be obse rved and on 
inspection, they provide accreditation to those who  fulfil the said standards. There is no guarantee t hat once accredited, the 
Hospital/diagnostic centre will maintain those standards till the next inspection by NABL/NABH. Further, it has been observed 
that many of the reputed hospitals don’t go for acc reditation under them. In such a scenario it may be  counterproductive as the 
beneficiaries may be deprived of services under suc h reputed Hospitals/diagnostic centres. The Committ ee accordingly 
recommends to the Department to be cautious on this move. 
3.26   The Committee would also like to have inform ation regarding the number of NABH/NABL accredited Government 
hospitals/diagnostic centres as well as private hospitals/diagnostic centres empanelled under CGHS. 
Action Taken  
  When the CGHS initiated and completed the process  of empanelment of private hospitals and diagnostic  centres during 
2004, the so called big hospitals acted pricey and did not accept the rates arising out of tender proc ess. CGHS was left with no 
option but to empanel only those hospitals and diag nostic centres which accepted the package rates. CG HS has no power to 
compulsorily empanel hospitals and diagnostic centr es under it. After the completion of empanelment pr ocess, considerable 
doubts were expressed in various forums that CGHS e mpanelled “fly-by night operators” and “big hospita ls have been 
eliminated from the tendering process”. One point that no one appreciated was that CGHS had prescribed the parameters for the 
hospitals and diagnostic centres to fulfil before e mpanelment and also that the empanelment orders wer e not issued without the 
specific recommendation of the Quality Council of I ndia. Quality Council of India (QCI) is an organisa tion set up by the 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry. A team of QCI wo uld physically inspect the premises of the hospital s and diagnostic 
centres to confirm that they conformed to the param eters fixed by the CGHS, and only those hospitals a nd diagnostic centres 
were recommended to the CGHS for empanelment as wer e fulfilling the prescribed conditions. In addition , the hospitals and 
diagnostic centres were required to submit bank guarantees and sign MOA with CGHS, which had stringent conditions. 
  The criticism of CGHS of ignoring “big” hospitals  continues even today though on a slightly muted condition. 
  According to QCI, accreditation is a process base d on a system implemented across the organisation. It has to be practiced 
by its management, staff, clients (patients) all the time and being continuously monitored, leaving no room for relaxation of the 
requirements. Moreover, it is a process adopted by the management with an aim to improve its services.  It is different from an 
inspection which is based on the verification of in frastructure on fixed time basis. Therefore, accred itation mechanism is 
entirely different from the inspection. Accreditati on body also monitors the performance of .its accre dited facilities on a 
continuous basis by way of on-site surveillance ass essments, renewal assessments, off-site monitoring using data on various 
indicators, verifying complaints from users of the services, etc. Thus, a hospital once accredited doe s not mean that it will 
remain accredited forever. NABH can suspend or with draw accreditation on various grounds laid down in its policies and 
known to accredited hospitals. Patient safety and qualify of care are cardinal points in the accreditation. The accredited hospital 
needs to establish systems, processes and more impo rtantly monitor key clinical outcomes. All major gr oups of hospital 
industry, i.e.  Apollo, Fortis, Max Wockhardt, Columbia Asia, Narayana Hrudalaya, etc., have adopted NABH accreditation. 

  Unlike regulation, accreditation is voluntary. Ac creditation is driven by market forces, empanelling  and paying agencies. 
It stands to logic that paying agency has the right  to demand quality and the CGHS has taken the appro priate decision to 
demand accreditation so as to provide safe healthcare to its beneficiaries. 
  Presently, 45 private and 2 Government hospitals have been accredited by NABH and there are over 400  applications for 
accreditation which are under different stages of evaluation for accreditation. Over 70 hospitals have undergone pre-assessment 
and now working towards final assessment. Over 20 h ospitals have undergone final assessment and now wo rking to close the 
deficiencies so that case can be put to the Accredi tation Committee for recommendation. It is a dynami c process and the 
statistics keep changing as hospitals keep moving from one step to another. 
  It is learnt that after the CGHS imposed the cond ition of accreditation with NABH / NABL for empanel ment under it, 
QCI received over 300 applications for accreditation, which proves that private hospitals and diagnostic centres need CGHS for 
their profitability as much as CGHS wants them to s erve its beneficiaries. The condition will, in the long run, prove beneficial 
to the welfare of CGHS beneficiaries, which is a win-win situation for CGHS. 
V.  Dr. RAM  MANOHAR  LOHIA  HOSPITAL,  NEW DELHI 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.5   The Committee welcomes the proposal to start a general maternity ward, construction of a New Casualty Building, multi-
storey super speciality block and setting up of Centre of Excellence for Mental Health. However, the Committee recommends to 
the Department to keep a close watch on the progres s of new initiatives from the outset so that they a re accomplished as 
targeted. The Committee also recommends to the Depa rtment to take all necessary steps for early posses sion of land in the G 
point near Trauma Care Centre. The Committee may be informed of the progress made w.r.t.  the new initiatives. 
Action Taken  
  The position in this regard has been explained in  reply to Para 5.3 above. The progress of these pro jects is being closely 
monitored. 
VI.  ALL  INDIA  INSTITUTE  OF  MEDICAL  SCIENCES  (AIIMS) 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.7   The Committee takes note of the fact that AII MS has initiated the process of making a composite Redevelopment Plan of 
its Masjid Moth, Ansari Nagar and A.V. Nagar campus es. The work of preparation of redevelopment plan o f A.V. Nagar 
campus has been entrusted to CPWD. The work of Ansa ri Nagar and Masjid Moth campuses has been entruste d to HSCC by 
the Governing Body on 23rd January, 2009. The conce pt Master Plan was finally approved by the Project Implementation 
Committee on 12th May, 2009. The revised Master Pla n as presented before the Institute Body in Decembe r, 2009 has since 
been submitted to NDMC for approval. HSCC has also been entrusted with the consultancy and project man agement work of 
the redevelopment of old OPD Block.  
Action Taken  
  The redevelopment plan of AIIMS Ansari Nagar/Masj id Moth Campus has been submitted to NDMC on 24.02. 10 and is 
under process of scrutiny. The work of refurbishmen t of existing building of laundry/OPD is underway a s HSCC has awarded. 
the contract for Rs.13.27 crores. The work was started in April, 2010 and is expected to be completed in ten months time.  
Recommendations/Observations  
6.18   The Committee is not inclined to agree with the Department’s view. The Committee is aware that as per media 
reports during recent time some very prominent doct ors of the Institute have left it citing pathetic w orking conditions. This 
coupled with the existing vacancies does not present a rosy picture of the Institute. 
Action Taken  

  As per official records, the faculty members who left the services of the Institute cited the reasons as “Personal grounds”. 
This institute has no information about the media reports on their leaving the Institute because of pathetic working conditions. 
VII.  POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH (PGIMER),  
  CHANDIGARH 
Recommendations/Observations  
7.5   The Committee is constrained to note that the  fund allocation during the first four years (inclu ding the current fiscal) 
amounts to less than half of the Eleventh Plan allo cation. The funds allocated for the first 3 years of the Plan have been utilized 
optimally by the Institute. The Committee is not aw are about any new projects proposed to be taken up during the remaining 
period of the Plan. If that is not the case, the Co mmittee can only conclude that there is some unreal istic assessment of the 
requirements of the Institute for the current Plan period leading to excess allocation of funds. It is  highly impractical to make 
out that the Institute can spend an enormous amount  of Rs. 330 crore left for the final year of the Pl an. The Committee would 
like to be updated in this regard. 
Action Taken  
  The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its me eting held on 12.03.2010 approved the Eleventh Five  Year Plan 
Projects amounting to Rs.515.00 crores. The EFC rec ommended that in addition to the already released f unds amounting to 
Rs.205.00 crores in the first three years of the El eventh Five Year Plan, Rs.310.00 crores will be rel eased to the Institute in the 
next two years (Rs.l40.00 crores in 2010-11 and Rs.170.00 crores in 2011-12). 
Recommendations/Observations  
7.6   The Committee notes that all the projects und ertaken by the Institute during the Ninth and Tenth  Plan are functional. The 
only exception is the Advanced Trauma Centre (Phase -I) which is stated to be complete but not function al. The Committee 
would like to have the reasons for the abnormal delay in the operationalisation of the Centre. 
Action Taken  
  The capital work of Advanced Trauma Centre, Phase - I and Advanced Trauma Centre, Phase-II are interl inked, so 
without the completion of the work of Phase-II, the  Phase- I cannot become functional. The whole build ing is to be made 
functional by September, 2010. 
VIII. NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUT E OF HEALTH AND MEDICAL  
  SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG  
Recommendations/Observations  
8.3   The Committee would like to be briefed about the components of ‘further development plan’ of the  Institute. The 
Committee would also like to be given an idea wheth er the Institute has become fully operational and a ll the pending items of 
developmental work have been completed. 
Action Taken  
  The Institute, as part of further development pla n, is finalizing the proposals of MBBS hostel, Regi onal Cancer Centre 
and Nursing College. 
  The Institute has also been given in-principle ap proval by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for courses viz . DM in 
Cardiology, MS in General Surgery and MD in General  Medicine and increase MD/MS seats in the Departmen ts of Pathology, 
Microbiology, Anaesthesia subject to recruitment of additional faculty. 
  The Institute is fully functional with 22 Departm ents (inclusive of 4 super specialty departments - Urology, Cardiology, 
CTVS and Neurology). The Institute is having fully operational Blood Bank with facility for blood separation. 
  The procurement of equipment has been made for al l departments which are presently functional. 

  The Diagnostic Departments like Radiology, Bioche mistry, Physiology, etc. are fully equipped. A well equipped Casualty 
(Medicine) has also been made operational. 
  The Institute was formally inaugurated on 5th Mar ch, 2010. 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
8.6   The Committee is very concerned at the contin uance of a very large number of vacant positions in  the Institute that is 
supposed to be developed on the pattern of AIIMS, New Delhi and PGIMER, Chandigarh and provide specialized health care to 
the deprived regions of North East India. The Commi ttee notes that the efforts of the Institute to fil l up Group “B” and “C” 
technical posts have yielded some fruits. But the s ame is not the case w. r. t.  other categories of posts. The Committee wonders 
as to how the Institute can be considered functiona l when more than one-third of sanctioned Faculty po sts are lying vacant and 
out of total strength of 189 posts of SRD/JRD, only  83 are in position. Both the teaching and healthca re facilities as envisaged 
are simply not there at present in the Institute. T he Committee is of the opinion that manpower alongw ith the infrastructure is 
the foremost important ingredient which is a must for smooth functioning of this Institute. The infrastructure having been put in 
place to a satisfactory level needs to be backed wi th requisite manpower. The Committee accordingly re commends to the 
Department to approach the CAT (Guwahati Bench) or an appropriate authority with a sense of urgency in  public interest so 
that the case is settled or at least the stay is va cated to facilitate an early filling up of the vaca ncies. The Department needs to 
keep its relentless efforts to attract manpower by special incentives and special recruitment drives. The Committee may be 
updated on the issue.  
Action Taken  
  Due to the stay order of CAT (Guwahati Bench), th e Institute is not able to appoint faculty. Efforts  are being made to 
appoint faculty on ad-hoc  basis. The Standing Legal Counsel of the Institute  has informed that the appointment of faculty on 
ad-hoc  basis does not violate CAT order. Special efforts have been made to fill up the vacant faculty posts. 
  Vide Government order dated 31.12.2009 and 12.01. 2010 NEIGRIHMS’ Faculty has been put at par with fa culty of 
AIIMS, New Delhi, PGIMER, Chandigarh, JIPMER, Puddu cherry, NIMHANS, Bangalore with regard to pay and s ervice 
conditions. 
  The faculty of the Institute has been paid specia l duty allowance and provided fully furnished accommodation; 2 seats for 
MBBS course from Meghalaya quota have been reserved for wards of the faculty. 
IX.   CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, KANKE, RANCH I (CIP, RANCHI) 
Recommendations/Observations  
9.5   The Committee notes with displeasure that the  matter of creation of additional posts continues t o be at a proposal stage 
even after about two years of directions given by the Jharkhand High Court. If this is the state of af fairs inspite of a High Court 
intervention, the Committee is compelled to conclud e that things are not going to show any marked impr ovement in the near 
future. The Committee would like to point out that the Department has to play a more pro-active role i n improving the services 
in a national level premier institute, especially because of High Court intervention. The Department must be aware that the area 
of services where CIP used to hold a commanding pos ition in the earlier times is the most neglected ar ea of our present-day 
healthcare.  
Action Taken  
  The process is being expedited. 
X.   LADY HARDINGE MEDICAL COLLEGE AND SMT. SUCHETA  KRIPALANI HOSPITAL,  
  NEW DELHI.  

Recommendations/Observations  
10.4   The Committee is disappointed that there has  been considerable delay in achieving the target of  first phase of 
redevelopment of the college and its associated hos pital. When enquired about the same, the Principal and Medical 
Superintendent of the College during his deposition  before the Committee on 23rd March, 2010 informed that EFC for the 
comprehensive redevelopment plan envisaged three ye ars back has already been cleared. The same was app roved by the 
Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs in the beginn ing of the last year. The approved plans were subse quently submitted to 
specific authorities of the Delhi Government and ot her institutions and out of 12 such authorities, ap proval from the Delhi 
Urban Arts Commission and the Forest Department was yet to be received. Accordingly, construction work could not be started. 
As soon as all the NOCs are available, tender would  be floated for construction of buildings under pha se -1 of Comprehensive 
Redevelopment Plan.  
Recommendations/Observations  
10.5   The Committee would appreciate if all the pr ocedural delays coming in the way of Phase-I of Com prehensive 
Redevelopment Plan of the Lady Hardinge Medical Col lege and Sucheta Kriplani Hospital are removed at t he earliest. The 
Department needs to play a more pro-active role in such matters. 
Action Taken  
1. Immediately after the Architectural Consultant M /s G. D. Sambhare & Co. submitted the redevelopment plan to the 
Local Authorities for clearance, the matter was tak en up by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare wi th these 
authorities to facilitate early clearance of the LH MC plan. As a result, all the clearances except fro m the Forest 
Department and Delhi Urban Arts Commission (DUAC) h ave been received by the Institution. As regards DU AC, 
it has found the concept of the proposal acceptable  subject to certain observations. After incorporati ng changes 
accordingly, the revised plan has been submitted to  NDMC for referring the plan to DUAC for final appr oval. As 
soon as the DUAC gives its final approval, the plan  shall be submitted to the Forest Department for ne cessary 
clearance. The Notice Inviting Tenders (NIT) can be issued only after the necessary clearances are received from all 
the authorities. 
2.  To avoid any delay in issuing the NITs for the project after the necessary clearances are obtained , the Draft NITs 
were referred to the Ministry of Law & Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) for approval. They have made certain 
observations. The Draft NITs are under revision as per the observations of the Department of Legal Aff airs. Thus, 
by the time clearances are obtained, the Draft NITs  shall be ready. This would circumvent the possibil ity of any 
delay in issuing the NITs after the necessary clearances are received. 
XII.  OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE 
Recommendations/Observations  
12.4  The Committee views with serious concern the non-implementation of the recommendations of the Oversight Committee. 
The matter is more serious when the Department is a pparently going for expansion only in those disciplines where seats can be 
enhanced initially with existing infrastructure wit h suitable augmentation of manpower. Funds do not s eem to be a problem in 
the instant case as most of the approved outlay for  the Eleventh Plan is still lying unutilized. There fore, the Committee 
recommends to the Department to chart out a concret e strategy for implementing this constitutional obl igation in a time bound 
manner and on priority basis. The Committee would also like the Department to explain as to how the expenditure figures of Rs. 
16.90 crore (upto 28-2-2010) jumped to Rs. 50.00 crore in a matter of one month. 
Action Taken  
  At the very outset, it is submitted that much pro gress has been made in implementation of Oversight Committee 
recommendations. As per information furnished by five premier institutions out of 19 Institutes/Medical Colleges covered under 
the Oversight Committee, a total of 715 additional PG and 824 additional UG seats would be increased a s per the following 
statement: 

INSTITUTION UG PG 
AIIMS, New Delhi 297 302 
PGIMER, Chandigarh 285 214 
JIPMER, Pudducherry 41 51 
NIMHANS, Bangalore 131 110 
Lady Hardinge Medical College 70 38 
 
  The task, which is presently being accomplished, is to upgrade the facilities in these Institutions,  for which Rs.300 crores 
have been provided in this year’s budget. 
  Incidentally, with reference to Hon’ble Committee ’s observation regarding actual expenditure under t he scheme during 
2009-10, it is submitted that funds to the tune of Rs.30 crore were spent during the year under the sc heme. The jump from 
Rs.16.90 crore as on 23.02.2010 to Rs.30.00 crores as on 31.03.2010 was due to release of Grants of Rs .13.10 crore to Post-
Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh on account of Oversight Committee. 
XIII. PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJNA (PMSSY) 
Recommendations/Observations  
13.4   Such a slow progress of implementation is bo und to result in huge amount remaining unutilized a t the end of the 
Plan period. The Committee had time and again been inviting the attention of the Department towards th e urgent need to take 
some corrective measures, but it appears that the same has not yielded fruits atleast as of now. 
Action Taken  
  Progress has been slow in the past. However, all efforts are being taken now to implement the PMSSY Projects quickly. 
Civil work for package I, i.e. construction of medi cal college complex has been awarded and the work h as started. Civil work 
for package-II, i.e. hospital complex has been re-tendered. Upgradation of Trivendrum Medical College has been completed and 
work at other medical colleges in the first phase o f PMSSY is progressing. Upgradation programme in the second phase is also 
gathering momentum. In order to close monitoring/ i mplementation of PMSSY projects, a retired Addition al Director General 
of CPWD has been appointed as Project Advisor in Project Monitoring Unit of PMSSY. 
Recommendations/Observations  
13.12  The Committee has been monitoring the progre ss of implementation of PMSSY very closely. The Com mittee observes 
that scheduled dates of various stages of different  components of both AIIMS like institutions alongwi th their residential 
complexes and upgradation of 13 existing medical co lleges have been revised time and again for varying  reasons. The 
Committee is perturbed to note that this ambitious programme was launched on 15th July, 2003. Even after a lapse of more than 
six years, the likely date for selection of contrac tors has been given as April, 2010, with civil work  supposed to start in June, 
2010 and date of completion projected as December, 2012. As per the latest information, bids for the p roject are under 
finalization. Similarly, with regard to residential  complexes, time-lines have been revised, indicatin g a delay of six months to 
one year. The Committee apprehends that there are a ll chances of further revision of date of completio n. For example, whereas 
only 15 percent and 20 percent of construction work  in respect of Bhubaneswar and Bhopal residential c omplex, respectively, 
has been reported, their likely date of completion is December, 2010.  
Action Taken  
  Slow progress in Bhopal site is due to certain si te specific issues such as removal of encroachers and shifting of overhead 
high tension wire and delay in obtaining building p ermission from State Government. Similarly, housing  project at 
Bhubaneswar has been delayed due to non-availability of a portion of land which is presently under lit igation. Therefore, scope 

of work for housing complex has been reduced from 1 8 to 9 blocks and contract price has been revised t o Rs.54.75 crore. 63% 
of housing work at Rishikesh and 58% at Patna have been completed. The work at Jodhpur and Raipur sites was completed. 
  For Package-I civil work, i.e. medical college co mplex, work was awarded in April, 2010. Civil work for Package-II has 
also been recently awarded in April, 2010. Civil work for Package-II has also been recently awarded. 
Recommendations/Observations  
13.13   Position with regard to upgradation of 13 m edical colleges is also quite discouraging. Here also with the exception 
of Trivandrum Medical College (reported to be complete and ready for inauguration), likely date of completion in respect of the 
remaining colleges indicates shifting 6 months to one year. Here again in respect of RIMS, Ranchi 15 p ercent progress, and for 
Srinagar Medical College, 39 percent progress has been made so for. 
Action Taken  
  The civil work at RIMS, Ranchi could only be star ted in September, 2009 due to failure of earlier bids and subsequent re-
tendering. There are also site specific issues such  as shifting of overhead electrical line passing ov er the proposed Oncology 
Block. 
  As regards Srinagar Medical College, climatic con ditions as well as periodical local disturbances in  the region caused 
slow progress in civil work.  
Recommendations/Observations  
13.14  The Committee appreciates the candid admissi on of the Secretary regarding errors of judgment of  the Department and 
lack of adequate monitoring while implementing the Scheme. The Committee would, however, like to point  out that this alone 
would not suffice. The new monitoring mechanism has to be in place immediately and every effort has to  be made to adhere to 
the fresh timelines set under various components of  the Scheme. The Committee would also like to empha size that the revised 
estimate of  
Rs. 820 crore for each AIIMS like Institution is more than two and half times when compared with origi nal estimate of Rs. 332 
crore. Therefore, it is essential to adhere to the new time lines, otherwise there is every possibilit y of further escalation. The 
Committee finds that PMSSY was conceptualized in the first year of the Tenth Plan. As the things stand today, one can hope of 
its becoming operational only in the beginning of the Twelfth Plan.  
Action Taken  
  Project Cell comprising of Superintending Enginee r and Financial Adviser have already been put in pl ace at each of the 
sites. In addition, a retired Additional Director G eneral of CPWD has been appointed as Project Adviso r in Project Monitoring 
Unit of PMSSY. 
  A society at each site is also being formed in or der to facilitate in greater autonomy and faster execution of projects. 
XIV.  DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES 
Recommendations/Observations  
14.6  On an analysis of various physical targets se t and their achievement level during the first three years of the Eleventh Plan, 
the Committee finds a discouraging scenario. Achiev ement in the most crucial component, i.e., training  of nursing personnel 
has remained much below the targeted coverage. Against a target of training of 8000, 9000 and 12000 nursing personnel during 
2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10, funds could be releas ed for training of only 2400, 2880 and 2800 nursing  personnel during 
these three years. It is not known as to whether the reported number of nurses could be eventually trained.  
Action Taken  
  The targets are for the period when the scheme wa s in the process of revision and therefore could no t be up to the mark. 
Since the CCEA has approved the modified scheme, all out efforts are being made to implement the scheme earnestly. 
XV.   NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME (NMHP) 

Recommendations/Observations  
15.3   The Committee observes that during the first  two years of the Plan period, utilization of alloc ated funds was 
minimal. Against an allocation of Rs. 70.00 crore i n both the years, expenditure reported at the end o f year was only Rs. 14.57 
crore and Rs. 23.26 crore, respectively. Plan alloc ation of Rs. 70.00 crore in 2009-10 was reduced to Rs. 55.00 crore at the RE 
stage. The expenditure reported as on 28th February 2010 is Rs. 38 crore only.  
 
 
Action Taken  
  There has been delay in initiating expenditure du ring the first two quarters of 2009-10 because CCEA  approval for 
Manpower Components (1st EFC) of NMHP was obtained in March, 2009 the sanction of which could be conve yed to the 
states only in the end of April 2009 due to model c ode of conduct for general election being in force.  Due to this completed 
proposals were received from the State Government i n subsequent months and after due inspection of the  institutes short listed 
for centers of excellence in mental health recommendations for funding could be completed by August 2009. However, later on 
by the end of the 4th quarter, an amount of Rs.51.5 crore was spent.  
Recommendations/Observations  
15.4   The Committee finds that achievement level vis-a-vis  the physical targets set during 2007-08 and 2008-0 9 was also 
very discouraging as indicated below: 
2007 -08 
Physical targets Achievement level 
Extension of Distt. Mental Health Programme  Funds released to 15 new DMHPs and 5 
in 30 old/new districts old DMHPs 
Upgradation of psychiatric wings in 25 medical  Fun ds released to 7 medical colleges 
colleges   
2008-09 
Physical targets Achievement level 
Assistance to 125 new and 100 old districts Grants released to 7 old districts. For new  
  districts, scheme is under process 
Upgradation of 2 existing Mental Hospitals to the level  –  
of NIMHANS 
 
Action Taken  
  Achievement level vis-a-vis  the physical targets set during 2007-08 and 2008-0 9 was discouraging as achievements for 
these years were set in anticipation of approval of the Grant for proposed NMHP for the Eleventh plan in those concerned years. 
Since the same could not be obtained and conveyed t o the states during 2007-09 the achievement level d uring this period was 
very modest. 
Recommendations/Observations  
15.5  The Committee is disappointed to note that si tuation has deteriorated further in 2009-10. Follow ing details are self-
revealing: 

Target Achievement (till date) Remarks 
Extension of DMHP to 50 new Nil Expansion to new DM HP not 
districts  approved by Government 
Support to 110 Old DMHPs on 2 DMHP on existing Non submission of Utilization 
new pattern pattern Certificate led to grant of 
  support to only 2 old DMHP. 
Modernisation of Mental Nil Non receipt of complete  
Hospital: 4  proposal from the State 
  Government. 
Upgradation of Psychiatric wings of 
38 Medical Colleges/ General 
Upgradation of Psychiatric wings of 3 Lack of recei pt of adequate and 
Hospitals Medical Colleges/ General complete propos als under the 
 Hospitals scheme from the States. 
Initiation of work of 11 Centers of 
Excellence and 40 PG departments 
                                               Initiation 
of work of 6 
Lack of receipt of adequate and complete 
proposals for Center 
in mental health specialities; Centers of Excellenc e and of Excellence and PG 
 13 PG departments in departments under the scheme 
 mental health specialities from the States. 
 at 7 institutes;  
NGO/PPP Nil Scheme not yet approved by 
  Government 
Other (Monitoring, Evaluation & Completion of evalu ation Research component of NMHP 
Research): of NMHP Programme not approved yet  
  
Action Taken  
  At the end of 2009-10 the achievement level for t he last year stands revised to initiation of 7 centers of excellence and 19 
PG training departments in mental health at 9 insti tutes in addition to support for 2 old DMHPs and 3 Psychiatry wings. Other 
proposed schemes such as new DMHPs, NGO/PPP scheme,  Monitoring & Evaluation, Research & Training has n ot yet been 
approved. Due to lack of dedicated monitoring mecha nism in the programme the monitoring of existing DM HPs the utilisation 
of funds have been rather slow and procurement of c omplete proposals under various schemes of NMHP was  adversely 
affected. The monitoring and evaluation component has now been approved by the competent authority before initiating it. Lack 
of qualified professionals for the programme which was affecting the programme adversely in States is being addressed by 
implementing manpower development schemes and provi sion of using the trained manpower in DMHP team til l the time 
qualified manpower is available. With a dedicated m onitoring mechanism, production of more trained man power in mental 
health, the provision of using trained DMHP team in the absence of qualified mental health professionals, the implementation of 
the programme is expected to improve. 

Recommendations/Observations  
15.8  The Committee is aware that active cooperatio n of the State Governments is key to the success of  a Programme of vast 
magnitude like this. However, it cannot buy the arg ument that it is only the States who are responsibl e for not achieving the 
intended results under the Programme. The fact that  EFC considered the proposal of NMHP only in July, 2008 and only after 
that it was placed before the CCEA for approval is proof of the procedural hassles that are hampering the Programme. Further, 
the Department needs to take a pro-active approach and try to bring all the States on board for effect ive implementation of the 
Programme and have regular interactions with them. It is high time that the problem areas hampering the implementation of the 
Programme are identified and suitable and timely action taken accordingly. 
Action Taken  
  Lack of a dedicated cell/manpower at the Central level is an area of concern. This was reflected in the EFC also but was 
not agreed to by the Department of Expenditure. However, the problem areas like acute shortage of mental health professionals, 
lack of proposals and cooperation from the state go vernments have been identified and are being adequa tely addressed by 
increasing the PG training capacity in mental healt h, provision of training for general health staff i n mental health and a more 
active monitoring and mentoring system for involvin g the states actively. More regular interventions h ave been planned and 
would be intensified further once the dedicated monitoring mechanism is in place.  
Recommendations/Observations  
15.12  Majority of districts in the country have no t still been covered under District Mental Health P rogramme, which was 
initiated way back in 1996. It has taken almost 15 years for extending the component to only 123 distr icts. With about 500 
districts still remaining outside the reach of this  vital aspect of the Programme, the Committee can o nly conclude that it has 
failed to take off so far. With the Secretary herse lf indicating a further delay, the Committee does n ot have hope of more 
districts being covered under this component and of  the Programme in the near future. The Committee, t herefore, recommends 
to the Department to seriously take all conceivable  measures to cover the 200 Districts under DMHP, as  envisaged in the 
Eleventh Plan period.  
Action Taken  
  For the plan period, expansion of DMHP to new dis tricts has not been recommended in view of shortage of funds as well 
as shortage of manpower for the programme. However, all conceivable measures to extend the programme to 200 more districts 
will be explored by the programme division. Eleventh Plan covered 27 districts and Tenth Plan covered 110 districts, achieving 
more than the target of expansion of DMHP to 100 districts. 
XVI.  NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME (NCCP) 
Recommendations/Observations  
16.8   The Committee is very concerned with the per sisting underutilization of funds earmarked under t he Programme. 
The Committee in its earlier reports has been comme nting on this issue and has been recommending to it  to take some 
corrective steps in this regard. The Committee cann ot accept any justification in this regard as it is  a clear indication of poor 
planning and execution as well as monitoring mechanism. The Committee hopes that at least now, the Department would take a 
more pro-active approach in getting all the requisi te approvals without further delay and try to imple ment the revised 
Programme vigorously in the last two financial years with a focused strategy. 
Action Taken  
  As advised by the Committee, this Ministry has be en taking steps to expedite the completion of codal  formalities related 
to requisite approvals for the National Cancer Cont rol Programme so that implementation of the revised  programme in the 
remaining two financial years i.e. 2010-11 and 2011 -12 can be ensured. The revised NCCP strategy is aw aiting necessary 
approval of CCEA. States in which the programme is proposed to be implemented are being selected. The necessary operational 
technical and financial guidelines for the implementation of the programme are also being finalized. 
XVII. NATIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMME (NTCP) 

Recommendations/Observations  
17.2   The Committee is constrained to observe that  in 2007-08 and 2009-10 BE funds had to be revised downwards 
substantially at the RE stage keeping in view the p ace of expenditure under the Programme. Against an allocation of Rs. 40.00 
crore and 30.00 crore in 2007-08 and 2009-10 respectively, an expenditure of only Rs. 13.98 crore and Rs. 16.60 crore has been 
reported. The Committee opines that time and again the Department brings the rhetoric of scarcity of f unds and here it is not 
utilizing the available resources persistently. The  Committee may be informed of the measures taken by  the Department to 
optimally utilize the available resources under this Programme.  
Action Taken  
  The National Tobacco Control Programme was launch ed in 2007-08 as a pilot programme. In the first ye ar (2007-08), 
expenditure incurred under Tobacco Free Initiative was Rs.13.98 crore against RE allocation of Rs.29.0 0 crore. Subsequently, 
in the year 2008-09, actual expenditure was Rs.35.l7 crore against RE allocation of Rs.39.00 crore. Further in the year 2009-10, 
consequent to CCEA approval in January 2010, out of  RE allocation of Rs.17.00 crore, Rs.16.60 crore wa s utilized under the 
National Tobacco Control Programme. 
  A budget allocation of Rs.45.00 crore has been pr ovided under BE 2010-11 under “Tobacco Free Initiatives”. It has been 
decided to carry out the IEC activities under Natio nal Tobacco Control Programme in four phases to uti lize the budget 
allocation of Rs.23.00 crore in the year 2010-11. An amount of Rs.8.00 crore has already been sanctioned so far for running anti 
tobacco campaign through print and electronic Media  in the first phase of campaign during the month of  May-June, 2010. 
Second phase will be initiated after evaluation of the first phase in the month of August-September, 2010. 
  An amount of Rs.14.84 lakhs has been released dur ing the current FY 2010-11 to State Health Society,  Nagaland for 
carrying out NTCP. Further, State and District Toba cco Control Cells are being asked to furnish the ut ilization certificates in 
respect of grants released to them for carrying out  the National Tobacco Control Programme to enable t his Ministry to release 
next instalment of grant to them for the purpose. 
  An amount of Rs.91.00 lakhs has been released dur ing the current FY 2010-11 to IIPS, Mumbai for carr ying out GATS-
India survey and the remaining instalments will be released after the final report is submitted. 
  The process to procure equipment for setting up o f tobacco testing laboratories has been initiated. 
Recommendations/Observations  
17.9   The Committee notes that though the Departme nt has been able to come up with a law for restricting use and sale of 
the Tobacco products, the ground realities have not changed much. The various provisions of the Act are not being implemented 
in letter and spirit even in metro cities in India.  Situation in respect of small towns and rural area s can well be imagined. The 
Department cannot remain a silent spectator on such  vital issues. A proper pro-active strategy should be developed whereby all 
the States are roped in to work sincerely in this regard. 
Action Taken  
  Since the State Governments/ UTs are the main enf orcing agencies for implementing provisions of the Cigarettes and 
Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisemen t and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production,  Supply and 
Distribution) Act (COTP A), 2003, they have been as ked to ensure strict compliance of the various prov isions of the Act and 
Rules made thereunder. For regular monitoring of th e progress of implementation of the tobacco control  programme, action 
taken reports are sought from the states. 
  Further, Central Level Steering Committees for lo oking into violation of section 5 of the COTP A has  been constituted. 
An Inter-Ministerial task force has been constituted to look at inter-sectoral issues on tobacco control. 
XX. NEW INITIATIVES/PROGRAMMES 
Recommendations/Observations  

20.2   Besides that, programmes on Control of Human  Rabies and Prevention and Control of Flurosis are still being run on 
pilot project basis. So far only utilization of all ocated fund has been very nominal. The Committee th erefore recommends that 
process of approval for all these initiatives/progr ammes needs to be expedited so that substantial all ocation proposed for 2010-
11 is put to use for the targeted beneficiaries. 
Action Taken  
  The reply is at Annexure-XV.  
XXI.  MISCELLANEOUS 
Recommendations/Observations  
21.4   The Committee is happy with the introduction  of such a policy tendering monetary award to infor mers providing 
information about the spurious drugs. The Committee  would like to be apprised of the details of the po licy along with any 
achievement made so far under the policy.  
Action Taken  
  Whistle Blower Scheme ––  Whistle Blower Scheme has been devised by the cent ral Government for giving monetary 
rewards to the Whistle Blower who can take risk of providing the information about the perpetrators fo r such crimes. The 
Reward scheme provides for giving handsome rewards to the informers who provides specific information to the designated 
authorities leading to the seizures of spurious, adulterated, misbranded and not of standard quality drugs, cosmetics and medical 
devices. This reward scheme will be applicable to both the informers as well as the officers of the Government and CDSCO. 
  The Additional secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has issued letters to all Chief Secr etaries of States/UTs 
on 14th October 2009 with the request for the wide publicity of the Scheme. 
  As per the Whistle Blower Policy, the reward of m aximum of upto 20% of the total cost of consignment s seized will be 
payable to the informer / officials which should no t in any case exceed Rs.25 Lakh in each case. 25% o f the amount will be 
payable to the whistle blower at the time of filing  of complaint in the court of law, 25% at the time of disposal of the case in 
favour of the Government and the rest of the amount, that is, 50% when the case is finally decided and the matter is not pending 
in any court of law in the country. The eligibility  of the informer and the quantum of cash rewards wo uld be decided by a 
Committee, which will consist of officials from different departments / offices. To ensure speedy trials of the cases, these cases 
will be filed before the Designated / Special Court s set up for the purposes of drugs related issues a s per the provisions of the 
Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Act, 2008. 
  Drug Controller General (India) along with other officials will be the nodal authority who will inter alia  oversee the 
functioning of the Reward Scheme as proposed herein above. 
  The Zonal and Sub-Zonal officers of the CDSCO wil l act as the nodal officer to whom the whistle blow er/informer can 
provide the information about the manufacture /movement of spurious /adultered drugs. 
  The identity of the whistle blower/informer will be kept secret and will be known only to the Nodal Officers, i.e. 
concerned zonal and sub-zonal officers of the CDSCO , the DCG (1) and the Director General Health Servi ces. It will be the 
responsibility of the concerned officials to keep the details of the whistle blower / informer secret. 
  On receipt of the information from a whistle blow er/informer, the concerned Nodal officers will orga nize immediate and 
systematic investigation in co-ordination with the State Drugs Control Administration to unearth the spurious drugs racket. 
  The details of the investigations will then be fo rwarded by the concerned zonal/sub-zonal officer to  the DCG (I) for the 
consideration of the committee to decide about the merit of the case for reward and the quantum of rew ard to be given to the 
whistle blower / informer. 
  The CDSCO has received so far 27 cases from the d ifferent parts of the country, however in some case s complaints were 
repeated as they were received twice and some of the cases were found to be fictitious, Rest of the cases are under investigation. 

The details of the current status on the Whistle Bl ower Policy as on 30th April 2010 are at Annexure-XVI  for your kind 
perusal. 
  No reward under the scheme has been offered as th e first instalment has to be given after launching of prosecution in the 
court of Law. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
II.   BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.7   The Committee is dismayed at the fact that it s continuous concerns and recommendations to the De partment to put a 
proper mechanism in place for - presenting its case for fund requirement before the Planning Commission in a realistic manner, 
and to arrest the trend of under utilization of funds seem to have failed to make any impact. Atleast the Department needs to try 
some innovative methods to achieve optimum utilization of funds. Health is a crucial sector for the allround development of the 
nation and accordingly the Committee has been advoc ating higher allocation of funds for this sector ev ery year. But with the 
Department itself admitting to the slow pace of exp enditure in respect of many schemes/programmes init iated by it, the 
Committee finds advocacy for additional funds servi ng no purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends  to the Department 
to undertake a comprehensive analysis of the trend of expenditure for the past three years with a view  to identifying the 
underlying causes of underutilization. Such an exer cise should enable the Department to not only impro ve the utilization level 
of the budgeted funds but also to improve upon the existing system of assessing requirement of funds. The Committee is also of 
the opinion that the Department needs to take up wi th the implementing agencies as and when schemes ar e found not being 
implemented as per the Action Plan.  
Action Taken  
  The Department examines critically each proposal before arriving at the requirement of budgetary allocations for the plan. 
The Department assesses the fund requirement based on the several factors like expenditure trends of e ach 
scheme/programme/institution, status of New Schemes - whether EFC/SFC has been prepared or not, finaliz ation of tendering 
process in respect of construction activities, proc urement of Machines and Equipments, etc. The requir ements of outlay are 
conveyed to the Planning Commission for approval. H owever, it is the jurisdiction of the Planning Comm ission to decide the 
plan outlay for the Ministries/Departments based on  the overall resources available and priorities dec ided by the Planning 
Commission. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee had urged upon the Department to unde rtake a comprehensive analysis of the trend of 
expenditure for the past three years with a view to improve the utilization level of the budgeted funds as also to improve 
upon the existing system of assessing requirement o f funds. However, the Committee is constrained to o bserve that the 
Department’s response has been outrightly evasive in as much as it has reproduced its existing procedure of examination 
of funds requirement. The onus of providing Plan Ou tlay has been solely put on the Planning Commission . The 
Committee opines that if the utilisation of funds had been sub-optimal, how it can expect allocation of enhanced amount 
of funds from the Planning Commission for its vario us programmes/policies/schemes. The Committee finds that sincere 
efforts are lacking on the part of the Department i n this direction. No innovative or new strategy, as  exhorted by the 
Committee, seems to have been worked out by it. In such a scenario, the Committee does not hope any positive change in 

this regard if the Department’s approach remains un changed. The Committee, therefore, recommends to th e 
Department to put forth concerted efforts to convince the Planning Commission for allocation of adequate funds. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.15   The Committee appreciates this forward movem ent w.r.t. audit of Autonomous Bodies/Societies/Gra ntee 
Institutions/Programmes receiving Grants-in-Aid fro m the Department. The Committee recommends to the D epartment to 
furnish the major audit findings of 2008-09 and 200 9-10 and action taken thereon. A list of Autonomous  
Bodies/Societies/Grantee Institutions/Prograrnmes likely to be covered during 2010-11 may also be furnished to the Committee.  
Action Taken  
  A list of Autonomous Bodies/Societies/Grantee Ins titutions/ Programmes which are likely to be covere d during 2010-11, 
is enclosed in Annexure-I.  The major audit findings in 2008-09 and 2009-10 in  respect of audited Autonomous 
Bodies/Societies/Grantee, Institutions/Programmes are given in Annexure-II and Annexure III.  respectively. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee notes that from 24 in 2008-09 to 25 in 2009-10, the Department, as per the latest information made 
available, proposes 59 Autonomous Bodies/Societies/ Grantee Institutions/Programmes to be audited durin g 2010-11. 
The Committee appreciates Department’s continued fo rward movement w.r.t. audit of Autonomous 
Bodies/Societies/Grantee Institutions/Programmes re ceiving Grant-s-in-Aid from the Department. The Com mittee is, 
however, constrained to note that only a list of th e major audit findings in 2008-09 and 2009-10 have been furnished by 
the Department and that too, without indicating the action taken on such findings. The Committee feels that if corrective 
actions on deviations from the financial norms are not taken the entire process of audit of the entiti es would become an 
exercise in futility. The Committee, therefore, desires that the action taken on the audit findings under reference may be 
furnished to it. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.18  The Committee has for long been emphasizing t he Department to make all conceivable efforts to st rengthen its internal 
audit wing as also take all corrective measures so that the laid down procedures are adhered to in let ter and spirit at the outset. 
The Committee is, however, surprised to observe tha t pendency of internal Audit Paras continues to be on the high side. 
Following details are self-revealing: 
Year No. of Units Audited No. of Paras raised Paras  Outstanding 
2007-08 68 737 448 
2008-09 73 651 478 
2009-10 44 415 396 
 
  The Committee fails to understand as to why more than half of the Audit Paras raised during 2007-08 and 2008-09 
continue to remain outstanding. The Committee would  like to have a Status Note on the details of major  units showing 
pendency alongwith instances of serious deviations from the prescribed financial norms (unit-wise). 
Action Taken  
  Internal Audit Wing has taken various corrective measures to ensure that the laid down procedures are adhered to in letter 
and spirit. It is also ensured during the course of  audit of a particular unit that the major procedur al violations are pointed out 
and corrective measures are suggested to the unit f or future compliance. The Internal Audit Wing is al so taking various 
initiatives to settle the outstanding paras by issuing timely reminders and also ensuring settlement at the time of audit. The latest 
position of outstanding paras and paras settled is given below for 2007-08 and 2008-09:- 
Year No. of No. of Para Paras settled from Paras ou tstanding as 

 Units Paras outstanding as 8.3.10 to 20.5.10 on 20 .5.10 
audited raised on 8.3.10     
2007-08 68 737 448 NIL 448 
2008-09 73 651 478 39 439 
2009-10 44 415 396 9 387 
 
  A status note on the details of major units showi ng pendency alongwith instances of serious deviatio ns from the 
prescribed financial norms for 2007-08 and 2008-09 are given in Annexure-V and Annexure II,  respectively. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The figures made available to the Committee regardi ng latest position of outstanding paras and paras s ettled for 
2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 do not inspire much co nfidence. That Internal Audit Wing of the Departmen t has not 
been able to make a significant impact is evident f rom the fact that pendency of internal Audit Paras have not been 
liquidated within a justifiable timeline. The Commi ttee also observes some serious deviations involvin g huge amounts 
from the prescribed financial norms made by some un its in recent times. The Committee feels that the D epartment 
needs to further strengthen its Internal Audit Wing  and make it an effective tool of removing outstand ing audit paras. 
Proper training to staff placed at Units may be one  of the interventions in this regard. The Departmen t, apart from 
issuing necessary routine instructions, may initiat e invoking penal provisions in cases of serious dev iation. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard. 
III.  CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS) 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.6   The Committee is happy to note that a number of initiatives under CGHS are proposed to be undert aken during 2010-11. 
One such initiative is expansion of a pilot project  for Preventive Health Check-up for pensioners and serving employees over 
the age of 40 years at CGHS dispensary, Sector-12 a nd Sector-4, R.K. Puram, New Delhi. The Committee w ould like the 
Department to share its experiences of the pilot pr oject and recommends to the Department to expand th e initiative to more 
dispensaries in a time-bound manner. 
Action Taken  
  Preventive health care check-up for CGHS benefici aries above the age of 40 years was introduced on 2 4th February, 
2010, for a period of six months, as a pilot project in two Wellness Centres (earlier known as Wellness Centres) in Ramakrishna 
Puram with a view to conducting periodic examinatio n which can not only detect disease early but also help in stopping before 
it starts. Such a preventive check up is a health a ppraisal whose scope and timing are tailored to age , risk factors and life style. 
Under this project, the. following tests/investigations are carried out: 
Male Female 
Hb; Blood Sugar (Fasting & PP); ‘LFT; 
KFT; T3 T4 TSH; Lipid Profile and 
Hb; Blood Sugar (Fasting & PP); LFT; 
KFT; T3 T4 TSH; Lipid Profile; ECG 
ECG and PAP Smear 
 
  For carrying out the health check-up of CGHS bene ficiaries, a concessionaire was selected on the bas is of response 
received to the tender floated by the CGHS. For car rying out the tests, the concessionaire would charge Rs.800/- (Rupees Eight 
hundred only) for every male checked and Rs.900/-(R upees Nine hundred only) for every female checked. The cost of health 

check up of pensioner beneficiaries are borne by th e CGHS and the respective Ministries/Departments wo uld reimburse the 
expenditure incurred by serving employees. 
  After investigations, the beneficiaries undergo h istory taking, general examination, eye examination  and gynaecology 
examination. They are then examined by medical specialists. Based on the examinations, the beneficiaries, where necessary, are 
advised for follow-up and further examination and treatment from specialists. The beneficiaries are advised about the following 
four categories: 
/circle6 Apparently healthy (for follow-up after one year);  
/circle6 At risk of diseases (Next check-up after six months); 
/circle6 Require further investigations(advised investigations and follow up after 90 days); and 
/circle6 Found to have diseases (To be referred to specialist). 
  So far 948 beneficiaries have taken advantage of the health check-up facility introduced on 24th February, 2010. No final 
decision has been taken (i) either for the extensio n of the duration of the pilot project; or (ii) for  extending the project to areas 
covered by other wellness centres.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee in its earlier report had appreciated  Department’s initiative of introducing a pilot pro ject for 
Preventive Health Check-up for pensioners and servi ng employees over the age of 40 years at CGHS dispe nsaries, 
Sector-12 and Sector-4, R.K. Puram, New Delhi. As i nformed a good number of beneficiaries have benefit ted from this 
facility since its introduction on 24th February, 2 010. However, contrary to Committee’s recommendatio n, the 
Department is non-committal on either the extension  of the duration of the pilot project or extending the project to the 
areas covered by other wellness centres. The Commit tee would like to reiterate its earlier stand that in view of the 
increased lifestyle related diseases, the Departmen t needs to expand this initiative to expand its out reach to more 
beneficiaries. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.7   The Committee also welcomes the introduction of a proposal under which the empanelled hospitals will forward the bill 
for the treatment of pensioner CGHS beneficiaries t o UTI-TSL and payment of the same within 10 days. S uch an initiative is 
bound to help the pensioners in availing of healthcare without any hindrance. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of Record. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee, while making the observation in para  3.7 had expected the Department to apprise it of t he 
updated status of the proposal regarding forwarding the Bill for treatment of pensioner CGHS beneficiaries to UTI-TSL 
for payment within 10 days .The Committee, therefor e, once again recommends to be enlightened about th e progress 
made in the matter. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.9   The Committee views the introduction of the c urrent proposal of the Ministry with serious concern. The Committee is not 
convinced by Department’s categorical statement that it does not intend to replace the CGHS with this new insurance scheme. It 
is amply clear that the scheme would be mandatory f or future employees and pensioners. The Committee w ould like to point 
out that CGHS is one of the very important social s ecurity measures which has been providing health ca re services at 
economical rates to its beneficiaries for so many decades. The Committee fails to comprehend the rationale for depriving all the 
beneficiaries of such an essential service in the l ong run. The Committee would like to point out that  there is a well-structured 
set up of CGHS dispensaries, Government Hospitals p roviding allopathic and AYUSH healthcare and also a  number of 
empanelled diagnostic centres and private hospitals . In the recent years a number of initiatives have also been taken for 

strengthening/revamping different components under the Scheme. A number of additional dispensaries are  also proposed to be 
set up in the near future. The existing CGHS scheme  is part of the social responsibility of government  for its serving/retired 
employees. Full reimbursement as per the prescribed  norms is payable to the beneficiaries. There is no  upper limit on annual 
expenditure on the treatment of a beneficiary. The very idea of capping the amount of coverage to Rs. 5 lakh per family per year 
as well as the limit of coverage to only - Self, sp ouse, two dependent children and dependent parents and thereby forcing for 
payment of the fixed percentage of premium per additional dependent family member under the proposed scheme indicates that 
the Government intends to dilute its social obligation primarily to its employees. This is unacceptable to the Committee. 
Action Taken  
  The proposed health insurance scheme is primarily  aimed at Central Government pensioners residing in areas not covered 
by the CGHS and also for serving Central Government  employees presently not covered by the CGHS. Exist ing CGHS 
beneficiaries will have the option of continuing wi th the CGHS or opt for the proposed health insuranc e scheme, when 
introduced. 
  Additionally, the cost of running the CGHS in the  existing 25 cities has been increasing alarmingly and the Government is 
finding it difficult to fund the increasing need of  funds to maintain the present level of satisfactio n. Presently, CGHS 
beneficiaries are reimbursed their expenditure base d on the package rates fixed for different treatmen t in private hospitals and 
diagnostic centres. Here also, differential entitlement of wards exists. 
  As per information available from IRDA, more than  97% of the claims settled under different mediclaim/health insurance 
policies were claims under Rs.3.00 lakhs; and 0.35%  of the claims were between Rs. 3.00 lakhs and Rs.5 .00 lakhs and the 
balance were over Rs. 5.00 lakhs. Hence, the present proposed coverage of upto Rs. 5.00 lakhs per beneficiary per annum would 
be more than adequate to cover the health needs of the beneficiaries who would be joining the health insurance scheme. 
  It is not that the beneficiaries would be left hi gh and dry if the expenditure exceeded RS.5.00 lakns in any given year. The 
proposal includes a provision for the creation of c orpus for reimbursement of expenditure beyond the a nnual limit of Rs. 5.00 
lakhs, on a case to case basis. What is being propo sed in the scheme is that the liability of the insu rance agency would be upto 
the limit of Rs.5.00 lakhs. 
  In order to encourage small family norms, it is p roposed to restrict the number of persons to be cov ered under the 
proposed scheme. It is denied that the Government i s diluting its social obligation primarily to its e mployees. The proposed 
scheme allows the coverage of self, spouse, two dependent children and dependent parents, which clearly shows that the benefit 
is sought to be extended to the nearest family members of the beneficiary. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Action Taken Note furnished by the Department h as proved beyond doubt the apprehensions of the 
Committee that the Government wants to dilute its s ocial obligation towards its employees. The justifi cation by the 
Department that the proposed health insurance schem e is primarily aimed at Central Government pensione rs residing 
in the areas not covered by the CGHS and also for t he serving Central Government employees presently not covered by 
the CGHS, does not hold ground as it would be manda tory for the new entrants in Government service apd  those 
retiring subsequent to its introduction. Further, t he justification that the capping is a well thought  out exercise and 
would be more than adequate to cover the health needs of the beneficiaries is not convincing at all. To prove its point the 
Department has even stated that a provision for the  creation of corpus for reimbursement of expenditur e beyond the 
annual limit of Rs.5.00 lakhs, on a case to case ba sis, is also a part of the scheme. The Committee fi nds this very 
intriguing that when it is ready to shell out reimb ursement over and above this limit, why the limit h as been prescribed 
at all for the beneficiaries. It is understandable that the Department needs to place a capping while negotiating with an 
insurance agency, but keeping discretion of Departm ent to reimburse amount over and above this amount on a case to 
case basis dilutes the responsibility of the Depart ment and can lead to favouritism or even corruption . Another major 
concern is that whether the Insurance agency with w hich the Government is proposing to reach a tie up would promote 
cashless facilities with beneficiaries. The Committ ee has serious apprehensions about the adequacy of this scheme. The 
Committee, accordingly, outrightly rejects the forc ed enforcement of the proposed Insurance Scheme to Government 

servants and recommends to the Department to concen trate on strengthening this well structured CGHS sc heme and 
continue to fulfil Government’s social obligation towards its employees. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.11   The Committee is dismayed at the Department’ s approach from the very outset. First, it had taken the plea of a large 
number of private hospitals and diagnostic centres empanelled under the CGHS and the opposition from t he staff side to any 
such move. Then, subsequent to Committee’s recommen dation that flexible timings are order of the day a nd desirable in the 
interest of many of the CGHS beneficiaries who are unable to avail the facilities of dispensaries in t he morning hours, the 
Department in its Action Taken Note on Committee’s 27th Report had stated that the Ministry intends to take the matter before 
the Committee of Secretaries. The latest reply prov es beyond doubt that the Department is not willing to move forward in the 
matter. Like in the previous instances, the new ple a taken by the Department is its inability to go ah ead on account of its 
existing staff strength. The Committee is of the op inion that if there is shortage of manpower, necess ary action plan may be 
drawn up and approval sought for requisite manpower  at appropriate level. The Committee would like to reiterate that the 
matter needs to be taken up seriously and in the ri ght spirit. The Committee would like to be informed  of the progress made in 
this regard.  
Action Taken  
  It is the experience that only about 25% of the d octors recommended for appointment by the UPSC repo rt for duty. With 
this trend of in-take, CGHS experiences shortfall i n its day-to-day working. Opening of second shift w ill necessarily involve 
shifting of staff from the present morning shift, leading to further shortage of staff. 
  The proposal was internally discussed in the CGHS . The proposal is a pro-beneficiary move to provide  CGHS benefits 
especially to serving employees, but all were of un animous opinion that as per existing staff position , starting of this double 
shift Wellness Centre will further increase the wor kload and shall be taxing on the routine facilities  being provided during the 
day in the Wellness Centers, especially in view of “posting of CGHS doctors on administrative posts an d other duties of 
Emergency nature”. 
  It is pertinent to mention here that appointment of retired doctors on contractual basis was taken b ecause of ever existing 
shortage of GDMOs in CGHS only as small percentage of doctors, who are given appointments by the Minis try actually join. 
Posting of contractual doctors in CGHS, although, h as given some relief, but obviously cannot match fi lling up of the posts by 
regular appointments. 
  It was felt that starting double shift in wellnes s centre is seemingly not feasible. It was agreed t hat the proposal may be 
kept in abeyance till such time the in-position of the various categories of staff improves to the sanctioned strength. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee has been advocating the idea of CGHS being transformed into a truly service oriented ven ture of 
the Department. However, to its dismay, the Committ ee is finding it very discouraging on the part of t he Department 
not taking it in the right spirit and that too when  it is for its own set of employees. The Committee fully shares the 
concerns of the Department regarding shortage of do ctors. The Department needs to be receptive to the idea, which is 
apparently lacking. The Committee would like to poi nt out that when the double shift system was operat ional, morning 
and evening shift timings were having lesser hours.  With the switch-over to double shift system, the p resent duty hours 
would be accordingly adjusted. The question of havi ng substantial additional staff would, therefore, n ot arise. 
Therefore, the Committee would again recommend to t he Department to improve upon the work culture acco rding to 
the need of the time and move forward in this regard. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.17   The Committee is given to understand that th e workload on the dispensaries in Delhi has increas ed manifold. The 
Committee therefore recommends to the Department to  have a realistic assessment of workload in CGHS di spensaries in Delhi 
with a view to explore opening up of new dispensari es to mitigate the problems faced by the beneficiar ies. The Committee 
would recommend to the Department to furnish a deta iled status note on the no. of beneficiaries attach ed with each dispensary, 

zone-wise in Delhi and the NCR and plans of the Department to open new dispensaries in underserved areas of Delhi and NCR. 
The Committee may also be briefed about the availability of unused land lying with CGHS in different cities covered by CGHS 
alongwith the purpose of their acquirement.  
Action Taken  
  A proposal for starting 8 new wellness centres ha s been approved by Department of Expenditure. The s ites of these 8 
newly sanctioned dispensaries are as follows:- 
S.No. Name of wellness center 
1. Sarita Vihar 
2. Vasant Kunj 
3. Mayur Vihar Phase. II 
4. Sahibabad 
5. Model Town 
6. Sector 23 Dwarka 
7. Sector 16 Rohini 
8. Shalimar Bagh 
 
  For opening these above 8 wellness centres an adv ertisement was published in newspapers in February,  2010 and the 
offers received against areas at Sahibabad and Dwarka are being actively pursued. 
  Regarding opening of wellness centre at Shalimar Bagh, the building is nearing completion and the we llness centre shall 
be opened soon. 
  Zones have reported that since no suitable offers  have been received for Sarita Vihar, Vasant Kunj, Mayur Vihar Phase-II, 
Model Town and Rohini Sector-16, the matter for hir ing accommodation is to persue with Local Civic Age ncy like DDA, 
MCD, Baghidari societies and also to take the help of Local Welfare Association. The matter is also to be re-advertised in local 
newspapers. 
  Zone-wise details of the number of beneficiaries attached with each CGHS Wellness Centre in Delhi is at Annexure VI.  
  Details of plots of land in possession of CGHS, D elhi, for construction of wellness centres are at Annexure VII . Details 
about availability of land in cities outside Delhi are given in Annexure VIII . 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee observes that 13 plots of land in dif ferent localities of NCT of Delhi are under the pos session of 
CGHS for construction of CGHS Wellness Centres. All  these plots of land are at various stages of appro val. Status 
Report submitted by the Department clearly indicates that construction work is not going to start at any of the centre in 
the near future. The Committee is not aware about s ince when this process started. The Committee can o nly conclude 
with conviction that considerable time has passed a nd no progress worth mentioning is expected. The Co mmittee is 
intrigued with the details made available about Wel lness Centre at Vasant Vihar. It is very strange th at although the 
sanction for the Centre is not there, construction of boundary wall and provision of security at the p remises has been 
duly sanctioned. The Committee apprehends that this particular plot at Vasant Vihar has been lying ear marked for the 
past so many years. The Committee recommends that t he Department should review the position in respect  of all these 
plots of land and expedite the construction process of Wellness Centres. 
Recommendations/Observations  

3.28  The Committee would like to point out that pr ior to 2001, all the premier specialized hospitals had opted for CGHS 
empanelment. The Committee wonders as to whether th e recently empanelled hospitals of Delhi can provid e the same services 
as being provided by Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Hospital o r Dharamshila Cancer Hospital. The Committee is als o not aware about 
the quality status of the only empanelled hospital.  The Committee reiterates that the kind of speciali zed services being offered 
by a particular hospital, specially for terminal di seases like cancer and not the lowest rates should be the basic criteria for 
selection of a hospital. One must not forget that t he main objective of CGHS is to provide quality hea lth care at economical 
rates. Not only this, Government is supposed to rei mburse only the packages rates. Payment of differen ce in treatment 
expenditure is the concern of the beneficiary. In C ommittee’s view, package rates need to be governed by quality service. 
Nobody stops the concerned authorities to negotiate  with the applicant hospitals for arriving at mutua lly acceptable package 
rates. It cannot be that services offered by a smal l hospital can be considered on an equal footing wi th an advanced well 
established hospital. The Committee, accordingly, recommends framing of a policy for revision of rates after every two years to 
realistically fix the rates of treatment. The Committee may be informed about the action taken by the Department in this regard.  
Action Taken  
  As per instructions issued by the Central Vigilan ce Commission, negotiation with bidders is forbidde n in the ordinary 
course. In exceptional cases, negotiation may take place about price/rate alone, and that too with the  lowest responsive bidder 
referred as “L-l”. At best, CGHS can offer L-l rate to all the bidders who had participated in the tender process. 
  It has been decided that from now on the package rates offered to empanelled hospitals and diagnosti c centres would be 
valid for a period of two years with option to cont inue the same for one more year with mutual consent , and thereafter, action 
would be initiated for revision of package rates by floating of fresh tenders. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee is happy to note that a decision has been taken for keeping the package rates offered to empanelled 
hospitals and diagnostic centres valid for a period  of two years with the option to continue the same for one more year 
with mutual consent. The Committee would like to re iterate that for life-threatening diseases like can cer, specialized 
hospitals are the best option for patients. In the Capital where the maximum number of CGHS beneficiar ies are 
residing, facilities available at Hospitals like Ra jiv Gandhi Cancer Hospital and Dharamshila Cancer H ospital not 
reaching them due to their remaining outside CGHS empanelment cannot be ignored and needs due consideration of the 
Department. The Committee would, therefore, like to  emphasize that feasibility of such specialized hos pitals. under 
CGHS may be explored. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.30   The Committee appreciates the number of init iatives taken by the Department for effective funct ioning of CGHS. 
The Committee however, feels that wide publicity th rough local and print media needs to be given in th is regard. Only then 
CGHS beneficiaries will be in a position to avail of such facilities  
Action Taken  
  CGHS has decided to bring a “Newsletter” on a reg ular basis informing all stakeholders about the developments that have 
taken place and also the likely future course of action to acquaint beneficiaries of the same. 
COMMENTS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
  The Committee appreciates the number of initiatives  taken by the Department for effective functioning of CGHS. 
The Committee however, feels that wide publicity th rough local and print media needs to be given in th is regard. Only 
then CGHS beneficiaries will be in a position to avail of such facilities. 
IV.   SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL AND VARDHMAN MAHAVEER MED ICAL COLLEGE, NEW DELHI 
Recommendations/Observations  

4.4   The Committee is very concerned with the vaca ncy position in different categories of posts at th e Hospital. This coupled 
with the admission of the head of the Hospital itse lf that the sanctioned strength is far below the pr actical requirement, presents 
a sorry state of affairs. The Committee is of the o pinion that vacancies irrespective of any category are not only directly or 
indirectly bound to have an adverse impact on the quantity and quality of the services rendered by the Hospital but also result in 
overstressing of the existing staff. Further, the vacancies also have the potential to affect the quality of education imparted at the 
attached medical college. The Committee is given to  understand that in case of Resident Doctors, vacan cies occur frequently 
and are filled regularly depending on the requireme nt. The Committee is, however, not able to comprehe nd as to why there is 
about 25% of vacancies at any given point of time. At least the Department can take pre-emptive action  so that it has the next 
batch of Resident Doctors available to step-in in p lace of the outgoing Resident Doctors. Similarly, v acancies in Group 'A' and 
Group 'B' Gazetted posts are far above the justifiable limits. The Committee accordingly recommends to the Department to take 
up the issue of vacancies seriously and on priority basis. It also recommends a review of the requirement of manpower vis-a-vis 
the sanctioned strength of the Hospital and college . The Committee would like to be informed about the  progress made in this 
regard. 
Action Taken  
  Vacancy position:  The sanctioned strength of Group 'A' is 383 and out of these 63 are vacant. The sanctioned strength of 
Group 'B' is 56 and out of these 28 are vacant. The  Hospital has taken up various steps with the compe tent authority for filling 
up of these posts. Regular requisitions are also sent to the UPSC for filling up CHS posts in the hospital. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee is dismayed at the way the issue of  manpower is being consistently handled by the Department for 
so long. The Action Taken Note furnished in the ins tant case reflects the lackadaisical attitude of th e Department in the 
matter. The Department has only informed the vacanc y position status as well as the procedure of filli ng up them. 
Action on the Committee’s recommendation regarding review of manpower vis-a-vis  the sanctioned strength of the 
Safdarjung Hospital and Vardhman Mahavir College as  well as pre-emptive action in case of vacancies of  Resident 
Doctors do not find any place in Department’s reply. The Department needs to make sincere efforts and indicate specific 
measures taken to address the issue of manpower whi ch is crucial for better delivery of healthcare ser vices by the 
Hospital which caters to lakhs of poor patients coming from different regions of the country. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.5   Committee’s attention was also drawn towards acute shortage of nursing staff at the Hospital. No n-availability of good 
accommodation for nursing staff was cited as the ma in factor responsible for such a situation. Existin g staff quarters at 
Srinivaspuri were considered to be too inadequate. The Committee was given to understand that another project was coming up 
at Dwarka. The Committee is of the view that provis ion of accommodation nearest to the Hospital is the  basic requirement for 
all hospital employees, especially for the nurses r endering 24 hour services. The Committee, according ly, recommends that 
provision of required accommodation facilities for nurses should be taken up on priority basis. Viabil ity of such facility at the 
Hospital premises itself under the ongoing Redevelopment Plan of the Hospital needs to be looked into. 
Action Taken  
  Accommodation of Staff Nurse:  The land approx. 8000 sq. mtr. was acquired at Dwarka for construction of 96 Type-III 
and 16 Type-IV residential quarters for Nurses. At present there is no space available in the hospital  premises for construction 
of residential quarters for nurses. However, there is a piece of land approx. 5.86 acres of Safdarjung  Hospital adjacent of 
Incinerator Plant which is under litigation. Another land measuring approximately 16.0 acres behind the Trauma Centre, AIIMS 
has been acquired by the L&DO. In this regard, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has taken up with the Ministry of Urban 
Development for allotting some of the lands adjacen t to the hospital for further expansion of the hosp ital. If some lands are 
allotted to Safdarjung Hospital the same can also be used for the residential quarters of Nurses of Safdarjung Hospital. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 

  The Committee is happy to note that possibility o f land being available behind the Trauma Centre, AIIMS and the 
area adjacent to Incinerator Plant of Safdarjung Ho spital for construction of residential quarters for  nurses is there. 
The Committee would appreciate if this matter is pu rsued vigorously with the concerned authorities so that the nurses 
of Safdurjung Hospital have the required residential facilities. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.7   The Committee is unhappy with the pace with w hich things are moving in respect of the Re-develop ment Plan of the 
Hospital. The Committee in its 27th Report had urge d the Department to make wholehearted efforts to ex pedite the procedural 
formalities regarding this. The Committee notes tha t the Department itself has now stated a time line of six years for the entire 
work to complete. Keeping in view the inordinate de lay already made since its inclusion in the Elevent h Plan, the Committee 
recommends to the Department to make all conceivabl e efforts so that the whole redevelopment work is c ompleted within this 
period of six years. For this to happen, targets need to be set, resources placed at the disposal in time and implementing agencies 
need to be made accountable to accomplish the set targets from the very outset. 
Action Taken  
  The proposal for the redevelopment of Safdarjung Hospital is being further considered. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee has been monitoring the Re-developmen t Plan of the Safdarjung Hospital since the outset and its 
observations and recommendations as contained in it s 27th and 39th Reports are indicative of the fact that the 
Department is not addressing the bottlenecks in imp lementing the Re-development Plan. The present stat us furnished 
by the Department also apparently shows no forward movement in this regard. The Committee is constrained to observe 
that this is a classic case of procrastination. The  Department had earlier set a timeline of six years  for completion of the 
project. However, the Department’s reply that the p roposal for the redevelopment is being further cons idered, entails 
further delay, which is indicative of a very sorry state of affairs. The Committee would like to reite rate that the 
Department needs to come up with a focused strategy  in order to achieve the Re-development Plan in a t ime bound 
manner. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.10   The Committee is extremely disappointed with  the persisting slow progress made by the Departmen t w.r.t.  setting 
up of the Renal Transplantation Unit and IVF Unit. The Committee recommends to the Department to remove all bottlenecks in 
setting up of the two units at the earliest. The Co mmittee would like to have a status note on the sam e inter-alia  containing 
details regarding the original timeline set, reason s for inordinate delay, resultant cost escalation a nd fresh timeline set with 
special efforts taken to meet the timeline this time.  
Action Taken  
The progress of the setting up of Renal Transplanta tion and IVF lab. has been delayed due to unavailab ility of required space 
for these projects. Nevertheless, efforts have been  made to get certain land allotted from the land wh ich is available near the 
AIIMS trauma centre. It is also anticipated that th e required space for such projects would be address ed in the re-development 
plan of the Hospital. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  Expressing extreme disappointment over the persisti ng slow progress with regard to setting up of the R enal 
Transplantation Unit and IVF Unit, the Committee ha d called for a status note inter-alia  containing details regarding 
the original timeline set, reasons for inordinate delay, resultant cost escalation and fresh timeline set with special efforts 
taken to meet the timeline this time. The Departmen t’s Action Taken Note in this regard is evasive and  silent on all the 
issues raised above. It merely points out unavailability of land as a reason for delay. To avoid basic issues of delay, it has 
further been stated that the Re-development Plan of the Institute would be able to address the space s pecific issue. With 

the Re-development Plan of the Institute itself hea ding nowhere at present, the Department’s response does not inspire 
much confidence towards achieving the target of setting up of the Renal Transplantation Unit and IVF Unit. 
V.  DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.4   The Committee takes note of the fact that ins pite of a lot of developmental work being undertaken by the Hospital, several 
of the items of work like setting up of the Renal T ransplantation Unit have gone beyond the targeted t imeline. Concerned that 
time-overruns are certain to result in cost overruns, the Committee recommends that the Hospital chalk out a time-bound Action 
Plan for such projects. The Committee would like to  point out that the emphasis should not only be on the optimal utilization 
but also on the judicious utilization of scarce fun ds. The Committee at the same time recommends to th e Department to ensure 
that the developmental activities initiated by the Hospital do not get hampered due to scarcity of funds.  
Action Taken  
  Setting up of Renal Transplantation Unit:  The Renal Transplantation Unit is under establishm ent. The Renal ICU and 
Renal Transplantation Ward have been made. Efforts are on to go for Renal Transplantation by October/N ovember, 2010 for 
which a time- bound action plan is being chalked ou t and only after due training of faculty and manpow er, the Renal 
Transplantation will be started. 
  The hospital has constraints of land and space fo r implementation of several projects already in hand and the land already 
allotted to the hospital at ‘G’ point could not be handed over to the hospital by L&DO. The Hospital h as already taken up the 
matter with the L&DO in April 2010. The Ministry ha s taken up the matter with the Ministry of Urban De velopment for 
allotment of additional land nearby the hospital wh ere the projects like centre of Excellence for Ment al Health, General 
Maternity Centre etc. could come up. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee would like to be apprised about the  reasons for land already allotted to the Hospital at ‘G’ point 
being not handed over by L&DO. If need be, this matter may be taken up at the highest level. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.7   At the outset the Committee places its disple asure over the mismatch in the figures provided to it with respect to vacant 
posts vis-a-vis  ‘sanctioned and in-position’ posts. For example, i n respect of Group 'A' CHS posts, sanctioned and in -position 
posts are 219 and 194 (including 20 contractual pos ts) respectively while vacancies shown are 27. Such  variations exist in 
respect of some other categories of posts also. The  Committee would like the Department to explain thi s mismatch. The 
Committee is constrained to find a lot of vacancies  across the grades. The Hospital is already overbur dened with patient load 
and in such a scenario it is really a matter of con cern that such a large number of vacancies are allo wed to continue. The 
Committee is of the opinion that in the smooth func tioning of the hospital services, all the posts whe ther they are in technical 
side, nursing side or in the clerical side, have th eir part to play. Vacancies beyond permissible limi ts in any grade affect the 
overall patient care offered by the Hospital as well as result in overburdening the existing set of employees. Taking into account 
the increased patient load, the Committee recommend s to the Department to take immediate steps for rea ssessment of the 
manpower requirement in the Hospital and fill up th e vacant posts in the various grades at the earlies t. The Committee may be 
apprised of the steps initiated by the Department t o streamline the existing procedure of recruitment so that vacancies in the 
different grades are filled up at the earliest. 
Action Taken  
  Filling up the vacant post in various Grades:  The updated staff position of hospital establishme nt is given in table 
below. It may be mentioned that the 27 vacancies in  respect of Group 'A' CHS Post have occurred due to  7 newly created post 
for General Maternity Service. The hospital had con ducted Walk-in-Interview and offers issued for cont ractual appointment. 
However, many of the selected candidates have not joined. 

  As regards the vacancies (21) in respect of Group -'A' Non-CHS posts, there are 7 newly created posts  for college of 
Nursing, the filling of which is pending as the proposal for issue of notification of Recruitment Rules is under process. Many of 
the Administrative posts are unfilled for several y ears for which proposals are being initiated for re vival/notification of 
Recruitment Rules. The Group ‘B’ posts are also vacant for similar reasons. As regard Group-'C' posts, there are about 40 posts 
of LDC lying unfilled due to ongoing recruitment pr ocess through SSC. The posts of Stenographers Cadre  are lying vacant for 
want of eligible candidates in the feeder grade and  efforts to fill up these posts through deputation failed despite 
circulation/advertisement twice due to non--response. The remaining promotional posts are being filled through DPC for which 
process is going on. The Group-'C' posts (Nursing Cadre) are being filled through the ongoing recruitment exercise. The written 
examination has already been conducted in May 2010.  Another process of recruitment has also been initi ated for filling newly 
created 119 posts of Staff Nurse. The process of fi lling up of the Technical Group-'C' Posts (Includin g erstwhile Group 'D' 
posts) has been initiated by holding DPC and through Open advertisement/Employment Exchange. 
  However, in the meantime, with a view to overcome  the situation affecting the overall patient care s ervices, efforts are 
being made to fill the posts of Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ o n contract basis so as to facilitate smooth running  of patient care services at 
the hospital. 
  Moreover, the Hospital is in the process of condu cting training programmes for supporting as well as Ministerial Staff for 
knowledge update and providing better services to the patient care/ Hospital establishment. 
  Group-wise break up of Sanctioned, Filled and Vac ancy Position of various posts at Dr. RML Hospital (Including 
PGIMER) as on 01.06.2010 is as under: 
Group of the Posts Sanctioned Filled Vacant 
Group ‘A’ CHS 220 193 27 
Group ‘A’ Non-CHS 37 16 21 
Group ‘B’ (Gazetted) 43 23 20 
JR and SR 636 556 80 
Group ‘B’ (Non-Gazetted) 41 24 17 
Group ‘C’ - Clerical 175 129 46 
Group ‘C’ - Technical 493 392 101 
Group ‘C’ - Nursing 1116 783+ 185* 148 
 =968   
* Filled on Contract basis. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee had categorically sought pointed re asons for supplying it with the figures showing mismatch w.r.t. 
the number of vacancies in the different cadre post s in the Dr. R. M. L. Hospital. The reply of the De partment is 
conspicuously evasive on this issue. The Committee cautions the Department to be careful in supplying information as 
well as data properly in future. 
  From the response, the Committee infers that some  posts in different cadres lapsed and the Departmen t is now 
trying to get them revived. In some cases, issue of  notification of the Recruitment Rules is underway while in some cases 
the Department has initiated filling up of the promotional posts through DPCs. 
  The Committee would like the Department to give a  detailed status note covering inter-alia  the number of posts 
(category and post-wise) that lapsed during the las t 5 years, the reasons therefor, and the efforts ma de by the 
Department to revive them now. The Committee may also be furnished a comprehensive comparative status of vacancies 
(post-wise as well as cadre-wise) as in 2009 and in 2010.  

VI.  ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS)  
Recommendations/Observations  
6.5   The Committee is anguished to note that out o f a total allocation of Rs. 1461 crore for the Eleventh Plan, the Institute does 
not seem to be able to utilize the earmarked funds for the Plan period during the first three years of the Plan period. The Institute 
has been able to utilize only Rs. 648.00 crore (as on 28-2-2010). The Committee sees little hope for o ptimum utilization of 
remaining funds during the last two years of Eleven th Plan. As a result, the initiatives/ongoing proje cts are not likely to be 
executed as targeted originally. The Committee observes that as many as 21 projects were envisaged to be completed during the 
Eleventh Plan for which an outlay of Rs. 623.63 crore was made. The Committee is, however, dismayed to note that by the end 
of the first three years of the Plan, utilization reported is only Rs. 70.18 crore. The situation is worsened by the fact that work in 
respect of as many as 14 projects is yet to start. These projects include expansion of OPD Block and N ew Emergency Ward, 
Burns Unit at JPN Apex Trauma Centre, Multi-level p arking, Pediatrics Surgery. Out of total expenditur e of Rs. 70.18 crore, 
Rs. 55.00 crore has been utilized for minor works i n Hospital/ hostels/ residential areas o(the campus . Thus, progress made in 
the remaining six projects can also be considered a t the initial stage only. The Committee cannot rema in a silent spectator to 
present circumstances as AIIMS is India’s premier I nstitute providing specialized health services to p atients from across the 
country. The Committee is of the firm view that it is high time that an effective monitoring mechanism is set in motion. 
Action Taken 
  An amount of Rs.1461.00 crore has been allocated for the Eleventh Five Year Plan Period. Due to non- finalisation of 
EFCs of various projects, the Institute has been ab le to utilize only Rs.640.74 crore by 31st March, 2 010. The details of 
allocation and Expenditure thereof during the Eleventh Five Year Plan period is given below:- 
(Rs. in crore)  
Year Allocation Expenditure 
2007-2008  163.84 
2008-2009  223.17 
2009-2010 250.51 253.13 
 (Under reconciliation)  
 
  It is stated that utilization of funds during the  first three years of Eleventh Five Year Plan perio d has already been 
intimated vide  this office letter of even number dated 21.05.2010. However, it is again mentioned that the Institute has been able 
to utilize Rs.110.53 crore (during 07-08, 08-09 and  09-10) only for works out of the total expenditure  of Rs. 640.74 crore 
against the allocation of Rs.l461.00 crore due to n on--finalization of EFCs of various projects. The d etails about projects 
planned for the Eleventh five year plan are at Annexure-IX . 
  A Planning and Monitoring Committee has been set up by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare und er the 
Chairpersonship of Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee is deeply disturbed by the manner i n which the Department is treating its top most Institute of the 
country, more so when there is no scarcity of earma rked funds for its developmental activities. The wo rk and patient 
load of the Institute is increasing alarmingly day by day warranting urgent addition/strengthening of its existing 
infrastructure. There are projects duly approved by the Governing Body on 13th August, 2008, with EFCs submitted or 
to be submitted but work is yet to commence. Either  procedural formalities are still remaining or ther e is a change in 
the location or Master Plan is yet to be approved. The Committee is very surprised to note that even v ery small works 
like additional lift in hospital, expansion of exis ting cafeteria in Eastern campus, construction of c ommunity centre are 
not proceeding further. Though setting up of a Plan ning and Monitoring Committee under the Chairperson ship of 

Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare is a welcome step but no concrete steps or strategy  for putting 
things right on track in the next two financial yea rs, has been shared with the Committee. In such a s cenario, the 
Committee can only hope that the Department takes s ome concrete steps to put the developmental agenda of the 
Institute back on track. 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.9  While appreciating the candid statement of the  Health Secretary, the Committee fails to comprehen d the basis for such a 
Company being allowed to be associated with carryin g out tasks of such magnitude and of public interes t. The Committee 
understands that a number of projects in different areas are being handled by HSCC at present. The Com mittee recommends 
that a Status Note giving all the details of the va rious projects awarded to HSCC may be furnished to it at the earliest. The 
Department should take the issue very seriously and if need be, some kind of penalty clause may be introduced in the agreement 
itself to fix liability for any delay. The Committee may be apprised of the development in this regard.  
Action Taken  
  HSCC was entrusted with the work “Preparation of Comprehensive Master Plan (Revised), Design Consult ancy and 
Project Management Services for Ansari Nagar Campus  & Masjid Moth Campus of AIIMS” vide  agreement dated 25th March 
2009. Under said agreement HSCC had to: 
/circle6 Prepare Redevelopment Plan (Phase-I) of Ansari Nagar/ Masjid Moth Campus. 
/circle6 The Plan regarding Phase-I has been submitted to NDMC on 24th February, 2010 after due deliberations/revisions. 
/circle6 Detailed design & Project Management Consultancy for Phase-II for individual blocks to be developed/bu ilt as per 
Redevelopment Plan. 
/circle6 As per Master Plan submitted for Phase-II, HSCC was  asked to do detailed architectural and PMC consult ancy for 
following blocks: 
(a)  Facilitation Block -  The Plans were approved by Project Implementation Committee on 13.03.10 and have 
been submitted to NDMC on 25th March, 2010. 
(b)  Hostel Block - Concept Plan approved by AIIMS on 28th April, 2010 and is due to be  submitted by 
HSCC to NDMC. 
(c)  Block for Pediatrics & Gynecology -  The Concept Plan was submitted by HSCC on 3rd May,  2010 and 
observations of AIIMS had been sent on 7th May,  20 10. Concept Plan is being revised by HSCC. 
(d)  New Block for Teaching Resources - The Concept plan was finalized by HSCC and approved by AIIMS on 
3rd April, 2010. HSCC has submitted the drawings to NDMC on 18 May, 2010. 
(e)  Block for General Surgery - The Concept Plan has been submitted by HSCC in 2nd  week of May and is to 
be approved by AIIMS. 
(f)  New OPD Block - The Concept Plan has been submitted by HSCC in 2nd week of May 2010 and is yet to be 
approved by Project Implementation Committee of AIIMS. 
  Penalty Clause: - The contract entered into with HSCC has provision of levy of compensation for liquidated damages to 
the tune of 4.0% of total value of consultancy serv ices. The reasons for levy of same can be delay and /or substandard 
deliverables. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee views with serious concern the Stat us Note on the various projects in AIIMS being hand led by 
HSCC. Agreement for Redevelopment Plan Phase I and II with HSCC was signed on 25th March, 2009. It too k almost 
one year for Phase I Plan being submitted to NDMC o n 24th February, 2010. With regard to Phase II Plan , while 
proposal on Facilitation Block, New Block for Teach ing Resources have been submitted to NDMC on 25th M arch, 2010 
and 18th May, 2010 respectively, concept plan for H ostel Block is yet to be submitted to NDMC and for Block for 

Pediatrics and Gynecology is being revised by HSCC. The two remaining Plans, i.e. , Block for General Surgery and New 
OPD Block are yet to be approved by AIIMS authorities. It would be almost two years since the signing of agreement by 
HSCC but paper work and formalities are yet to be c ompleted. In such a scenario, the Committee apprehe nds that 
starting of real execution of work will take consid erable time. The Committee, therefore, recommends t hat the 
Department in co-ordination with AIIMS and all the implementing agencies should carry out the implemen tation of 
these two ambitious projects in a time-bound manner. 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.12   The Committee is unhappy with the dilly-dall ying approach of the Department on the issue of set ting up of the 
Burns Unit. The Committee notes with displeasure Department’s attitude from the outset which has been evident from the delay 
in the matter. ‘ Avoiding duplication’ can never be  considered as a valid justification for dropping t his project. The Committee 
notes that funds to the tune of Rs. 48 crore have b een earmarked for this purpose during the Eleventh Plan. The Committee is 
unaware whether the Department, before taking a view in the matter, has taken into account the patient load in the Burns Unit at 
the Safdarjung Hospital. Further, the Committee wou ld also like to point out that availability of any service at Safdarjung 
Hospital cannot be made the criteria for not initia ting the same at AIIMS. If that be so, the same arg ument can be put forth for 
not adding a particular service at Safdarjung Hospi tal since the same was available at the next door A IIMS. The Committee 
would like to point out that with the ever increasi ng patient load, both the hospitals have been provi ding exemplary services. 
Any addition or expansion of service will be going to provide better healthcare to our people. 
Action Taken  
  As desired by the Committee, the matter will be t aken up with the concerned authorities. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  Response of the Department about the proposal for  setting up of a Burns Unit at AIIMS does not give much hope 
to the Committee. The Committee would once again reiterate that all efforts need to be made to revive the proposal and 
expedite the setting up of Burns Unit. It would go a long way in reducing the ever increasing patient load of burn victims 
on Safdurjung Hospital. 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.16   The Committee is pained by the acute shortag e of the manpower at the Institute and is of the op inion that the same 
is not justifiable in any manner. The Committee app lauds the existing set of employees of the Institut e, who inspite of the 
tremendous work pressure, have been able to uphold the high standards and reputation of the Institute.  With large number of 
vacancies at Faculty level posts, it is practically  difficult to maintain the high standards of patien t care and teaching in the 
Institute for which it has been known. The Committee accordingly recommends to the Department to make all out efforts to fill 
up the vacant posts - both faculty and non-faculty and all other groups in a time-bound manner.  
Action Taken  
  It is stated that out of 629 sanctioned faculty p osts, 195 posts in various categories are lying vac ant. The main reason 
behind these vacancies is non- finalisation of rese rvation roster. With a view to overcome this situat ion, a former Director, 
DOPT was engaged as Consultant for preparing reservation roster for faculty posts who has submitted his report and the same is 
to be considered by the Institute Body in its next meeting. The reservation roster prepared by Consultant in conformity with the 
DOPT instructions/guidelines is presently under submission to the DOPT. The response of DOPT is awaite d. All efforts would 
be made to fill the vacant faculty posts at the earliest.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee has been constantly monitoring the i ssue of vacancies in AIIMS, particularly the vacanc ies at the 
Faculty level posts, subsequent to the matter being  brought before it in November 2008 by the Faculty Association of 
AIIMS through a representation. The Committee is aware that the matter of reservation has been amicabl y resolved by 
the Department after intervention of the PMO and se tting up of a high level Committee in this regard. But the 
Committee is upset over the delay in implementing the final outcome as no forward movement seems to have been made 

since the Secretary, Health and Family Welfare’s pr esentation before the Committee during examination of Demands 
for Grants 2010-11 in March, 2010. The Committee, therefore, urges the Department to take up the issue of filling up of 
these Faculty level posts with a sense of urgency s o that this issue gets sorted out without further l oss of time. The 
Committee feels that now that the reservation roste r has been prepared by the Consultant, the Departme nt should 
vigorously pursue the matter with DoPT for prompt response. 
  As regards vacancies in other categories of posts , the Committee is aware that the patient load of t he Institute is 
increasing day by day as the Institute caters to th e needs of poor and needy patients from the remotes t corners of the 
country in the absence of the quality tertiary heal thcare there. The Department needs to not only fill  up the existing 
vacancies urgently, but also needs to reassess its manpower requirements regularly. The Department’s r esponse in this 
regard is silent on the, issue of vacancies. The Co mmittee would like to be apprised of the specific s teps taken by the 
Department in this regard. 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.19   The Committee would also like to invite the attention of the Department to its concerns raised in its 27th Report on 
Demands for Grants of the Department wherein it has  cited a WHO report according to which out of 428 s tudents of AIIMS 
(studying between 1989 and 2000), 233 (54%) are res iding abroad. This presents a very disturbing pictu re that on the one hand 
there is acute shortage of staff in the Institute and on the other hand pass outs from this one of the best training grounds in India 
are turning to greener pastures, that too after ava iling highly subsidized quality education. The Comm ittee therefore reiterates 
it’s earlier stand that the Department should serio usly come up with some kind of bond or legislation in respect of premier 
institutes like AIIMS so that the young graduates o r post graduates are made to serve in AIIMS or othe r Government 
Hospitals/Institutes for a certain period. The Committee wishes to be informed of some concrete steps in this regard.  
Action Taken  
  It may be stated that during the year 1989 to 200 0 about 565 MBBS students have passed from the Inst itute. There is no 
reservation for AIIMS medical graduates (MBBS) in t he Postgraduate seats viz.  MD/MS in AIIMS, therefore they left the 
Institute. After that, the AIIMS has no information of their whereabouts. Hence it cannot be confirmed or denied that out of 565 
MBBS graduates from this Institute, 233 MBBS graduates are residing abroad. It is also mentioned that there is no Bond system 
for retaining these pass out students at AIIMS. However, as desired by the Committee, the possibility of evolving such a system 
will be explored. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee is very surprised by the response o f the Department on a very pertinent issue. It is v ery strange 
that a premier Institute like AIIMS does not mainta in any record about its passouts, that too in this era of high tech. 
connectivity. The Committee strongly feels that whe n an international organization like WHO can conduc t an 
assessment in this regard, similar step can be easi ly initiated by AIIMS also. The Committee would lik e to be informed 
about the steps taken by the Department so as to ev olve a mechanism/ procedure for utilizing the services of its students 
on completion of their studies. 
VII.  POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH (PGIMER),  
  CHANDIGARH 
Recommendations/Observations  
7.7   As regards the projects undertaken during the  Eleventh Plan, the Committee finds that out of 14 projects, 6 are reported to 
be complete and functional. The Committee has been informed that the only major project with an estimated expenditure of Rs. 
35.92 crore is the Advanced Trauma Centre (Phase II ) which is likely to be completed by September, 201 0. The Committee 
would, however, like to point out that the Centre n eeds to be made functional also at the earliest. Th e Committee is not aware 
about the likely date of Advanced Trauma Centre (Ph ase I) becoming functional. For a project completed  in the previous Plan 
remaining non-functional by the end of next Plan period is indeed a cause of serious concern. The Comm ittee would appreciate 
if Advanced Trauma Centre (Phase I) is made functio nal without any further delay. Simultaneously prepa ratory exercise for 

sanction/appointment of required staff and procurem ent of equipment for the Advanced Trauma Centre (Ph ase II) may also be 
initiated.  
Action Taken  
  The capital work of advanced Trauma Centre, Phase  I and Advanced Trauma Centre, Phase- II are interlinked, so without 
the completion of the work of Phase II, the Phase I  cannot become functional. The whole building is to  be made functional by 
September, 2010.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee would like to be apprised about the  deadline set for the functioning of Advanced Traum a Centre 
Phase II. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
7.9   The Committee is constrained to observe that nearly 50 percent of the vacancies are lying vacant  at the level of 
Additional/Associate Professors. The Committee opines that the teaching standards at the Institute are  being compromised with 
such a large number of vacancies. This situation ca n not be allowed to remain to persist any further. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends to the Department to go for special recr uitment drives at the earliest to fill up the vacan t positions at the Institute. 
The Committee may be apprised of the efforts put in by the Department in this regard.  
Action Taken  
  The Standing Selection Committee of the Institute  has been constituted now. The advertisement for fi lling of the vacant 
posts has already been issued. The vacant posts are expected to be filled up soon. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee notes that the process of filling u p of the vacant posts at PGIMER has been initiated.  The 
Committee would like to emphasize that this exercis e should be completed at the earliest so that requi red strength of 
Faculty Members at the Institute are in place. 
IX.   CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, KANKE, RANCH I (CIP, RANCHI) 
Recommendations/Observations  
9.6   As regards the redevelopment plan, inspite of  the proposal being approved way back in 2008-09, t he progress w. r. t.  the 
redevelopment of the Institute is at snail’s pace. The Committee would like to have a status note on t he redevelopment plan of 
the Institute inter-alia  covering the components of the plan, funds earmark ed and spent, timeline set for completion alongwith  
the progress made so far. The Committee recommends to the Department to give all requisite support - i n monetary terms as 
well as in terms of expeditious bureaucratic cleara nces so that the redevelopment of the institute is achieved in a time bound 
manner. 
Action Taken  
  An EFC of Rs.l00 crores for redevelopment of this  Institute in the Eleventh Five Year Plan has been approved which 
includes the following: 
  i-Manpower Development:  EFC has already recommended creation of 140 posts. 
  ii-Capital Work/Infrastructure Development:  The Administrative Approval and Financial Sanction  has been accorded 
for the amount of Rs.16,17,25,000/- for the construction of 210 .bedded Hostel and 15 bedded Married Residents. The same has 
been communicated to CPWD, Civil and Electric Deptt. to undertake the work as soon as possible. 
  For the construction of OPD, Neurology Block, Cas ualty and Service Block, Residence Ward (Family War d), OT Block, 
Diagnostic Centre, Pharmacy Block, CSSD Block and C orridor, CPWD (Civil) has been asked to call open t ender to hire the 
hospital consultant for preparation of architectural drawing and drawing for other allied services. The response is awaited. 

  iii-Equipments: Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), ECG Monitor, Gas Chromatography, Telemetric EEG, 
Mass Spectrometry are to be purchased during the El eventh Five Year Plan under this scheme. An open te nder has been 
processed for the ECG Monitor. The Institute will b e raising an indent for the purchase of MRI equipme nt. The rest of the 
equipments will be acquired after the construction of the new buildings mentioned above. 
  Year-wise expenditure (Both Revenue and Capital) on the development Plan of the Institute is as follows: 
(Rs. in crore)  
Year Plan outlays Actuals expenditure 
2007-08 10.00 9.76 
2008-09 16.90 21.32 
2009-10 15.00 20.97 
2010-11 27.25 —— 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee has been monitoring the status of the  Premier Institute, the Central Institute of Psychi atry, 
particularly its developmental activities, subseque nt to the same coming under the scrutiny of the Jha rkhand High 
Court. Accordingly, in order to bring back the lost  glory of the Premier Institute in the field of psy chiatry, the 
Committee had called for a status note inter-alia covering the components of the plan, funds earmarke d and spent, 
timeline set for completion thereof alongwith the progress made so far. The response of the Department is conspicuously 
silent on the crucial issues like timelines set and  progress made so far. The Committee would urge the  Department to 
play a proactive role and accomplish the various co mponents of the redevelopment plan in a planned man ner. The 
Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
XI.  COMMON RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING HOSPITALS 
Recommendations/Observations  
11.1   The Committee is concerned with the procedur al hassles earning in the way of the developmental work in various 
hospitals and institutions of repute under the Depa rtment. Though the Committee considers the laid daw n procedures as means 
of systemic checks and balances, yet it finds no merit in their coming in the way of urgent developmental work, and that too far 
a project targeted at taking care of the health care needs of the common man of the country. The Committee is of the considered 
opinion that the imperatives of development and env ironmental concerns need to be reconciled without f urther less of time to 
avoid further time overruns in respect of this proj ect. The Committee therefore recommends to the Depa rtment to have a 
centralized cell under a dedicated senior officer t o coordinate all such procedural issues with the va rious agencies. The 
Department needs to. playa proactive role here. If required, the matter may be taken up at the senior most level to facilitate early 
sanction of requisite statutory clearances and the concerned approving authorities may also be apprise d of the Committee’s 
concern aver approval delays in this regard. The Committee may be informed about the progress made in this regard.  
Action Taken  
  As of now, there is no such proposal to set up a centralized cell. However, developmental works pertaining to Safdarjung 
Hospital and Dr. RML Hospital, New Delhi have been closely monitored appropriately by the concerned Senior Officers. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  Perturbed over the persistent delay caused in coo rdinating the procedural issues with various agenci es of the 
Centre and the State Governments in respect of several developmental initiatives of the Department, the Committee had 
urged the Department to have a positive approach an d accordingly mooted the idea of having a centraliz ed cell under a 
dedicated senior officer to coordinate all such pro cedural issues with the various agencies in respect  of all the 

Government run hospitals of India. While making the  above recommendation, the Committee’s only concern  was that 
procedural delays should not be allowed to put a sp anner in the works of developmental plans of hospit als and 
institutions. The Committee is in no way interested  in suggesting the nitty-gritty of the monitoring f ramework, but 
would like to see the progress on the ground. Howev er, the Committee is at a loss to understand the gr ounds of the 
Department’s reluctance in having a centralized cell for coordination and would like to be enlightened about it. 
Recommendations/Observations  
11.2   The Committee is pained by the fact that the  healthcare fraternity under the Department has to function under very 
stressful conditions. Taking strong view of the eno rmous patient load in almost all the institutions/h ospitals under the 
Department, which is in many cases manifold than en visaged, the Committee would like to make a general  recommendation to 
the Department. It recommends strongly to the Depar tment to have an independent reassessment of manpow er done in all the 
institutions/hospitals under it - sanctioned vis-a-vis  the patient load of the hospital. The Committee al so recommends a close 
monitoring of the vacancies in all the institutions /hospitals of the Department under a dedicated seni or officer for coordination 
between the institutions/hospitals and the recruitment agencies so as to facilitate early filling up of vacant posts. 
Action Taken  
  In so far as Safdarjung Hospital and Dr. RML Hosp ital, New Delhi is concerned, review meetings to ad dress the pending 
issues including filling up of manpower are constan tly held in the Ministry. Appropriate steps are tak en to fill up the vacancies 
arising from time to time.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee is dismayed at the manner in which th e Department has attempted to skirt the issue of ma king an 
independent assessment of manpower requirement in h ealth institutions. The Committee had heard the hea ds of many 
hospitals based in Delhi during its examination of Demands for Grants of the Department in March 2010 and one of the 
glaring problems put forth by them was that of the manpower crunch. The Committee is also aware of the  fact that 
manpower requirements of almost all the hospitals h as not been analyzed for many years inspite of the patient and 
workload increasing manifold, thereby warranting corresponding increase in staff strength. Accordingly, the Committee 
had urged upon the Department to have a dedicated o fficer assigned the task of taking care of the vaca ncies and 
workload specific issues at the central level and c oordinate with the recruiting agencies as well. How ever, the 
Department has evaded an elaborate reply and merely  made a generic statement regarding existing proced ure w.r.t.  the 
Safdarjung Hospital and Dr. RML Hospital. The Commi ttee wonders as to what could be the reason for so many posts 
lying vacant for so many years inspite of constant holding of review meetings to address the pending i ssues including 
filling up of manpower w.r.t.  these two hospitals. The Department needs to welco me fresh and innovative ideas to 
smoothen and facilitate processes rather than adopting an indifferent attitude. 
XIII. PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY) 
Recommendations/Observations  
13.19  The Committee is happy to note that the second phase will extend the reach of AIIMS like facilities to more underserved 
areas of the country and will help in upgradation o f other medical college institutions. However, the Committee cautions the 
Department to be careful from the outset so that th e problems that afflicted the first phase do not re cur here. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress made in implementing the second phase of the Scheme.  
Action Taken  
  Both in West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh, a final de cision is to be taken on the location of the propos ed facility. 
Concurrence of the State Government on the availability of land at the location chosen would also need to be obtained. 
  As regards 6 upgradation projects in the second p hase of PMSSY, tender document for civil work at Government Medical 
College, Amritsar has been finalized and is being f loated shortly. Government Medical College, Nagpur has been released 

Rs.40 crore for procurement of equipments. Concept plans of the four remaining institutions are being prepared by the Project 
Consultants.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee recommends to the Department to proac tively take up the matter with the concerned State 
Governments of West Bengal and U.P. so as to achiev e the setting up of the AIIMS like institutes there , within targeted 
timelines. 
 
 
XIV.   DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES  
Recommendations/Observations  
14.8   Another area of concern for the Committee ha s been strengthening of RAK College of Nursing as C entre of 
Excellence. Even before the beginning of the Eleventh Plan, this project is being shown as under progress. The Committee finds 
that the work for upgradation of RAK College of Nur sing into Centre of Excellence had been entrusted t o HSCC which has 
completed the work of renovation of existing buildi ng. However, the new construction has not yet start ed due to pending 
clearances and approval of concept plan from various statutory bodies. When asked on this specific iss ue during the meeting of 
the Committee on 23rd March, 2010, the Committee wa s informed that there has been a problem due to the  fact that the 
Department does not have the ownership of the land in favour of RAK College of Nursing. The matter has  been taken up with 
the Department of Urban Development and the Land and Development Office and would be sorted out.  
Action Taken  
  The matter is being reviewed with the HSCC and RA K College of Nursing in the meetings being held at regular intervals.  
Recommendations/Observations  
14.9  The Committee is not happy with the state of affairs of the work of upgradation of RAK college of Nursing into Centre of 
Excellence. This is the position when this old inst itution is located in Delhi itself. The Committee w onders as to whether any 
attempt of monitoring has been made by the Departme nt so far. The project has been in the pipeline for  many years now. The 
Committee recommends to the Department to make sinc ere efforts to sort out all the outstanding issues and problem areas 
hampering in the upgradation of the college at the earliest.  
Action Taken  
  Noted for compliance. Concerted efforts are being  made to sort out the outstanding issues at the earliest. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Action Taken Note of the Department does not present a very encouraging picture w.r.t. upgradation of RAK 
College of Nursing into Centre of Excellence which has been pending since before the beginning of the Eleventh Plan. 
The Committee neither finds any forward movement on  the issue, nor any commitment, from the Department  in this 
regard. The Department’s efforts are limited to reviewing the matter with HSCC and the college authorities on a regular 
basis. Department’s initiatives to sort out the bot tlenecks and specific problem areas are apparently lacking. Such a 
situation does not inspire any hope for early compl etion of the upgradation work. The Committee would recommend to 
the Department to take some concrete and decisive steps in this regard. 
Recommendations/Observations  
14.12 The Committee appreciates and welcomes the af oresaid initiatives taken by the Department. The Co mmittee infers that 
these measures will help in producing more number o f nursing personnel. The Committee is happy to note  that the Department 
has constructed 413 dwelling units for nurses and t he Directorate of Estate has also allowed accommoda tion for Nurses in 

general pool. However, the Committee is still skeptical whether this would suffice the requirements. The Committee would like 
to be enlightened about the availability of dwelling units vis-a-vis  the demand.  
Action Taken  
  The demand and availability of residential accomm odation for nurses is being assessed in consultation with the concerned 
hospitals. 
  As regards improvement in quality of nursing serv ices in the interest of quality patient care vis-a-vis  fulfilling the 
requirement of nurses by outsourcing, the matter would be taken up with the concerned hospitals. 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee is happy to note that the Departmen t has started consultations with the concerned hosp itals to 
assess their demand and availability of residential  accommodation for nurses. The Committee also appre ciates 
Department’s willingness to take up the matter with the concerned hospitals to fill up the required nu mber of nurses by 
outsourcing. But the Committee cautions the Departm ent to be careful in this regard as outsourcing can  never be a 
solution or substitute to regular employment. The C ommittee would like the Department to apprise the C ommittee 
regarding its outcome on the accommodation assessment exercise as well as the manpower outsourcing aspect. 
XV.  NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME (NMHP) 
Recommendations/Observations  
15.6   The Committee is aware that the slow pace of  the implementation during the Tenth Plan has alrea dy resulted in the 
spillover of many components of the Programme to th e Eleventh Plan. The Committee is dismayed at the p ersistent 
discouraging level of achievements under the parame ters, viz. , the financial and physical, set under this ambiti ous Programme. 
The Committee has been voicing its concern time and  again in this regard and recommending to the Depar tment to take 
immediate corrective measures to achieve the target s set under the Programme. But no corrective measur e seems to have been 
taken by the Department so far.  
Action Taken  
  With a dedicated monitoring mechanism approved by  the competent authority and soon to be initiated, the situation of 
lack of proposals and cooperation from States will improve with more proactive role from the centre. A cute shortage of 
manpower which is the other hindrance of the programme is being addressed by implementing manpower development schemes 
on mid to long term and use of trained manpower in the DMHP team to address the acute shortage in short term. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee hopes that with the Department clai ming a “dedicated monitoring mechanism” as well as 
addressing the acute shortage of manpower in short term by “implementing manpower development schemes on mid to 
long term and use of trained manpower in the DMHP team”, things will move in the right direction and bring one of the 
most neglected National Programme back on track. Th e Committee would like to have the details of the “ dedicated 
monitoring mechanism” and the details of addressing  manpower shortage problem for this Programme, put into force 
by the Department.  
Recommendations/Observations  
15.9   As regards, the issue of shortage of manpowe r like trained Psychiatrists, Clinical Psychologist s and Psychiatric 
social workers, the Committee shares the concerns o f the Department. The Committee can only suggest th at the requisite 
manpower needs to be attracted by offering a suitab le compensation package and offering good working c onditions. Another 

initiative which can be taken is to increase the nu mber of seats in the field of Mental Health in the medical colleges across the 
country. The Committee would like to be briefed about the steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
Action Taken  
  The remuneration of mental health professionals h ave been revised in the programme and with effectiv e monitoring 
mechanism soon to be in place, the responsiveness a nd working conditions in the programme is set to im prove. The number of 
PG seats in mental health specialities of Psychiatry, Clinical Psychology, Psychiatric Social Work, Psychiatric Nursing is being 
increased in medical colleges as well as in mental hospitals under the Manpower Development Schemes of  NMHP. The 
manpower development schemes are expected to genera te an estimated no. of 1756 professionals per year in addition to the 
current capacity after implementation of the scheme in 11 centres of excellence and 120 PG departments in mental health during 
the plan period. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee is happy to note that some concrete  steps have been initiated by the Department for much-awaited 
revamping and augmentation of the National Mental H ealth Programme. These initiatives need to be const antly 
monitored by the Department in coordination with the implementing agencies. 
Recommendations/observations  
15.11   The Committee notes with displeasure that t hough the Department has proposed to include 200 mo re districts 
under this component during the Eleventh Plan, fina l approval is yet to be given by the competent auth ority. The Committee is 
informed that during 2010-11, the Department proposes to implement DMHP on new pattern to only existing 123 districts. 
Action Taken  
  The department had proposed for expansion of DMHP  to 200 new districts. However, the EFC did not agr ee to the 
proposal of the department in view of paucity of funds.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The main objective of the Programme has been to e nsure the availability and accessibility of minimum  mental 
healthcare for those suffering with mental illness,  particularly to the most vulnerable and underprivi leged sections 
amongst them. The Department would be failing in it s duty if it does not expand the Programme in a big  way so as to 
reach the remotest corners of the country. The Depa rtment cannot shy away from this social responsibil ity. Funds for 
the Programme have been ceremoniously revised downw ards at the RE stage owing to poor implementation s tatus. 
Department’s reply that the EFC did not agree to its proposal for expansion of DMHP to 200 new districts in view of the 
paucity of funds does not sound logical. The Department appears to have not presented its case based on sound logic and 
facts or it might not have inspired confidence of a ctually being able to execute the expansion work ba sed on its track-
record. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the  Department to focus on better utilization of the a llocated funds 
and effective implementation of the Programme. The Committee is sanguine that more efficient use of th e allocated 
funds would bolster the Department’s proposal for expansion of DMHP.  
XVI. NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME (NCCP)  
Recommendations/observations  
16.3   The Committee has been witnessing a consistent unsatisfactory level of performance under the various components of the 
Programme. Gap in physical targets and achievement level under different components of the Programme i s evident in the 
Elevenrh Plan period also. Neither the existing Reg ional Cancer Centres are being strengthened nor rec ognition being given to 
new Regional Centres. Shortfall is reported in the assistance being provided to existing/new oncology wings of Govt. Medical 
Colleges. District Cancer Programme has also not been showing satisfactory progress. 
Action Taken  

  During the Eleventh Five Year Period, the revised  NCCP was under consideration for which there was s hortfall in the 
assistance provided to existing/new oncology wings of Govt. Medical Colleges and the District Cancer Control Programme. 
Recommendations/observations  
16.4   Performance level of the Programme becomes a ll the more discouraging when it is noticed that th ere is no shortage 
of funds. Funds are being duly allocated every year , religiously reduced at the RE stage and the utili zation status at the end of 
the year reported to be under-utilized. The Committ ee notes the following figures of expenditure for 2 007-08,2008-09 and 
2009-10 in respect of the National Cancer Control Programme (NCCP):- 
 
 
 
(Rs. in crores) 
 2007-08   2008-09       2009-10 (as on 28.2.10)  
BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals 
140 70 46.32 120 120 33.60 95 35 14.24 
 
Action Taken  
  Grant-in-aid could not be released to some of the  Government Medical Colleges/Institutions due to a number of reasons-
viz.  absence of BARC approval and recommendation of the  State Govt. for continuation of the scheme after c essation of the 
Central Govt. assistance. 
  Many of the institutes that had availed grant-in- aid had pending utilization certificates in the abs ence of which further 
grant-in-aid could not be released as per GFR guide lines. The expenditure for 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 as on 31st March 
in respect of the NCCP was Rs.52.28 crore, Rs.109.00 crore and Rs.40.42 crore respectively.  
Recommendations/observations  
16.5 The Committee is dismayed at the fact that the  Department does not appear to be serious w.r.t. th e implementation of this 
programme and the same is evident from the fact that the EFC for Eleventh Plan is being prepared by th e Department and there 
is no approved scheme for the current Plan. 
Action Taken  
  The Task Force of the NCCP was constituted in 200 5 and its report was received in 2006. Thereafter, the EFC for the 
revised NCCP for the remaining two years of the Ele venth plan was under preparation and the completion  of formalities has 
been undertaken after extensive consultations with stake holders including Planning Commission, Depart ment of Expenditure, 
State Governments/UTs etc. 
Recommendations/observations  
16.6  The Department itself has been admitting canc er to be one of the ten leading causes of death in India with nearly 7 to 9 
lakh cases occurring every year. The Committee opin es that this Programme can be singled out as one of  the classic examples 
where inspite of ample fund allocation and good obj ectives, the Programme has not been able to take of f in the desired manner 
due to apparent apathy of the Department. 
Action Taken  
  The Revision of NCCP for the Eleventh Five Year P lan has taken more time than envisaged involving co nsultations with 
experts, stake holders, State Governments/UTs.  

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  Department’s response in the Action Taken Note is a  mere acknowledgement of the failures on account of  its 
exercise of revising the NCCP eating into most of t he time during the Eleventh Plan period. Though the  Committee 
acknowledges problems like withholding of grants to  the institutes in accordance with the GFR guidelin es, yet the same 
cannot be termed as the primary or sole reason for poor performance of the Programme. As pointed out earlier also, the 
fact that the Programme is still not having any app roved scheme during the current Plan is proof enoug h of 
Department’s consistent neglect of this Programme. The Department needs to seriously review its implem entation 
strategy which has been hampering implementation of  such a crucial Programme of vital importance for s o long and 
that too when there is no shortage of earmarked funds for this purpose.  
 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
16.7  The Committee is aware that the Department co uld utilize only Rs.252.95 crore during the Tenth Plan out of an approved 
outlay of Rs.333 crore. The Committee notes that th e approved outlay for the Eleventh Plan has been in creased about eight 
times to Rs.2400 crore out of which only Rs.94.16 crore have been utilized upto 28th February, 2010. This leaves Rs.2300 crore 
(approx.) remaining to be utilized during the remai ning two financial years of the Plan. Taking into a ccount the provision of 
Rs.155 crore during 2010-11, it still leaves behind a huge amount of funds to the tune of Rs.2150 crore (approx.) left for the last 
financial year. With the current pace of utilizatio n, the Committee apprehends that it is going to sho w a worse performance 
when compared with the Tenth Plan track record.  
Action Taken  
  The budget allocated for the NCCP in the Eleventh  Five Year Plan was Rs.2400.00 crores. The amount u tilized in the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan till date (31.03.10) is Rs. 201.70 crores. Due to budgetary constraints, the pr oposed budget of NCCP 
has been scaled down to Rs.731.52 crore for the rem aining two years of the Eleventh Five Year Plan. Th e Ministry has also 
initiated a concerted plan of action to implement the revised programme on a priority basis.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee notes that the Department has cited b udgetary constraints as the reason for scaling down  budget 
of NCCP to Rs.731.52 crore for the remaining two ye ars of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee hopes that this 
curtailment is not as a result of sub-optimal utili zation of the allocated funds due to poor implement ation of the 
Programme and wonders as to whether the Department has drawn an effective strategy to utilise even thi s curtailed 
amount fully in the remaining two years. The Commit tee would like to be apprised of the status and com ponents of the 
revised Programme and the details of the “concerted  plan of action to implement the revised programme on a priority 
basis”. 
Recommendations/Observations  
16.9   In order to identify weak links and ensure e ffective implementation of various components of th e programme, the 
Committee had in its 27th Report recommended to the  Department to give utmost priority to evaluation o f the National Cancer 
Control Programme by a premier agency having experience of work in such Disease Control Programmes. Ho wever, in respect 
of a query in this regard, the Committee is informe d that the programme was last evaluated in 2004 by the National Institute of 
Health and Family Welfare (NIHFW). Certain amendmen ts in the programme were incorporated in 2005, in t he light of that 
assessment. Another review has now become due. The process to select an independent outside agency has been initiated. 
16.10   The Committee is unhappy to note that the D epartment has actually not taken any step further in the last two years. 
The Committee would like to point out here that it was informed during examination of the Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the 
Department that the proposal submitted by the NIHFW  for second evaluation of the NCCP was not up to th e mark. In addition 
ICMR also submitted the proposal for evaluating the NCCP. It was stated that the Department decided to  invite proposals from 
other organizations including IIM. However, no resp onse had been received in the matter and hence no f inal decision could be 

taken regarding selection of the agency for evaluat ing the NCCP. The Committee opines that the severe underutilization of 
funds as well as the physical targets under the Pro gramme warrant an immediate evaluation and necessary corrective measures. 
The Committee therefore recommends to the Department to immediately evaluate the implementation of the Programme so that 
all the loopholes and hurdles afflicting the smooth  implementation of such an ambitious Programme are identified and 
corresponding corrective measures taken at the earliest. 
Action Taken  
  The last evaluation of NCCP was carried out in 20 04. One of the premier institutions is under Ministry of Health & FW is 
being short listed to carry out the evaluation as per recommendation of the Committee. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee has been voicing its concern over t he implementation of the Programme since long and 
accordingly had advocated its evaluation in order t o identify weak links and ensure effective implemen tation of its 
various components but no forward movement seems to  have been made in this regard. The Committee is di smayed at 
the fact that even after two and a half years the D epartment is still in search of an agency to take u p this task. The 
Department needs to take this in the right earnest and have the Programme scrutinised by a credible ag ency at the 
earliest. 
Recommendations/Observations  
16.11 The Committee notes that a large number of Utilization Certificates are pending against various colleges spread across the 
country. Maximum amount of pending UCs is against the following colleges:- 
Sl. No. Year of State Name of the Institute Amount 
 release of   (in Rupees) 
 the grant    
1      2     3                    4        5 
1. 2007-08 Assam Dr. B.B. Barooah Cancer Instt.  05 .00 crore 
   Guwahati under Centre of Excellence  
   Scheme  
2 2007 -08 Himachal Indira Gandhi Medical College, 296,48,463/- 
  Pradesh Shimla under RCC Scheme  
3. 2007-08 Madhya Cancer Hospital & Research Instt. , 88.00 lakh 
  Pradesh Gwalior under DCCP Scheme  
4. 2007-08 Mizoram Civil Hospital, Aizawl for devel opment  01.00 crore 
   of oncology wing  
5. 2007-08 Punjab Govt. Medical College, Patiala 03 .00 crore 
   for development of oncology wing  
6. 2007-08 Kerala Govt. Medical College, Kottayam,  01.00 crore 
   Kerala for development of oncology wing  
7. 2007-08 Chhattisgarh Pt. J.N. Medical College, R aipur 03.00 crore 
8. 2007-08 Haryana Govt. Hospital, Bhiwani under 03 .00 crore 

   development of oncology wing  
9. 2007 -08 Rajasthan RNT Medical College, Udaipur 1,95,87,000 
   for development of oncology  
   wing  
10. 2007-08 West Bengal R.G. Kar Medical College & 98,66,320/- 
   Hospital, Kolkata for  
   development of oncology wing  
11. 2008-09 Nagaland Naga Hospital Authority, 90.00  lakh 
   Kohima for development  
   of oncology wing  
12. 2008-09 Punjab Guru Govind Singh Medical 03.00 crore 
   College & Hospital, Faridkot for  
   development of oncology wing  
13. 2008-09 Tripura Cancer Hospital, Agartala 05.00  crore 
   (Under new RCC Scheme)  
14. 2008-09 Rajasthan S.N. Medical College, Jodhpur  01.50 crore 
   (Development of Oncology Wing)  
 
  The Committee recommends to the Department to tak e immediate action to liquidate the pending UCs. Th e Committee 
may also be informed about the efforts made by it i n this regard along with a status of all the pendin g UCs under the 
Programme.  
Action Taken  
  Sincere efforts are being made to settle the pend ing utilization certificates in a time bound manner . The list of utilization 
certificate pending under NCCP for 2007-08 and 2008-09 are enclosed at Annexure X . 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee is unhappy to note that in the name o f sincere efforts to liquidate the pending UCs, the  
Department has been sending reminders. The Department needs to grow wiser by its experience and take u p the matter 
at appropriate higher levels. It can also initiate other administrative actions available at its dispo sal to liquidate these 
pending UCs. 
XVII. NATIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMME (NTCP) 
Recommendations/Observations  
17.3  The Committee observes that launched as a pil ot project in 12 districts of 6 States in 2007-08, by the end of 2009-10, 
Programme has been extended to only 42 districts of  21 States. It would not be wrong to conclude that the Programme 
continues to be run on a pilot basis even after thr ee years of its launch. This is the position when t he target was to extend the 
coverage to 100 districts by the end of 2008-09. 
Action Taken  

  Pilot phase of NTCP was launched in 2007-08 in 18  Districts covering 9 States. In 2008-09, it has be en upscaled to 24 
Districts covering 12 States. The total financial o utlay for the programme approved in the Eleventh pl an is Rs.182 crore, to be 
implemented in the remaining years of the Eleventh plan in 42 Districts of 21 States within the NRHM f ramework from 2010-
11. The EFC did not agree for expansion of NTCP to more districts during Eleventh Five Year Plan period. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  Perturbed by the snail’s pace of implementation o f the Programme, the Committee had commented that t he 
Department has not moved beyond running the ambitio us Programme as pilot project. Department’s candid admission 
that the EFC did not agree for expansion of NTCP to  more districts during Eleventh Plan period is perhaps not a result 
of financial constraints but appears to be Departme nt’s failure in expanding this Programme in the des ired manner. 
With the recent track record, the Department does not seem to achieve the target of implementing the programme in the 
remaining years of the Eleventh plan period in 42 Districts of 21 States within the NRHM framework from 2010-11. The 
Committee hopes that the Department gears up to the demanding task of expansion of the Programme in th e remaining 
States. For this to happen, it has to achieve the t argets beforehand first and then approach the EFC f or necessary 
clearance for expansion. 
Recommendations/Observations  
17.5   The Committee would like to remind the Depar tment that subsequent to its examination of Demands  for Grants of 
the Ministry for 2008-09, in its 27th Report, it ha d taken a strong view of the fact that despite the ‘in principle’ approval of the 
Planning Commission for setting up of the National Regulatory Authority and Referral Labs for testing Tar and Nicotine 
content and initiation of the process for seeking approval of the competent authority, no progress had been made for quite some 
time. Accordingly, the Committee had called for con certed efforts of the Department to achieve the app roval of the competent 
authority for setting up of the National Regulatory  Authority. However, as per information available w ith the Committee now, 
there has been ‘no’ improvement on this front even after a period of two years. The Committee is dismayed at the Department’s 
attitude in this regard. National Tobacco Regulator y Authority is supposed to be pivotal to the whole Programme to help in 
effective implementation of Tobacco free initiatives. Even the progress w.r.t. setting up of tobacco testing labs has not seen any 
improvement. To aggravate the matter further, the D epartment has not been able to expand the Programme  in more districts of 
the country as scheduled. Even the first Adult Toba cco Survey has been lingering on for quite some tim e. The Committee is 
upset with the way things are being managed under t he Programme. Fixing realistic targets on paper is only the first step 
towards achieving a goal and the Committee does fin d the targets set to be realistic and achievable. T herefore, it is not able to 
comprehend itself with the reasons for the delay in  achieving the targets. The Committee would, theref ore, recommend some 
urgent and concrete action plan in achieving the targets set under the Programme in a time bound manner.  
Action Taken 
/circle6 The modalities of establishment of Central Tobacco  Regulatory Authority are being worked out. 
/circle6 As regards Referral labs, one Apex/research labora tory and five testing laboratories have been identified and tender 
notice has been issued with regard to procurement of equipments for the identified tobacco laboratories. 
/circle6 As regards to expansion of programme, as per CCEA approval dated 28.01.10, State and district level component of 
NTCP are to be integrated with the NRHM framework w.e.f.  2010. 
/circle6 The fieldwork with regard to Global Adult Tobacco Survey (GATS) has been completed by IIPS, Mumbai, which is 
the implementing agency. The final report is under preparation and is likely to be released in August- September, 
2010.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee had been critical of the manner in w hich various components of the Programme are allowe d to 
linger on for several years. The Action Taken Note of the Department does not present a forward moveme nt w.r.t. 
various components. Setting up of the National Toba cco Regulatory Authority is still in the pipeline w ith no progress at 
all. No noticeable improvement w.r.t. Setting up of  Referral Labs for testing Tar and Nicotine content s has been made 
and there is every possibility that this target als o would be carried forward in the next Plan period like setting up of the 

National Tobacco Regulatory Authority. Similarly, f inal report of the Global Adult Tobacco Survey (GAT S) is still 
under preparation. With such dismal progress in res pect of the various components, the Committee can o nly conclude 
that some inherent problems are still persisting an d creating roadblocks in the smooth implementation of the 
Programme. The Committee would reiterate that the Department takes some concrete remedial action for achieving the 
various targets set under the Programme. 
XVIII. MEDICAL EDUCATION  
18.2  The Committee is concerned with the fact that  as many as 10 colleges are being considered for wi thdrawal of recognition 
and 15 more being issued show cause notices. From t he large number of colleges caught compromising the  standards while 
being scrutinized, it is clear that all is not well . This clubbed with the fact that these colleges ar e those which have come under 
scheduled scrutiny and there may be many which keep  on functioning until they come under inspection sc rutiny, makes the 
matter more serious. The Committee would like to ha ve a brief about the status of inspection of all th e medical colleges inter-
alia  containing the selection procedure vide  which the colleges are selected for inspection, th e date of establishment of college, 
date of inspections, shortcomings noticed and actio n taken during the last 5 years. The Committee may also be informed of the 
details w. r. t. the progress made for withdrawal o f recognition of 10 colleges, show cause notice to 15 colleges and the court 
cases in respect of the 4 colleges.  
Action Taken  
  Procedure for conducting the inspection by the Medi cal Council of India  Presently, there are about 300 medical 
colleges in the country out of which 229 medical co lleges are recognized and remaining 71 medical coll eges have been 
approved for running MBBS courses and will be consi dered for recognition as per the provisions of Medi cal Council of India 
(MCI) regulations. 
  MCI carries out periodic inspections of medical c olleges as per the provisions of IMC Act and regula tions made 
thereunder. MCI conducted the inspections of medical colleges under section 10A, 11 (2) and 19 of IMC Act for establishment 
of new medical college, renewal of permission, reco gnition of medical colleges and continuance of reco gnition for award of 
MBBS degree. 
  The medical colleges are inspected by the MCI fro m time to time under the following categories: 
(i) The recognition of a medical college is reviewe d after every five years.  
(ii)  The permission of the approved medical colleg es is renewed every year till such time the medical  college is 
recognized. The permission is renewed if it is found during inspection that all the facilities are as per MCI norms. 
(iii)  Those medical colleges which apply for postg raduate courses for the first time after its recognition, are inspected. 
(iv)  A medical college is inspected when there is a complaint with regard to the malpractice for teaching faculty, clinical 
material and infrastructural facilities. 
(v)  Inspection of a medical college is also conduc ted on the direction of High Courts/Supreme Court. 
  After conducting the inspections under the above said provisions of IMC Act, MCI has so far recommended to the Central 
Government for withdrawal of recognition of 10 medi cal colleges and has issued show cause notice to 15  medical colleges in 
the country. A statement showing the present status of above 25 colleges is at Annexure-XI  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee had called for a status note in res pect of all the colleges inspected by the MCI durin g the last 5 
years inter-alia  containing - the selection procedure vide  which the colleges were selected for inspection, t he date of 
establishment of college, date of inspection(s), sh ortcomings noticed and action taken after such insp ection. The 
Committee is dismayed at the fact that the required information is conspicuously missing in the Action Taken Note. The 
Committee would accordingly like the Department to furnish the requisite information at the earliest. 

XIX. VACANCIES IN CHS CADRE 
Recommendations/Observations  
19.4  The Committee notes with serious concern that  apart from marginal improvement in GDMO sub-cadre,  that too far too 
below any satisfactory level, there is seemingly no  improvement in the filling up of the vacant positi ons across all the sub-
cadres inspite of the sanctioned strength increasing in the three sub-cadres other than GDMO. The Comm ittee is not convinced 
with the Department’s efforts because had the Depar tment made sincere efforts there would have been so me kind of forward 
movement in filling up the vacancies over the years . The Committee cannot make out the delay in making  recruitments by 
UPSC. Promotion vacancies can be filled up by conve ning DPCs. Further, the Committee is unable to unde rstand the delay in 
notifying the revised CHS rules especially when the re is urgency involved in the matter. Temporary and  contractual measures 
can never be a solution in the long run. 
19.5   The Committee would like to be apprised abou t the details of contractual/temporary appointments made under CHS 
for the past one year. The Committee would also like to be furnished with a detailed note in respect of the posts under each sub-
cadre, inter-alia  covering issues like when it approached the UPSC f or making direct recruitments, holding of DPCs, rea sons 
for delay in notifying CHS rules and the efforts made by the Department for early filling up of the vacancies. 
Action Taken  
  Central Health Service is comprised of 4 sub-cadr es namely (i) Teaching; (ii) Non- Teaching; (iii) Public Health; and (iv) 
General Duty Medical Officers. First 3 sub-cadres a re specialist sub-cadres and recruitment in these s ub-cadres are made 
through UPSC by holding Interviews. On the other ha nd, recruitment in GDMO sub-cadre is made through C ombined Medical 
Service Examination conducted every year by the UPSC. The UPSC being a Constitutional Authority follow its own procedure 
and the Ministry has no role in recruitment process  except to make a request to Commission for expedit ing the process of 
recruitment that too in case of recruitment of spec ialists only. UPSC has a fixed schedule for conduct ing examination followed 
by interviews in case of GDMOs. It takes about one and quarter year for completing the recruitment process commencing from 
conducting of written examination to issue of offer s of appointment to the successful candidates. Ther e is no short cut to this 
method of recruitment of GDMOs. Moreover, most of t he selected candidates have been found to be pursui ng Post Graduate 
Courses and they do not join the posts till their PG course is completed. As such joining rate in GDMO sub-cadre is about 25-30 
% thereby causing the continuance of vacancies. 
  Further, since the appointment process takes long  time, the appointments are made on contractual bas is to ensure that the 
patient care does not suffer. The details of contra ctual/temporary appointments made in the year 2009- 10 and the requisitions 
sent to UPSC for direct recruitment in 4 sub-cadres of CHS is given hereunder:- 
  Details of contractual appointment in CHS 
Sub-
cadre 
No. of CHS doctors appointed on 
contractual 
Reasons 
 basis  
Teaching  59 Pending joining of regular candidates through UPSC,  
Public 
Health 
00 the Specialists/GDMOs have been appointed on  
Non- 
Teaching 
 
03 contract basis in public interest so that patient care  
GDMO 58# (In CGHS Delhi) may not suffer and the aca demic session is not  
  disrupted for want of teachers. 
# As on 1.4.2010, only 45 retired GDMOs are on contract basis in CGHS Delhi. 

  Details of direct recruitment in various sub-cadr e of CHS during 2009-10 are at Annexure-XIII. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  Status of vacancy position in CHS cadre has been e ngaging the attention of the Committee for consider able time. 
The Committee has been informed that the exercise o f completing the recruitment process by UPSC takes about 15 
months. The Committee is constrained to note that e ven this long-drawn exercise has failed to achieve the desired 
results. During 2009-10 against 186 Teaching Posts under CHS cadre 107 Posts were advertised by UPSC a nd only 22 
candidates joined. Similarly, under Public Health, against 28 posts, 15 posts were advertised by UPSC and only 5 
candidates joined. With regard to Non-teaching post s, against the availability of 90 posts, only 24 po sts were advertised 
by UPSC and not even a single candidate joined. Position was no better for GDMO posts. Out of 300 vacancies reported 
to UPSC for CMSE-2008, 241 candidates were recommen ded for posting. Against 142 candidates offered pos ting in 
April-May, 2010, only 3 candidates have joined so f ar. The Committee is extremely unhappy with the pro gress made in 
filling up the vacant posts of CHS cadre. Prolonged  process of recruitment is compounded by another di sturbing trend 
of candidates finally selected not coming forward t o join. This clearly shows that situation is bound to continue to 
remain very discouraging with the result that publi c at large as well as CGHS beneficiaries will conti nue to remain 
deprived of medical facilities. The Committee is of  the view that the nodal Ministry has to play a pro -active role by 
taking up the issue with UPSC for expediting the re cruitment process as well as analyzing the factors responsible for 
such a low level of joining by successful candidates. 
Recommendations/Observations  
19.7   The Committee is happy to note that finally there is some respite in the offing to General Duty  Medical Officers 
with PG qualification. The Committee recommends to the Department to pursue the matter sincerely so that the amendments are 
approved without further delay. The Committee would  like to be apprised about the progress made in thi s regard. The 
Committee would also like to have the details of the DACP scheme. 
Action Taken  
  The reply is at Annexure-XlV.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee observes that the revised draft of CH C Rules after concurrence of DoPT was forwarded to UPSC 
on 14th July, 2009 for approval. Since then, a numb er of queries have been raised by UPSC at different  points of time 
which have been duly clarified by the Department. L ast such clarification was sought by UPSC on 15th M arch, 2010. 
Since then, although almost nine months have passed , the matter hangs with the CHC Rules remaining unr evised. As a 
result, the process of creation of required posts i n different categories as well as modifications in eligibility criteria and 
other allied aspects is being unduly delayed. The C ommittee would appreciate if this matter is vigorou sly pursued, if 
need be at the highest level. 
XX.  NEW INITIATIVES/PROGRAMMES 
Recommendations/Observations  
20.1   A number of new initiatives/programmes were proposed to be launched during the Eleventh Plan, p reparatory 
exercise for some of which started even before the beginning of the Plan period. The Committee is cons trained to observe that 
against the approved outlay of Rs. 12609.63 crore f or the Eleventh Plan, very meagre allocation has be en made for the first 
three years which has also remained almost unutiliz ed. Status by the end of 2009-10 in respect of thes e initiatives/programmes 
clearly indicates that there is little hope of their taking off in the real sense by the end of Eleventh Plan, i.e.  2011-12. Following 
details are self-revealing: 
NEW INITIATIVES/PROGRAMMES STATUS BY THE END OF 200 9-10 
E-Health including Telemedicine Detailed EFC under preparation 

National Programme for Prevention and EFC under pro cess for approval  
Control of Diabetes, Cardio-vascular  
Diseases and Stroke   
National Organ Transplant Programme Proposal is und er process 
Oral Health  Scheme yet to be launched 
National Programme for Healthcare for Elderly Under  process for approval 
National Centre for Disease Control Under process f or approval 
Setting up of Para-medical Institutions Under proce ss for approval 
Strengthening/upgradation of pharmacy Under process  for approval  
Schools .  
Upgradation/strengthening of Nursing Under process for approval  
Services 
   
Action Taken  
(i)  Telemedicine- In order to prepare the Detailed Project Report fo r the purpose of formulating the EFC proposal for 
telemedicine and e-health projects and EFC note bas ed on the Detailed Project Report, several consulta tions were held 
with experts from time to time as the project is unique and an innovative in nature. This included a meeting with National 
Institute of Smart Government, Hyderabad on 4.11.09  which is supporting several Government departments  on e-
Governance initiatives. In the meanwhile, the work allocation of officers were re-allocated and a new officers were given 
this subject. Since the same was new to them, it to ok time to finalize the Detailed Project Report whi ch is under 
preparation. Another meeting was held on 21.12.2009 by inviting other agencies alongwith experts in this regard. A brain 
storming workshop was also held on 14.1.2010 by inviting a number of experts from governmental and non-governmental 
sectors. A meeting was also held under chairmanship of Secretary (H&FW) on 1.2.2010 and again on 3rd March, 2010. It 
was decided to set up a small Committee which will finalize the Concept Note on Telemedicine to be implemented during 
11th Five Year Plan. This Committee held a meeting on 9th March, 2010 and on 16th March, 2010. There will be another 
meeting to give final shape of this project. The report of the Committee will be submitted shortly. 
   Accordingly the Detailed Project Report and EFC note will be finalized very soon and the funds will  be utilized in 
the beginning of the next financial year. 
(ii)   Diabetes ----  The National Programme for Prevention and Control of Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke 
(NPDCS) is a new initiative in the 11th Five Year P lan. Rs.1660.50 crore had been earmarked for this purpose during the 
11th Plan Period. Though the Pilot Scheme on NPDCS was launched in 10 States with one district each, t he National 
level Programme could not be launched essentially b ecause the process of consultation was more extensi ve than 
envisaged. A very large number of stakeholders, exp erts and others were consulted. Based on this exerc ise, the NPDCS 
document was prepared. 
  Present Status -  The Expenditure Finance Committee considered and a pproved the NPDCS at an estimated cost of 
Rs.499.38 crore on 8th March, 2010 and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is moving a note for the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for its final approval. The programme will be taken up during the  remaining 
period of the 11th FYP, once approval of the Cabinet is obtained and other formalities are finalised.  
(iii)   Organ Transplant -  The SFC document for ‘Action Plan’ for 2010-11 and 2011-12 for implementations of Transplant of 
Human Organs Act (THOA) amendments has been sent to  Planning Commission and Finance Ministry. SFC meet ing 
would be held only after their comments are received. 

(iv)   Oral Health -  An amount of Rs.25 crore has been allotted in the 11th Five Year Plan for a Pilot Project. SFC on the same 
is being drafted with the aim to reduce orodental disease burden and integrate oral health with general health. The project 
emphasise the following objectives:- 
/circle6 Generating awareness among community regarding ora l health problems and their prevention by promoting oral 
public health, IEC, research and school oral health care program. 
/circle6 Strengthening Government Health Systems and develo ping and training adequate Manpower for service delivery. 
  During the year 2010-11 an amount or Rs.3.5 crore  has been provided for the above programme. Modalities 
for merging components of the scheme that can be taken up under NRHM are being worked out. 
(iv)   National Programme for Health Care of Elderly (NP HCE) -  National Programme for Health Care of the Elderly 
(NPHCE) is a new initiative in the 11th Five Year P lan to address various health related problems of e lderly people. 
Rs.400 crore has been earmarked for this purpose during the Plan period. 
   After detailed deliberations with subject expert s and the concerned Departments/Ministries, the Min istry of Health 
and Family Welfare has formulated a draft National Programme for Health Care of the Elderly (NPHCE) at  an estimated 
outlay of Rs.288 crore of which the Central share w ill be Rs. 240 crores and that of States Rs. 48 cro res. The programme 
will initially be implemented in 16 States/UTs with 8 medical institutions and 80 districts of the country. 
   The NPHCE envisages dedicated healthcare facilit ies to the elderly at all levels of healthcare deli very system along 
with provision for long term and short term trainin g to the healthcare Professionals to address the pr oblem of health 
manpower shortage in the field of Geriatrics. 
   The proposal has been approved and recommended b y the Expenditure Finance Committee on 8th March, 2010 and 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has moved for final approval of the programme by the Minister of Finance. 
   The programme will be taken up during the remain ing period of the 11th FYP, once approval of the Fi nance 
Minister is obtained and other formalities are finalised. 
(v)   Proposed upgradation of NICD into NCDC -  It is a new initiative under Central Sector. An ou tlay of Rs.450.00 crores 
has been provided in the 11th Five Year Plan (2007-2012) for upgradation of National Institute of Communicable Disease 
(NICD). During the current Annual Plan, 2010-11 a p rovision of Rs.18.69 crores (Revenue: Rs.6.20 crore s and Capital: 
Rs.12.49 crores) has been provided. The facilities that would accrue after the upgradation has been co mpleted would 
enable the Institute to undertake all the diagnosti c support services including development of rapid d iagnostic tools. The 
proposed upgradation envisages creation of newer ce ntres, newer divisions and up-scaling of the existi ng ones to cope 
with the ever increasing horizon and magnitude of emerging, re-emerging and new diseases. 
   The Institute had got its independent appraisal done as advised by the Planning Commission. The Dep artment of 
Management Studies, IIT Delhi carried out evaluatio n during November, 2007 and submitted its report in  May, 2008. In 
addition, MIS HSCC was appointed as Consultant for preparing Detailed Project Report (DPR). They submitted DPR-1 in 
November, 2009. Based on the above inputs and also detailed consultations at different levels, includi ng with technical 
officers, a draft Memo for Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) was prepared. 
   The EFC is under consideration in the Ministry. 
(vi)   Setting up of Paramedical institutions -  Cabinet approved the proposal on 23.06.2010. Furth er modalities for 
implementation of the scheme are being worked out. 
(vii)   Strengthening/upgradation of pharmacy Schools - SFC is under preparation. 
(viii)   Upgradation/strengthening of Nursing Services -  Cabinet approved the scheme. Guidelines of the sch eme have 
been forwarded to the States for approval. The States have been asked to forward proposals accordingly. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  

  Latest feedback on a number of initiatives and new programmes to be launched during the Eleventh Plan clearly 
indicates that all these proposed ventures are at t he initial stage so far as completion of various fo rmalities are 
concerned. Apprehensions made by the Committee last  year about their progress stand confirmed. The Com mittee has 
no other option but to conclude that chances are ve ry dim so far as launching of these programme durin g Twelfth Plan 
Period are concerned. The Committee, therefore, rec ommends that all these new programmes should be mon itored 
vigorously for their initiation at the earliest. 
XXI.  MISCELLANEOUS 
Recommendations/Observations  
21.2  The Committee opines that seven years is a lo ng period and during this period several drugs woul d have become 
necessary for inclusion or deletion as per practica l requirements. It is not happy with the delay in t he revision of the List. It 
recommends an early updation of the List. The Commi ttee may also be informed when did the updation pro cess of NEDL 
started and whether there is a set time gap prescribed for initiating revision of the List. The Committee may also be informed of 
the progress made in this regard.  
 
Action Taken  
  Preparation of National Essential Drug List of Indi a - ‘National List of Essential Medicine’ was first ti me introduced 
in the country in year 1996 by the Ministry of Heal th and Family Welfare consisting of drugs considere d adequate to meet the 
common contemporary health needs of the general pop ulation and general obligation of the health admini strator to ensure 
abundant availability of such drugs in the country. 
  The National Essential Drug List 1996 was revised  in 2003 and 354 drug formulations covered under the list. The list was 
revised by an expert committee constituted by Direc torate General of Health Services in June, 2002 con sisting of expert of 
various medical specialities. The list was approved by the Ministry in July, 2003. 
  For further revision of the list of essential med icine, a proposal to set up an expert committee has  been forwarded by the 
Office of DCG (I) to the Ministry with the approval of the DGHS. The matter is under consideration of the Ministry of Health. 
  It may however be stated that a collaborative wor kshop was conducted by CDSCO in collaboration with AIIMS in 
September, 2009 which discussed the National Essent ial List 2003. The recommendations of the workshop could also be 
considered by the Committee during its deliberations. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The ‘National List of Essential Medicine’ intends to have some noble objective of ensuring abundant availability of 
drugs considered adequate to meet the common contem porary health needs of the general population in th e country. 
The Committee is happy to note that the same is und er consideration of the Department. The Committee r ecommends 
early consideration and clearance of the same by the Department. The Department’s reply is, however, silent on the time 
gap for such exercise. If such a time lag has not b een decided for this exercise of updation of the Li st, the Committee 
would recommend to the Department to work out in-pr inciple time lag for mandatory updation of the List  in future. 
The Committee may be informed about the progress made in this regard.  
Recommendations/Observations  
21.5   The Committee takes note of a recent Delhi H igh Court directive given on 23rd March, 2007 where by private 
hospitals which were allotted cheap or free land by Government agencies are required to provide free treatment to poor patients 
at the rate of 10% in the Indoor Patient Department  (IPD) and 25% in the Outdoor Patient Department (O PD) of their total 
respective treatment capacities. Hospitals to whom land was allotted on institutional/concessional rat es have been directed to 
provide 10% of the total beds free for poor (whose family income is Rs.4, 000/- or less per month) and free treatment to 25% of 
total patients free in the OPD in pursuance of Hon’ ble High Court orders dated 22.3.2007 and 17.7.2007 . Three hospitals 
namely, Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute, St. Stephens  Hospital and Mool Chand Khairati Ram Hospital are not providing free 

treatment stating that they are not covered under H igh Court orders. Ten other hospitals having 171 be ds have approached 
Hon’ble Supreme Court against the orders of Hon’ble High Court and have got interim stay with regard to providing free X-ray, 
CT Scan, Diagnostics etc. However, they are providi ng free treatment as in accordance with orders of H on’ble Supreme Court. 
Remaining 25 hospitals are providing free treatment  as per direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court. The Com mittee may be 
informed about the progress w.r.t.  the case filed by ten hospitals in Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
Action Taken  
  The matter is still sub-judice  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee is aware that the matter is still sub-judice . However, the Committee recommends to the 
Department to pursue the pending matter in the cour t vigorously so that it does not remain entangled i n prolonged 
litigation and the poor patients are deprived of mu ch needed healthcare needs. The Committee would app reciate if the 
present status of the case is submitted to it alongwith steps taken by the Department to expedite its early resolution. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
21.7   The Committee is pained by the fact that the  poor patients have to pay for the branded name of the medicines. This 
state of affairs is leading the poor patients to hu ge financial debts. Besides, procurement of the bra nded/generic branded 
medicines for Government hospitals, dispensaries an d CGHS leads to heavy burden on the Exchequer compr ising of precious 
taxpayer’s money. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to make it mandatory for the Gov ernment hospitals 
and CGHS to procure only generic medicines so that their procurement cost is reduced substantially wit hout compromising on 
the quality and efficacy of such medicines. The Com mittee further recommends the Department to initiat e some measures so 
that generic medicines are not marketed and sold as  generic branded medicines leading to exorbitant pr ices by the profiteering 
companies so that such medicines are available to the common man at reasonable prices. The Committee also recommends that 
it should be made mandatory for the Government doctors to prescribe only generic medicines. The Committee may be informed 
of the action taken by the Department in this regard. 
Action Taken 
  Branded Medicine, Generic Medicine, Branded Gener ic Medicines - The Committee has recommended that the use of 
generics in the public as well as private sectors w ill reduce the drug costs and increase drug availab ility. Competitive bulk 
procurement in generic name will help in procuring drugs at competitive prices. 
  It may be stated that earlier the Drugs and Cosme tics Rules, 1945 were amended vide  GSR 27(E) dated 17.01.1981 and 
the following Rule was inserted under rule 96 on labelling of drugs: 
  "The following preparations shall be labelled onl y with proper name of the drug and not with any trade name: 
(1) preparations containing any new drug as the sin gle active ingredient and approved under Rule 30-A,  69-B or 75-B 
by the Licensing Authority subject to the condition that such preparations should be marketed under a generic name 
only. 
(2) Preparations containing any drug specified in S chedule W as the single active ingredient." 
  At that time there were five drugs namely Analgin , Aspirin and its salts, Chlorpromazine and its sal ts, Ferrous Sulphate 
and Pipeprazine and its salts in Schedule W which w ere required to be marketed under generic names onl y. M/s. Heochst 
Pharmaceuticals filed a petition in the High Court challenging the above rule and Schedule W. The prov ision permiting the 
marketing of the five drugs in Schedule W only if l abelled only with the generic name was struck down by the High Court as 
arbitrary. High Court also directed to amend the no tification, with liberty to require the manufacture rs to prominently display, 
apart from the trade name of the drug, its generic name on the labels, containers or bottles (Union of  India v. Hoechst 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., 1999 SCC (Cri) 138. 

  In compliance to the directions of the Court, the  said rule and Schedule W was omitted by the Minist ry of Health and 
Family Welfare vide  notification GSR 94(E) dated 08.02.2000. 
  At present there is no provision under Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules which makes it mandatory th at medicines 
should be marketed under generic name only without any brand name. Manufacturer or importer is free to  market their product 
either under a generic name only or under a brand name. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee recommends to the Department to ini tiate suitable action to amend the Drugs and Cosmet ics Act 
and Rules so that generic medicines are not allowed  to be sold as branded medicines for the sake of pr ofiteering. The 
Committee would also recommend to the Department to  ensure availability of generic medicines in the op en market. 
The Committee would like to be informed about the action taken by the Department in this regard.  
Recommendations/Observations  
21.8  The Committee’s attention has been drawn to t he Mukhyamantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana being run in the State of 
Rajasthan which gives healthcare coverage to depriv ed sections of the society. The Committee feels tha t such welfare schemes 
should be encouraged in all possible ways including extending central funding for the same. The Committee may be apprised of 
the Department’s view in this regard. 
Action Taken  
  Health being ‘State’ subject, it is the prerogati ve of respective State Government to take initiatives as per the needs of that 
State and availability of resources. In so far as M /O Health and Family Welfare is concerned, no propo sal is presently under 
consideration for providing central funding for State-specific Schemes. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  While appreciating a scheme for the healthcare cove rage for the deprived sections of the society by th e State of 
Rajasthan, the Committee had called for encouraging  such initiatives in different States in all possib le ways including 
extending central funding for the same. The Departm ent’s cold response to this suggestion by terming “ health” as a 
State subject and stating that there was no proposa l for providing central funding for the State-speci fic subjects is 
nothing but outrightly rejecting a good initiative on technical grounds. Had the Department been serio us on this 
suggestion, it would have seized the initiative and started a similar initiative at the Central level whereby all other States 
could be funded from the central pool for undertaking similar initiatives for the poor people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL  
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
Part - B 
(NRHM)  
  The Report of the Committee deals with the Action  Taken by the Government on the recommendations con tained in its 
Thirty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand N o. 46) of the Department of Health and Family Welfa re for the year 
2010-11. 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. 
They have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been ac cepted by the Government Para Nos.- 2.2, 2.3, 3.3, 3.7, 3.8, 
4.22, 4.23, 8.1, 8.2, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3  
 Total-12    (Chapter-I) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee does not desire to pursue in view of the Governm ent’s 
replies: Para Nos.-2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.14, 3.2, 3.9, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 3.15, 3.16, 3.17, 
3.19, 3.20, 3.21, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.9, 4.10, 4. 13, 4.14, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5 .9, 5.10, 5.11, 5.12, 
5.13, 5.14, 5.15, 5.19, 5.20, 5.21, 5.22, 5.23, 5.29, 5.30, 5.31, 5.32, 5.33, 6.1, 6.2, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.10, 6.19, 6.20, 
6.21, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 7.6, 7.7, 7.9, 7.10,  7.11, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, 8.7, 8.9, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3,  9.6, 9.12, 10.4, 11.1, 
11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 11.5  
 Total-92    (Chapter-II) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich replies of the Government have not been accepte d by the 
Committee: Para Nos.- 2.1, 2.13, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.17, 3.18, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8, 4.11, 4.12, 4.18, 4.21, 4.24, 4.25, 4.29, 4.30, 
4.31, 5.16, 5.17, 5.18, 5.26, 5.27, 5.28, 6.3, 6.4,  6.9, 6.13, 6.14, 6.18, 7.8, 8.8, 8.10, 9.4, 9.5, 9 .7, 9.10, 9.11, 9.13, 
10.5, 10.6 
 Total-42     (Chapter-III) 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of whi ch final replies of the Government are still awaited:   
 Nil     (Chapter-IV) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NRHM  
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
I.  BUDEGETARY PROVISIONS 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.2   The Committee has been informed that against the projected demand for Rs.19,989.00 crore for NRH M, the Planning 
Commission has approved an outlay of Rs.15440.00 cr ore for 2010-11. The lower approved outlay as compa red to proposed 
outlay is likely to affect implementation of a numb er of ongoing schemes under NRHM like Mission Flexi ble Pool, RCH 
Flexible Pool, Infrastructure Maintenance, National  Vector Borne Disease Control Programme, Revised Na tional TB 
Programme, Management Information System and Routin e Immunization. The Committee would, however, like to point out 
that under all such programmes which are going to b e adversely affected due to non-allocation of requi red funds, funds 
allocated so far have remained underutilized during 2009-10, as indicated below:- Annexure-C of Report.  
Action Taken  
  The proposed and approved outlay for National Rur al Health Mission (NRHM) is Rs.19989 crores and Rs. 15440 crores 
respectively. Keeping in view the inter-sectoral priorities within the NRHM, the outlay has been distributed among the different 
schemes. The lower approved outlay as compared to proposed outlay is likely to affect implementation of a number of ongoing 
schemes in the NRHM like Mission Flexible Pool, RCH  Flexible Pool, Infrastructure Maintenance, Nationa l Vector Borne 
Disease Control Programme, Revised National Tubercu losis Control Programme, Management Information Sys tem and 
Routine Immunization. A mid-year exercise is propos ed to be carried out to assess the requirement of f unds required by the 
schemes/programmes based on the activities planned and progress made therein and supplementary, if req uired, will be sought 
from Ministry of Finance. 
  The allocation and expenditure under the above sc hemes during 2009-10 are given in the Annexure-II.  
  It may be seen from the statement that in most of  the programmes there has been considerable progres s in so far as 
utilization of funds is concerned. This has been possible due to increased absorptive capacity of the States. 
  The efforts will continue to be made by the Minis try to further increase the absorptive capacity of States by removing the 
existing constraints. 

Recommendations/Observations  
2.3   Not only has this, with the exception of Miss ion and RCH Flexible Pool in other programmes, posi tion has been more or 
less the same during 2007-08 and 2008-09 also. Comm ittee’s attention has also been drawn by the fact t hat provisions for all 
these programmes have been made at an enhanced leve l in 2010-11 when compared with 2009-10 allocations . The Committee 
would, therefore, appreciate if concerted efforts a re made by all concerned for optimum and judicious utilization of allocated 
funds. If required, at the time of mid-year assessm ent, the Department can pursue for additional funds  with the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance. 
Action Taken  
  Noted for compliance. 
III.  INFRASTRUCTURE STRENGTHENING  
3.3  On a query about the progress in the construct ion work of sub-centres under the ‘Infrastructure S trengthening Project’ of 
NRHM, the Committee was informed that the progress of Sub-Centre construction is being followed on priority basis to ensure 
functional facilities at Sub-Centre level across th e country at the earliest. As per RHS-2008, out of total 1,46,036 Sub-Centres 
functioning across the country, a total of 78,803 w ere functioning in Government buildings, and 9684 S Cs were being 
constructed across the country. The Committee was given to understand that estimated cost of construction is Rs.968.4 crores at 
the rate of Rs.10 lakhs for 9684 sub-centres, for which funds were released through NRHM Flexible Pool. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.7   Another cause of serious concern for the Comm ittee is the lack of basic infrastructural facilities noticed by the test checks 
carried out by the CAG. Following details are self-revealing:- 
ANNEXURE-E OF REPORT 
  The Committee would like to point out that Perfor mance Audit by CAG covered all the 33 States/UTs wi th 123 districts 
covering 2369 health centres. These 123 districts w ere selected from all the States. In each selected district - 3 CHCs, 6 PHCs 
and 12 Sub-Centres were audited. The Committee, taking note of CAG findings, in these 123 districts, apprehends that position 
would be more or less the same in the remaining districts of the country. 
Action Taken  
  Point noted for action. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.8  The Committee would like to point out that one  of the key objectives of NRHM is to provide improv ed health care 
services through creation of adequate number of SCs , PHCs and CHCs. However, this basic goal of NRHM h as failed to show 
the desired results. This has been amply proved in the latest Performance Audit of NRHM conducted by t he CAG. The 
Committee has also been expressing grave concern re garding lack of adequate rural health infrastructur e, especially in High 
Focus States from time to time. Even though NRHM ha s completed its 5th year since commencement, much r emains to be 
accomplished so far as infrastructure development i s concerned. With two more years of the Mission per iod remaining, the 
Committee wonders if the targets to overcome the sh ortfall of Health Care Infrastructure would be met in the real sense. The 
Committee, therefore, once again urges the Departme nt to quicken the pace of implementation so that it  does not remain very 
far off from the targeted goals.  
Action Taken  

  The NRHM promotes creation of new health infrastr ucture. It, however, is trying to consolidate exist ing health 
infrastructure before focusing only on creation of new infrastructure as human resource has to be adequately provided wherever 
physical infrastructure is developed. 
IV.   MISSION FLEXIBLE POOL 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.22   Role of ASHA  
  The Committee notes that the major job responsibi lities of ASHA are :- 
– awareness generation on Health, RCH, HIV/AIDS amo ng the people. 
– advising newly married couples for their special needs 
– providing escort services to and guiding pregnant  women for availing of institutional facilities for Anti-Natal, Natal 
and Post-Natal needs 
– counselling on nutrition, pregnancy, breast-feedi ng, immunization and family planning 
– establishing link with PHCs, private providers an d others for service requirement of beneficiaries 
– mobilising parents for child survival interventio ns 
– promoting basic sanitization 
– provision of non-clinical spacing contraceptives 
– surveillance of communicable diseases. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record.  
Recommendations/Observations  
4.23   Apart from all these, ASHA is also the prima ry interface conferred with the duty of detection, follow up and 
counseling of patients for all National Health Prog rammes run under the banner of NRHM. She is the Dep ot Holder for a 
number of health commodities like Vitamin A, Impreg nated bed nets, ORS etc. She is also supposed to ha ndle treatment of 
minor ailments and use the Drug Kit assigned to her  effectively for preliminary investigations. Anothe r major task assigned to 
ASHA is to provide escort services for women seekin g delivery services at institutions, requiring emer gency care and MTP 
services, women and men for clinical contraception services and VCTC. The Committee would like to note  that it had raised 
serious apprehensions regarding the effectivity of ASHA as a multipurpose social health activist as envisaged under the NRHM, 
given the increasing number of job responsibilities  that she was being burdended with, in its 27th Rep ort on Demands for 
Grants 2008-09. The Committee had also voiced its c oncerns on the remuneration package of the ASHA vis-a-vis  the various 
activities she was to be associated with, and had a ccordingly recommended that the role of ASHA needs to be reassessed and 
reformulated. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
VIII.  NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME 
Recommendations/Observations  
8.1  The goal of leprosy elimination at the Nationa l level is less than 1 case per 10000 population. N ational level elimination 
of Leprosy has been achieved since 31st December, 2 005 when the prevalence rate came down to 0.95 or l ess than 1/10000 

population. 32 States/ UTs have achieved the status of leprosy elimination. Only 3 States/ UT i.e.  Bihar, Chhattisgarh and Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli are yet to achieve elimination level, whith have the prevalence rate of 1.07, 2.30 and 2.21 respectively.  
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
8.2  The Committee was informed that in Bihar and C hhattisgarh reduction in prevalence of leprosy star ted late, due to late 
introduction of Multi Drug Therapy (MDT) for treatm ent of leprosy. D and N Haveli being an industrial area has large number 
of migratory cases from nearby States/UTs, and due to less population, a small increase in the number of recorded cases resulted 
in enormous increase in the prevalence rate. 
Action Taken  
Matter of record. 
X.   NATIONAL IODINE DEFICIENCY DISORDERS CONTROL P ROGRAMME 
Recommendations/Observations  
10.1   Deficiency of iodine can cause physical and mental retardation, cretinism, abortions, still-birth, deaf, mutism, squint 
and various types of goiter. Out of 325 districts c overing all the States and Union Territories where sample surveys were 
conducted, 263 districts have been found to be endemic, where the prevalence of iodine deficiency disorder is more than 10 per 
cent and estimated 71 million people are suffering from Iodine Deficiency Disorders. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
10.2   The budget allocation under the Programme fo r 2009-10 was Rs.40 crore which was reduced at the RE stage to 
Rs.29 crore. The Department has informed that uptill 28.2.2010, the fund utilization was to the tune of Rs.15.32 crore. On being 
asked regarding the drastic reduction in the alloca tion at RE 2009-10, the Department has informed tha t the reduced allocation 
was mainly due to review of the technical specifications of salt testing kits, and approval of Empowered Programme Committee 
(EPC) being under consideration. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
10.3  The Committee is not very happy with the tren ds of fund utilization under the programme. During 2007-08 and 2008-09 
against an allocation of Rs.25.00 crore and Rs.32.0 0 crore respectively, expenditure reported is only Rs.19.45 crore and 
Rs.17.95 crore respectively. The Committee observes  that every year there have been substantial amount  of savings over the 
allocated funds. The Committee notes with disappoin tment that this neither speaks of good financial ma nagement nor good 
programme implementation under the Programme. The C ommittee once again recommends to the Department to  devise 
measures to overcome the obstacles coming in the way of proper implementation of the programme initiatives. 
Action Taken  
  The actual allocation and expenditure during the year 2007-08 and 2008-09 under National Iodine Defi ciency Disorders 
Control Programme (NIDDCP) is as below: 
(Rs. in crores)  
Year Allocation Expenditure 

2007 -08 25.00 19.90 
2008-09 32.00 22.67 
 
  Intensive monitoring of States/UTs where the prog ramme implementation is not appropriate namely Andh ra Pradesh, 
A&N Islands, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand,  Lakshadweep, M.P., Rajasthan, U.P., Uttarakhand an d Tamil Nadu will 
be ensured so that the activities envisaged under the Programme can be implemented and fund utilized. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
II.  BUDGETARY PROVISION 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.4   The Committee views with serious concern the trend of allocation of funds and utilization thereo f in some other crucial 
programmes such as National Programme for Control o f Blindness, Iodine Deficiency Disorder Control Pro gramme, 
Procurement of Drugs and Equipments under RCH, Information Education and Communication (Both RCH and Non-RCH) and 
Area Projects are some of the other programmes unde r which performance level during the Eleventh Plan so far has also been 
far from satisfactory. The Committee has been repea tedly cautioning the Department to take remedial me asures to ensure 
optimum utilization of funds year after year. Howev er, no significant improvement has been noticed so far. The case for 
Procurement of Drugs and Equipments under RCH remai ns a classic example, where, during 2008-09 Rs.300 crore were 
allocated and no expenditure was made. Again, in 20 09-10 an initial outlay of Rs.1 00 crore were made under the same head 
which was revised upwards to Rs.150 crore and no expenditure is reported to be there up till January, 2010. Approved outlay of 
Rs.1500 crore for the Eleventh Plan has thus remained unspent in spite of three years of the Plan period being over. 
Action Taken  
  Under the scheme Procurement of Drug and Equipmen ts under RCH, RE (2009-10) was Rs.150 crores and as  per the 
status of expenditure as on 31.3.2010, the funds under the scheme stand fully utilized. However, during 2008-09, no funds could 
be utilized against BE of Rs.300 crores due to non-finalisation of MOU with World Bank. As desired by the Committee, sincere 
efforts will continue to be made by the Ministry to  ensure optimum and judicious utilization of funds under each and every 
scheme. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.5   The Committee strongly feel that poor plannin g and execution on the part of the Department regar ding the various on-
going schemes have been responsible for such a disc ouraging scenario. The Committee is well aware of t he fact that in a vast 

country like ours, with healthcare facilities espec ially in the rural areas showing a negligible prese nce, need for additional fund 
will also be there. The Committee has also been str ongly advocating the case for enhanced allocation o f funds for NRHM but 
the trend of under-utilization/unutilisation weakens the justification for higher provision of funds. The Committee is also aware 
of the fact that Union Government alone cannot achieve the targeted goals. It has to carry out the implementation with the active 
support of State Governments. The Committee, theref ore, once again recommends the Department to make i ts monitoring 
mechanism more effective so that such large amount of funds do not lapse/remain unutilized. The Commit tee also suggests the 
Department to undertake a comprehensive self-assess ment study on the means and methods used to improve  financial 
accountability under the Mission so far, and based on the findings, to devise a mechanism whereby funds utilization for the rest 
of the Mission period could be in a better state. T aking note of significant and persistent shortfall in utilization of the budgeted 
funds, the Committee would like the Department to e xercise greater prudence in their budget formulatio n and make their 
estimates only after proper assessment and planning. 
Action Taken  
  The Ministry has put into place a comprehensive, multi projected strategy for regular monitoring, co ncurrent evaluation 
and local feedback with respect to various components of the schemes. Monthly review meeting on expenditure are being taken 
by Secretary. (H&FW) with senior level officers. Pe riodic review meeting are also taken by Secretary w ith State Health 
Secretaries and Mission Directors of the States. 
  The Ministry has taken all efforts to utilize the  allocated funds. A Financial Management Group (FMG) has been set up in 
the Ministry to oversee the release of funds, monit oring of Utilisation Certificates and Audit Reports . The increased focus on 
accurate and timely reporting of SOEs and UCs has substantially improved the status of outstanding funds with the States. Since 
the number of financial transactions in the sector is expected to increase substantially in the coming  years, the NRHM has 
envisaged augmentation of accounting manpower at th e level of the PHCs in all States. The State Progra mme Management 
Units (PMUs) have also been advised to constitute F MGs within the PMUs to facilitate accurate and time ly reporting of health 
sector allocations. With the enhanced flexibility and institutional structures strengthened at the ground level, fuller utilization of 
allocated outlay is expected in future 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.6   NRHM is targeted to provide accessible, affor dable and equitable health care services for people  living in rural areas of 
the country with focus on under-served population a nd marginalized groups. Therefore, it is the consid ered view of the 
Committee that under-funding should not be allowed to come in the way of delivery of essential and qua lity health care to the 
most vulnerable sections of our society. The Committee, therefore, recommends that additional funds be allocated under NRHM 
wherever required 
Action Taken  
  The Department would like to thank the Committee for recommending more funds for NRHM. The framework  for 
implementation had envisaged an increase of 40% eve ry year. Unfortunately, the increase is now in the range of 10-20% every 
year. With increased absorptive capacity in the Sta tes, the allocation is inadequate to meet the chall enge of setting up an 
effective public health system. There are constrain ts on absorptive capacity with regard to physical i nfrastructure development 
in States like Orissa, Bihar and Jharkhand which ar e being addressed through state specific system int erventions. The Ministry 
will make even greater efforts to increase the absorptive capacity in the coming years  
Recommendations/Observations  
2.7   The twin problems of pending Utilization Cert ificates (UCs) and Unspent Balances under various 
programmes/components of NRHM have been engaging th e attention of the Committee since long. The Commit tee finds that 
the year 2009-10 was also no different. The Committ ee was informed that as on 15th April, 2009, there were 2083 UCs 
amounting to Rs. 7785.90 crore outstanding in respect of grants released upto March, 2008. This pendency must have increased 
manifold by the end of March, 2010. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 

Recommendations/Observations  
2.8   On being asked specifically about the measure s taken by the Department to liquidate pending Util ization Certificates, the 
Department has informed that as per the provision of the General Financial Rules it is necessary that in case of recurring grants, 
funds for the same purpose beyond 75% of the next y ear’s provision will not be released unless audited  Utilisation Certificate 
for the grants released in the previous year is rec eived. Further, for non-recurring grants, no fresh releases are being authorized 
unless audited Utilisation Certificate for grants released in the year prior to the last year ( i.e. , with a ‘grace period’ of one year) 
has been received. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.10  The Committee observes that 2083 number of pe nding UCs amounting to Rs.7785.00 crore is too large to be comfortable 
with. The Committee notes that the biggest defaulte rs in terms of amount involved in pending UCs are U ttar Pradesh 
(Rs.1097.39 crore), Karnataka (Rs. 596.08 crore), B ihar (Rs.537.74 crore) and Assam (Rs.437.11 crore) and unreconciled 
amount is to the tune of Rs.707.40 crore involved i n 31 UCs. The Committee is also astonished to find that the pendency of 
UCs has been continuing year after year, especially in case of the High Focus States, EAG States and NE Region, although well 
over two-thirds of the time period of NRHM(2005- 10 ) is over. What is more astonishing is that Union T erritories like Delhi, 
Chandigarh, Puducherry and A&N Islands also figure in the list. 
Action Taken  
  The Ministry is happy to report that as a result of relentless efforts made in this regard, out of p ending UCs amounting to 
Rs.7785 crores, UCs worth over Rs.5000 crores were settled during the year 2009-l0.The UCs of 2009-10 would be formally 
settled once the audit reports of States/UTs are received in August-September, 2010. That would substantially liquidate unspent 
balances and pendency of Utilization Certificates. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.11  The Committee would like to point out that me re advisories/ DOs to States for liquidation of pending UCs is not a tenable 
solution for expeditious liquidation of pending UCs. The Committee is of the view that monitoring of p ending UCs needs to be 
further strengthened. The Committee also recommends  that a senior officer be assigned the task of lais ing with the States and 
monitor the progress in this regard on a quarterly basis. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken to revamp 
the monitoring of pending UCs. The Committee is als o of the view that the Department take up the matte r with the States 
showing maximum pendency of UCs at the highest level impressing upon them the imperative of furnishing the UCs timely and 
exercising fiscal discipline.  
Action Taken  
  In order to streamline the monitoring of UCs, a n ew software has been evolved in Pay and Accounts Of fice to keep track 
of all UCs. It is aimed to give reports periodicall y to respective Divisions to enable them to take up  the matter with the States 
showing low utilization so that necessary steps can be taken to improve the situation. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.12  The Committee observes that availability of u nspent balances continues to remain on the high sid e, both under Mission 
Flexible Pool and RCH Flexible Pool, the two major components under NRHM. Opening balance as on 01.04. 2008 with 
different State Governments/DTs under Mission Flexi ble Pool was Rs.4150.07 crore, while funds provided  during the year 
2008-09 were Rs.2597.44 crore. Against the total fu nds amounting to Rs.6747.51 crore with the State, u tilization figures are 
only Rs.3254.29 crore, less than half of the total availability of funds. The Committee finds that final position as on 01.04.2009 
was no different from the previous year as opening balance of Rs.3493.22 crore was again lying with th e State Governments. 
Following are the States/UTs where level of utiliza tion of funds available from the previous year as w ell as releases made 
during the year was very low: 

[Rs. in crores]  
State/UT Opening Allocation Release Exp. Unspent % 
 Balance as     balance as Utilization 
 on 1.4.2008     on 31.03.09  
Bihar 309.94 216.20 216.20 106.24 419.90 20% 
Chandigarh 2.46 1.75 0.04 0.56 1.94 22% 
Chhattisgarh 96.03 54.18 54.18 8.92 141.29 6% 
Delhi 28.51 27.59 27.02 10.78 44.75 19% 
Goa 2.69 2.76 2.38 1.21 3.86 24% 
Himachal Pradesh 39.99 12.29 12.29 16.72 35.56 32% 
Jharkhand 113 .97 70.23 90.23 59.47 144.73 29% 
Madhya Pradesh 220.52 157.51 157.51 109.54 268.49 2 9% 
Orissa 161.71 95.81 123.44 65.70 219.45 23% 
Pudducherry 4.23 2.01 2.01 1.73 4.51 28% 
Tamil Nadu 235.99 124.15 124.15 136.86 223.28 38% 
Tripura 43.26 27.88 27.88 25.93 45.21 36% 
Uttar Pradesh 654.12 432.93 305.43 300.53 659.02 31 % 
West Bengal 318.07 160.77 160.77 180.13 298.71 38% 
Others  5.80  0.00   
TOTAL (All India) 4150.07 2603.24 2597.44 3254.29 3493.22   
  
Action Taken  
  As explained earlier, the utilization of funds un der the flexible pools has substantially increased every year. A 
comparative chart is given in the Annexure-III.  
Recommendations/Observations  
2.14   The Committee is surprised to note that unde r RCH Flexible Pool also Opening Balance amounting to Rs.1157.46 
crore was available as on 01.04.2008 with different  States. Assam with availability of Rs.126.67 crore , Maharashtra with 
Rs.209.69 crore, Tamil Nadu with Rs.97.73 crore, U. P. with Rs.192.33 crore and West Bengal with Rs.101 .59 crore can be 
considered slow performing States. Not only this, S tates like Goa, Meghalaya and Tripura failed to uti lise even the opening 
balance during the course of the year. Percentage o f utilization of total allocated funds (opening bal ance + Release) was very 
low in respect of A&N Islands (44%), Assam (53%), G oa(23%), Haryana (52%), Himachal Pradesh (53%), J&K  (40%), 
Manipur (54%), Meghalaya (26%), Nagaland (45%), Tam il Nadu (40%), Tripura (33%) and West Bengal (40%).  The 
Committee is very disappointed with such a utilization status, specially because under RCH Flexible Pool, States/ UTs have the 
flexibility to plan on a need basis without being b ound by rigid normative prescriptions. The Committe e, therefore, feels that 
with more than two-third of the mission period alre ady being over, it is high time that the Department  identifies the problem 
areas in the implementation of various components o f RCH Flexible Pool and takes measures for resolvin g the same. A 
beginning can be made by approaching the states lagging behind on a priority basis. 

Action Taken  
  Considering the status of low utilization of fund s by the States, an exercise was undertaken and joi nt teams of the 
MoHFW and National Health System Resource Centre (N HSRC) were sent to various States to identify the r easons and to 
address the same in the State PIPs for 2010-11. In order to bring about improvement in utilization of funds, the Financial 
Monitoring Reports (FMRs) are being regularly revie wed and reasons for low utilization are being commu nicated to the States 
on a quarterly basis. In addition to this, regular financial management reviews are also being underta ken by the Financial 
Management Group (FMG) and appropriate recommendati ons being made to the States. The Statutory Audits and Concurrent 
Audits of the State and District Health Societies a nd all divisions of Disease Control Programmes are being emphasized upon 
and followed up so as to highlight usage patterns, reasons for low utilization and suggest remedial measures. 
  The unspent balances as on 1.4.2008 year have bee n reduced from Rs.192.33 crores to Rs.93.86 crores in respect of Uttar 
Pradesh, from Rs.209.69 crores to Rs.118.40 crores in respect of Maharashtra, at the close of the fina ncial year. The remaining 
three slow performing States referred to above have reported increased expenditure in the financial year 2008-09 as compared to 
the previous financial year: Assam from Rs.105.24 c rores to Rs.194.74 crores; Tamil Nadu from Rs.77.03  crores to Rs.97.03 
crores; and West Bengal from Rs.78.67 crores to Rs.130.85 crores. 
  The percentage utilisation of allocated funds up to the year 2008-09 has increased as compared to th e previous financial 
year i.e.  from 44% to 77.13% in A & N Islands, from 53% to 6 8.34% in Assam, from 23% to 42.51% in Goa, from 52%  to 
72.55 % in Haryana, from 53% to 68.07% in Himachal Pradesh, from 40% to 60.66% in J & K, from 26% to 9 5.64% in 
Mizoram, from 45% to 62.93% in Nagaland, from 40% t o 63.32% in Tamil Nadu, from 33% to 45.24% in Tripu ra and from 
40% to 64.78% in West Bengal. 
  The amount of unspent balances with the States as  on 01.04.2008 was Rs.1157.46 crores which has been  reduced to 
Rs.1051.66 crores as on 1.4.2009. 
III.  INFRASTRUCTURE STRENGTHENING 
Healthcare Units  
Recommendations/Observations  
3.2   The Committee while taking note of progress m ade in strengthening the primary health infrastruct ure after the launch of 
NRHM would like to point out that considerable gap still continues to persist. In this connection, Com mittee’s attention has 
been drawn by Performance Audit of NRHM by CAG (Rep ort No.8 of 2009-10). There was a shortfall of 4398 7 Sub-Centres 
(27%) in 22 States/ UTs, 8613 PHCs (31 %) in 21 Sta tes/ UTs and 4200 CHCs (55%) in 23 States/UTs which  were required to 
be created during the NRHM period (2005-12). Target of creation of 30% of new infrastructure by 2007, i.e. 13196 sub-centres, 
2585 PHCs and 1261 CHCs could not be fulfilled. Acc ording to the CAG Report, as many as 14 States/UTs failed to take any 
initiative for bridging the gap. Out of the target of 43987 sub-centres, 8613 PHCs and 4200 CHCs only 2562 Sub-Centres, 685 
PHCs and 138 CHCs could be set-up. The Committee only hopes that 935 Sub--Centres, 178 PHCs and 67 CHCs reported to be 
under construction during CAG Audit must have been completed and become fully functional by now. The C ommittee would 
like to point out that even as per the target of 20 07, there was a shortfall of 9749 sub-centres, also  1722 PHCs and 1056 CHCs. 
Against this backdrop, bridging the gap of 43987 su b-centres, 8613 PHCs and 4200 CHCs by the end of mi ssion period i.e. 
2012 seems to be an uphill task. The Committee woul d like to point out that the targets set up under N RHM were as per the 
population norms of 2001. The shortfall of infrastructure is bound to increase manifold once 2011 census is over and population 
norms revise. The Committee has also taken note of the fact that only very few states like Assam, Chha ttisgarh, Rajasthan, 
Uttarakhand and Lakshadweep had made an attempt to achieve the target of 2007, while the remaining Sta tes reported nil 
achievement. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department has to pursue vigorously with all the non-performing 
States, otherwise even the basic objective of NRHM of having the minimum required infrastructure would  also remain 
unfulfilled. 
Action Taken  

  While considerable progress has been made from 20 05 to 2009, there is a long way to go in meeting the full requirements 
of infrastructure. A comparison of Primary Health Care Infrastructure and Human Resources in HSCs, PHCs and CHCs is given 
in the Annexure-IV . 
RURAL HEALTH FUNCTIONARIES 
Status of ANMs at Sub-Centres and PHCs  
3.9   The Committee has been monitoring the manpowe r resource availability and progress made in filling up of vacant posts in 
Health Centres. From the information furnished by t he Department, the Committee has been informed that  out of the total 
requirement of 1,69,494 ANMs @ one each at 1,46,036  Sub-Centres and 23,458 PHCs, the number of posts s anctioned as on 
March, 2008 are 1,43,269. On being asked to throw light on the latest position of sanctioned post of ANMs for Sub-Centres and 
PHCs, the Department has informed that as per avail able latest data, there are a total number of 1,87, 902 ANMs (1,39,798 in 
2005) at Sub-Centres/PHCs presently. From a detaile d analysis of the information furnished by the Depa rtment the Committee 
notes that in the following States there is a gap between sanctioned posts and in-position posts. 
State Sanctioned In-position Vacant 
Bihar 10,557 9127 1430 
Chhattisgarh 5462 4850 612 
Himachal Pradesh 2813 2496 317 
Karnataka 8487 8028 459 
M.P. 9983 8718 1265 
Maharashtra 12,645 12,027 618 
Orissa 7121 6768 353 
Punjab 3129 2706 423 
U.P. 23,570 21,024 2546 
 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.10  Not only this, with regard to a number of cru cial States/UTs like Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, J&K,  Jharkhand, Tripura 
and A&N Islands, information about even sanctioned posts was not available with the Centre. These were also States where in-
position ANMs exceeded their required strength. The  Committee also notes that 46,690 ANMs have been re cruited on contract 
basis by the States across the country. The Committ ee would like to point out that the filling of vaca ncy of ANMs at Sub-
Centres and PHCs is a thrust area under NRHM. Howev er, the clarification given by the Department that limited capacity at 
ANM schools poses problem in availability of ANMs d epicts another glaring shortcoming in the provision  of healthcare 
facilities in rural areas. The Committee is not rea dy to accept the contention of the Department that since the training of ANM 
requires 18 months, it will take some time in availability of ANMs and filling up of the vacant ANM posts at various levels. The 
fact remains that the key functionary, i.e.  ANM, is not there at all the health centres indica tes that large number of targeted 
beneficiaries still continue to be deprived of the very basic healthcare facilities. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 

Recommendations/Observations  
3.11   Status of Health Assistants (Female)/LHVs at PHCs  
  Against the requirement of one Health Assistant ( Female)/LHV per PHC, status thereof as on March 200 8 is very 
discouraging. Out of total 23,458 required posts of  Health Assistant (Female)/LHV, sanctioned posts ar e only 19,920 and in-
position posts are even less i.e.  17,608. The position in this regard in some of the States is very discouraging as indicated below: 
States Required Sanctioned In-Position Vacant 
Arunachal Pradesh 116 NA 0 NA 
Assam 844 NA NA NA 
Bihar 1641 850 479 371 
Gujarat 1073 481 267 214 
Himachal Pradesh 449 198 114 84 
J&K 375 120 27 93 
Jharkhand 330 NA NA NA 
Karnataka 2195 1209 1170 39 
Kerala 909 830 740 90 
Meghalaya 103 85 75 10 
Punjab 484 241 179 62 
 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.12   Asked to clarify the situation, the Departme nt has informed that Lady Health Visitor is a promotional post for ANM 
and before promotion they are required to undergo 6  months training in LHV training schools. In many S tates, LHV training 
schools were closed down. Under NRHM, support is pr ovided for running of LHV training schools. It is l ikely to take some 
time to fill up the gaps of Health Assistant (Female)/LHV at PHCs. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.13   Status of Health Workers (Male) at Sub-Centres  
  Similarly, against the requirements of 1,46,036 H ealth Workers(Male), only 78,813 posts of these wor kers have been 
sanctioned as on March, 2008, against which only 60 247 workers are reported to be in-position. The Com mittee finds that in 
quite a few States the sanctioned posts of Health W orkers (Male), inspite of being less than the requi red number of posts, 
remain vacant as indicated below: 
State Required Sanctioned In-position Vacant  

Assam 4592 NA NA NA 
Andhra Pradesh 12,522 7340 6127 1213 
Bihar 8858 2135 1074 1061 
Gujarat 7274 6206 4456 1750 
Himachal Pradesh 2071 2008 1270 738 
J&K 1907 NA NA NA 
Karnataka 8143 5009 3762 1247 
Kerala 5094 2672 2654 18 
M.P. 8834 7170 4030 3140 
Orissa 6688 4911 3392 1519 
Rajasthan 10742 3968 2528 1440 
Tamil Nadu 8706 5062 3278 1784 
Uttarakhand 1765 771 616 155 
West Bengal 10356 6543 4215 2328 
 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.14   Replying to a query regarding the reasons be hind the non-availability of Health Worker (Male) i n the States, the 
Department has informed that posts of Health Worker (Male) at Sub-Centers are lying vacant in many States because the States 
had stopped recruitment of Health Worker (Male) for  many years, due to closing down of training school s and financial 
austerity measures. The Department has further stat ed that now, under NRHM, States are being encourage d to fill up the posts 
of Health Worker (Male) by allowing engagement of 2 nd ANM if they post a Health Worker (Male). Consequ ently, several 
States have initiated steps for engaging Male Health Worker. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.15   Lab-Technicians at PHCs and CHCs  
  Out of the required number of 27,734 of Lab-Techn icians, only 15,223 posts have been sanctioned so f ar, and in-position 
Lab-Technicians are even less i.e. 12,886, with acu te shortages being seen in U.P. (3120 against 4205)  Bihar (1576 against 
1711), Madhya Pradesh (928 against 1419), Karnataka (1276 against 2518), Maharashtra (1454 against 2223) West Bengal (832 
against 1273), Orissa (1199 against 1510) the others being Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Tamil Nadu and Punjab. 
The clarification for non-availability of required technical manpower given by the Department is that under NRHM, Lab-
Technicians are permitted to be engaged on contract  basis. Moreover, the multi-skilling of Lab-Technic ians is also encouraged 
to provide services for various purposes at CHC or PHCs wherever single Lab-Technician is available. T o the Committee’s 
observation that generally there is a mismatch between the required and sanctioned number of posts of different workers of Sub-

Centres, the Department has stated that many of the States are yet to sanction the required number of posts of Lab-Technicians; 
hence, a mismatch between number of posts required and sanctioned by the States is observed. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.16   The status of available posts of Doctors at PHCs and Specialists at CHCs  
  As on March, 2008, against the required number of  23458 doctors at PHCs (1 doctor for each PHC) the sanctioned 
number is 25086 and the in-position number is 24375 . There are 4708 vacancies and the All India shortf all figures are 3537. 
The states where vacancies of doctors are highest a re Assam, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punja b, U.P. and West 
Bengal. The Committee observes that as on 31st January, 2010, a total of 8624 doctors have been recruited at PHCs on contract 
basis. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.17   Four Specialist doctors are required to be p osted at one CHC. The Committee finds that against the required number 
of 17104 Specialist for CHCs, sanctioned strength i s less than half i.e. 8376 and Specialists in-posit ion are only 4279. State-
specific details are more disappointing. While no s pecialists have been posted in CHCs in Manipur, Miz oram, Delhi, 
Lakshadweep and Puducherry, no information is avail able in this regard with respect of Orissa, Tamil N adu and Tripura. The 
Committee is also constrained to observe that Speci alists recruited by the States fall short of their actual requirements. 
Maximum gap is noticed in respect of the following States:- 
States/UTs CHCs Functioning Specialists Required In -position 
Arunachal Pradesh 44 176 9 
Gujarat 273 1092 81 
Himachal Pradesh 73 292 10 
Jharkhand 194 776 40 
Meghalaya 26 104 2 
Nagaland 21 84 1 
West Bengal 349 1396 186 
 
  In all the above States, against the requirement of four Specialists per CHC, not even one Specialis t is available in all the 
CHCs. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.19   The Committee also notes with dismay that th e latest data about healthcare functionaries is not  available with the 
Department. The Committee would like to emphasize that building up of capacity at the grass roots level is an essential part of a 
proper planning process and improvements in this regard can only be noticed if the planned measures are put to implementation. 
One must not forget that these key functionaries ar e also pivotal in the collection and dissemination of health related 
information from the field levels. The Committee wo uld, therefore, appreciate if updated data is got c ollected by the 

Department in coordination with the States/UTs. Onl y then it would be possible to make a proper assess ment of the ground 
realities and plan for augmentation of both the extant and future capacity of manpower in the States. 
Action Taken  
  The RHS 2009 has been approved and will be publis hed shortly. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.20   Another area of concern for the Committee is  the number of contractual appointments being made under the 
Mission to fill up the various vacant posts. The Co mmittee observes that out of total 1,53,568 ANMs in -position in health 
centres across the country, 46,315 ANMs are on cont ract basis. The Committee is constrained to note th at such ANMs are 
concentrated in a few states as indicated below:- 
States ANMs in- Contractual 
position ANMs  
Bihar 9127 5896 
Jharkhand 5011 3204 
Assam 8289 4575 
Andhra Pradesh 12541 9505 
Haryana 2592 2465 
Maharashtra 12027 6250 
 
  Similarly, out of 4279 Specialists in-position, a s many as 2426 are on contract basis. 
Action Taken  
  Point noted. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.21  The Committee feels that for effective delive ry of public health services, it is essential that service personnel are present 
continuously in their place of postings. However, w ith more and more number of contractual manpower be ing recruited under 
NRHM, the Committee fears that the accountability m echanism under the programme would get diluted, the reby affecting the 
delivery of quality services to the masses. The Com mittee, accordingly, recommends to the Department t hat an All India level 
drive for filling up of the vacant posts, first aga inst the sanctioned strength and thereafter against the required strength needs to 
be undertaken in a mission mode so that by the end of NRHM significant improvement is more than evident. 
Action Taken  
  NRHM has promoted recruitment of contractual staf f because health is a State subject and it is reall y for the State 
Governments to decide on a long term sustainability  of a special human resource. Also NRHM is about he alth sector reforms 
and it was felt that in order to ensure health work ers in remote areas, institution specific recruitme nts have to be made. These 
can only be done on contract for a specific facilit y. NRHM’s thrust has been on service guarantee and not on employment 
guarantee. 
IV.  MISSION FLEXIBLE POOL 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.1   Mission Flexible Pool provides for activities  like selection and training of ASHAs, upgradation of CHCs and PHCs to 
First Referral Units and Indian Public Health Stand ards (IPHS), constitution of Rogi Kalyan Samitis an d District Hospital 

Management Committees, Mobile Medical Units, untied  funds for Sub-Centres etc. States have the flexibi lity of utilizing the 
funds as per their priorities for the approved acti vities. The Committee notes that maximum expenditur e (31 %) is towards 
infrastructure upgradation, followed by Untied Funds (24%) and State Innovations (9%). 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.2   The Committee has been informed that the tota l approved outlay under Mission Flexible Pool for t he Eleventh Five Year 
Plan is Rs.33181.07 crore and the expenditure figur es for 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 (upto January 2 010) are Rs.3151.64 
crore, Rs.2599.13 crore and Rs.2479.17 crore respectively, totaling Rs.8229.94 crore for the three years taken together. Thus an 
amount of Rs.24951.13 crore (approx.) is still left  to be utilized during the remaining two financial years of the Eleventh Plan. 
However, against the projected demand of Rs.8000.00 crore, plan allocation of Rs.3569.70 crore, has been made in 2010-11. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.3   The Committee observes that allocation of Rs. 3567.27 crore for 2009-10 was reduced to Rs.3276.17  crore at the RE 
stage. This cut was imposed by the Ministry of Finance on account of slow pace of expenditure. The Committee is concerned to 
note that as on 31st January, 2010, expenditure reported was only Rs.2479.17 crore. Position was no better during 2008-09 with 
States like U.P., Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Himacha1 Pradesh could utilize less than 50% while Bihar and  Chhattisgarh were 
able to spend only 13% and 17% respectively. Very l ow use of untied funds provided under the Mission F lexible Pool in Bihar 
and delayed transfer of funds to the districts in C hhattisgarh have been cited as the main reason for unsatisfactory performance 
in the two States. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.4   The Committee is anguished to note the huge s hortfall in utilization of the budgeted funds and a lso the substantial 
variation between the projected demand for funds an d the sanctioned provisions. The Committee observes  that at a time when 
equitable access to health facilities across the so cial and geographical expanse of the country is the  declared policy of the 
Government, such inefficiencies in utilization of f unds can prove to be a potent deterrent. The Commit tee would like the 
Department to impress upon all concerned including the State Governments the imperative need to review  their existing 
mechanism for assessment of requirement of funds an d take corrective action to overcome the deficienci es in the existing 
system so that the possibility of surrendering unspent/under-utilized funds is obviated.  
Action Taken  
  The utilization of funds as pointed out earlier h as increased considerably under the Mission Flexibl e Pool. In terms of 
release of funds the Mission Flexible Pool has alwa ys utilized more than 99% of the allocated resource s in the last five years. 
Utilization in the States did take a little while but even that is now improved considerably. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.9   As per the mandate of Implementation Framewor k of NRHM, all Integrated District Health Action Pl ans (IDHAP) were 
to be finalised by the end of 2008. On being asked regarding the latest State-wise progress made so fa r, the Department has 
informed that though there was a delay initially, n ow States/UTs have shown remarkable improvement for  preparation of 
IDHAP. As on date, 617 districts of the country have already finalised IDHAPs, and teams from NHSRC were sent to backward 
districts to facilitate decentralised planning. 

Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.10   The Committee, however, notes that only 22 S tates/UTs have furnished IDHAPs fully, while, even by the end of 
March 2010, as many as 12 States/UTs are yet to fur nish the IDHAPs 100 per cent. Goa, D&N Haveli and L akshadweep have 
not been able to submit a single IDHAP, while Rajas than has been able to furnish only 26 out of the 33  IDHAPs. This is the 
position when timeline to complete the submission of IDHAPs by the States/UTs was by the end of 2008. The Committee fails 
to understand what could be the possible reasons fo r such inordinate delays in the submission of IDHAP s. The Committee 
would like to emphasise that Integrated District He alth Action Plans are the very basis for improving the availability of health 
care facilities in a district. In the absence of a concrete plan of action drawn by the districts, pro per health care facilities for 
people residing in such districts cannot be develop ed optimally. The Committee therefore, impresses up on the Department to 
vigorously pursue this issue with concerned States/UTs to furnish the same as early as possible.  
Action Taken  
  All districts have now been doing the Districts P lans and teams from the Central Government have bee n visiting the 
districts to facilitate the process. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.13  Grants to State Training Institutions  
  The Committee notes that out of this allocation, major funding of Rs. 520.48 crore is meant for basi c training for ANMs/ 
LHVs and Rs. 56.09 crore for basic training for MPW s (Male). The Committee notes that out of Rs. 520.4 8 crore kept for 
training of ANMs/ LHVs, only Rs. 218.04 crore have been released during the first three years of the E leventh Plan. With Rs. 
85.18 crore proposed for 2010-11, more than Rs. 200 .00 crore would be left for the last year of the pl an period. Not only this, 
during 2008-09 and 2009-10, the allocated funds have remained under-utilised. The Committee finds that funds meant for basic 
training for MPW s (Male) also could not be put to optimum use during the Eleventh Plan period so far. 
Action Taken  
  The eleventh Plan outlay is an indicative outlay,  which will be available for the Department on annu al basis depending 
upon the utilization of funds and it is the jurisdi ction of the Planning Commission to decide the Plan  Outlay for the Ministries/ 
Departments based on the overall resources available and priorities decided by the Planning Commission. 
  The year-wise Approved Outlay (BE) and Expenditur e under the schemes namely Basic Training of ANM/LH V s and 
Basic Training of MPW Workers (Male) during 2007-08 to 2009-10 and BE for 2010-11 is given in the Annexure- V  
  Under the scheme, funds are released to the State s for salary of the staff, rent for school and host el, stipend for trainees, 
educational aids and training material, hiring for bus and contingency. The utilization of funds under  the above schemes were 
less during 2008-09 and 2009-10 due to unspent bala nces of the previous years lying with the States. T he approved outlay for 
the above schemes has been increased in 2010-11 aga inst the approved outlay in 2009-10 to pay the arre ars of the staffs posted 
at Training Schools, on account of implementation of 6th Pay Commission Report by the States.  
Recommendations/Observations  
4.14   The Committee is not aware about the reasons  for lack of interest on the part of State Governme nts for creating/ 
strengthening the training schools meant for key He alth functionaries with the support of Central Fund s. The Committee 
strongly feels that it is high time for the Departm ent to make an assessment of this crucial area in c onsultation with all the 
States/ UTs and bring about all round improvement. One must not forget that a fully trained and qualif ied health worker alone 
can handle his job responsibilities effectively. 
Action Taken  

  Since the launch of NRHM, many ANM/LHVTCs, which were closed in some of the States, have been reopened. In some 
of the ANM Training Centres, the admission capacity  of students increased from 20 to 40 candidates and  in others from 40 to 
60 candidates per annum. For example, the State of Bihar has proposed establishment of 10 new ANMTCs a nd also 
strengthening of 21 ANMTCs in PIP 2010-11. Chhattis garh has also proposed to strengthen the ANMTC of D hentari District 
under Tribal development. They have also proposed t raining to Mitanin for ANM and nursing for their ca reer progression. In 
Rajasthan, five new ANMTCs have been opened under N RHM and they are proposing to open one more ANMTC i n the new 
district in PIP 2010-11. They have also proposed in PIP 2010-11 to enhance the seats of ANM trainees from 60 to 90. 
  Under the scheme of Upgradation/Strengthening of Nursing Services, there is a provision to open new ANM Training 
Schools and about 132 ANM Training Schools are proposed to be opened in the different districts of the States. 
  As regards LHVTCs many States are reopening the L HVTCs also. Senior ANM with five years of experienc e. is given 
six months promotional training to become LHV /Heal th Assistant (Female). Health Assistants (Female)/L HV provides 
supportive supervision and technical guidance to th e ANMs in sub-centres. About 34 LHVTCs are function al, including 4 in 
UP. 
  Regarding MPHW(M) Training Schools, in UP 5000 MH W(M) are being proposed to be trained. 2400 FHW are  also 
being proposed to be trained in 40 ANMTCs and it is  already approved in PIP 2010-11. It may be mention ed that 49 
MPHW(M) Training Centres are functional in the coun try, each with an admission capacity of about 60 tr ainees per annum. In 
other States, where these schools were not function al, they have started functioning. For example, in Chhattisgarh three 
MPHW(M)TCs started functioning. In many States (lik e Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Jharkh and) MPHW(M) 
training are being imparted by the Health and Family Welfare Training Centres. 
  In the 11th meeting of EPC of NRHM on 10th May 20 10, it was proposed to have provision Health Worker (Male) in 235 
high focus districts. 
V.  RCH FLEXIBLE POOL 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.1   The main objective of RCH Flexible Pool is to  bring about the change in the three critical healt h indicators: Infant 
Mortality Rate (IMR), Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR ) and Total Fertility Rate (TFR) consistent with th e goal of National 
Population Policy 2002, the Tenth and Eleventh Plans and Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The targets to be achieved 
by the year 2012 are to bring down IMR to less than  30, MMR to less than 100 and TFR to 2.1. Against t his, the achievement 
levels as per latest available studies are: IMR 53 (SRS 2008), MMR 254 (SRS 2004-06) & TFR 2.6 (SRS 20 08). One of the 
most important strategies adopted under the Program me is the freedom given to the States to prepare th eir Annual State and 
District level Project Implementation Plan (PIPs) after assessing their need- based requirements. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.2   Secretary, Health, during her presentation be fore the Committee, highlighted the main strategies  for Maternal Health and 
stated that the main factors for high rate of MMR could be broadly classified as delay in decision-making, delay in reaching the 
hospital and delay in initiating appropriate care. Delay in decision-making takes place mainly due to lack of awareness and 
financial constraints. The Committee was informed t hat to tackle these basic constraints, a number of significant interventions 
have been made so far. Awareness and counseling thr ough ASHAs/ANMs/AWWs, availability of financial ass istance through 
Janani Suraksha Yojana for institutional delivery, and skilled providers for domiciliary birth were ci ted as the main 
interventions. The other problem area coming in the  way of checking MMR was delay in reaching the hosp ital due to lack of 
knowledge about danger signs and availability of tr ansport facilities. Here again, ASHAs/ANMs/ AWW s a re meant to do the 
counseling on danger signs. Transport facilities are being made available through JSY and referral services through Government 
ambulances/ PPP arrangements. Another hindrance not iced was lack of availability of operational facili ty for tracking 
pregnancy and its complications. The Committee was given to understand that these hindrances were bein g tackled by 

upgradation of infrastructure at the district level and multi-skilling of Doctors to overcome shortage of critical specialists. As on 
date, 1024 doctors have been trained in anesthesia skills, 543 doctors trained in obstetric skills and  37,162 Staff nurses/ LHVs/ 
ANMs trained as skilled birth attendants. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.3   The Committee was also apprised about the mai n factors found responsible for high rate of IMR, w hich were severe 
infections (36% deaths), pre-term birth (25% deaths ), birth asphyxia (23% deaths) and neo-natal tetanu s (4% deaths). Steps 
taken so far for checking this high incidence of ne o-natal deaths were Integrated Management of New Bo rn and Childhood 
Illness, Basic New Born Care and Navjat Shishu Suraksha Karyakaran etc. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.4   Allocation for RCH Flexible Pool for 2009-10 was Rs.3545.00 crore and the actual expenditure rep orted upto January, 
2010 was Rs.2641.84 crore. The Committee observes t hat there has been optimum utilization of allocated  funds. Against a 
provision of Rs. 1872.00 crore and Rs.3126.04 crore  in 2007-08 and 2008-09, utilization reported was R s.1999.25 crore and 
Rs.3077.16 crore respectively. Committee’s attentio n has, however, been drawn by State-wise utilizatio n status which depicts 
wide ranging disparities, that too in NE State specially as indicated below: 
ANNEXURE-G OF REPORT 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.5   Another disturbing trend noticed by the Commi ttee was that in respect of many States, Central fu nds released during the 
year were higher than the proposed allocation. Whil e trying to understand the reasons therefor, the Co mmittee came to know 
that all the States/UTs were having unspent balance s at the beginning of the year. As per the details made available to the 
Committee, as on 01.04.2008, opening balance amount ing to Rs.1157.46 crore was available with Assam (R s.126.67 crore), 
Maharashtra (Rs.209.69 crore), Orissa (Rs.60.99 crore), Tamil Nadu (Rs.97.73 crore), D.P. (Rs.192.33 c rore) and West Bengal 
(Rs.101.59 crore) reporting the maximum. 
Action Taken  
  As regards devising alternative strategies so tha t funds allocated are utilized optimally so that th e poor and weaker 
sections of the society are not bereft of the benef its of various on-going health care initiatives, ac tion is being taken on the 
following key areas identified for priority action during 2010:- 
/circle6 Action Plan for Backward Districts as part of the PIP 
/circle6 Action Plan for streamlining of procurement and lo gistics, 
/circle6 Action Plan for operationalising HMIS up to facili ty level 
/circle6 Capacity Development of all Institutions crafted u nder NRHM 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.6  This clearly shows that States have generally failed to take the full benefit of various Central interventions inspite of their 
having the discretion to spend money as per their r equirements. The Committee, therefore, strongly fee ls that if despite the 
availability of funds the States are unable to util ize them, and thus is a cause for a thorough review  of strategies. The low 

utilization of funds has seriously hampered Governm ent’s initiatives for bringing down IMR, MMR and TF R. Seriously 
concerned with this state of affairs, the Committee  recommends that the Department, in consultation wi th the States/UTs, 
should devise alternative strategies so that the fu nds allocated are utilized optimally so that the po or and weaker sections of the 
society are not bereft of the benefits of various on-going health care initiatives. 
Action Taken  
/circle6 Higher utilization of financial resources under NRHM, and 
/circle6 Plan for human resources for health including ince ntives for staff being posted in difficult, most difficult and 
inaccessible areas. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.7   On being asked as to whether any assessment h as been made so far about the main factors responsi ble for some of the 
High Focus States/NE States and Hill States of Hima chal Pradesh and J&K failing to avail of maximum fa cilities under RCH 
Flexi pool, the Department has highlighted the following main constraints:- 
– Shortage of Human resources in the relevant State s 
– Difficult geographic conditions (NE States, J&K, Uttarakhand, HP) 
– Low absorption capacity 
– Absenteeism 
– Tenures of key officers like, Programme Officers an d Administrators are not assured, which affects pro gramme 
ownership and continuity of interventions 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.8   Following are the remedial measures suggested  to States for inclusion in their State Programme I mplementation Plans 
(PIPs). 
– Hiring health staff on contractual basis and local people 
– Providing hardship allowance to health staff  
– Capacity building of the State and district programme officers in decentralized planning and financial matters. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.9   The Committee desires to know whether the PIP s of the States under reference has started reflecting the deficient areas as 
flagged off by the Department, and asking for funds to overcome them. 
Action Taken  
  The States have reflected the key areas for prior ity action in their PIPs for 2010-11 and monitorable targets have also been 
prescribed in consultation with the States/UTs to b e achieved by them during 2010-11 and specifically included in the 
administrative approvals being issued for the State  Programme Implementation Plans. The details are gi ven in the Annexure- 
VIII . 
ROUTINE  IMMUNIZATION  

Recommendations/Observations  
5.10   A provision of Rs.2457.16 crore has been mad e for Routine Immunization during the Eleventh Plan . The 
Committee observes that funds allocated during the first three years have remained under-utilised with  only less than 50 per 
cent being spent so far. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.11   The Committee was informed that against the budget allocation of Rs.466.30 crore during the yea r 2008-09, a sum 
of Rs.159.96 crore was utilized. Out of this Rs.145 .08 crore was utilized for procurement of vaccines including Hepatitis B. 
Further, the saving was mainly under the sub-head ‘Vaccine for Hepatitis B/Pentavalent Vaccine’ for which a fund ofRs.205.30 
crore was allocated out of which Rs.21.16 crore cou ld only be utilized as the scheme regarding introdu ction of Pentavalent 
Vaccine was deferred for technical re-examination o f the issue. Out of the budget provision of Rs.86.0  crore under Needle 
syringes and Rs. 47.0 crore under cold chain equipm ent, a sum of Rs.13 .09 crore and Rs.1. 79 crore wa s utilized respectively, 
due to non-finalization/less procurement of these items. 
Action Taken.  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.12   Allocation in 2010-11 has been increased to Rs.417 crore against an allocation of Rs.388.21 cro re during 2009-10. 
The Committee was given to understand that the enha nced allocation of RS.28.79 crores has been propose d for procurement of 
cold chain equipments and Hepatitis B/ Pentavalent vaccines. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.13   The Committee is constrained to observe that  this is yet another case of inept handling of budg eted funds by the 
Department. The Committee finds to its dismay that despite the efficacy and relevance of Pentavalent V accine being in 
question, a substantive amount of Rs.205.30 crore was allocated for the same out of which Rs.184.14 cr ore remained unutilised 
and had to be surrendered. The Committee would like  the Department to exercise greater caution in future and not allow repeat 
of such fiscal imprudence. 
Action Taken  
  During 2008-09, a sum of Rs.205.30 crores was all ocated for pentavalent vaccine introduction. However, scheme for the 
introduction of the pentavalent vaccine was deferred for technical re-examination. During the year 200 9-10, funds to the extent 
of Rs.50 crore were earmarked under the sub head “V accine for Hepatitis B/Pentavalent Vaccine”. In the current financial year 
i.e 2010-11 only a token provision has been kept fo r pentavalent vaccine as requisite administrative a pprovals for its 
introduction are yet to be obtained. Further, the i ssue of introduction of pentavalent vaccine has bec ome sub-judice. The 
observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.  
Recommendations/Observations  
5.14   Asked to furnish the latest State-wise detai ls of full immunization in the country, the Departm ent has informed that 
as per latest DLHS III survey in 2007-08 full immun ization coverage of children (12-23 months) in the country increased to 
54.1% compared to 45.9% as per the DLHS-II (2002-04 ). However, in some of the States, percentage of co verage still remains 
much below the national average: 

State/UTs/India Full Immunization 
 DLHS 2 (2002-04) DLHS3 (2007-08) 
Andhra Pradesh 62.0 68.5 
D & N Haveli 84.6 52.3 
Haryana 59.1 61.8 
Madhya Pradesh 30.4 38.5 
Meghalaya 13.5 34.3 
Tamil Nadu 91.4 81.6 
Uttar Pradesh 25.8 31.1 
Arunachal Pradesh 21.6 40.3 
Bihar 20.7 41.4 
Tripura 32.6 38.5 
ALL INDIA 45.9 54.1 
 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.15   The Committee notes that population left out  because of poor access to health care facilities has been cited the main 
factor responsible for such a situation. The Committee has been given to understand that a number of initiatives have been taken 
by the Department which include: 
– Micro-planning for routine immunization sessions  
– Social Mobilization to ensure universal access. 
– Support for Cold chain maintenance  
– Quarterly Review meetings for programme monitorin g. 
– Mobility Support to assist active supervision. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of Record 
PULSE  POLIO  PROGRAMME  
Recommendations/Observations  
5.19   Under Pulse Polio Programme,  Rs.1150.94 crore were allocated in BE 2009-10 whic h was revised upwards to 
Rs.1191.31 crore at the RE stage, with full utilization by the end of the year. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  

5.20   The Committee was informed that the increase d allocation during 2009-10 at RE stage was based on the number of 
rounds i.e. two National Immunization Day (NIDs), 7  Sub-National Immunization Days (SNIDs) and 3 Mop-U p. As compared 
to 2009-10, a reduced provision of Rs. 1017.08 cror e has been made for 2010-11. It has been clarified that during 2010-11, 
based on the epidemiological picture of polio infec tion being confined to western Uttar Pradesh and Ko si region of Bihar, the 
area of operation has reduced and hence the reduced allocation would not affect the on-going activities. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.21  The Committee has been informed that currentl y type 3 & type 1 virus was in circulation, limited  mainly to 107 high risk 
blocks of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. High density pop ulations, poor hygiene practices, nearly non-existe nt sanitation 
infrastructure, compromised drinking water supply, inadequate health and routine immunization services , high malnutrition 
rates, and poverty have been cited as the main factors responsible for such a scenario. A multi-pronged strategy is being planned 
which includes cross-cutting activities to minimize  the factors facilitating poliovirus transmission i n these 107 blocks while at 
the same time ensuring the highest possible quality of polio immunization activities. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.22   As a special intervention, the new-born trac king is being done in U.P. and Bihar for coverage d uring pulse polio 
round upto the age of one year, (now been extended to all the States). It has also stated that althoug h in 2009, a total of 602 
polio cases were reported compared to 305 cases in 2008 from Uttar Pradesh, it may be noted that only 34 cases were due to 
more virulent Wild Polio Virus (WPV)-l type as against 62 cases of WPV-1 in 2008. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.23   The Committee is happy to note that the Depa rtment has been diligently pressing forward with various measures to 
contain the spread of WPV-1 and WPV-3 types, especi ally entrenched in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. The Com mittee hopes that 
the introduction of the bivalent vaccine (P1& P3) d uring 2010 would go a long way in eradicating polio  from the country. 
Though the Department has cited that the absolute numbers of polio cases have been reducing over the years, given the massive 
scale on which the programme is being implemented with NIDs, SNIDs and mop-up rounds reported polio cases have shown no 
significant improvement during the past three years. The Committee would like to reckon here that as per the findings of DLHS 
III (2007-08) survey, the all India figures of polio immunization stand at 66.2% only, with Bihar (53.1 %), UP (44.4%), Madhya 
Pradesh (55.1%), Meghalaya (46.5%), Jharkhand (64.4 %), Rajasthan (63.9%) and most of the NE States per forming less than 
the all India average. Given the above levels of PP I coverage in various States, the Committee would l ike the Department to 
explain us as to how the goal of zero transmission can be achieved at the earliest.  
Action Taken  
  The bivalent vaccine has been introduced in the P ulse Polio Programme in 2010 and has been mainly used in the high risk 
areas of UP and Bihar. The NIDs, SNIDs and mop ups are also being implemented as guided by the epidemi ology of the 
poliovirus in the country. The number of polio cases during the first 19 weeks has declined from 40 cases in 2009 to 21 cases in 
2010 for a similar period during the 2 years.  
  The immunization coverage of 66.2% assessed throu gh DLHS III and mentioned above pertains to the evaluated coverage 
of polio vaccination through routine immunization programme and not through the pulse polio immunization programme (PPI). 
The figures of 53.1 % for Bihar and 44.6% for UP also pertain to the polio vaccination coverage through routine immunization. 

  As a part of the strategy to eradicate polio, mul tiple Pulse Polio Immunization (PPI) campaigns are being conducted in the 
high risk States in addition to the routine immuniz ation programme. The overall polio vaccination cove rage in UP and Bihar 
during these campaigns is extremely high. Independe nt monitoring of the pulse Polio Programme Immuniza tion (PPI) 
conducted by WHO-NPSP monitors has demonstrated tha t the overall pulse polio coverage in UP and Bihar has been 
maintained above 95% during each of the recent campaigns. 
  The Government is making concerted efforts to fur ther improve pulse polio immunization coverage thro ughout the 
country, especially in the high risk States of UP a nd Bihar with a focus on the 107 high risk blocks a nd the migrant population 
where the risk of a continuation of poliovirus circulation is high. 
  The Government is also making efforts to improve routine immunization across the country with a spec ial focus on the 
States that have low coverage as evaluated through DLHS III. Special intensive efforts to improve rout ine immunization 
coverage are being made in the 107 blocks that are at a high risk of poliovirus circulation by improvi ng the quality of delivery 
and access to services through improvements in micr o plans, training, community mobilization & support ive supervision and 
monitoring. 
JANANI  SURAKSHA  YOJANA  
5.29   The Committee was informed that the Governme nt is actively pursuing the goal of reduction in Ma ternal Mortality 
by focusing on the 4 major strategies of essential obstetric and new born care for all, skilled attend ance at every birth, 
emergency obstetric care and referral services. How ever, these critical components which figure among the four major 
strategies adopted for reducing MMR suffer from gra ve inadequacies. . Operationalisation of 50 per cen t PHCs for 24x7 
Services is the most important initiative under Ess ential Obstetric Care. However, status of 24x7 PHCs  in States having very 
high Maternal Mortality is very discouraging as indicated below : 
State PHCs functioning 24x7 PHCs 
Assam 844 343 
Bihar 1641 533 
Chhattisgarh 721 418 
Jharkhand 330 194 
Madhya Pradesh 1149 212 
Rajasthan 1503 500 
Uttarakhand 239 94 
Uttar Pradesh 3690 648 
 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.30   Establishing referral linkages between the c ommunity and First Referral Units are an essential component for access 
of services particularly during emergencies. However, very few CHCs/PHCs have been upgraded as FRUs in States having high 
Maternal Mortality like Bihar (76), Chhattisgarh (5 6), Jharkhand (19), Madhya Pradesh (87), Rajasthan (100), Uttar Pradesh 
(136), Uttarakhand (72) and Assam (60). The Committee notes that to manage and handle some common obstetric emergencies 
at the time of birth, Government has taken a policy  decision to permit Staff Nurses and ANMs to give c ertain injections and 
perform certain interventions under specific emerge ncy situations. However, no significant progress in  this regard has been 
noticed so far as indicated below: 

State ANMs in position ANM/SN trained 
Assam 8289 2051 
Bihar 9127 2237 
Chhattisgarh 4850 303 
Jharkhand 5011 1318 
Madhya Pradesh 8718 1850 
Rajasthan 12271 52 
Uttarakhand 1903 415 
Uttar Pradesh 21024 274 
   
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.31   Asked to indicate the reasons for such a dis mal scenario, the Department has stated that MMR of  poor performing 
States has seen considerable decline during the period 2004-06 as compared to the MMR during the period 2001-03. In the area 
of Essential Obstetric Care, Referral Services and Skilled Attendants at Birth, there has been conside rable improvement in the 
poor performing States also. However, owing to acut e shortage of manpower, these States are not in a p osition to relieve the 
trainees at time for getting multi-skilled or even for upgradation of their existing skills.  
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.32   The Committee observes that the goal of redu cing MMR to 100 per lakh like births by 2012 is ver y difficult to 
achieve at the present rate of decline. The goal ca n be achieved only if there is rapid expansion of S killed Birth Attendants and 
Emergency Obstetric Care (EmOC). It is in this cont ext that deficiencies in EmOC and Skilled Birth Att endance are very 
worrisome. 
Action Taken  
  To overcome the shortage of manpower, EmOC traini ng has been initiated. The number of medical office rs trained in 
EmOC increased from 277 in the year 2008-09 to 543 in the year 2009-10 (% increase of 96). The pace of  the training is 
proposed to be increased further and the States are advised to fully utilize the existing capacity of the training institutes. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.33   The Committee is of the view that in the abs ence of required ground-level health functionaries who have to be 
qualified, trained and semi-skilled personnel, the outreach of JSY and other specific interventions wi ll remain confined to the 
barest minimum. Number of ambitious schemes with hi gh objectives and availability of massive funding w ill not succeed in 
reaching the targeted beneficiaries. Close monitoring, not on paper but at the ground level, in the real sense alone can strengthen 
the effective implementation of all the initiatives taken so far. 
Action Taken  

  To overcome the shortage of trained manpower at t he ground level, ANMs/SNs/LHVs are being trained as  Skilled Birth 
Attendants. The total number of ANMs, LHVs and SNs trained as SBA has increased from 17,922 in the yea r 2008-09 to 
37,162 in the year 2009-10. (% increase of 107) 
  JSY has witnessed a phenomenal increase since its  inception in 2005. The number of JSY beneficiaries  has increased 
from 7.39 lakhs in the year 2005-06 to 102.77 lakhs  in the year 2009-10. The amount incurred on JSY in centive has increased 
from Rs.38.29 crores to Rs.1476.03 crores in the year 2009-10. 
  The overall monitoring mechanism in respect of JS Y has been explained in detail in the Action Taken Note against 
paragraph 5.27. However, the observations of the Committee regarding close monitoring at the ground level have been noted for 
compliance. 
VI.   NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAM ME (NVBDCP) 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.1.   The National Vector Borne Disease Control Pr ogramme is a comprehensive programme for prevention  and control of 
vector borne diseases namely Malaria, Filaria, Kala -azar, Japanese Encephalitis (JE), Dengue and Chiku ngunya which is 
covered under the overall umbrella of NRHM. Central Government provides technical and financial assistance and also logistics 
support and the State Governments have to meet the other requirements and operational costs. NE States  are provided 100 per 
cent central assistance under the .programme. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.2   The general strategy for prevention and contr ol of vector borne diseases under NVBDCP is through  Disease 
Management, Integrated Vector Management  and Supportive Interventions.  The Committee was informed that for the year 
2010-2011, the Directorate of NVBDCP has projected their demands amounting to Rs.698 crore. However, allocation of Rs.418 
crore has been made considering overall allocation of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. Out of the allocation of Rs.418.00 
crore for 2010-11, the EAP component is Rs.165.26 crore (GFATM Rs.84.87 crore and World Bank Rs.80.39 crore). 
Action Taken  
Matter of record 
MALARIA  
Recommendations/Observations  
6.5   The National Health Policy (2002) has set the  goal of reduction in mortality on account of malaria by 50 per cent by 2010. 
The Committee was informed that reported Malaria cases declined from 1.78 million in 2006 to 1.53 million in 2008 and deaths 
from Malaria declined from 1708 in 2006 to 1055 in 2008. Still it continued to be a major public healt h challenge in the North 
East States, Orissa, Jharkhahd, West Bengal, and Ch hattisgarh. In 2008, these States accounted for 65 per cent of the total 
reported Malaria cases, 85 per cent of total Pf cases and 68 per cent of total reported malaria deaths. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.6  It is also informed that though the number of reported Pf cases in the country has declined but o ut of the total malaria 
cases reported, proportion of Plasmodium falciparum  cases has increased from 44.32% in 2005 to 52.09% in 2009 (Prov.) As 
per the latest information furnished by the Departm ent, in 2009, Meghalaya (with 192 deaths), Orissa ( 192), Mizoram (119), 

Tripura (62), West Bengal (74), Maharashtra (159), Nagaland (35), and Assam (63) were leading the tabl e for malaria-related 
deaths. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.7   The Committee notes that the number of cases reported is already on the rise in many of the Stat es, especially the North-
Eastern States, where the problem is acute. Under the GFATM project all the 77 district in 7 NE States, 7 districts of Jharkhand, 
6 districts of West Bengal and 16 districts of Oris sa are covered. The Committee is not fully convince d by the Departments, 
contention that due to remote and inaccessible area s with poor access to malaria diagnosis and treatme nt facilities, NE States 
continue to remain a major challenge. The Committee  would like to state here that the programme has be en these for 
considerable period and with 100 percent central fu nding and also International assistance, these chal lenges, should have been 
significantly lessened. The Committee also finds that major interventions like introduction of Rapid diagnostic kits, for the field 
workers, introduction of specialized therapy for Pf  cases and long lasting insecticidal nets have all been made for North East 
States. However, inspite of such huge funding under the programme significant progress is not visible. The Committee can only 
conclude that supervision and monitoring, which is one of the main strategies adopted for effective co ntrol of malaria, is 
perhaps not being implemented to the desired levels, especially in NE region and Orissa. 
Action Taken  
  The programme is aware that inspite of sufficient  fund provision for NE States, the desirable impact  could not be 
achieved because of the following reasons: 
/circle6 Geo-ecological condition which includes difficult terrain and conducive climatic conditions favoring perennial 
transmission. 
/circle6 The prevalence of multiple and very efficient vect ors in the region to transmit malaria. 
/circle6 The predominant species of malaria parasite is P. falciparum which is known to lead severity and may result into 
mortality if timely effective treatment is not provided. 
/circle6 The different ethnic groups are in the region with  different treatment seeking behaviour. Gol has pro vided 
additional support as below: 
– Further the new tools like RDT, ACT, LLIN have be en introduced in the recent past and scaling up thr ough 
capacity building to use these tools is under way. 
– Under new GFATM project which is likely to commen ce shortly, in addition to State Level Consultant, 
District Vector Borne Disease Consultant and additi onal Malaria Technical Supervisors will be deployed  at 
district and sub-district level respectively. 
  For enhancing surveillance, all the NE States (ex cept Sikkim) have been provided contractual Male MP Ws by Gol to be 
deployed in the problematic districts. Contractual Laboratory Technicians under GFO ATM project have also been provided. 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.8   The Committee is of the view that shortage of  manpower is the main stumbling block in the successful implementation of 
malaria control measures. The Committee has been gi ven to understand that for strengthening supervisio n and monitoring, 
additional manpower like consultants at state level , Vector Borne Diseases Consultants at district lev el and Malaria Technical 
Supervisor at sub district level have been provided  in high endemic areas under the World Bank and GFA TM supported 
projects. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  

6.10   The fact that these functionaries play a vit al role in disease detection and surveillance canno t be set aside. By not 
appointing these functionaries, the States leave a large gap in the field-level disease surveillance and treatment. The Committee 
can only conclude from the above that it would be i mpractical to expect noticeable improvements in mal aria control with key 
functionaries missing, that too, in the malaria end emic States. Hence, the Committee advises the Depar tment that, apart from 
allocating sufficient funds to these States/UTs, it  should also pursue with State Governments to fill up the vacancies without 
delay so that the targets set to control malaria co uld be met within a realistic time- frame. The Comm ittee would like the 
Department to furnish details of various measures adopted by the States Governments in the past year to fill up these vacancies.  
Action Taken  
  The recruitment status of manpower allocated unde r the programme (including project) are being monit ored regularly. 
During review meetings, these issues are flagged with the states and action taken on this issue are followed. As a result, most of 
contractual human resource provided by GOI has been  filled up. The States have been requested to exped ite to fill remaining 
posts including contractual MPWs during 2010-11. 
 Allocated Recruited 
MTS 450 361 
LTs 250 217 
MPW(M) 9655* 4113 
 
* Out of 9655 posts, 4754 has been allotted in 2010 -11 and State have initiated recruitment. Arunachal  Pradesh has already 
filled up the allotted post. 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.19   The Committee would also like to be apprised  of the progress made towards establishing sentinel  sites for regular 
surveillance and Apex Referral Laboratories for adv anced diagnosis, circulation of standard guidelines , capacity building and 
intensive IEC campaign and vaccination with single dose under Universal Immunization Programme. Keeping in view the fact 
that Uttar Pradesh is the most endemic State which contributes 80% of JE cases, the Committee recommen ds that the 
Government must quickly take a decision on conducti ng a special JE vaccination campaign for left out c hildren in the seven 
most sensitive districts of Uttar Pradesh along wit h the affected districts of Andhra Pradesh, Assam a nd Tamil Nadu. The 
quarterly progress made in this regard may be communicated to the Committee. 
Action Taken  
  With regard to the establishment of sentinel site s it is submitted that Dte. of NVBDCP in consultati on with State 
Programme Officers of JE endemic States identified 51 sentinel sites across the country and most of th ese sites are functional 
Annexure-XlV . It is also pertinent to mention here that 40.27% increase in collection/diagnosis of AES cases has been reported 
during 2009 as compared to 2008. In order to streng then the clinical prowess of the physicians, Dte. o f NVBDCP developed 
revised guidelines on AES/JE treatment in consultat ion with experts on 4.8.2009 and circulated these t o States. Based on the 
revised guidelines, one day orientation course at H yderabad (AP) and Gorakhpur (UP) was organized by D te. of NVBDCP for 
clinicians during 2009. The JE endemic States have been time and again advised to cover children between 18-24 months under 
Routine Immunization, however, coverage of most of the States is reported to be between (30-40%). With  regard to special JE 
campaign in 7 most JE sensitive districts in Easter n Uttar Pradesh, a special campaign is being launch ed w.e.f.  31st May 2010 
which will last for 2 weeks. For carrying out effec tive IEC campaign, GOI allocated 45 and 54 lakhs to  JE endemic States 
during 2008-09 and 2009-10 respectively. Since Uttar Pradesh is contributing over 80% of AES cases and deaths, an amount of 
Rs.277.26 lakhs and Rs.141.45 lakhs respectively has been earmarked for Lab strengthening and IEC activities during 2010-11. 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.20   The Committee was also informed that apart f rom establishing field unit of NIV, Pune at BRD Med ical College, 
Gorakhpur for detecting and isolating non-JE viruse s, the management of AES/JE cases has been accorded  top priority. 

Prevention and control guidelines have already been  circulated to all the affected districts in the St ate for initiating control 
measures against entero-viruses. The diagnostic fac ilities have been strengthened at 50 sentinel and 1 3 Apex Referral 
Laboratories including 15 sentinel sites established in Uttar Pradesh. These have been supplied with d iagnostic kits free of cost 
from National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune. One Vector Borne Disease Surveillance Unit (VBDSU) and one JE sub-office 
was established at BRD Medical College, Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh. Lastly, for establishing a Physical,  Medicine & 
Rehabilitation (PMR) department at BRD Medical Coll ege for treating physical disabilities due to AES/J E, MOU has been 
submitted to the State of Uttar Pradesh. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.21   The Committee is happy to note that finally some action to check aggravation of non-JE viruses in Eastern UP have 
been initiated by the Central Government. It can on ly hope that the situation would improve this year during the outbreak 
season. The Committee hopes that the manpower required to make the sentinel sites, referral labs operational and the Diagnostic 
kits provided free of cost by National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, are in position.  
Action Taken  
  Dte. of NVBDCP organised two days workshop for St ate Programme Officers and Laboratory personnel dur ing Dec, 09 
for effective coordination and improved surveillance and diagnosis. It was attended by 53 national and international participants 
with financial support from WHO. On account of the funds provided by Dte. of NVBDCP, State of Assam has organised hands 
on training of laboratory personnel of the identifi ed sentinel sites w.e.f.  13-15 May 2010. Dte. of NVBDCP will continue to 
support the laboratories in terms of provision of JE kits free of cost from NIV, Pune. 
VII.  NATIONAL TB CONTROL PROGRAMME 
Recommendations/Observations  
7.1   Tuberculosis is a major public health problem  in India. The country accounts for nearly one-fift h of the global incidence. 
In 2007, out of the global annual incidence of 9.23  million TB cases, 1.96 million were estimated to h ave occurred in India, of 
whom 0.8 million were infectious cases. About two persons die from TB in India every three minutes; 900 people every day and 
almost 3.28 lakh every year. The Committee was info rmed that the Revised National TB Control Programme  (RNTCP) has 
been extended to the entire country in 2006. Till d ate, 11 million T.B. patients have been initiated o n treatment with 2 million 
additional lives saved. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
7.2   To tackle HIV/TB co-infection, TB + HIV colla borative activities with NACP, initiated in 2001, h ave been scaled up 
across the country. The Committee notes that intens ified TB/HIV package of services have been started in nine HIV high 
prevalence States (Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Pondicherry and Tamil Nadu) 
in 2008 and has been extended to nine additional States (Delhi, Gujarat, Punjab, Rajasthan, Kerala, Assam, West Bengal, Orissa 
and Chandigarh) in 2009-10 with a vision to cover t he entire nation by 2012. Monitoring of co-infected  patients was started 
from 4th quarter of 2008, and out of a total of 310 47 such cases, 5171 cases were treated with a 75 pe r cent success rate. The 
Committee is happy to note that the Department has been pursuing its concerns diligently to identify a nd provide treatment to 
HIV/TB co-infected patients. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  

7.3  To control this major health problem of the co untry, Revised National TB Control Programme (RNTCP ) based on 
internationally recommended strategy of Directly Observed Treatment Short Course (DOTS). The Programme has the objective 
of detecting at least 70% of cases and curing at le ast 85% of sputum positive patients. In order to ad dress the problem of Multi 
Drug Resistance TB (MDR- TB), establishment of a ne twork of 43 accredited Culture and Drug Susceptibil ity Testing 
Laboratories for diagnosis and follow-up of MDR-TB patients across the country was being undertaken in  a phased manner. It 
is planned to roll out services for Drug Resistant Tuberculosis in all State/ UTs by March 2011. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record 
Recommendations/Observations  
7.4   The Committee observes that the emergence of multi-drug resistant TB has increased the severity and magnitude of the 
problem in terms of cost, longer and difficult trea tment regimen. In this context, the Committee welco mes the initiative of 
establishing a network of 43 Laboratories for diagn osis and follow-up of MDR-TB patients. The Committe e hopes that such 
Laboratories will be set up across the country in s uch a way that people from all parts of the country  have equity in access to 
such facilities. The Committee would like to have a n idea of the location of such Laboratories and als o of the structure of 
charges, if any, proposed to levied for availing of the facilities therefrom. 
Action Taken  
  The programme is establishing the proposed networ k of 43 laboratories at a site identified by the States with the objective 
of ensuring convenient and equitable access while m atching the expected workload in the particular Sta te. In addition, the 
programme is also accrediting and involving identif ied NGO/Private and Medical College laboratories to  supplement the 
diagnostic capacity and further facilitate ease of access. 
  In order to ensure that the patients do not have to travel long distances to access the laboratory services the programme is 
establishing efficient mechanisms for collection an d transportation of sputum samples from microscopy centres (close to the 
patient’s residence) to these laboratories. 
  The programme is providing the MDR-TB diagnostic and treatment services absolutely free of cost to all the patients. 
Recommendations/Observations  
7.5   The Committee observes that utilization statu s of allocated funds under the programme has been s atisfactory. For 2009-
10, against the total allocation of Rs.296.25 crore  an expenditure of Rs.294.83 crore has been made ti ll 12th March, 2010. The 
Committee is however, surprised to observe that uns pent balances are available with all the States/UTs  in the beginning of the 
year. The opening balance of Rs.32.20 crore as on 01.04.2009 has reached the figure of Rs.79.19 crore by 31st December, 2009. 
Following States show the maximum amount of unspent balances. 
(Rs. in crore)  
State/ Union Territory Unspent Balance as on 01.01.10 
Andhra Pradesh 5.13 
Karnataka 4.69 
Kerala 4.14 
Madhya Pradesh 4.22 
Maharashtra 6.12 
Rajasthan 4.03 
Tamil Nadu 4.39 
Uttar Pradesh 15.50 

West Bengal 5.03 
 
Action Taken  
  Matter of Record 
Recommendations/Observations  
7.6   The Committee observes that it is a matter of  serious concern that a huge amount to the tune of Rs. 79.19 crore was left 
unspent with the States, and that too, the scare re sources allocated to counter one of the deadliest d iseases. The Committee is 
not aware about any specific measure to check this negative trend. The Committee would, therefore, lik e the Department to at 
least outline the roadmap for reducing, if not entirely wiping out, the extent of unspent balances. 
Action Taken  
  The Ministry is fully concerned to have the minim um unspent balance in the States at the end of the financial year and 
efforts have been made in this direction to reduce the closing balance. At any given time the unspent balance in the State may be 
higher which depends upon the timing of the release of funds. Therefore, the most appropriate time to see the closing balance is 
31st March. As shown in the table below, the unspen t balance as on 31.3.2010 for the country as a whol e showing Rs.3 5.64 
crore at National level for 2009-10 calculated for each District is about Rs.5.30 lakh per District wh ich is the bare minimum 
amount required to be available with the Districts at the beginning of next financial year till such t ime regular funds are 
released. Even for the States under reference, the closing balances are showing a downtrend as against  the balance as on 
1.1.2010 except for the State of Madhya Pradesh, wh ere the unspent balance has increased as the funds amounting to Rs.3.15 
crore were released in the month of March (22.3.201 0). The balances with the States under reference ar e just sufficient enough 
to meet expenses till the time regular funds are ma de available. For further release of funds in the n ext financial year, these 
unspent balances are adjusted for release of first instalment. 
(Rs. in crores) 
Sl. No. State Unspent Unspent Balance 
 Balance as on as on 31.03.2010  
 01.01.2010   
1 Andhra Pradesh 5.13 2.75 
2 Karnataka 4.69 0.30 
3 Kerala 4.14 2.69 
4 Madhya Pradesh 4.22 4.36 
5 Maharashtra 6.12 2.41 
6 Rajasthan 4.03 2.35 
7 Tamil Nadu 4.39 3.57 
8 Uttar Pradesh 15.50 5.71 
9 West Bengal 5.03 2.02 
 All India 79.19 35.64 
 
Recommendations/Observations  

7.7   The Committee takes note of the fact that out  of a total outlay of Rs.1156 crore for the Programme, Rs.756.00 crore is the 
credit from World Bank. The Committee would like to  be enlightened if the credit from World Bank has a ny financial 
implications by way of debt or commitment charges and if so, the extent of financial liability involved so far. 
Action Taken  
  The World Bank credit of Rs.756 crores is a typog raphical error. It may be read as Rs.765 crores. 
(a) Rs.765 crore credit from the World Bank has bee n converted into loan currency of credit which is S pecial drawing 
Rights. The SDR value of the credit available to Go vt. of India is SDR 115.700 Million. Out of which t ill date 
disbursement under IDA Credit No. 4228-IN is SDR 56 .608 Million equivalent to Rs.389.55 crore. This in cludes 
Advance of US $15 million (Rs.67.00 crore). 
(b) Disbursement under this credit will be repaid i n 35 years with a grace period of 10 years in 50 se miannual 
instalments starting from 15.02.2017. 
(c)  Service Charges @ 0.75% p.a. will be levied by  the IDA on outstanding debt on half early basis. T ill date a sum of 
0.923 Million SDR equivalent to Rs.6.37 crore (0.68 4 Million SDR equivalent to RsA.85 crore on account  of 
Interest and 0.239 Million SDR equivalent to Rs.1.5 2 crore on account of Commitment Charges) has been paid as 
Service Charges interest and commitment charges. 
(d)  As per agreement, IDA is charging Commitment C harges @ 0.50% p.a. on undrawn balance which have a  waiver 
clause to be decided on year to year basis by the B oard of Director of the World Bank. However, at pre sent, IDA 
has waived entire Commitment Charges for the last t wo years and it will continue up to 30th June, 2010  or till 
further orders from World Bank. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
7.9   To the Committee’s query regarding the latest  status on the new drug for treating patient with MDR- TB being developed 
by M/s Johnson and Johnson, the Department has info rmed that the new molecule (TMC 207) is currently u ndergoing Phase II 
clinical trials, to evaluate its efficacy, safety a nd tolerability in patients suffering from MDR- TB.  Tuberculosis Research 
Centre, Chennai and All India Institute of Medical Sciences are participating in this trial which is b eing undertaken in 17 
countries across the world. The details on the cost, affordability, efficacy etc. will be available only after successful completion 
of the clinical trials and once the drug is approve d for marketing by the regulatory authorities. The Committee would like the 
Department to furnish the latest status on the Phase II clinical trials and its findings. 
Action Taken  
  As per the available information, the Phase II cl inical trails for the new molecule (TMC-207) are pr esently ongoing and 
the results are likely to be available by September 2010. 
Recommendations/Observations  
7.10   Committee’s attention has also been drawn by  Drug Resistance Surveys (DRS) undertaken in Gujara t and 
Maharashtra in 2005-06, which have estimated the pr evalence of Multi-drug Resistant TB (MDR- TB) to be  around 3% 
amongst new TB cases and 14-17% amongst re-treatment TB cases. It has also been informed that in Andhr a Pradesh the study 
has been completed and the results of which were ex pected to be available by Second quarter of 2010. I n U.P. and Orissa 
similar surveys were going on. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of Record 
Recommendations/Observations  
7.11   The Committee would like the Department to s hare with it the State-wise details of the Survey R eports while 
submitting its action taken note. The Committee has  been given to understand that a baseline social as sessment study at the 

beginning of the RNTCP II project had been undertaken to assess some of the predisposing factors contributing to the spread of 
the disease, and that another such survey is being planned to be made in 2010-11 which will also inclu de evaluation of the 
predisposing factors for spread of TB. The findings of the baseline survey may be shared with the Committee.  
Action Taken  
  DRS Survey Report:  State representative drug resistance surveillance (DRS) surveys have been undertaken in Gujarat 
and Maharashtra in 2005-06 and the results of these  surveys indicate that prevalence of MDR amongst ne w cases is 2.4%. 
(Published data from Gujarat) and 2.7% (Unpublished  data from Maharashtra). The prevalence of MDR amon gst re-treatment 
cases was found to be 14% (Unpublished data from Maharashtra) and 17.4% (Published data from Gujarat). 
  Three more DRS surveys are presently being undert aken in Andhra Pradesh, Western Uttar Pradesh and O rissa. AP has 
completed the study and the results are awaited. The Western UP study is underway and is likely to be completed by mid 2010. 
The pilot study for the DRS survey in Orissa has been successfully completed. The main study is yet to be started. 
  Social Assessment Study:  The objective of the study was to understand the s ocial context, cultural practices and social 
institutions within which the project is to be impl emented; understand the health seeking behavior of the marginalized and 
vulnerable sections and through this identify factors, which enhance benefits to the marginalized and vulnerable groups. 
  The study highlights that special attention has t o be paid to the local context and needs of the spe cial groups at the local 
level. Accessibility to services is an issue mostly in tribal areas. Need based, area specific interventions, with the involvement of 
local leader have been identified as the best optio n to cater the needs of the people. Use of local po pular media, local leaders, 
and tribal leaders has been identified in the study . Role and importance of CBOs, NGOs and PRIs has be en highlighted. Study 
also emphasizes need to strengthen public private partnership, more importantly in tribal areas. 
 
VIII.  NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME 
Recommendations/Observations  
8.3   The Committee takes note of a number of preve ntive measures like involvement of ASHAs, focused attention in endemic 
blocks, urban areas, training of all General Health Services functionaries for leprosy diagnosis and management and Intensified 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC).  
Action Taken  
  Matter of record  
Recommendations/Observations  
8.4   While appreciating the steady progress in the  elimination of leprosy from the endemic States, th e Committee would like 
the Department to closely monitor the efficacy of t he measures taken and introduce suitable interventi ons for elimination 
disease leprosy in D&N Haveli. 
Action Taken  
  As desired by the Committee, the efficacy of meas urers taken will be closely monitored and suitable interventions would 
be taken for reducing leprosy burden in the UT of D&N Haveli. 
Recommendations/Observations  
8.5   On a specific query the Committee was informe d that against a Budgetary allocation of Rs.44.50 c rores for 2009-10, till 
31st December, 2009, an expenditure Rs 27.35 crore has been made. However, as per the background material submitted by the 
Department, upto January, 2010 expenditure reported is Rs. 26.66 crore. Committee’s attention has also been drawn by unspent 
balances available under the programme with different States. 
Action Taken  

  Matter of Record 
Recommendations/Observations  
8.6   The Committee notes that as on December, 2009  unspent balances amounting to Rs. 22.12 crore were  available with 
States like Bihar (Rs. 1.34 crore), Madhya Pradesh (Rs. 1.49: crore), Maharashtra (Rs. 1.67 crore), Or issa (Rs. 1.77 crore), 
Uttarakhand (Rs. 2.92 crore) and West Bengal (Rs. 1.39 crore) having the maximum balance. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of Record 
Recommendations/Observations  
8.7   Committee’s attention is especially drawn to the utilisation status shown against Bihar. The Com mittee notes that nearly 
Rs.2.67 crore were lying unspent with the State upt ill March, 2008. However, inspite of non-release of  funds during 2008-09 
and 2009-10 to the State, the unspent balances had to be carried forward from March, 2008 and could no t be exhausted 
completely during the next two years with Rs.1.34 c rore still remaining by 31st December, 2009. Simila rly, in case of Orissa, 
Uttaranchal, Jharkhand, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, West Bengal and Maharashtra, large sums of money have been carried forward 
unspent from the previous year. The Committee feels that given the trend over the past couple of years, this year too, substantial 
amount of funds would lie under utilised/ unutilised. 
Action Taken  
  The unspent balance available with the State of B ihar as on 31 st March, 2008 was Rs.1.96 crores (as  against mentioned 
Rs.2.67 crores). As reported by the State, unspent balance with the State has come down to Rs.1.15 crores on 31st March, 2010. 
Similarly, the reported unspent balance as on 31.3.2010 available with the said States/UTs is shown below:- 
State Amount 
Orissa Rs.0.43 crores 
Uttarakhand Rs.0.37 crores 
Jharkhand Rs.0.26 crores 
West Bengal Rs.0.88 crores 
Madhya Pradesh Rs.0.93 crores 
Maharashtra Rs.0.86 crores 
D & N Haveli Rs.0.08 crores 
 
  It could be seen from above figures that unspent balance available with the above States/UT as on 31 .3.2010 has come 
down. 
Recommendations/Observations  
8.9   The Committee has been monitoring the progres s made in providing incentive of Rs.5000/- for Reconstructive Surgery to 
leprosy disabled persons from BPL families and to 2 0 institutions for conducting RCS. List of 52 recog nized Reconstructive 
Surgery Centres (20 Govt. & 32 NGO) was also communicated to the States/ UTs. The States were further requested to identify 
more centres for conducting RCS. As per the latest information given by the Department, 26 more centres have been recognized 
thus making total of 78 centres for carrying out Re constructive Surgery (40 Govt. & 38 NGOs) in lepros y. As reported by 14 
States/UTs, 965 leprosy affected persons belonging to BPL family have been paid incentive for undergoing RCS. 
Action Taken  

  Matter of Record. 
IX.   NATIONAL TRACHOMA AND BLINDNESS CONTROL PROGR AMME  
Recommendations/Observations  
9.1   The National Programme for Control of Blindne ss (NPCB) was launched in the year 1976 as a 100% Centrally-Sponsored 
scheme with the goal to reduce the prevalence of bl indness from 1.4% to 0.3% by 2020. Rapid Survey on Avoidable Blindness 
conducted during NPCB during 2006-07 showed reducti on in the prevalence of blindness from 1.1 % (2001- 02) to 1 % (2006-
07). 
Action Taken  
  Matter of Record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
9.2   The Committee observes that there has been op timum utilization of allocated funds under the prog ramme during the 
Eleventh Plan. During 2009-10 also full utilization  of fund allocation of Rs. 250.00 crore was reporte d. The Committee is 
however surprised to note that achievement level of  physical targets has not matched the pace of fund utilization. Following 
details are self-revealing. 
Component Target During 2009-10 Status of 
 (Nos.) achievement 
  (Nos.) 
Cataract operations (Catops) 60,00,000 32,30,948 
  (54%) 
School Eye Screening 3,00,000 2,83,895 
Programme (No. of  (94%) 
spectacles distributed)   
No of donated eyes 55,000 30,658 
collected  (56%) 
 
Action Taken  
  Matter of Record 
Recommendations/Observations  
9.3  The Committee fails to understand the reasons for low level of achievements in the first three qu arters of 2009-10 under 
the various activities cited above. The reasons for such low achievements are only best known to the Department. 
Action Taken  
  As per reports received from States/UT, present s tatus of achievement of physical targets during the  year 2009-10 is as 
under. 
Component Target During Status of achievement  
 2009-10 (Nos.) (Nos.) (as on 18.5.2010) 
Cataract Operations (Catops) 60,00,000 51,56,881 
School. Eye Screening Programme  3,00,000 4,88,932  

(No. of Spectacles distributed) 
No. of donated eyes collected 55,000 44,532 
 
  Reports for the months of February/March, 2010 ar e awaited from some of the States/UTs. Defaulting S tates/UTs have 
been requested to furnish pending reports so that final achievement position for the year 2009-10 can be reflected. 
Recommendations/Observations  
9.6   In reply to a specific query regarding the mo nitoring mechanism under NPCB for monitoring of Surgical Eye Camps, the 
Department has informed that such eye camps are not  permitted under NPCB. However, Screening Eye Camps  are conducted 
by NGOs/private Service Providers in the States wit h the approval of the concerned State Health author ities under their 
monitoring and strict supervision. The performance of these camps is reviewed at district, State and c entral level meetings. 
However, the above information is contrary to the findings reported in the latest CAG Performance Audit of NRHM (2009-10), 
as per which in 14 States/UTs, 19.52 lakh cataract surgeries were performed in camps during the period 2005-08 which was 47 
per cent of total cataract surgeries in these States. Position in the following States in quite alarming. 
Action Taken   
  Matter of Record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
9.12   The fact that as many as 10 States/UTs do no t have a single operational eye bank is difficult f or the Committee to 
accept. Another point that strikes a chord is the n umber of Eye Banks in the Government vis-a-vis  the private sector. The 
Committee notes that the ratio of eye banks operated in the private sector is 2.5 times the figure for the Government sector. The 
NPCB is into the fourth year since the launch of NRHM and between 2007-08 to 2009-10, nearly Rs.650 crores have been spent 
under the programme. The Committee finds that measures like non recurring assistance upto Rs.15 lakh to Eye Banks, recurring 
assistance of Rs.1500 per pair of eyes towards hono rarium of Eye Banks Staff, appointment of Eye donat ion Counsellors have 
also seemed to have made no impact.  
Action Taken  
  With the aim to promote Eye Banks in all States/U Ts in Government as well as in private sector, non-recurring assistance 
to Eye Banks has been enhanced from Rs.I0 lakh to R s.15 lakh during the Eleventh Plan Period. Recurrin g assistance of 
Rs.1500 per pair of eyes towards honorarium of Eye Banks Staff and salary for appointment of Eye donat ion Counselors are 
also provided to Eye Banks. In addition, Eye banks are being provided with MK Media for preservation of donated eyes, as per 
demand. New guidelines have been formulated under t he programme to promote eye banking activities thro ugh Government 
facilities. The promotional activities have been un dertaken with the aim to achieve encouraging result s by the end of Eleventh 
Plan. The Eye donation during the year 2009-10 has increased to 47,000 as compared to 41,090 during 2008-09. 
X.  NATIONAL IODINE DEFECIENCY DISORDER CONTROL PRO GRAMME 
Recommendations/Observations  
10.4   The Committee hopes that the Empowered Progr amme Committee (EPC) approval must have been received by now 
and also the biding process on the technical specifications of salt testing kits, must have been completed. The Committee would 
like to emphasise that all conceivable efforts may be made so as to ensure optimal and judicious alloc ation of funds in active 
coordination with State authority for timely achievements of the targets during 2010-11.  
Action Taken  
  The Empowered Programme Committee (EPC) has not c onsidered the proposal regarding performance based payment to 
ASHA for monitoring quality of iodated salt in the Community under NIDDCP. The Technical specifications of salt testing kits 
have been finalized. The bidding process is almost completed for holding IPC meeting. 
XI.  INTEGRATED DISEASE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMME 

Recommendations/Observations  
11.1   The objectives of the Integrated Disease Sur veillance Programme are to establish a decentralized state based system 
of surveillance for communicable and non-communicab le diseases and to improve the efficiency of the ex isting surveillance 
activities of disease control programmes. Under the  Programme, for 2009-10, Rs.45.50 crore were alloca ted. As per the 
information furnished by the Ministry till 12th Mar ch, 2010 an expenditure of Rs.35.98 crore were incu rred. The Committee, 
however, notes that allocated funds during 2007-08 and 2008-09 have remained under-utilized. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of Record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
11.2   The Committee is disappointed at the achieve ments stated against the targets set for 2009-10. T he Committee has 
been given to understand that 610 District surveill ance teams (cumulative since beginning of project i ncluding 202 teams of 
phase - III) were to be trained during 2008-09 and 2009-10. The Committee finds that though 136 Dist. Surveillance Officers 
were trained in two week long FETD programme and Di strict Surveillance Teams of all States/UTs covered  except Bihar, 
Jharkhand, D& N Haveli, Daman & Diu & Lakshadweep w ere trained during 2008-09, there is no clear infor mation regarding 
the status during 2009-10 except that the training is underway. Similarly, against the 800 sites (Stat e HQ, District HQ, Govt. 
medical Colleges, Important Institutes) targeted to  be connected through Broad band network, during 20 08-09 and ‘2009-10, 
Broad Band network was installed across 606 distric ts during 2008-09, while the only information furni shed on the progress 
during 2009-10 by the Ministry is that connectivity  on Broad Band network is being established through  National Informatics 
Network. Under the head of data collection and anal ysis, though some information regarding the data co llected and analysed 
from phase I, II and III states is available for 2008-09, no information is available in this regard during 2009-10. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of Record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
11.3   The Committee fails to understand as to why clear information has not been furnished by the Min istry against the 
targets set by it for 2009-10. The Committee observes that concrete data is necessary for proper assessment of the targets set and 
merely stating that training programme is in progre ss or connectivity on Broad Band is being establish ed without quantifying 
the progress made evinces ignorance of the most bas ic principles of appraisal on the part of the Depar tment. The Committee 
would like the Department to furnish details of ach ievement during 2009-10 regarding the targets mentioned above in the table 
for 2009-10 while furnishing its ATN and also be more circumspect while furnishing the information in the Outcome Budget. 
Action Taken  
  The targets and achievements during 2009-10 are i ndicated in the table below: 
Target  Achievement 2009-10 
Training of District surveillance team - 610 1. Til l March 2010, training of District Surveillance Teams 
(cumulative since beginning of project inclu-  of a ll Phase-I & Phase-II States & training of 89 district 
ding 202 teams of Phase-III)  surveillance teams of  Phase-III States has been  
  completed. 
Broadband network for 800 sites (State HQ,  2.  Dat a centre equipments have been installed at 176 sites 
District HQ, Govt. medical Colleges,   out of 800 s ites so far. This includes 53 sites where  
Important Institutes)  equipments were installed in  2009-10. 

 3. During 2009-10 the number of diseases outbreaks  
  reported by the States/UTs were 827. While during the  
  calendar year 2009, the number of outbreaks report ed  
  were 799. 
Data collection and analysis 4.  Data analysis and reporting from States in 2009-10.  
  Phase I- 9 States- 95% 
Phase II- 14 States-90% 
  Phase III- 12 States-70% 
All States - 85% 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
11.4   Regarding the query as to whether the requir ed trained manpower is available for the successful  implementation of 
this Programme, and if not the action plan in this regard, the Department has informed that training f or PHC doctors, Lab 
technicians, other paramedical staff, etc. has been completed in Phase I and II States and is being undertaken in Phase III States. 
The Department has also stated that a total of 766 Technical Consultants are to be recruited (1 Epidem iologist each at State 
Surveillance Unit (SSU) and District Surveillance U nit (DSU); 1 Microbiologist each at SSU and 50 prio rity District Labs; 1 
Entomologist each at all SSUs), of these, 261 Epide miologists, 29 Microbiologists and 10 Entomologists  have joined 
State/District Surveillance units for assisting the  State/ District health officers. Training of these  newly recruited health 
professionals has also been undertaken. The 2nd rou nd of recruitment of technical consultants for 466 remaining vacant posts 
will be done after getting the approval for restructuring and extension of IDSP. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of Record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
11.5  The Committee is happy to note that the recru itment and training of the required manpower under IDSP is proceeding at a 
positive pace. The Committee observes that the presence of trained surveillance manpower are key to the prevention and control 
of diseases/epidemic in such a large country as Ind ia. Hence, the Committee hopes that the targets of recruiting and training 
technical consultants for the remaining 400 vacant post would have been completed after due approval f or restructuring and 
extension of IDSP were obtained. The Committee, the refore, recommends the Department to furnish the de tails in this regard 
for its perusal. The Committee would also like to b e apprised of the progress made towards establishin g video conferencing at 
the remaining sites and strengthening the remaining priority labs. 
Action Taken  
  It is true that recruitment and training of the r equired manpower under IDSP is proceeding at a positive pace. 
  To expedite the recruitment, Ministry of Health a nd Family Welfare has decided that these recruitmen ts will be 
decentralized and the State Health Societies have b een authorized for filling up the contractual posit ions at the State/District 
level. 
  At present, a total of 359 out of the 400 sites h ave been installed by Indian Space Research Organiz ation (ISRO). The 
remaining 41 sites are yet to be installed. The mai n reasons for non-installation of these sites are n on-readiness of the sites, 
equipments short shipped, equipments lost after delivery. The States have been requested to expedite t he process of making the 
sites ready and restore the lost equipments after d elivery; for equipments short shipped, ISRO has been requested to deliver the 
equipments. 

  Strengthening of Public Health Laboratories:  50 priority district laboratories identified in 35  States/UT are being 
focused for strengthening in the country for labora tory diagnosis of epidemic prone diseases. A referr al laboratory network is 
being established in 9 priority States on a pilot b asis to provide access to diagnostic facilities during outbreaks in the remaining 
districts of the State. Comprehensive guidelines fo r the procurement of equipments for the priority di strict labs have been sent 
to all the States. The process of procurement in 16  States (22 labs) has been completed. Active follow -up action to monitor the 
process of procurement of equipments in the remaini ng identified priority labs is being done through t elephonic conversation, 
video conference and on site visits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
II.  BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.1   The allocation for Health Sector has been sub stantially enhanced from Rs.36378.00 crore in the T enth Plan to 
Rs.l,31,650.92 crore in the Eleventh Plan. Approved  outlay for NRHM for the Eleventh plan is Rs.90558. 00 crore. The 
Committee observes that plan allocation during the first four years of the plan period shows a gradual  increase. However, 
substantial plan allocation still remains to be rel eased. Out of total approved outlay of Rs. 90558.00  crore for NRHM, total 
allocation for the first four years of the eleventh  Plan amounts to Rs.52,190.00 crore with a balance of Rs. 38368.00 crore 
remaining with only one year of the plan period lef t. The Committee is constrained to observe ‘that sh ortfall has been reported 
every year in the utilization of the allocated funds. Utilization status has simply failed to keep pace with the upward trend in the 
allocation as indicated below: 
(Rupees in crores) 
 2007-08  2008-09  2009-10 
Approved Expenditure Approved Expenditure Approved Expenditure 
outlay   outlay  outlay 
10890.00 10380.40 11930.00 11260.18 13930.00 10013. 91 
 

  What is more worrisome is that this discouraging trend is noticed under all the major sectors of NRH M, the only 
exception being Flexible Pool for State PIPs. The following details are self revealing:- 
(Rs. in crores)  
Scheme 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
 Allocation Expenditure Allocation Expenditure Allo cation Expenditure  
      (upto  
      31.01.10) 
Disease Control 882.00 863.21 1086.57 890.81 110 1. 07 726.48 
Programme      
Family Welfare 9418.00 9022.28 10193.43 10035.26 12 178.93 9015.48 
Routine 317.00 236.64 615.00 166.52 414.21 247.77 
Immunisation 
       
Action Taken  
  The position regarding allocation and expenditure  under Disease Control Programmes, Family Welfare a nd Routine 
Immunization during 2007-08 to 2009-10 is given in the Annexure-I. All out efforts are being made to increase the ab sorptive 
capacity of the States where there is less utilization than the allocation. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee notes that the cumulative expenditure  figures for the above three programmes, as given i n 
Annexure-I of the ATN, show a promising trend of increase. Yet it is also a fact that the expenditure figures for Routine 
Immunization Programme for the year 2008-09 are too  dismal to be ignored. Large sums of money I have b een left 
unspent under Routine Immunization Progranime during 2008-09. The Committee fails to understand as to why a mere 
27.08% of funds could be utilized under Routine Immunization Programme during 2008-09. 
  The Committee is disappointed to note that instea d of apprising it of a specific action plan to chec k the under-
utilisation of funds, the Department has made a gen eric statement that all out efforts are being made to increase the 
absorptive capacity of States where the utilization is less than the allocation. The Committee, therefore, suggests that the 
Department should assess the reasons for its failur e in monitoring the funds utilisation under these p rogrammes and 
devise means to remove the loopholes, to ensure optimum utilization of funds. 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.13   The Committee is not prepared to accept the Department’s contention that delay in taking up exe cution of civil 
works due to State healthcare departments being dependent on PWD and other State agencies, was the mai n factor behind such 
a scenario. The other reasons like requirement of opening of Back Account at each level and lack of pr oper planning for under-
served areas are also equally unconvincing. The Com mittee strongly feels that these are all such matte rs which should have 
been resolved in the initial one or two years of NR HM. The Committee would also like to point out that  the monitoring and 
joint review missions of NRHM need to be followed b y resolving of major constraints like shortage of q ualified and trained 
manpower and lack of infrastructural facilities. Ot herwise allocated funds will continue to remain und er-utilized every year 
defeating the very purpose of launching of NRHM in a mission mode. 
Action Taken  
  The point regarding Civil Works is well taken. It  is being pursued with the States. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee is happy that the Department is pursu ing the matter of delay in civil works with the Sta tes. 
However, the Committee notes that the reply of the Department is silent about the measures taken to ti de over the 

shortage of trained and qualified manpower for prop er monitoring and the lack of infrastructural facil ities. The 
Committee would expect the Department to be more circumspect while furnishing the action taken note in future.  
III.  INFRASTUCTURE STRENGTHENING 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.4  The Committee is perturbed to find that out of  1,46,036 Sub-Centres, as many as 67233 Centre are functioning from 
rented buildings. From the details furnished by the  Department, the Committee finds that a large numbe r of States have simply 
failed to take benefit from Central funds being provided for construction upgradation of sub-centre buildings. In States/UTs like 
Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Tamil Nadu, A&N Islands, D&N  Haveli, Daman & Diu, Chandigarh, Lakshadweep, Pudu cherry no 
construction activity has been initiated so far. In  States which have taken some initiative in this re gard, percentage of sub-
centres being strengthened! upgraded is very low  
Action Taken  
  As per RHS 2009, the number of Sub-Centres functi oning from rented buildings has come down substantially from 50338 
to 47001. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.5  The Committee is not convinced by the clarific ation given by the Department that in some States, sub-centres are working 
in other Government buildings/ spaces provided by P anchayats etc. The Committee also apprehends that c ondition of PHC and 
CHC buildings would also be no better. The fact rem ains that there is an urgent need for” undertaking a review of present 
condition of all the Sub-centre/ PHC/ CHC buildings  across the country and undertake the required cons truction under a time-
bound Action Plan. 
Action Taken  
  Point is noted. Efforts are being made under the NRHM approvals for States to focus on a building for every Sub-Centre. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.6   The Committee’s attention is also drawn by th e damaging report given by the CAG in its latest re port on this crucial 
aspect. As per CAG report, among audited units, 216  sub-centres (16%) of 10 States and 19 PHCs (3% of 4 States, were 
operating without buildings 435 sub-centres (32%) of28 States/ UTs and 102 PHCs (15%) of 17 States and  7 CHCs of 4 States 
were operating in a rented building/Panchayat Bhawan/Others. 217 Sub-centres (16%) of 16 States/ UTs, 86 PHCs (13%) of 16 
States/ UTs and 23 CHCs (7%) of 5 States/ UTs were functioning in dilapidated buildings.  
Action Taken  
  Point regarding shortage of infrastructure is wel l taken. Ministry will make more efforts to improve  the infrastructure in 
States in partnership with the State Governments. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee feels that the Department is very c asual in its reply to a situation of serious concer n. The CAG 
Report findings about the status of Sub-centres, PHCs and CHCs could have been easily made the basis for initiating the 
required corrective measures. The Committee would appreciate if action is initiated in this direction by the Department 
in close co-ordination with State implementing authorities.  
3.17   Four Specialist doctors are required to be p osted at one CHC. The Committee finds that against the required number 
of 17104 Specialist for CHCs, sanctioned strength i s less than half i.e.  8376 and Specialists in-position are only 4279. St ate-
specific details are more disappointing. While no s pecialists have been posted in CHCs in Manipur, Miz oram, Delhi, 
Lakshadweep and Puducherry, no information is avail able in this regard with respect of Orissa, Tamil N adu and Tripura. The 
Committee is also constrained to observe that Speci alists recruited by the States fall short of their actual requirements. 
Maximum gap is noticed in respect of the following States:- 

States/ UTs CHCs Specialists In-position 
Functioning Required   
Arunachal Pradesh 44 176 9 
Gujarat 273 1092 81 
Himachal Pradesh 73 292 10 
Jharkhand 194 776 40 
Meghalaya 26 104 2 
Nagaland 21 84 1 
West Bengal 349 1396 186 
 
  In all the above States, against the requirement of four Specialists per CHC, not even one Specialis t is available in all the 
CHCs.  
Action Taken  
  Matter of Record. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee notes that as per the figures shown by the Department, there seems to be no significant increase in 
healthcare infrastructure and the numbers of person nel within a span of 5 years. As per the informatio n furnished 
above, between 2005 and 2009, the net increase in t he number of sub-centre is 352 only. The number of PHCs 
functioning from Government buildings has increased by 4213 only. The number of Pharmacists posted at PHC/ CHCs 
by 3295 and Radiographers at CHCs by 549 only. Comm ittee’s specific observation about acute shortage o f specialists 
required to be posted at CHCs has elicited no respo nse from the Department. The Committee observes tha t if the 
present requirements and the personnel posted are matched up to the in-position figures, the deficienc ies would be even 
more glaring. The Committee takes due cognition of the fact that creating a brigade of healthcare personnel is no doubt 
a time taking process, but it observes that 5 years ’ time is sufficient to bring about a visible chang e in their numbers. 
The Committee suggests that Mission Directors should be impressed upon to take up with the States on u rgent basis the 
issue of recruitment and posting of personnel as well as bridging the shortfall in infrastructure to meet the targets set up 
under NRHM within a reasonable time frame. The Comm ittee would like to be kept apprised of the specifi c steps taken 
by the Department to overcome the shortage of health functionaries, and for strengthening the infrastructure. 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.18  Status of ANMs at Sub-Centres and PHCs  
  The Committee is also quite disappointed with the  progress made over the past four years regarding f illing up the vacant 
posts of the various healthcare functionaries under  NRHM. The Committee observes that one of the most important objective 
with which the Mission was launched at the outset w as to ensure the availability of the various health care functionaries, i.e.  
ANMs/ MPWs(M) /LHVs/ Lab Technicians, doctors and s pecialists at Sub-Centres, PHCs and CHCs at the rig ht places. 
Realizing that their presence is essential for the smooth functioning of health centres and hence, important for the success of the 
Mission, the Committee has been recommending to the  Department year after year to take up the issue of  non-filling up of the 
vacancies with the States/UTs. However, there seems  to be no significant improvement in the situation.  The Committee feels 
that four years of focused attention, and considerable infusion of funds under NRHM, aimed to create a brigade of healthcare is 

a long enough time for the situation to have improv ed. Neither the flow of funds nor the efforts of th e Department are found 
wanting. The only conclusion the Committee can draw is that required manpower for the Health Centres is simply not available 
in majority of the States. 
Action Taken  
  As the RHS comparison of 2005-09 has indicated th ere has been a substantial increase in health human  resources in the 
primary healthcare system. While acknowledging the gap which still exists, the Ministry would like to place on record that over 
7 lakh community workers and more than 1 lakh health workers have been added to the health system under NRHM. Filling up 
of full human resource gaps require longer time span as simultaneous efforts to increase seats in medi cal and nursing education 
have also to be made. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  It is a fact that considerable manpower has been created under NRHM so far. However, the Committee i s not 
convinced by the contention of the Department that a longer time span is required for filling up of human resource gaps. 
One must not forget that NRHM is mandated to be implemented in a mission mode. 
IV.  MISSION FLEXIBLE POOL 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.6   The Committee observes that while Tamil Nadu has been able to operationalise all its PHCs 24x7, no other State has been 
able to achieve such a feat. The Committee observes  that the status of PHCs running 24x7 in some of th e States need to be 
revisited. States indicated above need to double up  their efforts so as to achieve the targets of maki ng all the PHCs operational 
24x7. The Committee fails to understand as to what could be the hindrance, especially when funds are available for the purpose. 
The Committee recommends the Department to take up the matter of increasing the number of PHCs operati ng 24x7 as well as 
up gradation of PHCs/ CHCs to FRUs with all the Sta tes/UTs so that a critical service like Health Care  is available to the 
targeted beneficiaries wherever required. 
Action Taken  
  The suggestion of the Hon’ble Members of the Comm ittee is very appropriate. Given the constraints of  human resources 
and physical infrastructure, it has not been possib le to upgrade all PHCs into 24x7 at one go. More ef forts will be made in this 
direction in the commg years. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  While the Committee appreciates the fact that the  Department intends to make more efforts to upgrade  greater 
number of PHCs into 24x7, it would like the Departm ent to move in this direction in a structured way. The Committee 
would, therefore, like the Department to formulate a concrete and time-bound action plan for upgrading  all PHCs into 
24x7. The Committee does understand the major const raints in achieving the said objective of human res ource and 
physical infrastructure. Accordingly, the Committee impresses upon the Department to address these two basic issues on 
war footing. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.7   Another initiative under NRHM was to upgrade all CHCs to IPHS standards by 2010 in a phased mann er in all the 
States/UTs. From the latest information furnished t o it the Committee finds that in States/UTs like Bi har, Chhattisgarh, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Sikkim, Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, D&N Haveli, Lakshadweep, Delhi, inspite of CHCs being 
selected for up-gradation to IPHS, no progress has been reported so far 
Action Taken  

  Yes, it is true that up-gradation to Indian Publi c Health Standards of CHCs was a priority. A lot of work has been done in 
this regard but accreditation of CHCs on the basis of Indian Public Health Standards was not attempted so far. The same would 
be tried in the coming years. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.8   The Committee also notes that the status of p ercentage of physical upgradation of CHCs in States like J&K (26%), Orissa 
(13%), MP (4%), Tripura (33%), Kerala (29%), West B engal (9%) and A&N Island (25%) is far from satisfa ctory. The 
Committee fails to understand as to what could be t he inherent constraints being faced by these States in upgrading their CHCs 
inspite of required funds being made available by t he Centre. The Committee would like to impress upon  the Department that 
the very objective of NRHM was to provide quality h ealth care facilities which were not available earl ier and therefore, the 
Department had embarked upon upgrading the faciliti es into IPHS. With such low level of achievements i t cannot be said that 
the States are doing well in the progress of the wo rk. This is all the more disturbing when there is a  considerable gap between 
the required and existing CHCs. The Committee is co nstrained to note that the Department is perhaps no t pursuing the matter 
with the State Government for the need to focus the ir attention so that the targets are met within the ir prescribed time-lines. 
With only 1255 CHCs taken up for renovation so far,  the target of upgrading all CHCs to IPHS standards  by 2010 is likely to 
remain unaccomplished. 
Action Taken  
  Efforts to speed up the pace of physical infrastr ucture are being made.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee observes that upgradation of CHCs to Indian Public Health Standards is an important 
intervention under NRHM, designed to provide assure d quality health services to the people. Upgradatio n work of 
CHCs in States/ UTs like Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jhark hand, Himachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, D&N Haveli,  
Chandigarh, Lakshadweep and Delhi were yet to be st arted at the beginning of the year. However, the De partment has 
not furnished any information as to why such an imp ortant initiative has been set on the backfoot. The  Committee feels 
that the reply given by the Department is generic i n nature and gives no idea of the specific and conc rete action being 
taken or contemplated to be taken to meet the targe t of upgradation of CHCs to IPHS. With only two yea rs of the 
Mission period being left, the action plan regardin g accreditation of the CHCs should have been starte d earlier. The 
Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department to indicate the specific efforts made by it to speed u p the pace of 
upgradation of physical infrastructure. The Committ ee observes that the Department should abandon the lackadaisical 
attitude in the matter and come up with a specific plan to get the CHCs accredited at the earliest and  urges the 
Department to come up with a more elaborate reply in the matter. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.11   Rogi Kalyan Samitis  
  As per the latest information made available by t he Department, 568 District Hospitals in the countr y have Rogi Kalyan 
Samitis (RKS). RKS are also there in 4164 CHCs and 16687 PHCs. Resources are provided to all RKS. 
  Committee’s attention has been drawn by the asses sment of RKS by the CAG in its latest performance A udit of NRHM. 
A number of discrepancies have been pointed out by CAG in its Report. 
/circle6 RKS did not receive all the annual Central grants in any State. 
/circle6 During 2006-07 in 11 States, Rs.41 crore were released in excess of requirements. 
/circle6 In Uttar Pradesh, Rs.36.60 crore were released to all the 3660 PHCs as corpus grant as against only 5 60 eligible 
PHCs. 
/circle6 In Bihar, State Government released annual grant f or 84 Referral Hospitals and 470 PHCs, inspite of R KS being 
formed only at 44 Referral Hospitals and 311 PHCs.  

  Utilisation of funds available with RKS was very low with all 16 States/ UTs reporting 31 to 98% ava ilable funds with 
RKS remaining unspent. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.12   The Committee would emphasis that there is a n urgent need for monitoring of the functioning of RKS at ground 
level. Merely obtaining quarterly/ annual reports about funds allocated/utilized will not serve the purpose. A beginning needs to 
be made by taking up follow-up action with all the States/ UTs where performance of RKS has not been f ound satisfactory by 
CAG. 
Action Taken  
  Point noted. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  While making the above observation, the Committee h ad expected the Department to initiate some correct ive 
measures so that greater transparency is ensured in  the functioning of Rogi Kalyan Samitis. The Commit tee, therefore, 
urges the Department to take urgent corrective meas ures in this regard and keep the Committee apprised  of the results 
achieved. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.18   Training of ASHAs  
  The Committee views with serious concern the gap in meeting the targets of ASHA training upto IVth Module in most of 
the States. The Committee is not convinced by the reason furnished by the Department that the delay is only confined to the 4th 
Module training in ASHAs in some of the States. Kee ping in view the key role ASHA plays in achievement  of various NRHM 
objectives, these gaps need to be addressed with a sense of urgency. The Committee observes that given  the low level of 
availability of health care services in the rural a reas of high focused States, they cannot afford to be off-target in such a crucial 
area as training to ASHA. The Committee, therefore,  recommends to the Department to impress upon all t he States/UTs, 
particularly those lagging behind, to take immediat e corrective steps to meet the targets fixed in thi s regard. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the state-wise updated  status of progress made towards bridging the gaps in the IVth Module 
training of ASHA.  
Action Taken  
  All efforts to further speed up the training of A SHAs is being made. The progress up to the fourth m odule is quite 
satisfactory in most States except Bihar. The roll out of the fifth module has taken some time as it w as mandated that it will be 
carried out only through Non-Governmental Organizat ions. The State-wise updated status of training of ASHAs is at 
Annexure- VI . 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee takes notes of the submission of the Department that the roll-out of the fifth module ha s taken 
some time as it was mandated to be carried out only  through Non-Governmental Organisations. The Commit tee feels 
that delay in the roll out of the fifth module is indicative of the shortcomings in the coordination mechanism between the 
Department and the State Governments. The Committee  also feels that these issues should have been addr essed in the 
project conceptualization stage itself. The trainin g of ASHAs is an imminent necessity for accomplishm ent of the goals 
set under NRHM. The Committee feels distressed that  despite its repeated recommendations, the Departme nt has not 
been able to achieve the desired level of capacity building of ASHAs. The Committee once again urges u pon the 
Department to immediately initiate appropriate corr ective measures to complete the fifth module of tra ining of ASHAs 
in all the States.  
Recommendations/Observations  

4.21   Drug Kits for ASHAs  
  The Committee genuinely believes that unless all the eligible ASHAs are provided with drug kits, the  initial health 
activities/ work bestowed upon her would be hampere d. The Committee would like the Department to furni sh state-wise 
updated details of drug kits distributed to the ASH As. The Committee, therefore, recommends that along  with all the selected 
ASHAs being fully trained, equipping them with drug  kits also needs to be monitored. Gaps, wherever no ticed, have to be 
removed without any further delay. At the same time  the Department should take up with all the States where discrepancies 
have been noticed in the distribution of drug kits. 
Action Taken  
  Noted for compliance. 
  The State-wise updated details of drug-kits distr ibuted to ASHAs are given in statement at Annexure-VII . 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  From a perusal of the data furnished in the Annexur e VI and VII, the Committee notes that by May, 2010 , the 
second-module training of ASHAs could not be comple ted in Tamil Nadu and Chandigarh, the third module could not 
be completed in Himachal Pradesh. In case of Punjab , Kerala, Haryana, West Bengal and Maharashtra the story is no 
different. The Committee fails to understand the re asons behind such a poor display of achievements by  the above 
States/ UTs. The Committee finds that there is larg e disparity in the distribution of drug kit among t he States 
irrespective of the number of training module compl eted by them. In case of Bihar, while 49 per cent o f ASHAs 
completed training in fourth module no drug kit has  been issued to any of them. Whereas in Himachal Pr adesh while 
only 36 ASHAs out of a total of 2393 selected could complete first module drug kits had been provided to all the selected 
ASHAs. The case of West Bengal, Gujarat, Haryana, P unjab, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra seems to be no di fferent 
with regard to the disparity in the completion of t raining modules of ASHAs and distribution of drug k its to them. The 
Committee observes that there seems to be no set pr actice being followed regarding distribution of dru g kits and the 
level of training of ASHAs. The Committee would lik e the Department to clarify the reasons for such un even 
implementation of this initiative across the country. The Department should make all out efforts to pr ovide drug kits to 
all trained ASHAs.  
Recommendations/Observations  
4.24   The Committee is aware that the National Hea lth System Resource Centre (NHSRC) had been entrust ed with the 
work of reviewing the ‘job responsibilities’ and ‘R ole clarity of ASHA’ as well as that of A WW and AN M. On being asked 
about the latest status on the matter and to furnis h details thereof, the Department has informed that  NHSRC has reviewed the 
job responsibilities and role clarity of ASHA. To ensure that the current roles played by ASHA in various States are reflected in 
redefining the role clarity and job responsibilitie s, a process of consultations and reviews was under taken. These include 
Consultations with ASHA Monitoring Group (AMG) members, reviewing the reports of the Common Review Mission, decision 
of various consultative meetings, and reports of Ph ase I evaluation of ASHA programme done in eight St ates namely Assam, 
Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Bihar , Orissa and West Bengal. Based on these consultati ons and reviews, a 
note on the role of ASHA, her responsibilities and payment mechanisms has been prepared by NHSRC. The Department has 
further stated that NHSRC is in final stage of preparing its Report on review of job responsibilities and role clarity of ANM and 
AWW which would be available by March 2010. 
Action Taken  
  The report has since been submitted and is presen tly under examination. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.25   Role of ASHA  
  The Committee notes that from the interim finding s of the National Health System Resource Centre (NHSRC) note made 
available to the Committee that NHSRC has identified five areas for strengthening the ASHA programme:- 

– Role Clarity 
– Payment mechanism  
– Training strategies and focus  
– Supervision and Support 
– Financing package. 
  The initial findings of the NHSRC note, among oth er recommendations, confirm the Committee’s apprehe nsions 
regarding role clarity of ASHA and reinforces the C ommittee’s view point that ‘a clear set of measurab le health outcomes on 
priority goals’ may be determined for ASHAs with a ‘provision of a limited range of services’. The Committee understands that 
by now the NHSRC Report on the review of job responsibilities and role clarity of ANM and AWW would have been submitted 
to the Department. The Committee recommends to the Department to take due cognizance of the observatio ns of NHSRC and 
to take immediate measures to implement the same right from the first quarter of 2010-11 so that positive results in this regards 
become visible by the year-end. The Committee also recommends that in the meanwhile, a minimum amount per month as 
allowance as recommended by the Mission Steering Group, apart from the incentives per programme as currently done, may be 
given to ASHA as remuneration. 
Action Taken  
  Noted for compliance. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee is not happy with the vague and evas ive reply given by the Department to its specific observations/ 
recommendations pertaining to the most crucial functionary of NRHM. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action initiated by the Department on its specific suggestion to provide ASHA as remuneration a minimu m amount per 
month as allowance as was recommended by the Missio n Steering Group. The Committee would like to be ap prised of 
the findings of the National Health System Resource Centre (NHSRC) Report at the earliest. 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.29   Mobile Medical Units  
  The Committee is not very convinced by the Depart ment’s replies regarding procurement and provision of MMU s. The 
Department has informed that States, based on their need and the resources put forth their demands for MMUs in the state PIPs. 
However, the Committee feels that the Department sh ould take active interest in promoting and providin g MMUs to the 
uncovered/under-covered districts of the country. T he Committee notes that States/UTs like U.P, Chhatt isgarh and Himachal 
Pradesh are some of the States where the health car e indices are already on slippery ground. However, with not even a single 
MMU available in any of the district in the aforesa id States one can imagine the status of accessibili ty of healthcare services in 
under-served/unserved areas. Non-operationalisation / inadequate functioning of MMUs aggravated the pro blem further. The 
Committee observes that the Department would have t o devise other means and methods beyond mere pursua nce with the 
States, to impress the need for the presence of MMUs at the district level so that some emergency medical services can be made 
available to needy. 
Action Taken  
  It was important in Mobile Medical Units for the States to take full ownership of it. That is why fl exibility was provided 
to the States to choose the Mobile Medical Unit ide al model. It is also an issue worth considering whe ther all districts actually 
need a Mobile Medical Unit. Perhaps a better case w ould be to intensively provide MMUs in inaccessible  districts. Such 
districts will actually require many more MMUs and they need not be spread to all the districts of the country. 
Recommendations/Observations  

4.30   Of the 354 MMUs operational in the country, the fact as to how many of them are actually functi onal is unclear. 
Moreover, it is also unclear as to whether any asse ssment has been made to find out that the MMUs purc hased till date confirm 
to the standards. CAG findings in its latest report  are quite alarming. The Committee notes that MMUs procured in Manipur 
remained unutilized as of October, 2008 for want of  technical know-how and Specialist doctors. Similar ly, MMUs were duly 
procured by Tripura but remained unutilized. Expres sion of interest was floated in May, 2008 inviting interested NGOs/ 
Charitable Organisations for operationalising the MMUs. 
Action Taken  
  Noted for compliance 
Recommendations/Observations  
4.31   The Committee can well imagine that there ma y be any number of similar cases in other States al so. In such a 
scenario, the Committee strongly feels that the Min istry needs to undertake a country-wide review abou t functional status of 
MMUs. Thereafter, constant monitoring at regular in tervals has to be carried out so as to ensure the a ccessibility of healthcare 
facilities to the general masses. 
Action Taken  
  Noted for compliance. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee notes that this is a classic case of the fact that wisdom dawns on hindsight. The Commit tee 
observes that after so much of funds have been infu sed into a healthcare initiative, the assets so cre ated by allocating 
scarce resources seems to be lying idle and unused in so many of the States across the country. The Co mmittee observes 
that if the Department had acted with prudence and foresight, then such a waste of money could have been avoided. The 
Department has not informed the Committee the actua l number of MMUs functional across the country and as to 
whether how many NGOs/Charitable Hospitals have exp ressed interest to operationalise the MMUs. The Com mittee 
would like the Department to inform it about the latest status in this regard while examining Demands for Grants of the 
forthcoming year. The Committee would also like to be enlightened as to whether any proposal has been firmed up for 
providing more MMUs in the inaccessible districts of the country. 
V.  RCH FLEXIBLE POOL 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.16   From a perusal of the information made avail able, the Committee would like to state here that s ignificant progress 
under the Immunization Programme has not been noticed in many of the States. This fact holds true both for the high focus and 
EAG States and also the non-high focus States. In s ome instances like that of Tamil Nadu and Dadra & N agar Haveli, the 
immunization coverage has infact dropped below the DLHS II rate. The Committee observes that a low cov erage rate in some 
of the very densely populated States like Bihar and Uttar Pradesh means that a very large number of children remain exposed to 
the vagaries of diseases resulting in high incidence of IMR in the country. The Committee observes that unless proper execution 
of the plans are made by the programme authorities,  visible impact on the immunization coverage would remain a distant 
dream. It, therefore, urges the Department to take up the issue with the respective State Mission Dire ctors during the next 
Common Review Mission, who need to be impressed upon to achieve the required quarterly/ annual targets. 
Action Taken  
  As per the DLHS-2 data, the last 5 worst performi ng States have been the State of Bihar, Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Nagaland and Manipur. As per DLHS-3, all these Stat es of high focus and EAG has shown significant impr ovement in the 
coverage ( Annexure-IX & X ). However, there is further scope for improvement of the coverage in these States. In order to 
further strengthen the activity, all the State Miss ion Directors were called for the meeting on 12-13 April 2010 and the matter 
was discussed. The Common Review Mission has been reviewing the same and will take up the matter in the next review. In the 

good performing States like Tamil Nadu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli, the performance has shown some declin e and they will 
also be the focus to improve coverage. 
COMMENTS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
  The Committee is happy to note that in some of the crucial states like J&K (DLHS-2-32.0- DLHS-3-63.0),  
Uttarakhand (DLHS2-44.5 - DLHS3-63.3), West Bengal (DLHS2-50.3- DLHS3-75.8), Sikkim (DLHS2-52.7 - DLHS -3-
77.9), Daman & Diu (DLHS2-56.1 - DLHS-3-83.5), Raja sthan (DLHS-2-23.0-DLHS-3-50.00), Assam (DLHS-2-16. 0-
DLHS-3-51.00), Bihar (DLHS-2-20.7-DLHS-3-41.4) ther e has been significant improvement in immunization coverage. 
However, the Committee is not aware whether there i s any mechanism for surprise inspections so as to a ssess the exact 
position at the ground level. The Committee would a ppreciate if an initiative is taken for cross-check ing the data 
furnished by these States. Committee’s attention ha s also been drawn by the downward trend noticed in the 
immunization coverage in States like Tamil Nadu (DLHS2-91.4 - DLHS-3-81.6) and Maharashtra (DLHS2-70.9 - DLHS-
3-69.3). The Committee also notes with serious conc ern only marginal increase in the immunization cove rage in States 
like UP(DLHS2-25.8 -DLHS-3-31.1), Madhya Pradesh (D LHS2-30.4 - DLHS-3-38.5), Tripura (DLHS2-32.6 - DLH S-3-
38.5), Gujarat (DLHS2-54.0 - DLHS-3-55.5), Haryana (DLHS2-59.1 - DLHS-3-61.8) and Kerala (DLHS2-78.5- DLHS-3-
79.0). The Committee is of the view that Immunizati on Programme needs to be vigorously pursued in Stat es like UP, 
Madhya Pradesh, Tripura, Meghalaya, Arunachal Prade sh, Bihar, Manipur, Rajasthan where coverage remain s below 
the national average. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.17   Cold chain maintenance is the most crucial c omponent for effective implementation of the Immuni sation 
Programme. The Committee, however, observes that so  far this has proved to be the weakest link under t he programme. 
Committee’s apprehensions have been confirmed by th e assessment of cold chain maintenance arrangement made under the 
Performance Audit of CAG. As per the CAG Audit, non e of the cold chain equipment was available in any of the 124 test 
checked PHCs in Haryana, Meghalaya, Madhya Pradesh,  Puducherry and West Bengal. Besides, in Bihar, Lak shadweep and 
Uttar Pradesh, 31 to 68 per cent of cold chain equipment was found non-functional. 
Action Taken  
  The vaccines are stored in the temperature betwee n 2-8°C in all levels upto PHCs. The cold chain equ ipment i.e.  fridge 
and/or Ice Line Refrigerator storage are used to ma intain this temperature for the vaccine. The advant age of Ice Line 
Refrigerator is that even in case of electricity fa ilure, it can hold the temperature for 72 hours. No rmally an Ice Line 
Refrigerator would require 8 hrs of power supply pe r day to maintain the requisite temperature. The fr idge does not have such 
long hold over time. The States have been using fri dge or Ice Line Refrigerator for storing vaccine. T he deep freezers are used 
for freezing ice packs which are then used in the vaccine carrier for transportation of the vaccine on a session to session basis to 
outreach session site or to other site where the vaccines are not stored. 
  As per the performance audit of CAG (Report No. 8  of 2009-10) conducted in 2007-08 Para 6.5.5 (Annexure-Xl ) none of 
the cold chain equipment was available in any of th e 124 test checked PHCs in Haryana, Meghalaya, Madh ya Pradesh, 
Puducherry and West Bengal. It seems that these PHCs are functioning as outreach session without having storage facility. The 
audit report has not enclosed the list of these 124 PHCs. 
  Instructions have been issued from time to time t o the State governments to get all the serviceable cold chain equipments 
repaired and ensure that no equipment is kept for more than one month for want of repair. 
COMMENTS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
  The Committee is surprised by the response of the D epartment to the concern shown by it on non-availab ility of 
cold chain equipment as pointed out in the CAG Repo rt. The Committee doubts whether any follow-up acti on has been 
initiated by the Department on the findings of CAG Report. The Committee would appreciate if the list of 124 PHCs 
inspected by CAG is obtained from it without any further delay and corrective measures are taken accordingly. 
Recommendations/Observations  

5.18   The Committee is more disturbed by the fact that Government of India budgetary support for main tenance of cold 
chain equipments, supply of spare parts, provision of alternate power supply has proved to be of no av ail. The States have 
simply confirmed their inability to absorb the fund s for envisaged purposes. The Committee is of the v iew that the absence of 
cold chain management has indirectly resulted in adverse impact on the UIP, a high priority area under the Mission.  
Action Taken  
  The Government of India has been providing the bu dgetary support for maintenance of cold chain, supply of spares which 
are being used by the States for repair and mainten ance of the cold chain equipment lying with the Sta te governments. The 
provision for alternate power supply has been made to cover-up the period of electricity failure and e nsuring cold chain 
maintenance. The funds utilized by the various Stat es under this provision are annexed in Annexure-XII . It can be seen that 
most of the States have been utilizing the said funds for maintenance of the cold chain. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee notes, from the information given in Annexure XII, that the utilization of funds by as m any as 
eleven States/ UTs namely, D&N Haveli, Daman & Diu,  Delhi, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Puducher ry, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Ut tarakhand for repair and maintenance of the cold ch ain 
equipments ranges between 1.5% to 37.9% which by any standard cannot be termed satisfactory. The Committee views 
this trend with serious concern as the under-utilis ation of funds could have serious implication on th e proper storage of 
vaccines and the resultant efficacy thereof. The Co mmittee would, therefore, like the Department to ta ke appropriate 
remedial measures in this regard for making the UIP successful. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.26   The Committee notes that JSY, as a financial  package, has done well to improve institutional de liveries. 
Institutional deliveries have increased from 7.30 l akh in 2005-06 to 84.26 lakh in the year 2008-09. H owever, CAG in its 
Performance Audit of NRHM (2009-10) has pointed out a number of shortcomings in the implementation of JSY, out of which 
some are as follows:--- 
(i)  In 13 out of 20 States, less than 50 per cent of total registered pregnant women preferred instit utional delivery at 
health centres. Details of following States are self-revealing. 
States Women Not opting for 
 Registered institutional 
  delivery 
1 2 3 
Punjab 12,08,563 2,99,544 
Uttarakhand 4,82,854 1,50,652 
MP 46,74,067 15,71,933 
J&K 7,52,269 3,49,977 
UP 1,08,43,000 52,04,000 
Assam 12,46,815 6,63,420 
 
(ii)  Proper records and vouchers in support of pay ment of incentive were not always maintained. Cases  of fraudulent 
and excess payment, non-payment and inordinate delay have been pointed out by CAG. 
(iii)  Quarterly physical and financial reports to be furnished by States/UTs were not being regularly sent.  

(iv)  There were variations in the quarterly/annual  reports and Financial Management Reports sent by field nodal officers 
of JSY and State Health Societies. The CAG also men tioned that the Ministry’s data on institutional de liveries and 
number of beneficiaries was inconsistent with the d ata verified during audit. According to Quarterly R eport upto 
December, 2009 sent to Audit by the Ministry, numbe r of beneficiaries of domiciliary deliveries was 15 .95 lakh 
which came down to 11.30 lakh at the end of the year. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.27   The Committee views with serious concern the  high level of pregnant women registered for instit utional delivery 
not opting for the same. This clearly indicates tha t various interventions made under JSY so as to mak e aware the targeted 
population about the positive impact of institutional delivery both on the mother and child have not p roved to be very effective. 
Situation becomes more worrisome by the fact that h igh focus States, where need was the most, have bee n showing such a 
trend. The Committee fails to understand the reasons behind ground level functionaries not monitoring the trimester check-up of 
the registered pregnant women. The Committee would like to point out that the achievement of 47 per ce nt of institutional 
deliveries (DLHS-III 2007-08) from 37 percent (DLHS-I 1998-99) although indicates a slow but steady in crease, however, one 
must not forget that 53 per cent women still contin ue to remain deprived of the benefits of institutio nal deliveries. The 
Committee is of the view that the role of ASHA/ANM under the JSY seems to be limited to payment of cas h incentives only. 
Consistent tracking of expectant mother for antenat al and post-partum check-up and deliveries needed m ore focused attention. 
For this, regular monitoring and surprise inspections need to be included as an essential component of JSY.  
Action Taken  
  Regular IEC is being done by the States through m ass media, inter-personal communication during Vill age Health and 
Nutrition days to promote institutional deliveries.  Regular counselling on the benefits of institution al deliveries among the 
expectant mothers is ensured through a network of A SHAs. In order to improve institutional delivery am ong tribal pregnant 
women, ASHA incentive package of Rs.600/-is being introduced in the notified tribal areas. 
  In order to avoid delayed payment and other irreg ularities in the payment of cash assistance under J SY, if any, several 
steps have been taken which include payment through  cheque and display of the list of beneficiaries al ong with the date of 
disbursement at the health institutions. 
  In addition to HMIS, the Ministry also calls for periodic reports from all the States/UTs on physical and financial progress 
to JSY with prescribed format for close monitoring of the scheme. 
  If any irregularities in the payment of cash ince ntive under JSY are reported to this Ministry, instructions are issued to the 
States to investigate the case and take appropriate  remedial action. Central teams also visit the Stat es from time to time to 
monitor the implementation of JSY and make suggestions for improvement. 
  JSY is monitored through several mechanisms. Some  of the key steps taken are: 
  Health Management Information System (HMIS):  A robust system including comprehensive set of for mats for 
periodic flow of information of both physical and f inancial progress from district to State and then u pto the National Level has 
been introduced. 
  Quality Assurance (QA) Cell:  QA cells have been placed at district and at State  level to monitor and evaluate the 
performance of various strategies including training. 
  Community Monitoring:  Community based monitoring of health services is a  key strategy of National Rural Health 
Mission (NRHM) to ensure that the services reach th ose for whom they are meant. The provision for Moni toring & Planning 
Committees has been made at Primary Health Centre ( PHC), Block, District & State levels and at the lev el of community 
through the involvement of Village Health and Sanitation Committee. 

  Programme Management Units (PMUs):  The State PMUs/ District PMUs have been establishe d at State/District level 
to monitor the performance of the programme in their area through regular field visits, evaluation of data. 
  Evaluation Surveys:  Large scale surveys are also organized namely National Family Health Survey (NFHS) on the lines 
of Demographic and Health Surveys conducted in the other countries, District Level Household Surveys ( DLHS), Facility 
Surveys to assess and evaluate the outcome/impact o f the programmes/interventions from time to time. T he surveys throw data 
at district/State level covering the areas viz. Fam ily Planning, Immunization, Maternal Health & Care,  Infrastructure facilities 
available at various health facilities levels inclu ding trained/skilled manpower( medical & paramedica l) in the country. The 
Survey data also gives information by social groups viz. SC, ST, OBC, others. 
  Regional Evaluation Survey:  RETs are responsible for monitoring and evaluating  the programme implementation of 
Health & Family Welfare services provided to the co mmunity in the country and to check the reliability  of information on 
Family Welfare Programmes. This also includes Sample verification of the selected acceptors of Family Welfare Services. 
  Joint/Common Review Missions:  Regular review missions in partnership with develo pment partners and State 
representatives (JRM/CRM) are organized for review and concurrent evaluation of RCH-II and NRHM progra mme 
respectively. These Missions comprise State briefin gs, field visits and State level debriefings, event ually culminating in State 
reports which are used to assess the progress/bottl enecks in implementation of the programme and thus suggest 
recommendations/further actions to be taken. 
  Pregnancy Tracking:  Government of India has taken a policy decision to get every pregnant woman tracked by name by 
the respective State health machinery for provision of timely ANC, Institutional Delivery, PNC along with Immunization of the 
new born. 
  Maternal Death Review:  The Government of India has taken a policy decisio n to review every Maternal death by an 
expert group both at the health facilities and in t he community. This will be done by the States. The purpose of the review is to 
find the gaps in the service delivery which leads t o Maternal deaths and take corrective action to imp rove the quality of service 
provision. 
  Mother and Child Health Card (MCH):  A joint MCH card of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of 
Woman and Child Development (MOWCD) has been launch ed for recording of all the service provisions from  pregnancy to 
growth monitoring of the infants. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee takes due cognition of the efforts ci ted by the Department for promoting institutional d eliveries. 
However, what draws the Committee’s attention is th e fact that the Department has been silent about th e shortcomings 
pointed out by the CAG in its Performance Audit of the NRHM (2009-10). Inspite of the above interventi ons and 
monitoring mechanisms if the loopholes pointed out by CAG persist then the objective of such an important intervention 
like Janani Suraksha Yojana to reduce MMR in the co untry would stand diluted. Involvement of Voluntary  
Organisations/ NGOs working in the field of materna l health should be sought to track the number of be neficiaries 
opting for institutional delivery and the number of  beneficiaries under this programme. Even audit of records of 
payments to the beneficiaries should be handed over  to the independent agency to bring forth greater f inancial 
accountability into the programme. In order to incr ease institutional deliveries the Department should  first identify the 
district in a State with very high MMR and thereaft er, should carry out a campaign to track down pregn ant women in 
the area and counsel and persuade them to avail the benefits of the programme. This would be a beginning which can be 
replicated in other areas/districts/ states by givi ng credibility to the service guarantees envisaged to be provided to the 
needy pregnant women under the programme and the resultant outcome, i.e., reduction in the MMR. 
Recommendations/Observations  
5.28  The Committee has also been informed that an Evaluation Study of JSY is being conducted by an Expert Group led by the 
Executive Director, National Health Systems Resource Centre (NHSRC) with inter-alia the following objectives: 
(a)  Procedure for random verification of beneficia ries; 

(b)  Fund Flow mechanism for administering JSY sche me and mechanism adopted for ensuring timely paymen t to the 
beneficiaries; and 
(c)  Impact of JSY services on maternal mortality r atio and infant mortality rate. 
  The Committee would like to be informed about the  latest status in this regard. 
Action Taken  
  The detailed objectives of the evaluation study h ave been finalised. The study design covering state s to be evaluated, 
methodology, personnel to be interviewed etc. have been finalised. In addition, formats for collecting  information from State 
level, district level and block level officers, beneficiaries, ANMs have also been finalised. The study is still in progress. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee observes that the Evaluation Study of  JSY being conducted by the National Health Systems  
Resource Centre is yet to start as only required fo rmalities have been completed so far. The Committee  would like to 
emphasize that this Evaluation Study needs to be co mpleted at the earliest so that problem areas can b e identified and 
corrective action taken accordingly. 
VI.   NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAM ME (NVBDCP) 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.3  The Committee notes that against an allocation  of Rs.442.00 crore in 2009-10, expenditure reported as on 28.02.2010 was 
only Rs.278.61 crore. The Committee observes that t his trend of under-utilisation of allocated fund is  also there in the first two 
years of the Eleventh Plan. Against the provision o f Rs.399.50 crore and Rs.472.25 crore in 2007-08 an d 2008-09, expenditure 
was only Rs.383.66 crore and RS.299.38 crore respectively. The Committee is constrained to observe that against the total Plan 
outlay of Rs. 3190.00 crore for the Eleventh Plan, less than half of the funds were released and that too remained under-utilised. 
Committee’s repeated attempts for optimum utilization of allocated funds under NVBDCP has failed to make any impact. 
Action Taken  
  The allocation is made on Annual Plan basis and n ot Five Year Plan basis. During the year 2009-10, a n outlay of 
Rs.442.00 crores was approved for NVBDCP. On the basis of actual expenditure incurred and likely to be incurred upto March, 
2010, the final estimates to the tune of RS.371.19 crores was approved. The expenditure upto 31.03.2010 is RS.338.87 crores. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee does understand that the allocation i s made on Annual Plan basis but the fact remains th at the 
Department has chosen to remain silent on the issue of underutilisation of funds. The Committee would like to point out 
that total Plan outlay in respect of any scheme is based on the specific requirements, both existing and anticipated. Ideal 
position is to go for optimum and judicious utilisation of allocated funds with the objective of earmarked funds being put 
to use as per the envisaged physical targets. The C ommittee, accordingly, urges upon the Department to  take urgent 
remedial steps to address the issue to ward off any negative impact on the programme. 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.4   The Committee has always been responsive to t he genuine demands of the Department. The Committee would, however, 
also like the Department to focus on better utilization of the scarce resources. The Committee, once again, recommends that the 
Department need to focus on analyzing the reasons f or reduced utilization of the allocated funds and t ake corrective action 
accordingly. The Committee would also like to know whether any commitment charges are to be paid by th e Department in 
case of shortfall in utilization of EAP component and if so, the charges paid during the last three years. 
Action Taken  
  The reasons for reduced utilization of the alloca ted funds are under: 
/circle6 Delayed and incomplete recruitment of human resource under project and contractual staff. 

/circle6 Delayed procurement of goods and services due to a dministrative procedures and stringent guidelines of donor 
agencies. 
/circle6 Poor utilization of the cash allocation made to th e States due to delayed/non-performance of earmarked activities. 
  The efforts are being made through regular intera ction, review and monitoring activities. at regular basis and extension of 
technical support to needy States.  
  As far as NVBDCP is concerned, no such commitment  charges are to be paid for shortfall in utilizatio n of assistance 
provided under World Bank and Global Fund Supported projects currently being implemented.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee notes that though the Department has identified three clear reasons for reduced utilizat ion of the 
allocated fund under this head, its reply lacks cla rity inasmuch as it fails to indicate substantive m easures taken to 
overcome the problem. The Committee would, however,  like to be apprised about the outcome of the remed ial action 
taken by it to address this issue. 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.9   The Committee would however, like to draw the  attention of the Department to the status of some key functionaries under 
Malaria control programme. The Committee is astonis hed to find that inspite of special attention being  given to the NE States 
important functionaries are simply not there as indicated below: 
– Vector borne Disease Control (DVBOC) Consultant i s not there in any of the NE States and Sikkim.  
Action Taken  
  At present there is no provision of District VBD consultants in NE States. For effective planning, i mplementation, 
supervision and monitoring there should be a dedica ted District Malaria Officer in each district. The current status of No. of 
districts and DMOs in the NE states is as follows: 
State No. of No. of DMOs in 
Districts position  
1 2 3 
Arunachal Pradesh 16 3 
Assam 27 13 
Manipur 10 10 
Meghalaya 7 7 
Mizoram 8 8 
Nagaland 11 10 
Tripura 4 4 
Sikkim 4 0 
 
 The States have been requested to fill up all the sanctioned posts of DMOs and also to create and fil l up the posts in all 
remaining districts. 
 Further, M&E, Finance and IEC consultant and Proje ct coordinator have been provided at the State leve l under Global 
Fund supported project (Rd 4). The present status is as follows: 
/circle6 M&E consultants are in position in 4 States (Assam , Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland). 

/circle6 IEC consultants are in position in all the States except Tripura. 
/circle6 The project coordinator and Finance consultants ar e in position in all States. 
  The State of Sikkim has not been included under G lobal Fund supported project. 
Recommendations/Observations 
–  Only 522 PHC-MOs are posted in Arunachal Pradesh . Remaining States do not have this  
  functionary. 
Action Taken  
  State-wise status regarding no. of MOs is as unde r: 
State Total No. of MOs in position MOs at PHC (as per 
(as per State PIP 2010-11) RHS bulletin 2008)  
Arunachal Pradesh 577 87 
Assam 2254 408 
Manipur 647 115 
Meghalaya 443 106 
Mizoram 154 52 
Nagaland 400 79 
Tripura 423 255 
Sikkim 140 42  
–  Assam does not have a Lab- Technician/Lab- Techn ician (Contractual)  
Action Taken  
  The State of Assam has recruited 478 contractual LTs, hence the contractual LTs under GF support pro ject were not 
allocated. At present, 674 regular and 478 contractual LTs are in position in the State of Assam. 
Both Assam and Nagaland do not have a Health Supervisor (M) 
Action Taken  
  At present, as per the State PIP, there are 927 H ealth supervisors in Assam and 71 in, Nagaland in position. Further, under 
GF supported project, 32 and 10 Malaria Technical Supervisors (MTS) have been provided to the State of Assam and Nagaland 
respectively, for strengthening monitoring and supervision. 
–  No Health Supervisor (F) is posted in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura.  
Action Taken  
  The existing status of Female supervisors as per the RHS Bulletin March 2008 is as follows: 
State No. of Female Supervisors in 
 position 
Arunachal Pradesh Not given 
Assam 323* 
Nagaland 31 

Tripura 62 
Sikkim (No Project) 18 
* as per State PIP 2010-11 
–  Multi-Purpose Worker (M) is not there in Arunach al Pradesh and Assam. 
Action Taken  
  As per the State PIP 2010-11, there are 6349 MPWs  (M) in Assam and nil in Arunachal Pradesh. 
  However, as per information from State Programme Officer, there are 23 MPWs (male). 
  GoI has allotted 356 contractual Male MPWs to the  State of Arunachal Pradesh and 391 to the State of  Assam for 
strengthening surveillance. Out of them Arunachal P radesh already engaged all 356 and Assam has engage d 220 contractual 
MPWs (M). 
–  Only Nagaland has 28 Malaria Inspectors. 
Action Taken  
  Under the programme, the Malaria Inspectors, Heal th supervisors, Surveillance Inspectors are to be m erged and 
designated as Multi Purpose Health Supervisors. The  State of Nagaland has engaged 28 Malaria Inspector s in addition to 40 
Surveillance Inspectors. As per the State PIP 2010-11, State-wise status of Health Supervisors is as follows: 
State No. of Health Supervisors / 
Malaria Inspectors in position  
Arunachal Pradesh 69 
Assam 927 
Manipur 124 
Meghalaya 262 
Mizoram 77 
Nagaland 68 
Tripura 191 
Sikkim 6 
 
–  Surveillance Staff (307) is there only in Meghal aya.  
Action Taken  
As per State PIP 2010-11, the State of Meghalaya has 307 surveillance workers in addition to 872 MPW (M). These all workers 
are to be used for surveillance for malaria and oth er diseases. Further, GoI has also provided 100 con tractual MPW (M) to the 
State of Meghalaya. The status of these functionaries in other states is as follows: 
State Surveillance Contractual MPW 
 Worker MPW s (M) (M) provided by Gol 
Arunachal Pradesh 23* 356 
Assam 6349 391 

Manipur 305 165 
Meghalaya 1179 100 
Mizoram 267 75 
Nagaland 284 200 
Tripura 436 500 
Sikkim 183 Nil 
* as per information from State Programme Officer. 
–  Only Meghalaya has 54 Spray Squads.  
Action Taken  
  Spray squads are engaged seasonally by all NE Sta tes for Indoor Residual Spray for five months follo wing a norm of 52 
Squads for 1 Million population. Each squad consist s of five field workers and one Superior Field Work er. All NE States have 
engaged spray squads at the district level according to population targeted for IRS in 2010. The first  round of spray has already 
commenced. 
–  In Sikkim and Tripura Malaria Technical Supervis ors (Contractual) are not there 
Action Taken  
  The State of Sikkim is not included under Global Fund supported project. Ten Malaria Technical Super visors have been 
provided to the State of Tripura. 
–  In Arunachal Pradesh and Assam there are no regu lar MPW (M) at all 
Action Taken  
  23 Surveillance workers/MPWs are in position in t he State of Arunachal Pradesh and 6349 surveillance  workers are in 
position in the State of Assam. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee observes that there is considerable gap with regard to District Malaria Officers in two N-E States, 
i.e. Arunachal Pradesh and Assam. Out of 16 districts of Arunachal Pradesh, District Malaria Officer is posted in only 3 
districts. Similarly, only 13 districts out of tota l 27 districts of Assam have DMOs. The Committee wo uld appreciate if 
concerted efforts are made by the Department in pursuing this crucial issue with both these two states. 
  Another pressing issue that the Committee would l ike to place on record is that since most of the tr ibal areas are 
highly endemic with Malaria, the outreach of effect ive door to door surveillance services needs to be strengthened and 
carried out diligently. In order to ensure this, th e Committee recommends that the Department devise a  mechanism to 
carry out a monthly review of the surveillance carried out at the district level and to visit specific tribal pockets in order 
to gain first-hand information of the ground realities. 
KALA-AZAR 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.13   The Committee observes that though the Natio nal Health Policy (2002) had set the goal of elimination of Kala-azar 
by 2010, the above target is yet to be realized. This is evident from the fact that 2534 reported cases of Kala-azar from the States 
of Bihar, West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh have been r eported during the first two months of the year 201 0. It is in this context 
that two rounds of door-to-door search, which were to be undertaken for elimination of Kala-azar, assu me added significance. 
However, the Committee fails to understand as to why Kala-azar fortnights could not be observed in the most endemic States of 
Bihar and Jharkhand during the past year. Inspite o f the Committee’s repeated comments on carrying on intensive door-to-door 

surveillance and monitoring by the Department, the situation so far has been far from encouraging. The  Committee would like 
to be enlightened about the reasons behind not unde rtaking the door-to-door search in Bihar, Uttar Pra desh. The Committee 
recommends that effective surveillance, timely trea tment and compliance of treatment regimens in all P HCs in the affected 
districts need to be continued without any let-up.  
Action Taken  
Kala-azar fortnight was introduced to strengthen th e active case surveillance, which involves 15 days extensive search from 
house to house for the early detection of kala-azar  cases as per case definition of suspected case def initions. A large number of 
persons are required by the States to undertake thi s exercise. Due to the inadequate infra-structure a t the grassroot level, the 
States are not able to observe KA fortnight. States are reminded for strengthening surveillance and in this regard 919 contractual 
Male MPW s are allocated during 2010-11 to State of Bihar to be deployed in 16 high Kala-azar endemic districts. 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.14   The Committee would like the Department to a pprise it in clear terms the number of PHCs in the endemic districts 
that have been provided with anti-Kala-azar drugs, the number of household/ population covered distric t-wise under the door-
to-door surveillance activities, and the physical o utcomes of such initiatives. The Committee would al so like to be apprised 
about the number of NGOs/FBOs/PRIs involved in Kala -azar elimination activities in the above States, t he funds provided to 
them during the last three years, the cases treated  by them and the initiatives taken by them to ensur e treatment compliance of 
the patients. 
Action Taken  
/circle6  Anti Kala-azar drugs are available in all the 523  PRCs in 52 districts of 4 states namely Bihar, Jha rkhand, West Bengal 
and Uttar Pradesh. 
/circle6  Approx. 130 million population is at risk of Kala -azar, which requires door to door active case sear ch for the suspected 
kala-azar cases to ensure early diagnosis and complete treatment. 
  Presently no NGO/FBO/PRI is involved in Kala-azar  elimination activities. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  Kala-azar had remained a serious problem for the co untry for quite some time. The Department has repli ed in its 
ATN that no NGO/FBO/PRI is involved in Kala-azar el imination activities. The Committee feels that the proper 
incentives, support and counseling to the above ent ities would guarantee their involvement in the elim ination of the 
Kala-azar. The Committee fully agrees that for unde rtaking extensive search from house to house, a lar ge number of 
persons are required. Hence, it suggests that the P RIs could be used to be an effective mechanism of a ugmenting 
manpower for door to door searching and case detection. Hence, the Department should devise means of involving PRIs 
in Kala-azar elimination activities. The Committee suggests that the Department should also explore po ssibility of 
involving/ contracting out such activities to the p rivate entities. The Committee hopes that the Kala- azar rounds must 
have been carried out during 2010. The Committee would like to be apprised about the latest status in this regard. 
JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS 
Recommendations/Observations  
6.18   The Committee is dismayed to note that more than four years have elapsed since the vaccination programme was 
launched in 2006, yet the all India coverage of JE vaccination campaign is only 46.62% uptill 2009 as against the targeted 85% 
coverage. What is more worrisome is that JE vaccina tion coverage in four districts of Andhra Pradesh, one district of Assam 
and two districts of Tamil Nadu is nil, which paints a very grim picture, especially in the context of there being no specific anti-
viral drug for JE. The Committee feels that if such  gaps are not addressed immediately, efforts to con tain JE outbreaks will 
stand jeopardized. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends that the Department should, in coordination wi th the State 
Government concerned, chalk out an action plan to a chieve the targeted coverage of JE vaccination and also apprise the 

Committee of the progress made in this regard. Similar efforts for vaccine coverage of the affected di stricts of Andhra Pradesh, 
Assam and Tamil Nadu are also required. 
Action Taken  
  At the time of the submission of the earlier repl y, JE vaccination was underway in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Goa and 
West Bengal, however the process of vaccination in 30 districts in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam , Bihar, Goa, Haryana, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Uttar P radesh and West Bengal has been completed except di strict Adilabad in 
Andhra Pradesh where the campaign was to be halted due to bad logistic planning by the State health au thorities. The overall 
percentage coverage of 60.68% has been achieved dur ing 2009. The shortfall in desired achieving percen tage coverage of 85% 
is on account of temporary hold up of vaccination campaign in district Adilabad, poor vaccination coverage in two districts each 
in Goa and West Bengal where the campaign was not launched in accordance with Government of India guidelines and also due 
to the report of 6 Adverse Effect Following Immuniz ation (AEFI) cases in two districts of West Bengal namely Hooghly and 
Howrah. Annexure-XIII . 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee is not convinced by the Department’s reply that apart from Adilabad district in Andhra P radesh 
and two districts of Goa and West Bengal each, the vaccination coverage has been satisfactory. The Committee observes 
that in three out of four districts (i.e. Latur-27. 61 %, Gadchiroli-l1.85%, Washim-52.61%) in the stat e of Maharashtra 
and even in the districts of Krishna, Nellore and Medak of Andhra Pradesh the coverage has been far from satisfactory. 
As a result thereof overall 37% of children targeted in AP and 31% children in Maharashtra could be va ccinated in the 
districts given in Annexure-XIII. Even in the State  capital of Trivandrum in Kerala the coverage was o nly 40%. The 
Committee feels that the district programme officer s had perhaps failed to grasp the guidelines of the  Centre in regard 
to this disease. The Committee observes that the re asons for such a communication gap should be ascert ained by the 
Department and appropriate measures be taken to avo id such instances in future. The Committee would li ke to be 
apprised about the latest coverage status for all t he 30 districts where the vaccination was carried o ut and whether a 
follow-up round has been carried out by the Centre to determine the actual coverage of the targeted beneficiaries. 
 
VII.   NATIONAL TB CONTROL PROGRAMME 
Recommendations/Observations  
7.8   As per the information furnished by the Depar tment, 2524 NGOs, 19202 Private Practitioners, 268 Medical Colleges and 
150 Corporate Hospitals are involved under RNTCP. T he Committee would like to be apprised of the exten t of financial 
assistance extended to the NGOs, the amount utilized, the number of pending UCs from them and the amount involved therein. 
Action Taken  
  Under the Revised National TB Control Programme ( RNTCP), involvement of NGOs has been decentralized to the 
district level and no cash grant is given directly to NGOs from the Centre. Funds to NGOs are given by  the concerned District 
TB Society. Many NGOs also participate without any financial assistance. A statement indicating State-wise information on the 
amount spent on the NGOs during the last year as reported by the State TB Societies is given at Annexure-XV. 
  The Utilization certificate is collected at the d istrict level. No pending UC is there as all the ac counts have been audited 
and UCs submitted for 2008-09 to the State after which the further disbursement from Centre is done. For 2009-10, UCs are not 
yet due. 
  In addition, under Global Funds for AIDS, TB and Malaria (GF ATM) assisted RNTCP Project, for involv ement of 
private practitioners and faith based organization, funds are released directly from the Centre. 
Funds released for the year 2008-2009 are as under --- 
(Rs in lakhs)  

NGO 2008-09 
Indian Medical Association, New Delhi 282.77 
CBCI, New Delhi 167.50 
 
  The UCs have been received from both the organiza tion for 2008-09. For 2009-10 the UC are not yet due. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  From a perusal of Annexure-XV of the ATN furnished by the Department, the Committee finds that, for th e 
period April to December, 2009, in 9 States/ UTs no expenditure has been reported by the States TB Societies on account 
of disbursement of funds to NGOs under revised Nati onal TB Control Programme. Again, in another 10 Sta tes/ UTs, 
there is a disbursement of less than Rs. 1 lakh. Th e Committee finds an uneven pattern of funds disbur sement and fails 
to understand the reasons behind such a scenario. I t is also not clear as to whether the lack of disbu rsement is on 
account of less number of VOs/ NGOs functioning in the area or due to lack of timely disbursement of funds on the part 
of the States for the above programme. The Committe e suggests that the Department should come up with a clear 
picture in this regard. 
VIII.  NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME 
Recommendations/Observations  
8.8   The Committee is of the considered view that judicious utilization of funds is indispensable for  sound financial 
administration without which it would be difficult for the Department to obtain the targeted results u nder NLEP. The 
Committee is compelled to conclude that much needs to be done especially in the endemic States of Biha r, Jharkhand and the 
UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli. The Committee, therefor e, urges the Department to take up the matter of fu nd utilisation on an 
emphatic note with the State Programme Officers dur ing its quarterly review meetings. The Committee wo uld like the 
Department to find out the underlying causes of underutilization of funds and take corrective action accordingly.  
Action Taken  
  The matter of under-utilization of funds will be reviewed emphatically and would be taken up with th e State Programme 
Officers during quarterly and annual NLEP review meeting of the States and an attempt would be made to find out the cause of 
underutilization of funds so that corrective actions could be taken for improving fund utilization. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee is astonished by the Department’s r eply that it plans to review the matter of under-ut ilization of 
funds in an emphatic manner with the State Programm e Officers during quarterly and annual NLEP review meetings. 
From the above statement of the Department, it is c lear that there are no proper mechanisms in place t o monitor the 
funds utilization under this programme. The Committ ee would like to state that unless proper monitorin g of the 
programme is done, such lapses would continue and w ith only two years of the Mission period remaining such a trend 
does not augur well for the health of the programme. Hence it exhorts the Department to roll-out financial monitoring of 
the various schemes under the Programme so that the creases are ironed out from the beginning. 
Recommendations/Observations  
8.10   The Committee is happy to note that at last such an important scheme under NLEP has finally seen the light of day. 
However, with more than three years of the Eleventh Plan Period having passed, the Committee can only hope that the benefits 
of the scheme would accrue to more number of beneficiaries during the coming years. The Committee would like to add a word 
of caution to the Department regarding having an ef fective monitoring mechanism so as to determine the  veracity of the 
beneficiaries from initial stage itself. The Commit tee would also like to have an idea about the numbe r of beneficiaries (State-
wise). 

Action Taken  
  In 2009-10, 2856 Reconstructive Surgeries (RCS) w ere conducted for disability correction among lepro sy affected 
persons. The State-wise number of RCS conducted is at Annexure-XVI . The information on the number of leprosy affected  
persons belonging to BPL family being paid incentiv e for undergoing RCS in 2009-10 in respect of 8 Sta tes is at Annexure-
XVII . Effective monitoring system has already been developed to determine the veracity of beneficiaries under the scheme. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee observes that out of total 2856 Recon structive surgeries conducted on leprosy affected p ersons in 
different states during 2009-10, maximum beneficiar ies are reported to be in Andhra Pradesh (617), Bih ar (94), 
Chhatisgarh (108), Gujarat (110), Karnataka (113), MP (282), Maharashtra (451), Orissa (259), Tamil Na du (132), UP 
(376), West Bengal (101) and Delhi (132). However, as per the details furnished by the Department only  121 persons 
belonging to BPL family could avail of the incentiv e of Rs. 5000/- with 100 beneficiaries being in Kar nataka alone. This 
clearly shows that States have not been fully sensitized about this specific benefits available for leprosy patients going for 
reconstructive surgery. The Committee would like to  reiterate that all the States having higher concen tration of such 
cases need to be sensitized. 
IX.   NATIONAL TRACHOMA AND BLINDNESS CONTROL PROGR AMME 
Recommendations/Observations  
9.4   The Committee is also not happy with the stat us reports not being received from states on the cr ucial component of 
strengthening of District Hospitals, Sub-district H ospitals, PHCs (vision centers). Construction of on ly 5 Eye Wards and Eye 
Operation Theatres against the target of 20, clearly indicates that things are not moving inspite of funds being duly allocated. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of record. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
9.5   The Committee recommends to the Department to  give utmost priority to properly evaluate the reas ons for these under-
achievements so that the weak links in the chain of  implementation of the initiatives can be identifie d. This, the Committee 
believes, would surely result in addressing impleme ntation of various components of the programme effe ctively. The 
Committee feels that if the situation continues to remain as tardy as now then the goals set by the De partment under NPCB by 
the end of Eleventh plan would remain a distant dream.  
Action Taken  
  State Governments have been suitably instructed t o strengthen their monitoring mechanism to ensure u tilization of funds 
for allotted activities. It has also been suggested  to identify weak links in the chain of implementat ion for taking remedial 
measures. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Committee observes that to ensure utilization o f funds allocated for the earmarked activities, it is essential 
that the remedial measures identified during an ass essment of a programme be implemented at the earlie st so that 
initiatives can be brought back on to the track. The Committee finds that the Department has only passed instructions to 
the States for better financial management and the fact that it has not pursued the matter further is evident from its 
reply. The Committee suggests that with a number of  important entities like Chartered Accountant, MBAs  etc. finding 
place under the NRHM, the State Programme Management Units should be persuaded to execute the remedial measures 
so that the targets under such an important program me are achieved within a reasonable time-frame. The  Committee, 
therefore, suggests the Department to get the feedb ack from the States and formulate further remedial measures if the 
progress is below par. 

Recommendations/Observations  
9.7   The Committee is appalled to note that catara ct operations in such huge proportions were allowed to be performed in eye 
camps between 2005-08, although, Government of Indi a has banned eye operations in camps owing to high rate of mishaps in 
such camps. The Committee feels that the issue cann ot simply be done away with, especially in the ligh t of the findings of the 
CAG. The Committee fails to understand as to how, inspite of the claims made by the Department regarding regular monitoring 
of compliance to the guidelines, cataract surgeries  continued to be performed in camps in the aforesai d states. The Committee 
apprehends that such surgeries in Camps must be con tinuing even at present thereby putting a large num ber of patients to risk. 
The Committee observes that merely circulating the guidelines to the State Governments with no means t o ensure their strict 
compliance would not serve any purpose. There needs  to be a component of surprise inspections in the e xisting monitoring 
mechanism This, the Committee believes, would go a long way in ensuring compliance to the guidelines a nd act as a deterrent 
against violations by the defaulting agencies. 
Action Taken  
  Conducting Surgical Eye Camps in school buildings , Dharmshala, Club buildings and in open campus hav e been banned 
under NPCB since 2001. Screening Eye Camps are cond ucted. at these places to identify cataract cases a nd other eye diseases 
with the permission from competent District Health authority. The patients identified for eye operations are then shifted to fixed 
facilities for Eye operations under the direct supervision of District Health authorities. In most of the States these operated cases 
are being treated as camp surgeries and reflected a s operations in eye camps. In fact, these are opera ted in regular fixed 
operation theatres. However, reports have also been sought from the above States to clarify the position further. 
COMMENTS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
  The Committee would like to be apprised of the clarification sought from the States in this regard. 
Recommendations/Observations  
9.10   The Committee would, however, like to point out that achievement level still remains less than the target. What is 
more disturbing is that there is an actual requirem ent of at least 80,000 to 1,00,000 corneas per year  in the country for 
transplantation purpose. The Committee is of the vi ew that besides lack of awareness, other major caus e for low level of eye 
donation/collection is that infrastructure required  for the purpose is simply not there at the ground level. Committee’s 
apprehensions are supported by the following findings of CAG Performance Audit of NRHM (2009-10): 
– No Eye Bank was operational in Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Arunachal Pradesh, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Na gar 
Haveli, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Lakshadw eep, Manipur, Meghalaya and Uttarakhand (10 
States/UTs) 
– As of March, 2008, only 346 Eye Banks were operat ional in 17 States/UTs out of which 97 were in the Government 
Sector and 249 in the voluntary sector. 
– A comparative analysis of performance in 9 States /UTs showed that the voluntary sector collected 76 per cent of the 
eyes donated. Lack of eye donation facilities in Go vernment Hospitals was the reason for low presence and 
performance of Government Sector; and almost 52 per  cent of eyes collected in the Government sector ha d been 
either rendered unfit or were used for research as compared to 34 per cent in the voluntary sector. 
Action Taken  
/circle6  As per reports available under NPCB, there are 2 Eye Banks in Jammu & Kashmir and 1 each in Himachal  Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand. Remaining States/UTs, Andaman & Nicoba r Islands, Arunachal Pradesh, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Lakshadweep, Manipur and Meghalaya have been directed to initiate process for functional Eye Banks. 
/circle6  As per information available under NPCB, 586 Eye Banks in Government and voluntary Sector have been registered. 
/circle6  In order to improve the performance of Eye Banks in Government as well as in Voluntary Sector, NPCB has been 
providing non-recurring assistance upto Rs.15 lakh for strengthening/developing Eye Banks towards equi pments and 

furnishing. In addition, recurring assistance of Rs .1500 per pair of eyes collected is also being prov ided to Eye Banks to 
improve facilities for eye donation. 
  State Governments have been directed to ensure st andards of Eye Banking to improve utilization of co llected eyes in 
Government and Voluntary Sector. Suitable guidelines in this regard have already been sent to States/UTs. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee feels that merely issuing routine i nstructions to the States to ensure standards of Ey e Banking to 
improve utilization of collected eyes is unlikely t o bear fruit. The Committee would expect the Depart ment to devise 
innovative means and methods to objectively assess the progress and analyse in detail the reasons for the shortfall for 
formulating appropriate remedial measures. 
Recommendations/Observations  
9.11   The Committee is also perturbed to find that  there was a big gap between overall figures of eye s donated and 
utilized during 2005-2008 for 9 States/UT (Jharkhan d, Orissa, UP, Assam, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Tami l Nadu and West 
Bengal). Out of 13,986 eyes donated under Government Sector, number of eyes utilized was only 4326. Similarly, out of 44,964 
eyes donated under the Voluntary Sector, only 9362 eyes could be utilized. Notwithstanding the very lo w percentage of eyes 
donated in the country so far, the low level of uti lization of those eyes collected suggests that all is not well with the existing 
arrangement and the system suffers from some grave inadequacies. The Committee’s apprehensions are sup ported by the 
findings on the performance of Eye Banks in the following States: 
Government Sector (2005-08) 
State No.of eyes 
donated 
Utilised Rendered Unfit Used for research 
Delhi 3552 1944 804 517 
Gujarat 4452 1431 —- 3021 
Tamil Nadu 3752 —- —- 1660 
West Bengal 1802 570 1 1231 
Total 13,558 3,945 805 6,429 
 
Voluntary Sector (2005-08) 
State No.of eyes 
donated 
Utilised Rendered Unfit Used for research 
Delhi 5268 2515 1427 1039 
Gujarat 14917 4910 —- 912 
Haryana 704 177 169 13 
Tamil Nadu 20284 — —- 10317 
West Bengal 2741 1040 100 1331 
Total 43,914 8,642 1,696 13,612 
  
Action Taken  

  It has been informed by Tamil Nadu State that out  of 24,036 donated eyes collected during the period  2005-08, 11 ,988 
were utilized, 3,316 were found unfit for transplantation and 8,732 utilized for research purpose. 
  Gujarat State has informed that out of 19,369 don ated eyes collected during the period 2005-08, 2,05 7 were utilized 
during 2007-08 alone. Separate information on kerat oplasty and other purposes was not being maintained  by the State during 
2005-06 and 2006-07 in their format. They have assured that the all data will be reported from June, 2010. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  The Department has merely furnished the figures per taining to Tamil Nadu and Gujarat and not commented  on 
the reasons for low level of utilization of collect ed corneas. The Committee would have appreciated if  the Department 
had dwelt upon the reasons for low utilization and worked out remedial measures to smoothen the inadeq uacies within 
the existing arrangements and storage of the cornea s to bridge out the vast gap between the eyes donat ed and those 
utilized. 
Recommendations/Observations  
9.13   The Committee has been given to understand t hat it is normal that all cornea collected cannot b e used for 
replantation purpose, as it needs to be assessed by  cornea specialist for suitability and quality of c ornea. Only 30 to 40 percent 
corneas collected are suitable for optical Keratopl asty. The Committee would like to point out that as  per the above state-
specific details, percentage of corneas utilized is much below the accepted 30 to 40 percent level. One obvious reason for such a 
low level of utilization can be the upkeep and main tenance of Eye Banks being not as per the standard norms. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends to the Department to keep the  activities of all the entities/institutions involv ed in providing eye 
collection activities under constant scrutiny/monit oring and take urgent remedial steps so that the st umbling blocks in the 
optimum utilization of eyes collected is achieved by more number of beneficiaries getting back their vision. 
  The Committee would like to know as to whether th e Government is aware of the work done by Dr. Sinha. 
 
 
Action Taken  
1.   The corneas harvested are normally assessed an d evaluated for the suitability for corneal transpl antation. As per the 
reports furnished by the State Governments under NPCB for the year 2008-09, around 30-40% corneas collected are suitable for 
optical keratoplasty as shown in the table below:-. 
Sl. State/UT No. of donated eyes No. of eyes utiliz ed for 
No.  collected Keratoplasty 
1 Andhra Pradesh 4050 1551 
2 Chhattisgarh 117 98 
3 Gujarat 6468 1397 
4 Haryana 1175 510 
5 Jharkhand 2 2 
6 Karnataka 4100 1647 
7 Kerala 910 379 
8 Maharashtra 5885 1878 
9 Orissa 120 91 

10 Punjab 868 702 
11 Rajasthan 1386 647 
12 Tamil Nadu 10144 1928 
13 Uttar Pradesh 372 262 
14 Uttarakhand 8 26 
15 West Bengal 1370 509 
16 Assam 240 130 
17 Mizoram 16 12 
18 Tripura 6 6 
19 Chandigarh 485 333 
20 Delhi 1778 1013 
21 Pondicherry 378 176 
 Total 39878 13297 
   (33.59%) 
  
  Rests 60% of donated corneas are used for therape utic keratoplasty, lamellar keratoplasty or researc h and education 
purposes. Major cause of non-utilization of donated corneas is: 
/circle6 Poor quality of collected corneas. 
/circle6 Pre-existing degeneration/diseases. 
/circle6 Delayed collection after call for eye donation due  to difficult terrains and lack of collection and storage 
facilities.(ideally eye should be collected within 4 hours of death) 
2.   As per report furnished by Dr. R.P.Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, AIIMS, New Delhi regarding Dr.  Pawan Sinha’s 
Project, Dr. Pawan Sinha and his Project “Prakash” is very commendable. This is regarding treatment fo r amblyopia in older 
children. However, detailed results are still await ed. It has further been informed by Dr. R.P.Centre that although it was earlier 
believed that treatment for Amblyopia in older chil dren is difficult, Dr. R.P .Centre has been treatin g amblyopia in children of 
all ages including those in late teens and early twenties. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  The Committee understands that the two major reas ons cited for non--utilization of donated corneas a re beyond 
the control of the eye banks but the third reason c ited in the matter could be addressed to by the Dep artment by 
development of required infrastructure. The Committ ee, accordingly, impresses upon the Department to t ake adequate 
steps to ensure optimum utilization of collected corneas. 
X.   NATIONAL IODINE DEFICIENCY DISORDERS CONTROL P ROGRAMME  
Recommendations/Observations  
10.5.  The committee notes that as per the surveys that were conducted by the Directorate General of H ealth Services, Indian 
Council of Medical Research, the State Health Direc torates and Health Institutes, out of 324 districts  in all the 28 States and 7 
Union Territories, 263 districts are endemic. The p roportion of districts endemic for Iodine Deficienc y Disorders out of total 

districts surveyed so far were found to be more in Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand, 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, as compared to other State/UTs. 
Action Taken  
  Matter of Record 
Recommendations/Observations  
10.6   The Committee understands from the above tha t as many as nine States/UTs have been highly endem ic iodine 
deficiency. The Committee, however, does not find t hat any focused intervention has been initiated in the above States/UTs to 
reduce the deficiency rate. Since, the above observation is a result of certain sample districts surve yed in the above States/UTs, 
the numbers would be much more if all the districts  in these States/UTs are covered. Therefore, the Co mmittee suggests that a 
special intervention needs to be made in all of the above States/UTs. Intensified IEC activities may also be carried out covering 
all the districts so that the prevalence rate comes to less than 10. The Committee would like the Department to furnish details of 
the sample survey report concerning all the States/ UTs covered for its perusal. 
Action Taken  
  200 high focused districts in 16 States have been  identified for conducting the IEC activities on ID D and consumption of 
iodated salt through Song & Drama division and 1218  special interactive programmes through Directorate of Field Publicity in 
235 districts of 25 States/UTs during the current y ear. Further, Salt Testing Kits (STK) have been dis tributed at district level in 
all the States/UTs to monitor the iodine content of  salt at the community level and to create awarenes s through ASHA/ A WW 
about IDD & regular consumption of adequately iodated salt. The details of number of districts surveyed and found endemic i.e. 
more than 10% in all States/UTs are at Annexure-XVIII . 
COMMENTS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
  From a perusal of the above mentioned Annexure, the  Committee is perturbed to find that out of the dis tricts 
surveyed for iodine deficiency, a large number were found endemic. The Committee would like the Department to chalk 
out an action plan to deal with the situation and apprise the Committee about its outcome.  
 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS --- AT A GLANCE  
(Health Sector) 
 
II  BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
  The Committee had urged upon the Department to un dertake a comprehensive analysis of the trend of 
expenditure for the past three years with a view to improve the utilization level of the budgeted funds as also to improve 
upon the existing system of assessing requirement o f funds. However, the Committee is constrained to o bserve that the 
Department’s response has been outrightly evasive inasmuch as it has reproduced its existing procedure  of examination 
of fund requirements. The onus of providing Plan Ou tlay has been solely put on the Planning Commission . The 
Committee opines that if the utilisation of funds had been sub-optimal, how it can expect allocation of enhanced amount 
of funds from the Planning Commission for its vario us programmes/policies/schemes. The Committee finds that sincere 
efforts are lacking on the part of the Department i n this direction. No innovative or new strategy, as  exhorted by the 
Committee, seems to have been worked out by it. In such a scenario, the Committee does not hope any positive change in 
this regard if the Department’s approach remains un changed. The Committee, therefore, recommends to th e 
Department to put forth concerted efforts to convince the Planning Commission for allocation of adequate funds. 
       (Para 2.7)  
  The Committee notes that from 24 in 2008-09 to 25  in 2009-10, the Department, as per the latest information made 
available, proposes 59 Autonomous Bodies/Societies/ Grantee Institutions/Programmes to be audited durin g 2010-11. 
The Committee appreciates Department’s continued fo rward movement w.r.t. audit of Autonomous 

Bodies/Societies/Grantee Institutions/Programmes re ceiving Grants- in-Aid from the Department. The Com mittee is 
however constrained to note that only a list of the  major audit findings in 2008-09 and 2009-10 have b een furnished by 
the Department and that too, without indicating the action taken on such findings. The Committee feels that if corrective 
actions on deviations from the financial norms are not taken the entire process of audit of the entiti es would become an 
exercise in futility. The Committee, therefore, desires that the action taken on the audit findings under reference may be 
furnished to it.    (Para 2.15)  
  The figures made available to the Committee regar ding latest position of outstanding paras and paras  settled for 
2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 do not inspire much co nfidence. That Internal Audit Wing of the Departmen t has not 
been able to make a significant impact is evident f rom the fact that pendency of internal Audit Paras have not been 
liquidated within a justifiable timeline. The Commi ttee also observes some serious deviations involvin g huge amounts 
from the prescribed financial norms made by some un its in recent times. The Committee feels the Depart ment needs to 
further strengthen its Internal Audit Wing and make  it an effective tool of removing outstanding audit  paras. Proper 
training to staff placed at Units may be one of the  interventions in this regard. The Department, apar t from issuing 
necessary routine instructions, may initiate invoki ng penal provisions in cases of serious deviation. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard. (Para 2.18)  
III.  CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS) 
  The Committee in its earlier report had appreciat ed Department’s initiative of introducing a pilot p roject for 
Preventive Health Check-up for pensioners and servi ng employees over the age of 40 years at CGHS dispe nsaries, 
Sector-12 and Sector-4, R.K. Puram, New Delhi. As i nformed a good number of beneficiaries have benefit ted from this 
facility since its introduction on 24th February, 2 010. However, contrary to Committee’s recommendatio n, the 
Department is non-committal on either the extension  of the duration of the pilot project or extending the project to the 
areas covered by other wellness centres. The Commit tee would like to reiterate its earlier stand that in view of the 
increased lifestyle related diseases, the Departmen t needs to expand this initiative to expand its out reach to more 
beneficiaries.    (Para 3.6)  
  The Committee, while making the observation in pa ra 3.7 had expected the Department to apprise it of  the 
updated status of the proposal regarding forwarding  the Bill for treatment of pensioner CGHS beneficia ries to UTI- 
TSL for payment within 10 days .The Committee, ther efore, once again recommends to be enlightened abou t the 
progress made in the matter. (Para 3.7)  
  The Action Taken Note furnished by the Department  has proved beyond doubt the apprehensions of the 
Committee that the Government wants to dilute its s ocial obligation towards its employees. The justifi cation by the 
Department that the proposed health insurance schem e is primarily aimed at Central Government pensione rs residing 
in the areas not covered by the CGHS and also for t he serving Central Government employees presently not covered by 
the CGHS, does not hold ground as it would be manda tory for the new entrants in Government service and  those 
retiring subsequent to its introduction. Further, t he justification that the capping is a well thought  out exercise and 
would be more than adequate to cover the health needs of the beneficiaries is not convincing at all. To prove its point the 
Department has even stated that a provision for the  creation of corpus for reimbursement of expenditur e beyond the 
annual limit of Rs.5.00 lakhs, on a case to case ba sis, is also a part of the scheme. The Committee fi nds this very 
intriguing that when it is ready to shell out reimb ursement over and above this limit, why the limit h as been prescribed 
at all for the beneficiaries. It is understandable that the Department needs to place a capping while negotiating with an 
insurance agency, but keeping discretion of Departm ent to reimburse amount over and above this amount on a case to 
case basis dilutes the responsibility of the Depart ment and can lead to favouritism or even corruption . Another major 
concern is that whether the Insurance agency with w hich the Government is proposing to reach a tie up would promote 
cashless facilities with beneficiaries. The Committ ee has serious apprehensions about the adequacy of this scheme. The 
Committee, accordingly, outrightly rejects the forc ed enforcement of the proposed Insurance Scheme to Government 
servants and recommends to the Department to concen trate on strengthening this well structured CGHS sc heme and 
continue to fulfil Government’s social obligation towards its employees.  (Para 3.9)  

  The Committee has been advocating the idea of CGH S being transformed into a truly service oriented v enture of 
the Department. However, to its dismay, the Committ ee is finding it very discouraging on the part of t he Department 
not taking it in the right spirit and that too when  it is for its own set of employees. The Committee fully shares the 
concerns of the Department regarding shortage of do ctors. The Department needs to be receptive to the idea, which is 
apparently lacking. The Committee would like to poi nt out that when the double shift system was operat ional, morning 
and evening shift timings were having lesser hours.  With the switch-over to double shift system, the p resent duty hours 
would be accordingly adjusted. The question of havi ng substantial additional staff would, therefore, n ot arise. 
Therefore-, the Committee would again recommend to the Department to improve upon the work culture acc ording to 
the need of the time and move forward in this regard.  (Para 3.11)  
  The Committee observes that 13 plots of land in d ifferent localities of NCT of Delhi are under the p ossession of 
CGHS for construction of CGHS Wellness Centres. All  these plots of land are at various stages of appro val. Status 
Report submitted by the Department clearly indicates that construction work is not going to start at any of the centre in 
the near future. The Committee is not aware about s ince when this process started. The Committee can o nly conclude 
with conviction that considerable time has passed a nd no progress worth mentioning is expected. The Co mmittee is 
intrigued with the details made available about Wel lness Centre at Vasant Vihar. It is very strange th at although the 
sanction for the Centre is not there, construction of boundary wall and provision of security at the p remises has been 
duly sanctioned. The Committee apprehends that this particular plot at Vasant Vihar has been lying ear marked for the 
past so many years. The Committee recommends that t he Department should review the position in respect  of all these 
plots of land and expedite the construction process of Wellness Centres.  (Para 3.17)  
  The Committee is happy to note that a decision ha s been taken for keeping the package rates offered to empanelled 
hospitals and diagnostic centres valid for a period  of two years with the option to continue the same for one more year 
with mutual consent. The Committee would like to re iterate that for life-threatening diseases like can cer, specialized 
hospitals are the best option for patients. In the Capital where the maximum number of CGHS beneficiar ies are 
residing, facilities available at Hospitals like Ra jiv Gandhi Cancer Hospital and Dharamshila Cancer H ospital not 
reaching them due to their remaining outside CGHS empanelment cannot be ignored and needs due consideration of the 
Department. The Committee would, therefore, like to  emphasize that feasibility of such specialized hos pitals under 
CGHS may be explored. (Para 3.28)  
  The Committee appreciates the number of initiativ es taken by the Department for effective functionin g of CGHS. 
The Committee however, feels that wide publicity th rough local and print media needs to be given in th is regard. Only 
then CGHS beneficiaries will be in a position to avail of such facilities.  (Para 3.30)  
IV.   SAFDARJUNG  HOSPITAL  AND  VARDHMAN MAHAVEER MEDICAL COLLEGE, NEW DELHI 
  The Committee is dismayed at the way the issue of  manpower is being consistently handled by the Department for 
so long. The Action Taken Note furnished in the ins tant case reflects the lackadaisical attitude of th e Department in the 
matter. The Department has only informed the vacanc y position status as well as the procedure of filli ng up them. 
Action on the Committee’s recommendation regarding review of manpower vis-a-vis the sanctioned strengt h of the 
Safdarjung Hospital and Vardhman Mahavir College as  well as pre-emptive action in case of vacancies of  Resident 
Doctors do not find any place in Department’s reply. The Department needs to make sincere efforts and indicate specific 
measures taken to address the issue of manpower whi ch is crucial for better delivery of healthcare ser vices by the 
Hospital which caters to lakhs of poor patients coming from different regions of the country.  (Para 4.4)  
  The Committee is happy to note that possibility o f land being available behind the Trauma Centre, AIIMS and the 
area adjacent to Incinerator Plant of Safdarjung Ho spital for construction of residential quarters for  nurses is there. 
The Committee would appreciate if this matter is pu rsued vigorously with the concerned authorities so that the nurses 
of Safdurjung Hospital have the required residential facilities.  (Para 4.5)  
  The Committee has been monitoring the Re-developm ent Plan of the Safdarjung Hospital since the outse t and its 
observations and recommendations as contained in it s 27th and 39th Reports are indicative of the fact that the 
Department is not addressing the bottlenecks in imp lementing the Re-development Plan. The present stat us furnished 

by the Department also apparently shows no forward movement in this regard. The Committee is constrained to observe 
that this is a classic case of procrastination. The  Department had earlier set a timeline of six years  for completion of the 
project. However, the Department’s reply that the p roposal for the redevelopment is being further cons idered, entails 
further delay, which is indicative of a very sorry state of affairs. The Committee would like to reite rate that the 
Department needs to come up with a focused strategy  in order to achieve the Re-development Plan in a t ime bound 
manner.      (Para 4.7)  
  Expressing extreme disappointment over the persis ting slow progress with regard to setting up of the  Renal 
Transplantation Unit and IVF Unit, the Committee ha d called for a status note inter-alia  containing details regarding 
the original timeline set, reasons for inordinate delay, resultant cost escalation and fresh timeline set with special efforts 
taken to meet the timeline this time. The Departmen t’s Action Taken Note in this regard is evasive and  silent on all the 
issues raised above. It merely points out unavailability of land as a reason for delay. To avoid basic issues of delay, it has 
further been stated that the Re-development Plan of the Institute would be able to address the space s pecific issue. With 
the Re-development Plan of the Institute itself hea ding nowhere at present, the Department’s response does not inspire 
much confidence towards achieving the target of set ting up of the Renal Transplantation Unit and IVF U nit.  
        (Para 4.10)  
V.  DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI 
  The Committee would like to be apprised about the  reasons for land already allotted to the Hospital at ‘G’ point 
being not handed over by L&DO. If need be, this matter may be taken up at the highest level.  (Para 5.4)  
  The Committee had categorically sought pointed re asons for supplying it with the figures showing mismatch w.r.t. 
the number of vacancies in the different cadre post s in the Dr. R. M. L. Hospital. The reply of the De partment is 
conspicuously evasive on this issue. The Committee cautions the Department to be careful in supplying information as 
well as data properly in future. 
  From the response, the Committee infers that some  posts in different cadres lapsed and the Departmen t is now 
trying to get them revived. In some cases, issue of  notification of the Recruitment Rules is underway while in some cases 
the Department has initiated filling up of the promotional posts through DPCs. 
  The Committee would like the Department to give a  detailed status note covering inter-alia  the number of posts 
(category and post-wise) that lapsed during the las t 5 years, the reasons therefor, and the efforts ma de by the 
Department to revive them now. The Committee may also be furnished a comprehensive comparative status of vacancies 
(post-wise as well as cadre-wise) as in 2009 and in 2010.  (Para 5.7)  
VI.  ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS ) 
  The Committee is deeply disturbed by the manner i n which the Department is treating its top most Institute of the 
country, more so when there is no scarcity of earma rked funds for its developmental activities. The wo rk and patient 
load of the Institute is increasing alarmingly day by day warranting urgent addition/strengthening of its existing 
infrastructure. There are projects duly approved by the Governing Body on 13th August, 2008, with EFCs submitted or 
to be submitted but work is yet to commence. Either  procedural formalities are still remaining or ther e is a change in 
the location or Master Plan is yet to be approved. The Committee is very surprised to note that even v ery small works 
like additional lift in hospital, expansion of exis ting cafeteria in Eastern campus, construction of c ommunity centre are 
not proceeding further. Though setting up of a Plan ning & Monitoring Committee under the Chairpersonsh ip of 
Secretary, Department of Health & Family Welfare is  a welcome step but no concrete steps or strategy f or putting 
things right on track in the next two financial yea rs, has been shared with the Committee. In such a s cenario, the 
Committee can only hope that the Department takes s ome concrete steps to put the developmental agenda of the 
Institute back on track.   (Para 6.5)  
  The Committee views with serious concern the Stat us Note on the various projects in AIIMS being hand led by 
HSCC. Agreement for Redevelopment Plan Phase I and II with HSCC was signed on 25th March, 2009. It too k almost 
one year for Phase I Plan being submitted to NDMC o n 24th February, 2010. With regard to Phase II Plan , while 

proposal on Facilitation Block, New Block for Teach ing Resources have been submitted to NDMC on 25th M arch, 2010 
and 18th May, 2010 Respectively, concept plan for H ostel Block is yet to be submitted to NDMC and for Block for 
Pediatrics and Gynecology is being revised by HSCC. The two remaining Plans, i.e., Block for General Surgery and New 
OPD Block are yet to be approved by AIIMS authorities. It would be almost two years since the signing of agreement by 
HSCC but paper work and formalities are yet to be c ompleted. In such a scenario, the Committee apprehe nds that 
starting of real execution of work will take consid erable time. The Committee, therefore, recommends t hat the 
Department in co-ordination with AIIMS and all the implementing agencies should carry out the implemen tation of 
these two ambitious projects in a time-bound manner.  (Para 6.9)  
  Response of the Department about the proposal for  setting up of a Burns Unit at AIIMS does not give much hope 
to the Committee. The Committee would once again reiterate that all efforts need to be made to revive the proposal and 
expedite the setting up of Burns Unit. It would go a long way in reducing the ever increasing patient load of burn victims 
on Safdurjung Hospital.   (Para 6.12)  
  The Committee has been constantly monitoring the issue of vacancies in AIIMS, particularly the vacan cies at the 
Faculty level posts, subsequent to the matter being  brought before it in November 2008 by the Faculty Association of 
AIIMS through a representation. The Committee is aware that the matter of reservation has been amicabl y resolved by 
the Department after intervention of the PMO and se tting up of a high level Committee in this regard. But the 
Committee is upset over the delay in implementing the final outcome as no forward movement seems to have been made 
since the Secretary, Health & Family Welfare’s pres entation before the Committee during examination of  Demands for 
Grants 2010-11 in March, 2010. The Committee, there fore, urges the Department to take up the issue of filling up of 
these Faculty level posts with a sense of urgency s o that this issue gets sorted out without further l oss of time. The 
Committee feels that now that the reservation roste r has been prepared by the Consultant, the Departme nt should 
vigorously pursue the matter with DoPT for prompt response. 
  As regards vacancies in other categories of posts , the Committee is aware that the patient load of t he Institute is 
increasing day by day as the Institute caters to th e needs of poor and needy patients from the remotes t corners of the 
country in the absence of the quality tertiary heal th care there. The Department needs to not only fil l up the existing 
vacancies urgently, but also needs to reassess its manpower requirements regularly. The Department’s r esponse in this 
regard is silent on the issue of vacancies. The Com mittee would like to be apprised of the specific st eps taken by the 
Department in this regard.   (Para 6.16)  
  The Committee is very surprised by the response o f the Department on a very pertinent issue. It is v ery strange 
that a premier Institute like AIIMS does not mainta in any record about its passouts, that too in this era of high tech. 
connectivity. The Committee strongly feels that whe n an international organization like WHO can conduc t an 
assessment in this regard, similar step can be easi ly initiated by AIIMS also. The Committee would lik e to be informed 
about the steps taken by the Department so as to ev olve a mechanism/ procedure for utilizing the services of its students 
on completion of their studies.  (Para 6.19)  
VII.   POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION  & RESEARCH (PGIMER),  
  CHANDIGARH 
  The Committee would like to be apprised about the  deadline set for the functioning of Advanced Traum a Centre 
Phase II.      (Para 7.7)  
  The Committee notes that the process of filling u p of the vacant posts at PGIMER has been initiated.  The 
Committee would like to emphasize that this exercis e should be completed at the earliest so that requi red strength of 
Faculty Members at the Institute are in place.  (Para 7.9)  
IX.   CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, KANKE, RANCH I (CIP, RANCHI) 
  The Committee has been monitoring the status of t he Premier Institute, the Central Institute of Psyc hiatry, 
particularly its developmental activities, subseque nt to the same coming under the scrutiny of the Jha rkhand High 
Court. Accordingly, in order to bring back the lost  glory of the Premier Institute in the field of psy chiatry, the 

Committee had called for a status note inter-alia  covering the components of the plan, funds earmark ed and spent, 
timeline set for completion thereof alongwith the progress made so far. The response of the Department is conspicuously 
silent on the crucial issues like timelines set and  progress made so far. The Committee would urge the  Department to 
play a proactive role and accomplish the various co mponents of the redevelopment plan in a planned man ner. The 
Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  (Para 9.6)  
XI.  COMMON RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING HOSPITALS 
  Perturbed over the persistent delay caused in coo rdinating the procedural issues with various agenci es of the 
Centre and the State Governments in respect of several developmental initiatives of the Department, the Committee had 
urged the Department to have a positive approach an d accordingly mooted the idea of having a centraliz ed cell under a 
dedicated senior officer to coordinate all such pro cedural issues with the various agencies in respect  of all the 
government run hospitals of India. While making the  above recommendation, the Committee’s only concern  was that 
procedural delays should not be allowed to put a sp anner in the works of developmental plans of hospit als and 
institutions. The Committee is in no way interested  in suggesting the nitty-gritty of the monitoring f ramework, but 
would like to see the progress on the ground. Howev er, the Committee is at a loss to understand the gr ounds of the 
Department’s reluctance in having a centralized cell for coordination and would like to be enlightened about it.  
                         (Para 11.1)  
  The Committee is dismayed at the manner in which the Department has attempted to skirt the issue of making an 
independent assessment of manpower requirement in h ealth institutions. The Committee had heard the hea ds of many 
hospitals based in Delhi during its examination of Demands for Grants of the Department in March 2010 and one of the 
glaring problems put forth by them was that of the manpower crunch. The Committee is also aware of the  fact that 
manpower requirements of almost all the hospitals h as not been analyzed for many years inspite of the patient and 
workload increasing manifold, thereby warranting corresponding increase in staff strength. Accordingly, the Committee 
had urged upon the Department to have a dedicated o fficer assigned the task of taking care of the vaca ncies and 
workload specific issues at the central level and c oordinate with the recruiting agencies as well. How ever, the 
Department has evaded an elaborate reply and merely made a generic statement regarding existing procedure w.r.t. the 
Safdarjung Hospital and Dr. RML Hospital. The Commi ttee wonders as to what could be the reason for so many posts 
lying vacant for so many years inspite of constant holding of review meetings to address the pending i ssues including 
filling up of manpower w.r.t. these two hospitals. The Department needs to welcome fresh and innovativ e ideas to 
smoothen and facilitate processes rather than adopting an indifferent attitude.  (Para 11.2)  
XIII.   PRADHAN  MANTRI  SWASTHYA  SVRAKSHA  YOJANA  (PMSSY) 
  The Committee recommends to the Department to pro actively take up the matter with the concerned Stat e 
Governments of West Bengal and U.P. so as to achiev e the setting up of the AIIMS like institutes there , within targeted 
timelines.      (Para 13.19)  
XIV.  DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES 
  The Action Taken Note of the Department does not present a very encouraging picture w.r.t. upgradation of RAK 
College of Nursing into Centre of Excellence which has been pending since before the beginning of the Eleventh Plan. 
The Committee neither finds any forward movement on  the issue, nor any. commitment, from the Departmen t in this 
regard. The Department’s efforts are limited to reviewing the matter with HSCC and the college authorities on a regular 
basis. Department’s initiatives to sort out the bot tlenecks and specific problem areas are apparently lacking. Such a 
situation does not inspire any hope for early compl etion of the upgradation work. The Committee would recommend to 
the Department to take some concrete and decisive steps in this regard.   (Para 14.8 & 14.9)  
  The Committee is happy to note that the Departmen t has started consultations with the concerned hosp itals to 
assess their demand and availability of residential  accommodation for nurses. The Committee also appre ciates 
Department’s willingness to take up the matter with the concerned hospitals to fill up the required nu mber of nurses by 
outsourcing. But the Committee cautions the Departm ent to be careful in this regard as outsourcing can  never be a 

solution or substitute to regular employment. The C ommittee would like the Department to apprise the C ommittee 
regarding its outcome on the accommodation assessment exercise as well as the manpower outsourcing aspect.  
        (Para 14.12)  
XV.  NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME (NMHP) 
  The Committee hopes that with the Department clai ming a “dedicated monitoring mechanism” as well as 
addressing the acute shortage of manpower in short term by “implementing manpower development schemes on mid to 
long term and use of trained manpower in the DMHP team”, things will move in the right direction and bring one of the 
most neglected National Programme back on track. Th e Committee would like to have the details of the “ dedicated 
monitoring mechanism” and the details of addressing  manpower shortage problem for this Programme, put into force 
by the Department.    (Para 15.6)  
  The Committee is happy to note that some concrete  steps have been initiated by the Department for much-awaited 
revamping and augmentation of the National Mental H ealth Programme. These initiatives need to be const antly 
monitored by the Department in coordination with the implementing agencies.  (Para 15.9)  
  The main objective of the Programme has been to e nsure the availability and accessibility of minimum  mental 
healthcare for those suffering with mental illness,  particularly to the most vulnerable and underprivi leged sections 
amongst them. The Department would be failing in it s duty if it does not expand the Programme in a big  way so as to 
reach the remotest corners of the country. The Depa rtment cannot shy away from this social responsibil ity. Funds for 
the Programme have been ceremoniously revised downw ards at the RE stage owing to poor implementation s tatus. 
Department’s reply that the EFC did not agree to its proposal for expansion of DMHP to 200 new districts in view of the 
paucity of funds does not sound logical. The Department appears to have not presented its case based on sound logic and 
facts or it might not have inspired confidence of a ctually being able to execute the expansion work ba sed on its track-
record. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the  Department to focus on better utilization of the a llocated funds 
and effective implementation of the Programme. The Committee is sanguine that more efficient use of th e allocated 
funds would bolster the Department’s proposal for expansion of DMHP.  (Para 15.11)  
 
XVI.  NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME (NCCP) 
  Department’s response in the Action Taken Note is  a mere acknowledgement of the failures on account of its 
exercise of revising the NCCP eating into most of t he time during the 11th Plan period. Though the Com mittee 
acknowledges problems like withholding of grants to  the institutes in accordance with the GFR guidelin es, yet the same 
cannot be termed as the primary or sole reason for poor performance of the Programme. As pointed out earlier also, the 
fact that the Programme is still not having any app roved scheme during the current Plan is proof enoug h of 
Department’s consistent neglect of this Programme. The Department needs to seriously review its implem entation 
strategy which has been hampering implementation of  such a crucial Programme of vital importance for s o long and 
that too when there is no shortage of earmarked funds for this purpose.                      (Para 16.3, 16.4, 16.5 & 16.6)  
  The Committee notes that the Department has cited  budgetary constraints as the reason for scaling do wn budget 
of NCCP to Rs.731.52 crore for the remaining two ye ars of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee hopes that this 
curtailment is not as a result of sub-optimal utili zation of the allocated funds due to poor implement ation of the 
Programme and wonders as to whether the Department has drawn an effective strategy to utilise even thi s curtailed 
amount fully in the remaining two years. The Commit tee would like to be apprised of the status and com ponents of the 
revised Programme and the details of the “concerted  plan of action to implement the revised programme on a priority 
basis”.      (Para 16.7)  
  The Committee has been voicing its concern over t he implementation of the Programme since long and 
accordingly had advocated its evaluation in order t o identify weak links and ensure effective implemen tation of its 
various components but no forward movement seems to  have been made in this regard. The Committee is di smayed at 
the fact that even after two and a half years the D epartment is still in search of an agency to take u p this task. The 

Department needs to take this in the right earnest and have the Programme scrutinised by a credible ag ency at the 
earliest.      (Para 16.9 & 16.10)  
  The Committee is unhappy to note that in the name  of sincere efforts to liquidate the pending UCs, t he 
Department has been sending reminders. The Department needs to grow wiser by its experience and take u p the matter 
at appropriate higher levels. It can also initiate other administrative actions available at its dispo sal to liquidate these 
pending UCs.     (Para 16.11)  
XVII.  NATIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMME (NTCP) 
  Perturbed by the snail’s pace of implementation o f the Programme, the Committee had commented that t he 
Department has not moved beyond running the ambitio us Programme as pilot project. Department’s candid admission 
that the EFC did not agree for expansion of NTCP to  more districts during Eleventh Plan period is perhaps not a result 
of financial constraints but appears to be Departme nt’s failure in expanding this Programme in the des ired manner. 
With the recent track record, the Department does not seem to achieve the target of implementing the programme in the 
remaining years of the Eleventh plan period in 42 Districts of 21 States within the NRHM framework from 2010-11. The 
Committee hopes that the Department gears up to the demanding task of expansion of the Programme in th e remaining 
States. For this to happen, it has to achieve the t argets before hand first and then approach the EFC for necessary 
clearance for expansion.   (Para 17.3)  
  The Committee had been critical of the manner in which various components of the Programme are allow ed to 
linger on for several years. The Action Taken Note of the Department does not present a forward moveme nt w.r.t. 
various components. Setting up of the National Toba cco Regulatory Authority is still in the pipeline w ith no progress at 
all. No noticeable improvement w.r.t. Setting up of  Referral Labs for testing Tar and Nicotine content s has been made 
and there is every possibility that this target als o would be carried forward in the next Plan period like setting up of the 
National Tobacco Regulatory Authority. Similarly, f inal report of the Global Adult Tobacco Survey (GAT S) is still 
under preparation. With such dismal progress in res pect of the various components, the Committee can o nly conclude 
that some inherent problems are still persisting an d creating roadblocks in the smooth implementation of the 
Programme. The Committee would reiterate that the Department takes some concrete remedial action for achieving the 
various targets set under the Programme.  (Para 17.5)  
XVIII. MEDICAL EDUCATION 
  The Committee had called for a status note in res pect of all the colleges inspected by the MCI durin g the last 5 
years inter-alia  containing - the selection procedure vide  which the colleges were selected for inspection, t he date of 
establishment of college, date of inspection(s), sh ortcomings noticed and action taken after such insp ection. The 
Committee is dismayed at the fact that the required information is conspicuously missing in the Action Taken Note. The 
Committee would accordingly like the Department to furnish the requisite information at the earliest.      (Para 18.2)  
XIX. VACANCIES IN CHS CADRE 
  Status of vacancy position in CHS cadre has been engaging the attention of the Committee for conside rable time. 
The Committee has been informed that the exercise o f completing the recruitment process by UPSC takes about 15 
months. The Committee is constrained to note that e ven this long-drawn exercise has failed to achieve the desired 
results. During 2009-10 against 186 Teaching Posts under CHS cadre 107 Posts were advertised by UPSC a nd only 22 
candidates joined. Similarly, under Public Health, against 28 posts, 15 posts were advertised by UPSC and only 5 
candidates joined. With regard to Non-teaching post s, against the availability of 90 posts, only 24 po sts were advertised 
by UPSC and not even a single candidate joined. Position was no better for GDMO posts. Out of 300 vacancies reported 
to UPSC for CMSE-2008, 241 candidates were recommen ded for posting. Against 142 candidates offered pos ting in 
April-May, 2010, only 3 candidates have joined so f ar. The Committee is extremely unhappy with the pro gress made in 
filling up the vacant posts of CHS cadre. Prolonged  process of recruitment is compounded by another di sturbing trend 
of candidates finally selected not coming forward t o join. This, clearly shows that situation is bound  to continue to 
remain very discouraging with the result that publi c at large as well as CGHS beneficiaries will conti nue to remain 

deprived of medical facilities. The Committee is of  the view that the nodal Ministry has to play a pro -active role by 
taking up the issue with UPSC for expediting the re cruitment process as well as analyzing the factors responsible for 
such a low level of joining by successful candidates.  (Para 19.4 & 19.5)  
  The Committee observes that the revised draft of CHC Rules after concurrence of DoPT was forwarded t o UPSC 
on 14th July, 2009 for approval. Since then, a numb er of queries have been raised by UPSC at different  points of time 
which have been duly clarified by the Department. L ast such clarification was sought by UPSC on 15th M arch, 2010. 
Since then, although almost nine months have passed , the matter hangs with the CHC Rules remaining unr evised. As a 
result, the process of creation of required posts i n different categories as well as modifications in eligibility criteria and 
other allied aspects is being unduly delayed. The C ommittee would appreciate if this matter is vigorou sly pursued, if 
need be at the highest level.   (Para 19.7)  
XX.  NEW INITIATIVES/PROGRAMMES 
  Latest feedback on a number of initiatives and ne w programmes to be launched during the Eleventh Pla n clearly 
indicates that all these proposed ventures are at t he initial stage so far as completion of various fo rmalities are 
concerned. Apprehensions made by the Committee last  year about their progress stand confirmed. The Com mittee has 
no other option but to conclude that chances are ve ry dim so far as launching of these programme durin g Twelfth Plan 
Period are concerned. The Committee, therefore, rec ommends that all these new programmes should be mon itored 
vigorously for their initiation at the earliest.  (Para 20.1)  
XXI.   MISCELLANEOUS 
  The ‘National List of Essential Medicine’ intends  to have some noble objective of ensuring abundant availability of 
drugs considered adequate to meet the common contem porary health needs of the general population in th e country. 
The Committee is happy to note that the same is und er consideration of the Department. The Committee r ecommends 
early consideration and clearance of the same by the Department. The Department’s reply is, however, silent on the time 
gap for such exercise. If such a time lag has not b een decided for this exercise of updation of the Li st, the Committee 
would recommend to the Department to work out in-pr inciple time lag for mandatory updation of the List  in future. 
The Committee may be informed about the progress made in this regard.  (Para 21.2)  
  The Committee is aware that the matter is still s ub-judice. However, the Committee recommends to the  
Department to pursue the pending matter in the cour t vigorously so that it does not remain entangled i n prolonged 
litigation and the poor patients are deprived of mu ch needed healthcare needs. The Committee would app reciate if the 
present status of the case is submitted to it alongwith steps taken by the Department to expedite its early resolution. 
        (Para 21.5)  
  The Committee recommends to the Department to ini tiate suitable action to amend the Drugs and Cosmet ics Act 
& Rules so that generic medicines are not allowed t o be sold as branded medicines for the sake of prof iteering. The 
Committee would also recommend to the Department to  ensure availability of generic medicines in the op en market. 
The Committee would like to be informed about the action taken by the Department in this regard.       (Para 21.7)  
  While appreciating a scheme for the healthcare co verage for the deprived sections of the society by the State of 
Rajasthan, the Committee had called for encouraging  such initiatives in different States in all possib le ways including 
extending central funding for the same. The Departm ent’s cold response to this suggestion by terming “ health” as a 
State subject and stating that there was no proposa l for providing central funding for the state-speci fic subjects is 
nothing but outrightly rejecting a good initiative on technical grounds. Had the Department been serio us on this 
suggestion, it would have seized the initiative and started a similar initiative at the Central level whereby all other States 
could be funded from the central pool for undertaking similar initiatives for the poor people.  (Para 21.8)  
(NRHM) 
II.  BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 

  The Committee notes that the cumulative expenditu re figures for the above three programmes, as given  in 
Annexure-I of the ATN, show a promising trend of increase. Yet it is also a fact that the expenditure figures for Routine 
Immunization Programme for the year 2008-09 are too  dismal to be ignored. Large sums of money have bee n left 
unspent under Routine Immunization Programme during 2008-09. The Committee fails to understand as to why a mere 
27.08% of funds could be utilized under Routine Immunization Programme during 2008-09. 
  The Committee is disappointed to note that instea d of apprising it of a specific action plan to chec k the under-
utilisation of funds, the Department has made a gen eric statement that all out efforts are being made to increase the 
absorptive capacity of States where the utilization  is less than the allocation. The. Committee, there fore, suggests that 
the Department should assess the reasons for its failure in monitoring the funds utilisation under these programmes and 
devise means to remove the loopholes, to ensure optimum utilization of funds.  (Para 2.1)  
  The Committee is happy that the Department is pur suing the matter of delay in civil works with the S tates. 
However, the Committee notes that the reply of the Department is silent about the measures taken to ti de over the 
shortage of trained and qualified manpower for prop er monitoring and the lack of infrastructural facil ities. The 
Committee would expect the Department to be more circumspect while furnishing the action taken note in future. 
        (Para 2.13)  
III.  INFRASTUCTURE STRENGTHENING 
  The Committee feels that the Department is very c asual in its reply to a situation of serious concer n. The CAG 
Report findings about the status of Sub-centres, PHCs and CHCs could have been easily made the basis for initiating the 
required corrective measures. The Committee would appreciate if action is initiated in this direction by the Department 
in close co-ordination with State implementing authorities.  (Para 3.4, 3.5 & 3.6)  
  The Committee notes that as per the figures shown  by the Department, there seems to be no significant increase in 
health care infrastructure and the numbers of perso nnel within a span of 5 years. As per the informati on furnished 
above, between 2005 and 2009, the net increase in t he number of sub-centre is 352 only. The number of PHCs 
functioning from Government buildings has increased by 4213 only. The number of Pharmacists posted at PHC/ CHCs 
by 3295 and Radiographers at CHCs by 549 only. Comm ittee’s specific observation about acute shortage o f specialists 
required to be posted at CHCs has elicited no respo nse from the Department. The Committee observes tha t if the 
present requirements and the personnel posted are matched up to the in-position figures, the deficienc ies would be even 
more glaring. The Committee takes due cognition of the fact that creating a brigade of health care personnel is no doubt 
a time taking process, but it observes that 5 year' s time is sufficient to bring about a visible chang e in their numbers. 
The Committee suggests that Mission Directors should be impressed upon to take up with the States on u rgent basis the 
issue of recruitment and posting of personnel as well as bridging the shortfall in infrastructure to meet the targets set up 
under NRHM within a reasonable time frame. The Comm ittee would like to be kept apprised of the specifi c steps taken 
by the Department to overcome the shortage of health functionaries, and for strengthening the infrastructure.  
           (Para 3.17)  
  It is a fact that considerable manpower has been created under NRHM so far. However, the Committee i s not 
convinced by the contention of the Department that a longer time span is required for filling up of human resource gaps. 
One must not forget that NRHM is mandated to be implemented in a mission mode.  (Para 3.18)  
IV.  MISSION  FLEXIBLE  POOL 
  While the Committee appreciates the fact that the  Department intends to make more efforts to upgrade  greater 
number of PHCs into 24x7, it would like the Departm ent to move in this direction in a structured way. The Committee 
would, therefore, like the Department to formulate a concrete and time-bound action plan for upgrading  all PHCs into 
24x7. The Committee does understand the major const raints in achieving the said objective of human res ource and 
physical infrastructure. Accordingly, the Committee impresses upon the Department to address these two basic issues on 
war footing.     (Para 4.6)  

  The Committee observes that upgradation of CHCs t o Indian Public Health Standards is an important 
intervention under NRHM, designed to provide assure d quality health services to the people. Upgradatio n work of 
CHCs in States/ UTs like Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jhark hand, Himachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, D&N Haveli,  
Chandigarh, Lakshadweep and Delhi were yet to be st arted at the beginning of the year. However, the De partment has 
not furnished any information as to why such an imp ortant initiative has been set on the backfoot. The  Committee feels 
that the reply given by the Department is generic i n nature and gives no idea of the specific and conc rete action being 
taken or contemplated to be taken to meet the targe t of upgradation of CHCs to IPHS. With only two yea rs of the 
Mission period being left, the action plan regardin g accreditation of the CHCs should have been starte d earlier. The 
Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department to indicate the specific efforts made by it to speed u p the pace of 
upgradation of physical infrastructure. The Committ ee observes that the Department should abandon the lackadaisical 
attitude in the matter and come up with a specific plan to get the CHCs accredited at the earliest and  urges the 
Department to come up with a more elaborate reply in the matter.  (Para 4.7 & 4.8)  
  While making the above observation, the Committee  had expected the Department to initiate some corre ctive 
measures so that greater transparency is ensured in  the functioning of Rogi Kalyan Samitis. The Commit tee, therefore, 
urges the Department to take urgent corrective meas ures in this regard and keep the Committee apprised  of the results 
achieved.        (Para 4.11 & 4.12)  
  The Committee takes notes of the submission of th e Department that the roll-out of the fifth module has taken 
some time as it was mandated to be carried out only  through Non-Governmental Organisations. The Commit tee feels 
that delay in the roll out of the fifth module is indicative of the shortcomings in the coordination mechanism between the 
Department and the State Governments. The Committee  also feels that these issues should have been addr essed in the 
project conceptualization stage itself. The trainin g of ASHAs is an imminent necessity for accomplishm ent of the goals 
set under NRHM. The Committee feels distressed that  despite its repeated recommendations, the Departme nt has not 
been able to achieve the desired level of capacity building of ASHAs. The Committee once again urges u pon the 
Department to immediately initiate appropriate corr ective measures to complete the fifth module of tra ining of ASHAs 
in all the States.     (Para 4.18)  
  From a perusal of the data furnished in the Annex ure VI and VII, the Committee notes that by May, 20 10, the 
second-module training of ASHAs could not be comple ted in Tamil Nadu and Chandigarh, the third module could not 
be completed in Himachal Pradesh. In case of Punjab , Kerala, Haryana, West Bengal and Maharashtra the story is no 
different. The Committee fails to understand the re asons behind such. a poor display of achievements b y the above 
States/ UTs. The Committee finds that there is larg e disparity in the distribution of drug kit among t he States 
irrespective of the number of training module compl eted by them. In case of Bihar, while 49 per cent o f ASHAs 
completed training in fourth module no drug kit has  been issued to any of them. Whereas in Himachal Pr adesh while 
only 36 ASHAs out of a total of 2393 selected could complete first module drug kits had been provided to all the selected 
ASHAs. The case of West Bengal, Gujarat, Haryana, P unjab, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra seems to be no di fferent 
with regard to the disparity in the completion of t raining modules of ASHAs and distribution of drug k its to them. The 
Committee observes that there seems to be no set pr actice being followed regarding distribution of dru g kits and the 
level of training of ASHAs. The Committee would lik e the Department to clarify the reasons for such un even 
implementation of this initiative across the country. The Department should make all out efforts to pr ovide drug kits to 
all trained ASHAs.    (Para 4.21)  
  The Committee is not happy with the vague and eva sive reply given by the Department to its specific observations/ 
recommendations pertaining to the most crucial functionary of NRHM. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action initiated by the Department on its specific suggestion to provide ASHA as remuneration a minimu m amount per 
month as allowance as was recommended by the Missio n Steering Group. The Committee would like to be ap prised of 
the findings of the National Health System Resource Centre (NHSRC) Report at the earliest.         (Para 4.24 & 4.25)  
  The Committee notes that this is a classic case o f the fact that wisdom dawns on hindsight. The Comm ittee 
observes that after so much of funds have been infu sed into a health care initiative, the assets so cr eated by allocating 
scarce resources seems to be lying idle and unused in so many of the States across the country. The Co mmittee observes 

that if the Department had acted with prudence and foresight, then such a waste of money could have been avoided. The 
Department has not informed the Committee the actua l number of MMUs functional across the country and as to 
whether how many NGOs/Charitable Hospitals have exp ressed interest to operationalise the MMUs. The Com mittee 
would like the Department to inform it about the latest status in this regard while examining Demands for Grants of the 
forthcoming year. The Committee would also like to be enlightened as to whether any proposal has been firmed up for 
providing more MMUs in the inaccessible districts of the country.      (Para 4.29, 4.30 & 4.31)  
V.  RCH FLEXIBLE POOL 
  The Committee is happy to note that in some of th e crucial states like J&K (DLHS-2-32.0- DLHS-3-63.0 ), 
Uttarakhand (DLHS2-44.5 - DLHS3-63.3), West Bengal (DLHS2-50.3- DLHS3-75.8), Sikkim (DLHS2-52.7 - DLHS -3-
77.9), Daman & Diu (DLHS2-56.1 - DLHS-3-83.5), Raja sthan (DLHS-2-23.0-DLHS-3-50.00), Assam (DLHS-2-16. 0-
DLHS-3-51.00), Bihar (DLHS-2-20.7-DLHS-3-41.4) ther e has been significant improvement in immunization coverage. 
However, the Committee is not aware whether there i s any mechanism for surprise inspections so as to a ssess the exact 
position at the ground level. The Committee would a ppreciate if an initiative is taken for cross-check ing the data 
furnished by these States. Committee’s attention ha s also been drawn by the downward trend noticed in the 
immunization coverage in States like Tamil Nadu (DLHS2-91.4 - DLHS-3-81.6) and Maharashtra (DLHS2-70.9 - DLHS-
3-69.3). The Committee also notes with serious conc ern only marginal increase in the immunization cove rage in States 
like UP(DLHS2-25.8 -DLHS-3-31.1), Madhya Pradesh (D LHS2-30.4 - DLHS-3-38.5), Tripura (DLHS2-32.6 - DLH S-3-
38.5), Gujarat (DLHS2-54.0 - DLHS-3-55.5), Haryana (DLHS2-59.1 - DLHS-3-61.8) and Kerala (DLHS2-78.5- DLHS-3-
79.0). The Committee is of the view that Immunizati on Programme needs to be vigorously pursued in Stat es like UP, 
Madhya Pradesh, Tripura, Meghalaya, Arunachal Prade sh, Bihar, Manipur, Rajasthan where coverage remain s below 
the national average.    (Para 5.16)  
  The Committee is surprised by the response of the  Department to the concern shown by it on non-avail ability of 
cold chain equipment as pointed out in the CAG Repo rt. The Committee doubts whether any follow-up acti on has been 
initiated by the Department on the findings of CAG Report. The Committee would appreciate if the list of 124 PHCs 
inspected by CAG is obtained from it without any fu rther delay and corrective measures are taken accor dingly. 
        (Para 5.17)  
  The Committee notes, from the information given i n Annexure XII, that the utilization of funds by as  many as 
eleven States/UTs namely, D&N Haveli, Daman & Diu, Delhi, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Puducherr y, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Ut tarakhand for repair and maintenance of the cold ch ain 
equipments ranges between 1.5% to 37.9% which by any standard cannot be termed satisfactory. The Committee views 
this trend with serious concern as the under-utilis ation of funds could have serious implication on th e proper storage of 
vaccines and the resultant efficacy thereof. The Co mmittee would, therefore, like the Department to ta ke appropriate 
remedial measures in this regard for making the UIP successful.  (Para 5.18)  
  The Committee takes due cognition of the efforts cited by the Department for promoting institutional  deliveries. 
However, what draws the Committee’s attention is th e fact that the Department has been silent about th e shortcomings 
pointed out by the CAG in its Performance Audit of the NRHM (2009-10). Inspite of the above interventi ons and 
monitoring mechanisms if the loopholes pointed out by CAG persist then the objective of such an important intervention 
like Janani Suraksha Yojana to reduce MMR in the co untry would stand diluted. Involvement of Voluntary  
Organisations/NGOs working in the field of maternal  health should be sought to track the number of ben eficiaries 
opting for institutional delivery and the number of  beneficiaries under this programme. Even audit of records of 
payments to the beneficiaries should be handed over  to the independent agency to bring forth greater f inancial 
accountability into the programme. In order to incr ease institutional deliveries the Department should  first identify the 
district in a State with very high MMR and thereaft er, should carry out a campaign to track down pregn ant women in 
the area and counsel and persuade them to avail the benefits of the programme. This would be a beginning which can be 
replicated in other areas/districts/states by givin g credibility to the service guarantees envisaged t o be provided to the 
needy pregnant women under the programme and the resultant outcome, i.e., reduction in the MMR.  
                 (Para 5.26 & 5.27)  

  The Committee observes that the Evaluation Study of JSY being conducted by the National Health Syste ms 
Resource Centre is yet to start as only required fo rmalities have been completed so far. The Committee  would like to 
emphasize that this Evaluation Study needs to be co mpleted at the earliest so that problem areas can b e identified and 
corrective action taken accordingly.  (Para 5.28)  
VI.   NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAM ME (NVBDCP) 
  The Committee does understand that the allocation  is made on Annual Plan basis but the fact remains that the 
Department has chosen to remain silent on the issue of underutilisation of funds. The Committee would like to point out 
that total Plan outlay in respect of any scheme is based on the specific requirements, both existing and anticipated. Ideal 
position is to go for optimum and judicious utilisation of allocated funds with the objective of earmarked funds being put 
to use as per the envisaged physical targets. The C ommittee, accordingly, urges upon the Department to  take urgent 
remedial steps to address the issue to ward off any negative impact on the programme.  (Para 6.3)  
  The Committee notes that though the Department ha s identified three clear reasons for reduced utiliz ation of the 
allocated fund under this head, its reply lacks cla rity inasmuch as it fails to indicate substantive m easures taken to 
overcome the problem. The Committee would, however,  like to be apprised about the outcome of the remed ial action 
taken by it to address this issue.  (Para 6.4)  
  The Committee observes that there is considerable  gap with regard to District Malaria Officers in tw o N-E States, 
i.e. Arunachal Pradesh and Assam. Out of 16 districts of Arunachal Pradesh, District Malaria Officer is posted in only 3 
districts. Similarly, only 13 districts out of tota l 27 districts of Assam have DMOs. The Committee wo uld appreciate if 
concerted efforts are made by the Department in pursuing this crucial issue with both these two states. 
  Another pressing issue that the Committee would l ike to place on record is that since most of the tr ibal areas are 
highly endemic with Malaria, the outreach of effect ive door to door surveillance services needs to be strengthened and 
carried out diligently. In order to ensure this, th e Committee recommends that the Department devise a  mechanism to 
carry out a monthly review of the surveillance carried out at the district level and to visit specific tribal pockets in order 
to gain first-hand information of the ground realities.  (Para 6.9)  
KALA-AZAR 
  Kala-azar had remained a serious problem for the country for quite some time. The Department has rep lied in its 
ATN that no NGO/ FBO/ PRI is involved in Kala-azar elimination activities. The Committee feels that th e proper 
incentives, support and counseling to the above ent ities would guarantee their involvement in the elim ination of the 
Kala-azar. The Committee fully agrees that for unde rtaking extensive search from house to house, a lar ge number of 
persons are required. Hence, it suggests that the P RIs could be used to be an effective mechanism of a ugmenting 
manpower for door to door searching and case detection. Hence, the Department should devise means of involving PRIs 
in Kala-azar elimination activities. The Committee suggests that the Department should also explore po ssibility of 
involving! contracting out such activities to the p rivate entities. The Committee hopes that the Kala- azar rounds must 
have been carried out during 2010. The Committee would like to be apprised about the latest status in this regard. 
       (Para 6.13 & 6.14)  
JAP ANESE ENCEPHALITIS 
  The Committee is not convinced by the Department’ s reply that apart from Adilabad district in Andhra  Pradesh 
and two districts of Goa and West Bengal each, the vaccination coverage has been satisfactory. The Committee observes 
that in three out of four districts (i.e. Latur-27. 61 %, Gadchiroli-ll.85%, Washim-52.61%) in the stat e of Maharashtra 
and even in the districts of Krishna, Nellore and Medak of Andhra Pradesh the coverage has been far from satisfactory. 
As a result thereof overall 37% of children targeted in AP and 31% children in Maharashtra could be va ccinated in the 
districts given in Annexure-XIII. Even in the State  capital of Trivandrum in Kerala the coverage was o nly 40%. The 
Committee feels that the district programme officer s had perhaps failed to grasp the guidelines of the  Centre in regard 
to this disease. The Committee observes that the re asons for such a communication gap should be ascert ained by the 
Department and appropriate measures be taken to avo id such instances in future. The Committee would li ke to be 

apprised about the latest coverage status for all t he 30 districts where the vaccination was carried o ut and whether a 
follow-up round has been ca,rried out by the Centre to determine the actual coverage of the targeted beneficiaries. 
        (Para 6.18)  
VII.   NATIONAL TB CONTROL PROGRAMME 
  From a perusal of Annexure-XV of the ATN furnishe d by the Department, the Committee finds that, for the 
period April to December, 2009, in 9 States/ UTs no expenditure has been reported by the States TB Societies on account 
of disbursement of funds to NGOs under revised Nati onal TB Control Programme. Again, in another 10 Sta tes/ UTs, 
there is a disbursement of less than Rs. 1 lakh. Th e Committee finds an uneven pattern of funds disbur sement and fails 
to understand the reasons behind such a scenario. I t is also not clear as to whether the lack of disbu rsement is on 
account of less number of VOs/ NGOs functioning in the area or due to lack of timely disbursement of funds on the part 
of the States for the above programme. The Committe e suggests that the Department should come up with a clear 
picture in this regard.    (Para 7.8)  
VIII.  NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME 
  The Committee is astonished by the Department’s r eply that it plans to review the matter of under-ut ilization of 
funds in an emphatic manner with the State Programm e Officers during quarterly and annual NLEP review meetings. 
From the above statement of the Department, it is c lear that there are no proper mechanisms in place t o monitor the 
funds utilization under this programme. The Committ ee would like to state that unless proper monitorin g of the 
programme is done, such lapses would continue and w ith only two years of the Mission period remaining such a trend 
does not augur well for the health of the programme. Hence it exhorts the Department to roll-out financial monitoring of 
the various schemes under the Programme so that the creases are ironed out from the beginning.  (Para 8.8)  
  The Committee observes that out of total 2856 Rec onstructive surgeries conducted on leprosy affected  persons in 
different states during 2009-10, maximum beneficiar ies are reported to be in Andhra Pradesh (617), Bih ar (94), 
Chhattisgarh (108), Gujarat (110), Karnataka (113),  MP (282), Maharashtra (451), Orissa (259), Tamil N adu (132), UP 
(376), West Bengal (101) and Delhi (132). However, as per the details furnished by the Department only  121 persons 
belonging to BPL family could avail of the incentiv e of Rs. 5000/- with 100 beneficiaries being in Kar nataka alone. This 
clearly shows that States have not been fully sensitized about this specific benefits available for leprosy patients going for 
reconstructive surgery. The Committee would like to  reiterate that all the States having higher concen tration of such 
cases need to be sensitized.   (Para 8.10)  
IX.   NATIONAL TRACHOMA AND BLINDNESS CONTROL PROGR AMME 
  The Committee observes that to ensure utilization  of funds allocated for the earmarked activities, i t is essential 
that the remedial measures identified during an ass essment of a programme be implemented at the earlie st so that 
initiatives can be brought back on to the track. The Committee finds that the Department has only passed instructions to 
the States for better financial management and the fact that it has not pursued the matter further is evident from its 
reply. The Committee suggests that with a number of  important entities like Chartered Accountant, MBAs  etc. finding 
place under the NRHM, the State Programme Management Units should be persuaded to execute the remedial measures 
so that the targets under such an important program me are achieved within a reasonable time-frame. The  Committee, 
therefore, suggests the Department to get the feedb ack from the States and formulate further remedial measures if the 
progress is below par.    (Para 9.4 & 9.5)  
  The Committee would like to be apprised of the cl arification sought from the States in this regard.  (Para 9.7)  
  The Committee feels that merely issuing routine i nstructions to the States to ensure standards of Ey e Banking to 
improve utilization of collected eyes is unlikely t o bear fruit. The Committee would expect the Depart ment to devise 
innovative means and methods to objectively assess the progress and analyse in detail the reasons for the shortfall for 
formulating appropriate remedial measures.  (Para 9.10)  

  The Department has merely furnished the figures p ertaining to Tamil Nadu and Gujarat and not comment ed on 
the reasons for low level of utilization of collect ed corneas. The Committee would have appreciated if  the Department 
had dwelt upon the reasons for low utilization and worked out remedial measures to smoothen the inadeq uacies within 
the existing arrangements and storage of the cornea s to bridge out the vast gap between the eyes donat ed and those 
utilized.      (Para 9.11)  
  The Committee understands that the two major reas ons cited for non-utilization of donated corneas ar e beyond 
the control of the eye banks but the third reason c ited in the matter could be addressed to by the Dep artment by 
development of required infrastructure. The Committ ee, accordingly, impresses upon the Department to t ake adequate 
steps to ensure optimum utilization of collected corneas.  (Para 9.13)  
X.   NATIONAL IODINE DEFICIENCY DISORDERS CONTROL P ROGRAMME 
  From a perusal of the above mentioned Annexure, t he Committee is perturbed to find that out of the 
districts surveyed for iodine deficiency, a large number were found endemic. The Committee would like the Department 
to chalk out an action plan to deal with the situation and apprise the Committee about its outcome.  
                  (Para 10.5 & 10.6)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
MINUTES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VIII  
EIGHTH MEETING  
 The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 27th January, 2011 in Committee Room’ A’, Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Brajesh Pathak      -------         Chairman  
 2.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi  
 3.  Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho  
 4.  Shrimati Brinda Karat 
  LOK  SABHA  
 5. Shri Ashok Argal 
 6. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel  
 7. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan 
 8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
 9. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 

 10. Shri N. Kristappa 
 11. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
 12. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
 13. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 14. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
 15. Shri M.K. Raghavan 
 16. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 17. Shrimati Meena Singh 
 18. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
 19. Shri Ratan Singh 
  WITNESSES     
 I. Representatives from  *** *** *** 
  ***    *** *** *** 
 II. Representatives from  *** *** *** 
  ***    *** *** *** 
SECRETARIAT  
Dr. V. K. Agnihotri, Secretary General 
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Committee Officer 
2. * * * 
3. * * * 
4.  The Committee, then considered the draft * * * and 51st Reports on the Action Taken Notes (ATNs) f urnished by the 
Departments of *** and Health and Family Welfare, r espectively on the recommendations/observations as contained in 
Committee’s *** and 39th Reports on Demands for Gra nts (2010-11) of the aforesaid Departments. After s ome discussion, the 
Committee adopted the Reports with minor amendments. 
5. * * * 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the mee ting was kept. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.26 p.m. to me et next on the 18th February, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-A of Report  
Part - A (Health) Para No. 2.3  
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
BE Actuals BE Actuals BE Actuals BE 
   (Upto    
   18.2.2010)    
2985.00 2183.71 3650.00 3008.22 4450.00 2559.61 556 0.00 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-B of Report  
Part - A (Health) Para No. 2.6 
SI. Major 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
No. Heads          
  BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE    RE Exp. upto 
          28.2.2010 
1. Hospitals and 88.70 126.00 118.42 139.20 216.47 214.28 181.30 270.36 230.83 
 Dispensaries          
2. Medical 1016.95  891.81 872.31 1254.61  1512.91  1175.62  2279.52  1659.03 1123.01 
 Education          
 Training and          
 Research          

3. Public 1829.85  1258.63 1144.09 2187.80  1837.51  1550.99  1919.79  1806.95 1157.12 
 Health          
          
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-I 
Part A (Health) Para No. 2.15  
Department of Health and Family Welfare  
 1. Central Research Institute, Kasuali.    
 2. CHRI, Gwalior.     
 3. MCI, New Delhi.     
 4. PCI, New Delhi.     
 5. DCI, New Delhi.     
 6. INC, New Delhi.     
 7. AIIMS, New Delhi 
 8. NEE, New Delhi.     
 9. NDTB, New Delhi.     
 10. LESTB, New Delhi.     

 11. NIHFW, New Delhi.     
 12. NAMS, New Delhi.     
 13. Rotary Cancer, New Delhi.     
 14. R.P. Eye Centre, New Delhi.     
 15. Voluntary organization of A.T.C.    
 16. V.P. Chest Instt., New Delhi.     
 17. IHB, New Delhi.     
 18. NIB, Noida.     
 19. PGI, Chandigarh.  .  
 20. All India Institute of Physical Medical and Re habilitation, Mumbai.    
 21. KHS, Vardha.     
 22. GCRI, Ahmadabad.     
 23. NIOH, Ahmedabad.     
 24. National Tuberculosis Institute, Bangalore.    
 25. KMIO, Bangalore.     
 26. NIMHANS, Bangalore. 
 27. AIISH, Mysore.    
 28. RCC, Trivendrum.     
 29. CNCI, Kolkata.     
 30. RCC, Cuttack.     
 31. RCC, Impha1.     
 32. SMS, Mizoram.    
 33. RIMS, Imphal     
 34. SMS, Meghlaya, Shillong.     
 35. NEIGRIHMS, Shillong.     
 36. SMS, Sikkim, Gangtok.   
 37. SMS, Arunachal Pradesh, Itanagar.    
 38. SMS, Assam Guwahati.     
 39. SMS, Nagaland.     
 40. RIPANS, Aizawl.     
 41. SMS, Tripura     
 42. SMS, Manipur     
 43. LGBRIMH, Tejpur.     
D/o AYUSH      
 44. CCRAS. New Delhi.     
 45. IRCS, New Delhi (Grantee)     
 46. CCRYN, New Delhi     

 47. CCRUM, New Delhi     
 48. CCRH, New Delhi     
 49. CCH, New Delhi.     
 50. CCIM, New Delhi     
 51. RAV, Punjabi Bagh, New Delhi.    
 52. CRIA, Punjabi Bagh, New Delhi.    
 53. NIA, Jaipur.    
 54. NIS     
 55. MDNIY, New Delhi.  
 56. IMPCL     
 57. HPL, Ghaziabad.     
 58. CGHS, Ayurvedic Hospital, New Delhi.    
 59. Institute of PGT, Jamnagar. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-II  
Part A (Health) Para No. 2.15 & 218 
 
FOR THE YEAR 2008-09  
Name of the Auditee unit Instances of serious devia tions from the prescribed financial norms 
Dental Council of India Loss of Rs.97,00,000/- to Council by awarding work of renovation of DCI  
   building to other than 1st Party  
  -do- Sundry Debtors worth Rs.2,72,43,480/- as on 31.03.2008  
  -do- Irregular refund of application fee amounting to Rs .35,00,000/- pertaining  
   to higher study courses.  
  -do- Outstanding inspection fees amounting to Rs.3,75,50 ,000/- due to increase  
   of inspection fees 
Gujarat Cancer Research  Unclaimed earnest money/security deposit amounting to Rs.93,96, 123/- is  
Institute (GCRI),  lying un-refunded to the Various firms/suppliers, O ut of this, an amount of  

Ahmedabad. Rs.l 0,68,974/- is 3 years old. The Institute has b een advised to forfeit and  
   credit this amount in its account.  
National Institute of  Delay in submission of reports on Projects costing Rs.7.28 crore.   
Occupational Health,   
Ahmedabad 
Indian Nursing Council,  Outstanding Inspection/Affiliation fee from Institutes Rs.3.08 crore.   
New Delhi 
SMS, Shillong Non/Short deductions of TDS on payments made to Con tractors/  
   Professional Services amounting to Rs.7,45,036 r esulting in loss to the  
   government.  
  -do- Huge Balances are lying at the HQs & District to th e tune of Rs.48.46 crore  
   due to non-utilizations of funds.  
  -do- Non-utilization of funds by the Districts against s anctions of current and  
   previous years to the tune of Rs.1402.18 lakhs &  Rs.1424.24 lakhs  
   respectively.  
North East Indira Gandhi  Outstanding Advances with Hospital Service Consulta ncy Corporation  
Research Institute &  (HSCC) amounting to Rs.13.39 crores on accounts of construction and  
Medical Science, Shillong supply of equipments.  
LGBRINH, Tezpur Non-utilization of funds to the tune of Rs.23.05 cr ores provided to the  
   Institute as Grant-in-aid.  
  -do- Non-adjustment of outstanding advances amounting to Rs. 4,65,660/-. 
  -do- Irregularities in awarding construction contracts o n single quotation  
   amounting to Rs. 4,51,75000/- to a contractor. 
 
 
Annexure-III  
Part A (Health) Para No. 2.15  
FOR THE YEAR 2009-10  
Name of the Auditee unit Instances of serious devia tions from the prescribed  
 financial norms 
Lala Ram Sarup Institute of Tuberculosis  Rs.12,00,00,000/- advance payment pending with  
Respiratory Diseases (LRSITR), New Delhi H.S.C.C.  
-do- Non-recovery of treatment charges from patients/other  
 Departments amounting to Rs. l,36,73,057/-. 
Kasturba Health Society, Sevagram District,  Unauthorized expenditure on account of payment of  
Wardha interest on Bank overdraft charges amounting of  

 Rs.17,34,946/-. 
-do- Outstanding Security Deposit/Earnest Money Deposit  
 amounting to Rs.13,58,197/- as on 31.03.2009.  
-do- Unspent Government Money for to the tune of  
 Rs.4,68,36,751/-  
Vallabh Bhai Patel Chest Institute  Non-adjustment of balance Rs.27,28,574/-from scheme  
(VBPCI), Delhi to Non-plan under remittance Head.  
Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education Irregular payment of demurrage charges of Rs.l1.47   
and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh lakhs.  
-do- Blockage of 5.50 crores due to non completion of  
 projects expenditure  
-do- Non-remittance of ophthalmology package charges of  
 Rs.33,02,241/- to revenue receipt.  
-do- Irregular parking of funds of research scheme in STDR  
 to the tune of Rs.10 crore and the utilization of interest  
 by respective Departments.  
-do- Non-transferring the income earned of Rs.62.19 lakh  
 to main grant.  
-do- Non-adjustment of advances to the tune of Rs.138.23 crores. 
CRI, Kasauli Outstanding dues against State Governments for   
 Rs. 11,51,36,758/- upto 3103.2009 for supply of  
 commercial product and non- commercial products  
 w.e.f.  1973-74  to 31.03.2009.  
-do- Non Adjustment of contingent advances of  
 Rs.3,29,832=00.  
-do-  Outstanding dues against Autonomous Bodies on  
 account of sale of vaccine and serum amounting to  
 Rs.27,72,290/- 
NIMHANS, Bangalore  Non Refund of unspent balance received for various  
 research projects amounting to Rs.1.85 crores to the  
 Sponsoring Agencies. 
-do- Outstanding dues from the National and International.  

 Agencies amounting to Rs.1,44,23,234/- for projects  
 undertaken by the institute. 
-do- Irregular inclusion of interest amount of Rs. 6.47 lakh  
 approximately earned during the year 2008-09 on  
 unspent balance of sponsored project in the Institute  
 receipts. 
-do- Placing of funds without proper utilization amounting  
 to Rs.11,84,74,271/-. 
-do- Non-recovery of Rs. 4,21,458/- from defaulter Drug  
 Suppliers. 
-do- Blockade of Government Money amounting to Rs.48.29  
 lakhs due to non installation of equipments purchased 
 during the year 2007-08 and 2008-09. 
Lala Ram Sarup Institute of Tuberculosis  Outstanding amount of Earnest Money Deposit to the  
and Respiratory Diseases, New Delhi.  tune of Rs.2,36,358/- for more than three years to be  
 transferred in Government Account. 
Pharmacy Council of India, New Delhi  Outstanding contributions from State Pharmacy Council  
 amounting to Rs.26,54,303/-. 
Vallabh Bhai Patel Chest Institute, Delhi  Outstanding advances of Rs.30,36,293/- paid to the  
 various firms. 
 
Annexure-IV   
Part A (Health) Para No. 2.17  
Period of Para No Gist of CAG Para Present States  
Report 
2 of 1998 7.2 Loss due to expired medicine - Revise d ATN is under  
  GMSD preparation   
2 of 2002 2 (chapter II) Working of Govt. Medical R evised ATN is under  
  Store Department, Kolkata              preparatio n   
3 of 2002 Chapter 1  All India Review on Prevention  ATN is yet to be submitted  
 (Section 2) and Control of Diseases- to Audit.  
  National TB Control Programme     
3 of 2004 Entire Report National AIDS Control Entir e Report has been  
  Programme examined by different PAC.  
   ATN on latest recommenda-  

   tions of the Committee as  
   contained in 63rd Report,  
   duly vetted by DGACE, has  
   been forwarded to PAC  
   Sectt. on 29.06.2009.  
3 of 2006 1.1.2 Annual Accounts of ATN is being sen t.  
  Autonomous Bodies-     
  NIMHANS/PGIMER/CNCI     
20 of 2007 Entire Report Performance Audit: Procure ment  Para was selected by the  
  of medicines and medical  PAC. Oral evidence has  
  equipment already taken place. Final  reply  
   to the PAC on the questions  
   has also been submitted on  
   6.7.2010. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure- V  
Part A (Health) Para No. 2.18  
Name of the Auditee unit for the year 2007-08 Insta nces of serious deviations from the  
 prescribed financial norms 
Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi  Blockade of funds of Rs.4.63 crores on account of  
 purchase of Linear Accelerator for the Hospital. The  
 advance of Rs.4.63 crores was paid to State Trading  
 Corporation. The State Trading Corporation did not  
 supply the machine and refunded the advance without  
 interest resulting in loss of interest of Rs.50.18 lakhs. 
-do- Loss of Rs.23,85,000/- due to non-recovery of  
 licence fees as well as payment of House Rent  
 Allowance from 4/91 to 3/94 
-do- Non-disposal/condemnation of obsolete and  

 unserviceable machinery and equipments (Book  
 value) amounting to Rs.2,68,00,000/- 
-do- Loss of Rs.64,06,728/- due to theft and fire 
-do- Machinery and equipments lying idle in the Hospital  
 of Rs.96,71,000/- 
-do- Loss of Rs.45,00,000/- on a/c of interest due to non  
 utilization of land costing Rs.1.80 crores 
Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)  Loss on account of expired medicine of   
Pune  Rs. 52,02,372/- 
-do- Outstanding valuable for Rs.34,76,027/- 
Regional Health Office (RHO) Jaipur  Non-receipt of utilization certificate for   
 Rs. 9,03,30,971/- 
Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) Avoidable expenditure of Rs.14,37,596 on purchase  
Mumbai  of medicines on account of procedural lapses in  
 tendering process. 
-do- Excess expenditure of Rs.18,63,636/- incurred on  
 final budget allotted Heavy Local Purchase of  
-do- medicines for Rs.10,01,31,763 in CGHS Mumbai.  
 The medicines were required to be purchased from  
 GMSD preferably. 
-do- Non-maintenance of register of domiciliary visit by  
 doctor outside duty hours and irregular payment on  
 account of conveyance allowance of Rs.27,53,128/-  
 to CGHS Doctors. 
-do- Outstanding liabilities of Rs.44,19,449/- pertaining  
 to GMSD Mumbai. 
-do- Outstanding recoveries of Rs.l1,39,066 from paying  
 Departments i.e.  Post and Telegraph and Kendriya  
 Vidayalaya as on 31.03.2008. 
Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)  Unauthorized/irregular purchase of Rs.16,85,096/-  
Chennai  from local chemists by CMO Adyar, CGHS Dispensary. 
-do- Outstanding dues to the extent of Rs.2,63,38,150/-. 
Departmental Canteen Safdarjung Hospital (37)  Recurring loss of Rs.23,11,527/- on account of  
 improper maintenance of books of accounts. 

Regional Health Office (RHO), Trivendrum  Non-adjustment of Central Assistance upto  
 Rs.63,00,000/- under various (NAMP) National Anti  
 Malaria Programme. 
Chittranjan National Cancer Institute (CNCI), Earnest Money Deposit amounting to Rs.19,63,835/-  
Kolkata outstanding in the Book of CNCI, Kolkata. 
-do- Non adjustment of advance Rs.86,18,000/- paid to  
 CPWD for construction of staff quarter. 
-do- Outstanding advance for Rs.1,14,75,220/- pending  
 with various departments. 
Medical Store Depot CGHS, New Delhi.  Advance payment of Rs.31,54,14,183/- to Hospital  
 Services Consultancy Corporation (HSCC) NOIDA 
 for procurement of medicines has not been adjusted. 
-do- Advance payment of Rs.91.16 lakhs made to 
 Director. AIIMS for procurement of sophisticated  
 equipment for VIP units has not been adjusted. 
Central Indian Pharmacopoeia Laboratory  Drugs testing fees amounting to Rs.13,64,115/- is  
(CIPL), Ghaziabad  outstanding from the year 1997-98 to 2005-06.  
 Recovery is to be made from various State  
 Governments on account of testing fees for drugs  
 samples sent to CPIL. 
 
Annexure- VI   
Part A (Health) Para No. 3.17  
Zone-wise details of the number of beneficiaries attached with each CGHS  
Wellness Centre in Delhi  
East Zone  
Name of Wellness Center Total number of beneficiari es  
Chandni Chowk 2959 
Darya Ganj 3111 
Dilshad Garden 10798 
Ghaziabad 39235 
GKG 12150 
Kingsway Camp 31112 

Laxmi Nagar 29256 
Mayur Vihar 30150 
Rajpur Road 4982 
NOIDA 17784 
Shahdara 25655 
Subzi Mandi 7468 
Timarpur 19060 
Vivek Vihar 10978 
Yamuna Vihar 39379 
 
Central Zone  
Name of Wellness Center Total number of beneficiari es 
Aliganj 7056 
C.G. Road 9929 
Chankyapuri 3644 
Constitution House 3077 
Dr. Z.H. Road 4819 
Gole Market 12896 
Kali Bari 9277 
Pragati Vihar 7388 
Lodhi Road 9656 
Minto Road 7696 
North Avenue 6893 
Paharganj 5451 
Pandara Road 587 
President Estate 6159 
South Avenue 3836 
Telegraph Lane 1765 
 
South Zone  
Andrews Ganj 9535 
CBl Colony 1944 
Dakshinpuri (Pushp Vihar) 25460 

Faridabad 15903 
Gurgaon 24229 
Hauz Khas 9481 
Jungpura 2965 
Kalkaji-I 7061 
Kalkaji-II 5213 
Kasturba Nagar-I 8808 
Kasturba Nagar-II 4511 
Kidwai Nagar 12733 
Lajpat Nagar 4258 
Laxmibai Nagar 7943 
Malviya Nagar 6046 
M.B. Road 22445 
Moti Bagh 5978 
Munirka 9271 
Nanakpura 8091 
Nauroji Nagar 7472 
Netaji Nagar 10433 
R.K. Puram-I 13502 
R.K. Puram-II 8494 
R.K.Puram-III 10037 
R.K. Puram-IV 13869 
R.K. Puram-V 11974 
R.K.Puram-VI 7751 
Sadiq Nagar 10207 
Sarojini Ngar-I 5683 
Sarojini Nagar-II 3868 
Sarojini Nagar Market 5540 
Srinivaspuri 20471 
 
North Zone  
Ashok Vihar 8719 
Delhi Cantt. 11018 

Dev Nagar 6746 
Dwarka 19997 
Inderpuri 6614 
Janakpuri-I 24142 
Janakapuri-lI 8381 
Maya puri (Hari Nagar) 11235 
Nangal Raya 17629 
Naraina 4815 
New Rajinder Nagar 4228 
Palam Colony 36009 
Paschim Vihar 14268 
Patel Nagar-I (East) 4818 
Patel Nagar-II (West) 6936 
Pitampura 28047 
Pusa Road 3788 
Rajouri Garden 11956 
Rohini 19891 
Shakurbasti 11039 
Sunder Vihar 15434 
Tilak Nagar 12941 
Tri Nagar 2989 
Vikaspuri 13239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure- VII  
Part A (Health) Para No. 3.17 
 
Details about plots of land under the possession of CGHS for construction of  
CGHS Wellness Centres in Delhi and NCT of Delhi  
Sl. Name of the Wellness Center Wellness Status 
No  Sanctioned 
centre 
 
  Yes/No  
1. Mayur Vihar Yes Plans submitted to MCD for appro val. 
2. Yamuna Vihar Yes Plans submitted to MCD for appr oval. 
3. Gurgaon Yes Plans sanctioned / Funds for constru ction  
   sanctioned. 
4. Pushp Vihar, Sector VII M.B. Yes L& DO has been requested to keep the  

 Road  matter alive. 
5. R.K. Puram Sector XIII No Possession of land wil l be made available  
   shortly by L & DO, Delhi. 
6. Dwarka (3 plots in Sector 9, Yes Only one sancti oned, at Sector 23, Dwarka.  
 11 & 23)  Plan for the building is being got prepa red. 
7. Pitampura Yes DDA has been requested for grant o f  
   extension of time for starting construction. 
8. Rohini Sector 3 & Sector 16 Yes One Polyclinic i n Sector 16 is sanctioned.  
   Plan for sanction is being prepared. 
9. Shakurbasti Yes DDA has been requested to rectif y and  
   correct the plan. 
10. Vikaspuri Yes Drawings have been submitted by C DB to  
   MCD for approval. 
11. Patparganj No Drawings have been submitted to M CD for  
   approval. 
12. Model Town Yes Possession of land not yet taken  over by  
   CGHS 
13. Vasant Vihar No Sanction issued for constructio n of boundary  
   wall and for provision of security at the  
   premises. 
 
Annexure-VIII 
Part A (Health) Para No. 3.17  
Details about plots of land under the possession of CGHS for construction of  
CGHS Wellness Centers outside Delhi  
Sl. Name of the City Status 
No.   
1. Allahabad CPWD has earmarked one plot for CGHS. CPWD will, itself, construct  
  the building and hand over the same to CGHS. 
2. Bhopal One plot allotted in Arera Hills, but plo t not in possession of CGHS 
3. Chennai One plot allotted in Avadi, but plot not  in possession of CGHS 
4 Hyderabad One plot in Himayat Nagar in possession  
  

    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-IX 
Part A (Health) Para No. 6.5 
 
REVISED ALLOCATION/BUDGET STATEMENT FOR ELEVENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN  
I - NEW & ONGOING PROJECTS         
Sl. Name of Sub Estt.         
Allocation 
        Budget Est. Total Remarks 
No. Project Head Cost 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011   
  -08 -09 -10 -11 -12     
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10       11  
IA Approved bv G.B., EFC submitted          
(i) Covering of Engg. 24.5 5 0 0 9.5 10 24.5 Approv ed in G.B.  
 Nallah         141st dated 13.08.08  

 PH.- II         SFC item submitted  
          to MOH Approval  
          awaited. Work being 
          done bv CPWD. 
(ii) Expansion of Engg. 69.44 0 0 0 40 36.19 76.19 Approved in G.B.  
 OPD Block M.E. 3.39       141st dated 13.08.08.  
  Running 3.34       Plans changed in  
  Total 76.19       new Master Plan.  
          Being revised at  
          Masjid Moth campus. 
(iii) Expansion of  Engg. 29.17 0 0 0 25 31.2 56.2 Approved in G.B.  
 New Emergency M.E. 17.39       141st dated 13.08.0 8  
 Ward Running 9.65       Plans changed in  
  Total 56.2       new Master Plan.  
          Being revised at  
          Masjid Moth campus. 
 Sub-Total-IA  156.89 5 0 0 74.5 77.39 156.89   
    
IB Approved by G.B., EFC yet to be submitted        
(i) Burns unit at Total 42.77 0 0 0 10 32.77 42.77 Proposal under 
 J.P.N Apex         reconsideration due 
 Trauma center         to duplication at 
 for AIIMS         Safdarjung Hospital. 
(ii) Connecting East  Engg. 7.5 6 0 0 1.5 0 7.5 Wor k entrusted to 
 & West Ansari          DMRC. Detailed 
 Nagar Campus          project Report 
 with Motorable          subway. 
 submitted.          
(iii) Connecting 
Ansari 
Engg 37.16 0 0.15 0 27.01 10 37.16 Work entrusted t o 
 Nagar Campus          DMRC Detailed 
 with Trauma          project Report sub- 

 Centre with          submitted. 
 Motorable 
subway 
         
 Sub-Total- IB  87.43 6 0.15 0 38.51 42.77 87.43  
    
II MISC. PROJECTS           
IIA Approved bv G.B. EFC not required         
(i) Air conditioning  Engg. 3 0 0 0 1.5 1.5 3 Propo sal under pre- 
 in Main Hospital 
(SH: O.T’s  
        paration. 
 Additional Plant)          
(ii) Addition al lift in Engg. 4.25 1.3 l.l 0 1.85 0 4.25 Work awarded by 
 Hospital         CPWD & is in  
          progress. 
(iii) Augmentation of Engg. 4.8 0.5 0 0 4.3 0 4.8 D ue to change in 
 11 KV sub-
station  
        location of the  
 for Teaching &         Surgical block to 
 PC Block &          Masjid Moth plans  
 Surgical Block.         being remade. 
(iv) Air conditioning  Engg. 3.95 0 0 0 2 1.95 3.95  Tender under 
 in Main Hospital 
AHU’s 
        preparation. 
 (SH: Replacing          
(v) Expansion of Engg. 3 0 0 0 1.5 1.5 3 Drawings s ubmitted 
 Existing 
Cafeteria 
        to NDMC, held up on  
 in Eastern 
Campus 
        A/C of Master plan. 
 Sub-Total- IIA  19 1.8 1.1 0 11.15 4.95 19  
    
IIB Approved by G.B. EFC vet to be submitted       
(i) Construction of Engg. 33.25 0 0 0 15 18.25 33.2 5 Proposal under 
 Multilevel 
parking 
        preparation Work 
 at AIIMS (Fully         entrusted to HSCC to 

 mechanized for          be taken up after 
 500 cars).         approval of Master  
          Plan. 
 Sub-Total- IIB  33.25 0 0 0 15 18.25 33.25  
    
IIC Yet to be approved by GB EFC yet to be submitte d      
(i) New Multi  Engg. 13.65 0 0 0 10 6.65 16.65 Prop osal under 
 storied animal M.E. 2       preparation. Work 
 house in East  Running 1       entrusted to HSCC 
 Campus Total 16.65       To be taken up after 
          approval of Master  
          Plan. 
(ii) Construction of Engg. 9 0 0 0 5 4 9 Proposal s ubmitted 
 Community          to MCD. Work ent- 
 Centre AT A.V.          rusted to CPWD. To  
 Nagar, AIIMS         be taken up after  
          approval of Master 
          Plan. 
 Sub-Tota1- IIC  25.65 0 0 0 15 10.65 25.65  
    
IID Works not requiring approval of GB and EFC        
(i) Minor Works: Engg. 128.13 14.12 24.01 28.18 30 31.82 128.13 These are required  
 Renovation,         for renovation and 
 Addition 
alteration works 
        upliftment. 
 in hospital, 
hostels, and 
residential areas 
         
 in all campus of 
AIIMS 
         
(ii) Master plan &  Engg. 20 0 0 1 10 9 20 Work ent rusted to 
 Site develop-         HSCC Master Plan, 
 ment Ansari         Plans of Facilitation 
 Nagar Campus.         block, New block  
          for teaching re- 

          source submitted to  
          NDMC. 
 Sub-Total - IID  14.8.13 14.12 24.01 29.18 40 40.82 148.13   
    
 Works not requiring approval of GB and EFC       
III - SPILL OVER PROJECTS           
(i) J.P.N. Apex Est. 288.59 32.56 44 80.5 75 56.53 288.59 These are spill over 
 Trauma Centre cost        schemes of the X  
          Plan. Recurring ex- 
          penditure is being  
          incurred. 
(ii) Centre of Est. 53.89 1.39 10 8.35 14 20.15 53. 89 These are spill over 
 Dental Education  cost        schemes of the X  
 & Research.         Plan. Recurring  ex- 
          penditure is being  
          incurred. 
(iii) Covering of Engg. 6.66 6.66 0 0 0 0 6.66 Work  completed and 
 Nallah Ph-1         road put to use. 
 Total -III  349.14 40.61 54 88.85 89 76.68 349.14   
    
IV- MODERNIZATION/MISCELLANEOUS WORKS       
(i) Strengthening Est. 216.43 41.43 42 52.25 45 35. 75 216.43 These are for 
 of Centres cost        augmentation of 
          infrastructure of  
          Machinery and 
          Equipment in 
          routine as per 
          advent of new 
          technology. 
(ii) Strengthening Est. 383.95 50.34 93.61 83.58 80  76.42 383.95 These are for 
 of requirement cost        augmentation of 
 of various 
Deptts. 
        infrastructure of 
          Machinery and 

          Equipment in 
          routine as per 
          advent of new 
          technology. 
(iii) Computerisati Est. 41.13 2 3.13 0.27 13 22.73  41.13  
 on cost         
 Total -IV  641.51 93.77 138.74 136.1 138 134.9 641.51  
 Grand Total 
I+II+III+IV 
 1461 161.3 218 254.13 421.16 406.41 1461  
 Estimated cost of project underway  1137.78 crores   
 Estimated cost of project under planning 323.22 cr ores  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-X  
Part A (Health) Para No. 16.11 
Sl. Year of State Name of the institute Amount Rema rks 
No. release   (in Rupees)  
 of the     
 grant     
1    2     3                  4        5        6 
1. 2007-08 Assam Dr. B.B. Barooah Cancer Instt. 05. 00 crore Reminder is being  
   Guwahati under centre of ex-  sent. 
   cellence scheme   
2. 2007-08 Himachal  Indira Gandhi Medical College,   296,48,463/- Reminder is being 
  Pradesh Shimla under RCC scheme  sent to RCC Shim la 

3. 2007-08 Madhya  Cancer Hospital & Research 
Instt., 
88.00 lakh Last reminder sent 
  Pradesh Gwalior under DCCP scheme  on 18th May, 2 010 
4. 2007-08 Mizoram Civil Hospital, Aizawl for  01.0 0 crore Last reminder sent  
   development of oncology wing  on 61h May, 2010 
5. 2007-08 Punjab Govt. Medical College, Patiala 
for 
03.00 crore Revalidated on 
   development of Oncology wing  reminder sent on 
     12th April, 2010 
6. 2007-08 Kerala Govt. Medical College, 
Kottayam, 
01.00 crore Last reminder 
   Kerala for development of   sent on 11th May. 
   Oncology wing  2010 
7. 2007-08 Chhattis- Pt. J.N. Medical College, Raip ur 03.00 crore Last reminder sent on  
  garh   4th May, 2010 
8. 2007-08 Haryana Govt. Hospital, Bhiwani under 03 .00 crore Last reminder 
   development of Oncology wing  sent on 15th April ,  
     2010 
9. 2007-08 Rajasthan RNT Medical College, Udaipur 
for 
1,95,87,000 Last reminder sent 
   development of Oncology wing  on 6th April, 2010  
10. 2007-08 West  R. G. Kar Medical college &  98,6 6,320/- Last reminder sent 
  Bengal Hospital, Kolkata for develop-  on 6th May , 2010 
   ment of Oncology wing   
11. 2008-09 Nagaland Naga Hospital Authority, 
Kohima 
90.00 lakh Last reminder sent 
   for development of Oncology   on 12th April, 201 0 
   wing   
12. 2008-09 Punjab Guru Govind Singh Medical  03.00  crore Last reminder sent 
   College & Hospital, Faridkot   on 12th April. 20 10 
   for development of Oncology    
   wing   
13. 2008-09 Tripura Cancer Hospital, Agartala  05.0 0 crore Last reminder sent  
   (under new RCC scheme)  on 11th May. 2010 
14. 2008-09 Rajasthan S.N. Medical College, Jodhpur  01.50 crore Last reminder sent 

   (development of Oncology wing)  on 11 th May. 2010  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-X (continued)  
State-wise Expenditure under Revised NCCP for the last three years from 1.4.2006 to 31.3.2009  
Sl. Name of State Name of the Institution Name of t he Year Grant-in-aid Status 
No.   Scheme  (In Lakh Rs.) of UC 
1 2             3 4 5 6 7 
1. Andhra Pradesh MNJIO, Hyderabad RCC 2008-09 300. 00 P 
  Indian Red Cross Society,  Oncology 2007-08 50.00  P 
 Nellore      
  Venkteshwara, Thirupati Oncology 2006-07 300.00 P  
2. Assam RCC, Guwahati RCC 2007-08 500.00 P 
  Barpeta Nalbari & Darang DCCP 2007-08 22.00 P 

  AMC, Dibrugarh Oncology 2006-07 218.00 P 
3. Chhattisgarh RCC, Raipur RCC 2007-08 300.00 P 
4. Gujarat Gujarat Cancer & Research  DCCP 2008-09 17.00 P 
  Instt., Ahmedabad     
  RCC, Ahmedabad Excellence 2006-07 500.00 P 
  RCC, Ahmedabad DCCP 2006-07 6.99 Settled 
  MGIC, Wardha Oncology 2006-07 200.00 S 
5. Himachal Pradesh  RCC, Shimla RCC 2007-08 300.00  P 
  RCC, Shimla Oncology 2009-10 128.00 P 
6. Jammu & Kashmir GMC, Srinagar Oncology 2006-07 1 14.00 .. 
7. Karnataka RCC, Bangalore Excellence 2006-07 500. 00 S 
8. Kerala RCC, Trivendrum RCC 2007-08 400.00 S 
  RCC, Trivendrum DCCP 2007-08 17.00 S 
  Kottayam Oncology 2007-08 100.00 P 
  RCC, Thiruvananthapuram Excellence 2006-07 100.00  S 
9. Mahya Pradesh Cancer Hospital & Research  DCCP 2 008-09 22.00 P 
  Instt. Gwalior     
  Shivpuri, Guna & Ashoknagar DCCP 2007-08 22.00 P 
  Datia, Chattarpur & Tikamgarh DCCP 2007-08 22.00 P 
  Bikaner DCCP 2007-08 22.00  
  Seoni & Balaghat DCCP 2007-08 22.00 P 
  Bhind & Morena DCCP 2007-08 22.00 P 
  Bhopal & Raisen DCCP 2007-08 22.00 P 
  RCC, Gwalior DCCP 2007-08 44.00 P 
10. Maharashtra RST Nagpur RCC 2008-09 300.00 P 
11 Mizoram Civil Hospital, Aizwal RCC 2007-08 220.0 0 S 
  Civil Hospital, Aizwal Oncology 2007-08 100.00  
12. Nagaland Naga Hospital, Kohima Oncology 2008-09  90.00 P 
13. Orissa RCC, Cuttack RCC 2006-07 300.00 P 
14. Punjab GGS Med. College, Faridkot Oncology 2008 -09 300.00 P 
15. Rajasthan S.N. Medical College, Jodhpur Oncolog y 2008-09 150.00 P 
  Acharya Tulsi Cancer  DCCP 2008-09 17.00 P 
  Hospital, Bikaner     

  RNT, Udaipur Oncology 2007-08 196.00 P 
16. Sikkim District Project under National DCCP 200 8-09 44.00 P 
  Cancer Control Programme in      
  the Primary districts of Sikkim with 
congruent districts under National 
Cancer Control 
    
  Programme     
17. Tripura Cancer Hospital, Agartala RCC 2008-09 5 00.00 P 
  RCC, Agartala DCCP 2008-09 22.00 P 
18 Uttarakhand Doon Hospital, Dehradum DCCP 2006-07  66.00 P 
19. Uttar Pradesh KNHM, Allahabad Excellence 2006-0 7 500.00 P 
  JK Cancer Institute, Kanpur Oncology 2006-07 250. 00 ? 
  KGMC, Lucknow Oncology 2006-07 278.00  
20 West Bengal RG Kar Hospital, Kolkata Oncology 20 07-08 98.00 P 
  MCH, KoIkata Oncology 2006-07 100.00 P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-Xl   
Part A (Health) Para No. 18.2  
Statement showing the current status where MCI has recommended for withdrawal of recognition in respect of 
following 10 medical colleges as on May 14, 2010  
Sl. Name of the College Current status 
No.    
1                2 3 
1. S.S. Medical College, Rewa, The compliance repor t submitted by Principal Secretary was sent 
 Madhya Pradesh (15.12.2006) to MCI 10.11.2009. Rep ly from MCI is awited. 
2. MGM Medical College, Indore, The Executive Commi ttee of the Council has recommended to the 
 Madhya Pradesh (15.12.2006) General Body of the Co uncil to revoke its earlier decision to withdraw 

  the recognition of the said college u/s 19 of the IMC Act, 1956 
3. NSCB Medical College, The compliance report subm itted by Principal Secretary was sent 
 Jabalpur Madhya Pradesh to MCI 10.11.2009. Reply f rom MCI is awaited. 
 (15.12.2006)  
4. GR Medical College, Gwalior The Executive Commit tee of the Council has recommended to the 
 Madhya Pradesh (15.12.2006) General Body of the Co uncil to revoke its earlier decision to withdraw 
  the recognition of the said college u/s 19 of the IMC Act, 1956. 
  However, the college authorities have been granted two months time  
  to submit the compliance on rectification of the deficiencies, for  
  further consideration 
5. BRD Medical College, Compliance report dated 10. 3.2010 received from Government of  
 Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh U.P. has been sent to MCI  recently. Comments of MCI are awaited. 
 (27.02.2002)  
6. Kasturba Medical College, The college authoritie s have been granted two months time to submit 
 Manipal, Karnataka the compliance on rectification  of the deficiencies, for further  
  consideration 
7. Kasturba Medical College, Comments of MCI have b een sought on issues raised by the Manipal 
 Mangalore, Kamataka University with regard to non- acceptance of teachers having DNB 
  qualification, allowing KMC, Mangalore to utilize the facilities of 
  govt. hospital and PPP mode. Reply from MCI is awaited. 
8. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Medical The college was inspec ted by MCI on 6th & 7th April 2010 and the 
 College, Bangalore (22.5.2007) inspection report w as considered by the Executive Committee of  
  MCI at its meeting held on 12th & I3th May 2010, which noted  
  various deficiencies with regard to teaching faculty, clinical material  
  and infrastructural facilities. The Executive Committee of MCI has 
  recommended to the Central Government for withdrawal of  
  recognition and stoppage of admissions from the academic year  
  2010-11. 
9. Dr. Panjabrao Alias The compliance submitted by the college authorities has been 
 Bhausaheb’s Deshmukh forwarded to MCI for verifica tion. The comments from MCI are 
 Memorial Medical College, Amravati, 
Maharashtra 
still awaited. 
 (17.5.2006)  

10. Chhattisgarh Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Bilaspur 
Recognized by the Central Government. 
 (20.12.2007)  
 
Statement showing the current status of Show Cause notices issued to  
15 colleges as on May 14,2010  
1. GSYM Medical College, No satisfactory compliance  on rectification of the deficiencies as  
 Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh pointed out by the Council I nspectors in their last report has been  
 11.12.2009 submitted by the College as yet in spit e of repeated requests. Hence,  
  the current status is as it is. 
2. S.N. Medical College, No satisfactory compliance  on rectification of the deficiencies as  
 Agra Uttar Pradesh pointed out by the Council Insp ectors in their last report has been  
 (11.12.2009) submitted by the College as yet in sp ite of repeated requests. Hence,  
  the current status is as it is. 
3. MLN Medical College, No satisfactory compliance on rectification of the deficiencies as  
 Allahabad (11.12.2009) pointed out by the Council Inspectors in their last report has been  
  submitted by the College as yet in spite of repeated requests. Hence,  
  the current status is as it is. 
4. LLRM Medical College, No satisfactory compliance  on rectification of the deficiencies as  
 Meerut (11.12.2009) pointed out by the Council Ins pectors in their last report has been  
  submitted by the College as yet in spite of repeated requests. Hence,  
  the current status is as it is. 
5. JN Medical College, No satisfactory compliance o n rectification of the deficiencies as  
 Aligarh (27.01.2010) pointed out by the Council In spectors in their last report has been  
  submitted by the College yet in spite of repeated requests. Hence,  
  the current status is as it is. 
6. MLB Medical College, No satisfactory compliance on rectification of the deficiencies as  
 Jhansi  (11.12.2009) pointed out by the Council In spectors in their last report has been  
  submitted by the College as yet in spite of repeated requests. Hence,  
  the current status is as it is. 
7. Guru Gobind Singh No satisfactory compliance on rectification of the deficiencies as  
 Medical College, Faridkot, pointed out by the Coun cil Inspectors in their last report has been  

 Punjab (11.12.2009) submitted by the College as ye t in spite of repeated requests. Hence,  
  the current status is as it is. 
8. Maharashtra Institute of No satisfactory complia nce on rectification of the deficiencies as  
 Medical Sciences, Latur pointed out by the Council  Inspectors in their last report has been  
 (11.12.2009) submitted by the College as yet in sp ite of repeated requests. Hence,  
  the current status is as it is. 
9. Seth G.S. Medical The college authorities have r equested the Council office for the  
 College, Mumbai, extended time up to October, 2010  to submit the compliance on  
 Maharashtra (27.01.2010) rectification of the defi ciencies as pointed out by the Council  
  Inspectors in their last report. Hence, the current status is as it is. 
10. M.S. Ramaiah Medical The Executive Committee ha s recommended for continuance of  
 College, Bangalore, recognition in respect of the said college and the recommendations  
 Karnataka (27.01.2010) of the Executive Committee will be placed before the General Body  
  of the Council at its next meeting for approval. Hence, the show  
  cause notice issued to the college may be treated as withdrawn. 
11. B.M Patil Medical college, The show cause notic e issued to the college u/s 19 of the IMC Act,  
 Bijapur, Karnataka 1956 has been revoked by the Ex ecutive Committee of the Council.  
 (27.01.2010) However, the college authorities have  been granted two months time  
  to submit the compliance on rectification of the deficiencies, for  
  further consideration 
12. Vinayaka Mission The college authorities have s ubmitted the compliance on rectification  
 Medical College, of the deficiencies as pointed ou t by the Council inspectors in their  
 Pondicherry (10.02.2010) last report and the same is to be verified by way of inspection. 
  Hence, the present status is as it is. 
13. MNR Medical College, The college authorities ha ve submitted the compliance on rectification  
 Sangareddy, Andhra of the deficiencies as pointed out by the Council inspectors in their  
 Pradesh (09.02.2010) last report and the same is t o be verified by way of inspection. 
  Hence, the present status is as it is. 
14. SVS Medical College, The college authorities ha ve submitted the compliance on rectification  
 Mahaboobnagar, Andhra of the deficiencies as point ed out by the Council inspectors in their  
 Pradesh (04.03.2010) last report and the same is t o be verified by way of inspection. 
  Hence, the present status is as it is. 

15. NRI Medical College The college authorities hav e submitted the compliance on rectification  
 Guntur, Andhra Pradesh of the deficiencies as poin ted out by the Council inspectors in their  
 (04.03.2010) last report and the same is to be ver ified by way of inspection. 
  Hence, the present status is as it is. 
 
Status of 4 Medical Colleges who have filed Court cases with regard to withdrawal of recognition  
1. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Medical  With regard to withd rawal of recognition and show cause notice  
 College, Bangalore, Karnataka issued to the colleg e authorities, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Medical College  
moved to High Court of Karnataka. The High Court pa ssed an order on 11.6.2009 
directing the Central Government to take a final decision within 4 months. 
The college was inspected by MCI on 6th & 7th April 2010 and the inspection report 
was considered by the Executive Committee of MCI at  its meeting held on 12th & 
13th May 2010, which noted various deficiencies wit h regard to teaching faculty, 
clinical material and infrastructural facilities. T he Executive Committee of MCI has 
recommended to the Central Government for withdrawal of recognition and stoppage 
of admissions from the academic year 2010-11. 
2. Dr. Panjabrao Alias  Withdrawal of recognition a s recommended by MCI and the show  
 Bhausaheb’s Deshmukh  cause notice issued by this Ministry was challenged by the college  
 Memorial Medical College,  authorities. The High C ourt of Bombay at Nagpur passed an order  
 Amrawati, Maharashtra on 22.9.2008 permitting the college authorities to admit the students  
as per merit. The judgment of High Court was challe nged by MCI by filing an SLP 
(No. 24195/2008) in Supreme Court. On the basis of Supreme Court Order, students 
were admitted for the academic year 2008-09. No adm issions were made in the 
academic year 2009-10 as MCI directed the college a uthorities not to make any 
admission. 
The college authorities have itself asked some more  time to rectify the deficiencies. 
The compliance report made by the college has been sent to MCI and the comments 
of MCI are still awaited. 
3. Manipal University The Manipal University Challe nged this Ministry notification vide   
 (Kasturba Medical College,  which the admission ca pacity of KMC Manipal and KMC Mangalore  
 Manipal, Karnataka Kasturba  was reduced to 150 an d 100 students respectively. High Court of  
 Medical College, Mangalore,  Karnataka vide  its two interim orders (W.P. No. 13319/2008) resto red  
 Kamataka). the admission capacity of 250 students in each KMC, Manipal and  
KMC, Mangalore. Against the order of High Court, MC I file an Special Leave to 
Appeal (No. 20018-20019/2009) in Supreme Court and Hon’ble court on 6.11.2009 
ordered that “we do not approve of the way in which the interim orders are passed by 
the High Court. We request the High Court to dispose of the matter pending before it 
at an early date at least within the next academic year. 
The Ld. Division Bench of the Hon’ble High Court of  Karnataka at Bangalore has 
finally heard the Writ Petition No.13319/2008 filed  by Manipal University & Ors. - 
Vs . - Union of India & Ors. and other connected writ petition in the month of April, 
2010 and the Judgment is reserved. 

4. People’s Medical college of  A W.P No. 5933 has been filed by People’s College of Medical Sciences  
 Medical Sciences, Bhanpur,  praying before the Hon ’ble High Court praying to direct the MCI to  
 Bhopal. make recommendations in respect of recogni tion of petitioner’s  
  medical college to Central Govt. The matter is un der consideration  
  with Board of Governors, MCI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-XII   
Part A (Health) Para No. 18.4 
 
Present status of 15 medical colleges where first batch of MBBS students has appeared for final 
examination but are yet to be recognized in the academic year 2010 as on 14.5.2010  
Sl. Name of the College Current status 
No.   
1                2                                      3 
1. SRM Medical College MCI has recommended to the C entral Govt. for recognition of MBBS  
 Research Centre, Chennai degree. A notification in  this regard will be issued shortly. 
2. Sadan Institute of Medical The Executive Committ ee of MCI recommended for renewal of  
 Sciences, Peerancheru permission for the admission  of MBBS students for the academic  

  year 2010-11. Further the Executive Committee of MCI has approved  
  the said college for MBBS Course and the recommen dations of the  
  Executive Committee will be placed before the Gen eral Body of the  
  Council at its ensuing meeting for recognition of  MBBS degree. 
3. Bhasakar Medical College, The Executive Committe e of MCI recommended for renewal of  
 Yenkapally permission for the admission of MBBS st udents for the academic  
  year 2010-11. Further the Executive Committee of MCI has approved  
  the said college for MBBS Course and the recommen dations of the  
  Executive Committee will be placed before the Gen eral Body of the  
  Council at its ensuing meeting for recognition of  MBBS degree. 
4. Konaseema Institute of  The Executive Committee not recommended for approval and renewal  
 Medical Sciences and for admission of fresh batch of students at the said college for the  
 Research, Amlapuram academic year 2010-2011 due to  the gross deficiencies found in the  
  last Inspection report 
5. Santhi Ram Medical College, The Executive Commit tee not recommended for approval and renewal  
 Nandayal, Andhra Pradesh for admission of fresh ba tch of students at the said college for the  
  academic year 2010-2011 due to the gross deficien cies found in the  
  last Inspection report 
6. Rajarajeshwari Medical The Executive Committee o f MCI recommended for renewal of  
 College and Hospital, permission for the admission  of MBBS students for the academic  
 Bangalore, Karnataka year 2010-11. Further the Exe cutive Committee of MCI has approved  
  the said college for MBBS Course and the recommen dations of the  
  Executive Committee will be placed before the Gen eral Body of the  
  Council at its ensuing meeting for recognition of  MBBS degree. 
7. Agartala Government MCI has recommended to the C entral Govt. for recognition of MBBS  
 Medical College, Agartala, degree. A notification in this regard will be issued shortly. 
 Tripura  
8. Government Vellore Medical MCI has recommended t o the Central Govt. for recognition of MBBS  
 College, Vellore, Tamil Nadu degree. A notificatio n in this regard will be issued shortly. 
9. Shri Ram Murthi Smarak The Executive Committee n ot recommended for approval and renewal 
 Institute of Medical Sciences, for admission of fr esh batch of students at the said college for the  
 Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh academic year 2010-2011 du e to the gross deficiencies found in the  

  last Inspection report 
10. People’s College of Medical The Executive Commi ttee recommended to refer the matter with  
 Sciences & Research Institute regard to the approv al/renewal in respect of the said college to the  
 Bhopal Central Government for consideration 
11. Bharti Vidyapeeth Medical MCI has recommended t o the Central Govt. for recognition of MBBS  
 College & Hospital, Sangli degree. A notification in this regard will be issued shortly. 
12. Hi-Tech Medical College & The 1st batch of MBBS  Students is yet to appear in the final  
 Hospital, Orissa examination; hence, the question of recognizing the said Institute  
  does not arise. 
]3. Sri Gokulam Medical The 1st batch of MBBS Stude nts is yet to appear in the final  
 College, examination; hence, the question of recog nizing the said Institute  
 Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala does not arise. 
14. National Institute of Medical The Executive Com mittee of MCI recommended for renewal of  
 Sciences, Jaipur, Rajasthan permission for the adm ission of MBBS students for the academic  
  year 2010-11. Further the Executive Committee of MCI has approved  
  the said college for MBBS Course and the recommen dations of the  
  Executive Committee will be placed before the Gen eral Body of the  
  Council at its ensuing meeting for recognition of  MBBS degree. 
15. Swami Vivekanand Institute The permission was n ot renewed from the academic year 2005-06  
 of Medical Sciences & onwards. No communication ha s been received either from college  
 Research, Valia, Gujarat authorities or MCI. 
      
Annexure-XIII   
Part A (Health) Para No. 19.5  
Details of direct recruitment in various sub-cadre of CHS during 2009-10  
Sub-cadre Requisitions Action Taken/Status Status o f holding Efforts made to   
 placed with  DPC fill up the  
 UPSC   vacancies 
1        2                 3            4             5 
Teaching For 186 posts 107 posts were advertised by    
  UPSc. 22 candidates joined on  
  the basis of the recommenda-  
  tions of UPSC.  
 
 

 
 
Public- For 28 posts 15 posts were advertised by   
Health  UPSC. 05 candidates joined on   
  the basis of the recommenda-  
  tions of UPSC. 
Non- For 90 posts 24 numbers were advertised    
Teaching  by UPSC. No candidates joined   
  on basis of the recommenda-  
  tion UPSC. 
GDMOs For 210 posts UPSC conducted CMSE-2009  
and recommended only 450   
candidates for allocation   
among 5 participating cadres   
namely (i) Railways, (ii) Indian   
ordnance Factory; (iii) Central   
Health Service; (iv) Municipal   
Corporation of Delhi; and (v)   
New Delhi Municipal Corpo-  
ration. In all likelihood, appro-  
ximately 148 candidates would   
be available for allocation to   
GDMO Sub-cadre of CHS. 
Note:-300 vacancies were re-  
ported to UPSC for CMSE-  
2008, out of which 241 can-  
didates were recommended   
for posting in GDMO sub-cadre   
of CHS. Offers for postings   
have been issued in April-May,   
2010 to 142 candidates whose   
pre-appointment formalities   
were complete. Only 3 candi-  
dates have joined so far. Most   
of them have applied for ex-  
tension of joining period since   
they are pursuing PG courses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-XIV  
Part A (Health) Para No. 19.7  
(A)   Status of revision of CHS Rules:---  As regards status of the review/revision of CHS Ru les, it is stated that revised draft 
of CHS Rules, after concurrence of Department of Personnel and Training, were sent to UPSC on 14.7.2009 for the approval of 
the Commission. The UPSC vide  their letter dated 23.7.2009 raised certain querie s about the proposed amendments in CHS 
Rules, which were replied by this Ministry on 18.8.2009. Subsequently, the Secretary, UPSC was requested by this Ministry on 
17.9.2009 for expediting the approval of Commission  to the proposed amendments in CHS Rules. UPSC vide  their letter dated 
5.10.09 conveyed another set of queries about propo sed revised Rules. While clarifying all the queries  raised vide  letter dated 
26.10.2009, Secretary, UPSC was also requested for convening a meeting for early finalization of the R ules. Accordingly, a 
meeting was held in UPSC on 18.12.2009 under the Ch airmanship of Secretary, UPSC. The proposed amendme nts were 
discussed and UPSC asked for data about year-wise v acancies for three calendar years (2007, 2008 and 2 009) and a written 
confirmation that proposed qualifications for Speci alities/Super-Specialities are in harmony with exta nt Medical Council of 
India (MCI) Regulations. The requisite data about y ear-wise vacancies in respect of 22 Specialities wa s sent on 22.12.2009 
alongwith confirmation that the qualification mentioned in proposed Rules are as per MCI Regulations. 

  UPSC was reminded on 29.1.2010 for expediting the  clearance of amendments of CHS Rules. In response,  UPSC called 
another meeting for further discussion in the matte r. The meeting was held on 19.2.2010. Thereafter UP SC vide  letter dated 
15.3.2010 had sought further clarifications which have been sent. It would be observed from above narration that the Ministry is 
making all out efforts to get the Rules approved by UPSc. 
(B)    Dynamic Assured Career Progression Scheme (DACP) :---  On the recommendations of Vth Central Pay Commissi on, 
Dynamic Assured Career Progression (DACP) Scheme wa s introduced and implemented in respect of CHS doct ors w.e.f.  5th 
April, 2002 vide  letter No. 21/14/97-PC(H)/CHS.V. Under this Scheme , CHS doctors were granted promotion upto CMO 
(NFSG) level on time-bound basis without linkage to  vacancies. Further, consequent to: the decision ta ken by Government, at 
the time of implementation of recommendations of 6th CPC, DACP Scheme has now been extended upto SAG l evel posts vide  
O.M. No. A.45012/2/2008-CHS.V dated 29.10.2008. As of now, the CHS doctors are being granted promotion s under DACP 
scheme as per pattern given hereunder: 
General Duty Medical Officer sub-cadre  
Medical Officers (Grade Pay Senior Medical officer( Grade 4 years in grade Pay of Rs. 5400 in 
Rs. 5400 in PB-3) Pay Rs. 6600 in PB-3) PB-3 includ ing service rendered in the 
  pre-revised scale of Rs, 8000-13500 
Senior Medical officer (Grade Chief Medical Officer  (Grade 5 years in Grade Pay of Rs. 6600 in 
Pay Rs. 6600 in PB-3) Pay Rs.7600 in PB-3) PB-3 inc luding service rendered in the 
  pre-revised scale of Rs. 10000-15200 
Chief Medical Officer (Grade Chief Medical Officer (NFSG) 4 years in Grade Pay of Rs. 7600 in 
Pay Rs.7600 in PB-3) (Grade Pay Rs. 8700 in PB-4) P B-3 including service rendered in the 
  pre-revised scale of Rs. 12000-16500. 
Chief Medical Officer Senior Administrative Grade 7  years in Grade Pay of Rs. 8700 in 
(NFSG) (Grade Pay Rs. 8700 (Grade Pay Rs. 10000 in PB-4) PB-4 including service rendered in the 
in PB-4)  pre-revised scale of Rs. 14300-18300 
  or 20 years of regular service. 
 
Non-Teaching, Public Health and Teaching sub-cadre 
Specialist Grade-II (Junior scale) Specialist Grade -II (Sr. scale) 2 years in Grade Pay of Rs.6600 in 
Grade Pay Rs.6600 in PB-3) Grade Pay Rs.7600 in PB- 3) PB-3 including service rendered in the 
Assistant Professor Associate Professor pre-revised  scale of Rs. l0000-15200. 
Specialist Grade-II (Sr. scale) Specialist grade-I 4 years in Grade Pay of Rs. 7600 in 
Grade Pay Rs.7600 in PB-3) (Grade Pay Rs.8700 in PB -4) PB-3 including service rendered in the 
Associate Professor Professor pre-revised scale of Rs. 12000-16500 
Specialist Grade- I (Grade Pay Consultant/SAG Grade  7 years in Grade Pay of Rs.8700 in 
Rs.8700 in PB-4) (Grade Pay Rs. l 0000 in PB-4) PB- 4 including service rendered in the 

Professor Director -Professor pre-revised scale of Rs.14300-18300.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-XV   
Part A (Health) Para No. 20.2  
Pilot project on Prevention and Control of Human Rabies  
        Question                                      Answer 
              1                                          2 
The pilot project on control  To prevent human deat hs due to rabies a pilot project is being carried o ut in  
of human rabies and preven- five cities viz: Ahmeda bad, Bangalore, Delhi, Pune, and Madurai. NCDC is  
tion is still being run on pilot  the nodal agency to coordinate various activities under the project.  It was  
project basis taken as pilot project to test the st rategy for prevention and control of  
human rabies and develop interface with veterinary and animal husbandry department to development cons ensus strategy for 
control of rabies in animals. This would help in co nceiving programme for prevention and control of ra bies in the country in 
future. 
The project has been further extended for period of  one year i.e.  2010-11 to gain more experience on its implementat ion in 
semi-urban & rural areas and establish coordination with veterinary sector for prevention and control of rabies in animals. 
Progress made so far  

 /circle6 1865 doctors and paramedical staff have been train ed on appropriate animal bite 
management. 
 /circle6 Intradermal route of administration has been imple mented in 54 centres in pilot 
project cities. 
 /circle6 Rabies immunoglobulins are being procured and used  in pilot project cities out of the 
allocated funds. 
 /circle6 Awareness has been created in general community. 
 /circle6 One laboratory each in pilot project city has been  strengthened. 
 /circle6 Surveillance on animal bite cases has been strengt hened. 
Utilization of funds has been  Initially the projec t was proposed for Rs.8.00 crores. However, an amou nt  
nominal of Rs. 3.26 crores was allocated on final a pproval of the project. 
 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
Year Funds allocated Total 
expenditure 
% expenditure 
2007-08 0.5 0.5 100 
2008-09 199.53 197.05 99 
2009-10 77.00 75.94 99 
Utilization of allocation in 11.   An amount of Rs.  160.00 lakhs has been allocated for 2010  
 2010-11 Meeting to review the activities carried out so far and develop plan of  
 action for 2010-11 was organized at NCDC. Allocatio n of funds is under process. 
This will enable to develop a consensus strategy fo r control of rabies in animals 
along with prevention and control of rabies in huma ns and will help in formulation 
of national rabies control Programme. 
 
 
 
Annexure-XVI  
Part A (Health) Para No. 21.4  
CURRENT STATUS ON THE WHISTLE BLOWER POLICY (AS ON 30.04.2010)  
North Zone South Zone East Zone West Zone Hyderabad  Ahmeda- 
(22 cases) (1 case) (2 cases) (1 case) Sub-Zone bad  Sub- 
    (1 case) Zone  
     (No case)  
A total of 22 cases.  
Received *  
12 cases referred to the   
SLA for further neces-  
sary action. 
5 raids were carried out   
1 Case 
received & DI 
from CDSCO 
(SZ) is 
deputed to 
investigate 
the matter in 
the month of 
1 Case was received 
from West Bengal 
& it was found to 
be fictitious. 
(Informed by East 
Zone vide  letter 
no­EZ/6­12/Spuriou 
s/ Whistle Blower 
1 Case 
received 
about the 
suspicious 
acti­vities, 
Mumbai. 
Investigated 
the matter 
1 Case received, 
referred by 
CDSCO (HQ), vide  
F. No MHFW 
/2010/C DSCO 
dated 
19/01/2010, 
investigated by 
No case reported 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

with the SLA. 
3 premises kept under   
watch by deputing   
watchers 
Total of 26 samples were   
taken under the D & C   
Act 
Total of 40- samples   
taken under survey 
*2 complaints were re- 
peated as they were re- 
ceived twice. Same ac- 
tion was taken in these 
cases. 
(Informed by North zone 
vide  letter no. NZ/Spuri- 
ous/Whistle-Blower/2009- 
10/2480 dated 08/02/2010 
and vide  letter no NZ/  
Spurious/Whistle-Blower/ 
2009-10/2954 dated   
22/03/2010. 
March 2010. 
(Informed by 
South Zone 
vide  letter no 
64/SZ/10­
11­777 dated 
22/03/2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10/6/10 dated 
19/02/2010) 1 case 
is being referred to 
the east zone 
office. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on 
03/03/2010 
and 
inspecting 
team got  
Nil  stock of 
suspicious 
material 
and their 
related 
documents. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the DI of the sub­
zone (Hyd­
erabad) and 
found that the 
Firm is engaged 
in synthesis of 
chemical deriv­
atives/ bulk 
intermediates 
and has not 
manufactured 
any drug without 
any valid 
manufacturing 
licence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-A of Report  
(Part-B - NRHM- Para No.2.1)  
(Rupees in crores)  
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Approved Expenditure Approved Expenditure Approved Expenditure (upto 
outlay  outlay  outlay January, 2010) 
10890.00 10380.40 11930.00 11260.18 13930.00 10013. 91 
 
 
Annexure-B of Report  
(Part-B - NRHM- Para No.2.1)  
(Rs. in crores)  

Scheme 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
 Allocation Expenditure Allocation Expenditure Allo cation Expenditure 
      (upto 
      31.01.10) 
Disease Control 882.00 863.21 1086.57 890.81 1101.0 7 726.48 
Programme      
Family Welfare 9418.00 9022.28 10193.43 10035.26 12 178.93 9015.48 
Rautine 317.00 236.64 615.00 166.52 414.21 247.77 
Immunisation 
       
 
Annexure-C of Report  
(Part-B - NRHM-Para No.2.2)  
   (Rs in crores)  
 2009-10 
Schemes Allocation Expenditure (upto 
  30.01.2010) 
Vector Borne Disease Control Programme 442.00 227.7 3 
National T.B. Control Programme 312.25 259.60 
Infrastructure Maintenance 3087.68 2642.60 
RCH Flexible Pool 3545.00 2641.84 
Mission Flexible Pool 3567.27 2479.17 
IEC 186.31 75.95 
Routine Immunization 414.21 247.77 
 
 
Annexure-D of Report  
(Part-B - NRHM-Para No.2.12)  
(Rs in crores)  
State/UT Opening Allocation Release Exp. Unspent % 
 Balance as on    balance as Utilization 
 1.4.2008    on 31.03.09  
Bihar 309.94 216.20 216.20 106.24 419.90 20% 
Chandigarh 2.46 1.75 0.04 0.56 1.94 22% 
Chhattisgarh 96.03 54.18 54.18 8.92 141.29 6% 

Delhi 28.51 27.59 27.02 10.78 44.75 19% 
Goa 2.69 2.76 2.38 1.21 3.86 24% 
Himachal Pradesh 39.99 12.29 12.29 16.72 35.56 32% 
Jharkhand 113.97 70.23 90.23 59.47 144.73 29% 
Madhya Pradesh 220.52 157.51 157.51 109.54 268.49 2 9% 
Orissa 161.71 95.81 123.44 65.70 219.45 23% 
Puducherry 4.23 2.01 2.01 1.73 4.51 28% 
Tamil Nadu 235.99 124.15 124.15 136.86 223.28 38% 
Tripura 43.26 27.88 27.88 25.93 45.21 36% 
Uttar Pradesh 654.12 432.93 305.43 300.53 659.02 31 % 
West Bengal 318.07 160.77 160.77 180.13 298.71 38% 
Others  5.80  0.00   
Total (All India) 4150.07 2603.24 2597.44 3254.29 3 493.22  
  
Annexure-E of Report  
(Part-B - NRHM- Para No.3.7)  
Infrastructural Sub-Centres   PHCs   CHCs  
Deficiencies States No. of %age States No. of %age States No. of % age 
  SCs   PHCs   CHCs  
Lack of separate 28 1108 81 26 431 63 22 102 32 
utilities for men and          
women         
No arrangement for 27 529 39 18 120 17 27 529 39 
water supply          
No infrastructure for 28 1008 74 24 287 42 28 1008 74 
water storage         
No sewage diposal 18 668 49 23 241 35 18 668 49 
facility 
          
Annexure-F of Report  
(Part-B - NRHM- Para No.4.5)  
State/UTs Functional Functional 24X7 First Referral  Units 
 PHCs CHCs PHCs (FRUs) 
Bihar 1641 17 533 76 
Chhattisgarh 721 136 418 56 

Himachal Pradesh 449 73 95 51 
Jammu & Kashmir 375 85 105 58 
Jharkhand 330 194 194 19 
Madhya Pradesh 1149 270 212 87 
Orissa 1279 231 64 48 
Rajasthan 1503 349 500 100 
Uttar Pradesh 3690 515 648 136 
Assam 844 103 343 60 
Manipur 72 16 20 1 
Andhra Pradesh 1570 167 800 194 
Gujarat 1073 273 331 148 
Maharashtra 1816 407 663 466 
West Bengal 924 349 168 61 
 
Annexure-G of Report  
(Part-B - NRHM- Para No.5.4)  
(Rs. in crores)  
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
State Allocation Exp Allocation Exp Allocation Exp.  
      (upto 
      31.12.09) 
Assam 166.84 105.24 240.33 194.74 338.62 110.37 
Manipur 14.24 7.85 21.50 15.45 30.29 6.15 
Meghalaya 13.87 4.95 21.13 6.87 29.29 4.98 
Nagaland 11.88 4.57 18.12 11.54 25.32 5.88 
Tripura 18.53 5.47 28.57 ,14.41 40.72 4.94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-I  
(Part-B NRHM Para 2.1) 
 
        (Rupees in crores)  
Scheme  2007-08   2008-09   2009-10  
 Alloc- Expen- % age Alloc- Expen- % age Alloc- Exp en- % age 
 ation diture Expdt. ation diture Expdt. ation ditu re Expdt. 
        (upto   
        31.03.10)  
        (prov.)  
Disease Control 962.00 904.28 94.00 1158.57 931.17 80.37 1149.57 1008.38 87.72 
Programme          

Family Welfare 9611.00 9239.48 96.13 10156.43 10162 .49 100.06 12366.22 11680.33 94.45 
Routine 317.00 236.64 74.65 615.00 166.52 27.08 414 .21 350.34 84.58 
Immunisation          
TOTAL : 10890.00 10380.40 95.32 11930.00 166.52 1.40 1393 0.00 13039.05 93.60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-II  
(Part-B NRHM Para 2.2)  
(Rs. in crores)  
 2009-10 
Schemes Allocation Expenditure 
  (upto 31.03.2010) 
Vector Borne Disease Control Programme 442.00 338.9 8 
National T.B. Control Programme 312.25 311.56 
Infrastructure Maintenance 3087.68 3149.98 
RCH Flexible Pool 3545.00 3479.11 
Mission Flexible Pool 3567.27 3380.77 

IEC 186.31 155.13 
Routine Immunization 414.21 350.31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-III  
 (Part-B NRHM Para 2.12)  
Allocations and Utilization 
RCH Flexible Pool  (Rs. in Crore.)  
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
Allocations and Utilization 
Mission Flexi-Pool  
(Rs. in Crore.)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-IV  
(Part-B NRHM Para 3.2)  
Sl. Infrastructure/Human Resource 2005 2009 
1 Number of Health Sub-Centres 1,46,026 1,46,378 
2 Health Sub-Centers in Government  63,901 78,846 
 Buildings   
3 ANMs at Health Sub-Centres / PHCs 1,39,798 1,87,9 02 
4 PHCs in Government Buildings 16,023 out of 23,236  20,236 out of 23,474 
5 Doctors at PHCs 20,308 24,085 plus 6,323 AYUSH 
   Doctors 
6 Number of CHCs 3,346 4,385 (31% Increase) 
Allocation           Release         Expenditure  
Allocations and Utilization 
Mission Flexi-Pool  (Rs. in Crore.)  
Allocation           Release         Expenditure  

7 GDMOs Other Doctors at CHC 3,550 5,062 
8 Nurse Midwife at PHC / CHC NA 5,368 MBBS GDMOs pl us  
   1,569 AYUSH Doctors 
9 Nurse Midwife at PHC / CHCs 28,930 .46,903 
10 Lab Technicians at PHC / CHCs 12,284 12,941 (Out  sourcing in  
   States Like Bihar, WB) 
11 Pharmacists at PHCs / CHCs 17,708 21,003 
12 Radiographers at CHCs 1,337 1,886 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-V 
(Part-B NRHM Para 4.13)  
          (Rs. in crores) 
Name of  11th Plan     
the Scheme Approved 2007 -08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-1 1 
 Outlay 
Basic Training of  520.48 66.48 67.27 78.34 65.82 7 3.22 59.40 85.18 
ANM/ LHVs 
Basic Training of 56.09 8.72 8.71 10.23 9.47 10.62 8.25 12.34 
MPW Workers (Male) 
         

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure- VI 
(Part-B NRHM Para 4.18) 
 
State-wise status of ASHA selection & training (Up to May 2010)  
  States ASHAS ASHAS  Module    
   Targeted Selected  Mod-1 Mod-2 Mod-3 Mod-4 Mod-5 
EAG 1 Bihar 87135 73649 69402 44716 44716 44716 0*  
States 2 Chhattisgarh 60092 60092 60092 60092 60092  60092 60092 
 3 Jharkhand 40964 40964 40115 39482 39214 35675 22 580* 
 4 Madhya Pradesh 52117 49282 45908 42153 41237 379 69 0* 

 5 Orissa 34324 34252 34117 33910 33910 33910 33102  
 6 Rajasthan 48372 42496 40310 40310 40310 40310 0*  
 7 Uttar Pradesh 136268 136182 135130 128434 128434  128434  0* 
 8 Uttarakhand 9983 9983 9975 9975 9975 9975 8978 
NE  9 Assam 29693 28798 26225 26225 26225 26225 232 71 
States 10 Arunachal Pradesh 3862 3608 3379 3212 315 6 2533 1176 
 11 Manipur 3878 3878 3878 3000 3000 3000 3000 
 12 Meghalaya 6258 6258 6175 6175 6175 6175 3427 
 13 Mizoram 943 943 943 943 943 943 932 
 14 Nagaland 1700 1700 1700 1700 1700 1700 1700 
 15 Sikkim 666 637 637 637 637 637 637 
 16 Tripura 7367 7367 7367 7367 7367 7367 7362 
Other 17 Andhra Pradesh 70700 70700 70700 70700 707 00 70700 70700 
States 18 Delhi 3266 2266 2236 2236 2236 2236 0* 
 19 Gujarat 31438 27043 17835 17835 17835 17835 291 5 
 20 Haryana 14000 13098 12753 4359 4359 4359 0* 
 21 Himachal Pradesh 18248 16888 16888 0 0 0 0 
 22 Jammu and  9764 9500 9500 9000 9000 9000 ---- 
  Kashmir        
 23 Karnataka 39195 37681 25400 25400 25400 25400 2 5400 
 24 Kerala 32854 31868 28845 22263 11953  0 
 25 Maharashtra 60457 60441 53331 8413 7905 7411 39 38 
 26 Punjab 17756 17229 15481 3503 3503 0 0 
 27 Tamil Nadu 2650 2650 0 0 0 0 0 
 28 West Bengal 47689 30114 21338 17699 15473 11674  10772 
UTs 29 Andaman and 403 403 403 403 49 49 49 
  Nicobar        
 30 Chandigarh 430 423 0 0 0 0 0 
 31 Dadra and  250 107 87 87 87 87 87 
  Nagar Heveli        
 32 Lakshadweep 85 85 85 85 85 0 0 
 Total 
for 
872,807 820,585 760,235 630314 615676 588412 
 255838   

country 
 
Data source: NHSRC monthly Reports and ASHA information in pip 2010-11. 
Goa, Daman and Diu and Pudducherry has not opted for ASHA programme. 
* In Bihar 120 trainers will be trained for Module 5 and 50% of the ASHAs will be trained in module 5 by the March, 2010.  
* In Jharkand last year 22580 ASHAs are trained in Module 5 in MP 20,000 will be trained in module 1-4. 
* In UP 120 Trainers will be trained for module 5. 
* In Haryana TOT for the module 5 in completed. 
* Delhi TOT for Module 5 compieted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure- VII 
(Part-B NRHM Para 4.21)  
Progress under NRHM (As on 31.03.2010) 
Sl. 
No. 
State    ASHA      
  Selectio 
n 
Trainin 
g (upto 
Ist 
Trainin 
g (upto 
IInd 
Trainin 
g (upto 
IIIrd 
Trainin 
g (upto 
IVth 
Trainin 
g (upto 
Vth 
Drug 
Kit 
% of 4 
th  
Module 
Training 
%of Drug 
Kit 
   Module Module Module Module Module    
1   2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11  
High Focus Non - NE States 

1 Bihar 72000 69402 35000 35000 35000 0  49 00 
2 Chhattisgarh 60092 60092 60092 60092 60092 60092 60092 100 100 
3 Himachal Pradesh 2393 36 0 0 0 0 2393 0 100 
4 Jammu and 
Kashmir 
9500 9500 9000 9000 9000 0 9500 95 100 
5 Jharkhand 49282 40115 39482 39214 35675 0 35000 7 2 71 
6 Madhya Pradesh 49282 45908 42153 41237 37969 0 45 971 77 93 
7 Orissa 34252 34117 33910 33910 33910 33102 34214 99 100 
8 Rajasthan 43789 40310 40310 40310 40310 0 32059 9 2 73 
9 Uttar Pradesh 136182 135130 128434 128434 128434 0 128434 94 94 
10 Uttarakhand 9983 9975 9975 9975 9975 8978 9975 1 00 100 
High Focus NE States  
11 Arunachal Pradesh 3608 3379 3212 3156 2533 1176 3039 70 84 
12 Assam 28798 26225 26225 26225 26225 23271 26225 91 91 
13 Manipur 3878 3878 3000 3000 3000 3000 3878 77 10 0 
14 Meghalaya 6258 6175 6175 6175 6175 3427 6180 99 99 
15 Mizoram 943 943 943 943 943 932 943 100 100 
16 Nagaland 1700 1700 1700 1700 1700 1700 1700 100 100 
17 Sikkim 637 637 637 637 637 637 637 100 100 
18 Tripura 7367 7367 7367 7367 7367 7362 7362 100 1 00 
Non High Focus States - Large 
19 Andhra Pradesh 70700 70700 70700 70700 70700 707 00 70700 100 100 
20 Goa 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 0 
21 Gujarat 29081 27229 24142 22370 18272 2915 0 63 0 
22 Haryana 12706 11597 10211 10211 10211 0 0 80 0 
23 Karnataka 27000 25400 25400 25400 25400 25400 25 400 94 94 
24 Kerala 31868 30763 30763 30763 30763 0 23350 97 73 
25 Maharashtra 57897 51357 8413 7905 7411 3938 9000  13 16 
26 Punjab 16494 15481 0 0 0 0 14500 0 88 
27 Tamil Nadu 2650 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
28 West Bengal 23518 16481 11967 9698 9075 7842 0 3 9 0 
Non High Focus Smalls & UTs 
29 A & N Island 452 49 49 49 49 49 49 11 11 

30 Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 0 0 0   
31 D & N Haveli 107 87 87 87 87 87 87 81 81 
32 Daman and Diu 0 0 0 0 0 0 0   
33 Delhi 2266 2266 2266 2266 0 0 2266 0 100 
34 Lakshadweep 85 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
35 Puducherry 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
 T OTAL : 794768 746299 631613 625824 610913 254608 552954 76.87 69.57 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure- VIII 
(Part-B NRHM Para 5.9) 
  
                State Assam Manipur Meghalaya Nagal and Tripura 
Action Points  Amount approved in ROP 2010-11 (Rs. in lakhs) 
Action Plan for 
Backward districts 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Streamlining of 
procurement and 
logistics 
66 - 71.5 10.22 426.7 

Operationalizing HMIS 
UP to facility level 
675.17 31.4 279.53 160.27 24.02 
Capacity Building of 
State/district 
2322.08 178.68 523.12 227.93 140.42 
programme 
officers/Medical 
     
officers/Health staff      
Financial Management 
training for Higher 
75.3 84.76 69.84 17.5 22.1 
utilization of financial 
resources 
     
Incentives for staff being 
posted in 
2705.57 230.99 128.76 - 92.16 
difficult, most difficult 
and inaccessible areas 
     
Hiring of contractual 
staff under RCH 
889.78 833.52 194.4 699.79 102.26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-IX 
(Part-B NRHM Para 5.16)  
Evaluated Survey Data of India for the Children of age group 12-23 months 
Figures in percentage  
Sl.  State/UTs/India Full Immunization State/UTs/In dia Full Immunization 
No.  DLHS 2 (2002-04)  DLHS 3 (2007-08) 
1         2 3           4 5 
1 Nagaland* 13.1 Uttar Pradesh 31.1 
2. Meghalaya 13.5 Meghalaya 34.3 

3. Assam 16.0 Madhya Pradesh 38.5 
4. Bihar 20.7 Tripura 38.5 
5. Arunachal Pradesh 21.6 Arunachal Pradesh 40.3 
6. Rajasthan 23.9 Bihar 41.4 
7. Jharkhand 25.7 Manipur 48.5 
8. Uttar Pradesh 25.8 Rajasthan 50.0 
9. Madhya Pradesh 30.4 Assam 51.0 
10. Jammu and Kashmir 32.0 D & N Haveli 52.3 
11. Mizoram 32.6 Jharkhand 54.8 
12. Tripura 32.6 Mizoram 55.3 
13. Manipur 34.4 Gujarat 55.5 
14. Uttarakhand 44.5 Chhattisgarh 60.8 
15. West Bengal 50.3 Haryana 61.8 
16. Sikkim 52.7 Jammu and Kashmir 63.0 
17. Orissa 53.3 Orissa 63.1 
18. Chandigarh 53.5 Uttarakhand 63.3 
19. Gujarat 54.0 Delhi 67.7 
20. Daman and Diu 56.1 Andhra Pradesh 68.5 
21. Chhattisgarh 56.9 Maharashtra 69.3 
22. Haryana 59.1 Chandigarh 73.1 
23. Delhi 59.2 West Bengal 75.8 
24. Andhra Pradesh 62.0 Karnataka 76.8 
25. Lakshadweep 64.6 Sikkim 77.9 
26. A & N Islands 69.3 Punjab 78.9 
27. Maharashtra 70.9 Kerala 79.0 
28. Karnataka 71.3 Pudducharry 80.6 
29. Punjab 72.9 Tamil Nadu 81.6 
30. Goa 76.9 Himachal Pradesh 82.6 
31. Kerala 78.5 Daman and Diu 83.5 
32. Himachal Pradesh 79.3 A & N Islands 84.5 
33. D & N Haveli 84.6 Lakshadweep 86.9 
34. Pudducherry 89.3 Goa 88.6 
35. Tamil Nadu 91.4 Nagaland*  
 India: 45.9  54.1 

*DLHS 3 data for this state is not available 
Note : Provisional data for DLHS 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-X 
(Part-B NRHM Para 5.16)  
Evaluated Survey Data of India for the Children of age group 12-23 months 
Figures in percentage  
Sl.  State/UTs/India Full Immunization State/UTs/In dia No Immunization 
No.  DLHS 2  DLHS 3 
1         2 3           4 5 
1 Pudducherry 0.1 Goa 0.0 
2. Tamil Nadu 0.5 Tamil Nadu 0.0 

3. Kerala 0.7 Kerala 0.5 
4. Sikkim 0.9 Sikkim 0.7 
5. A & N Islands 1.2 Himachal Pradesh 1.0 
6. Goa 1.8 Daman and Diu 1.1 
7. D & N H 2.1 Pudducherry 1.4 
8. Himachal Pradesh 2.1 Andhra Pradesh 1.6 
9. Maharashtra 2.2 Karnataka 1.6 
10. Jammu and Kashmir 2.6 Maharashtra 2.5 
11. Andhra Pradesh 2.8 D & N Haveli 2.7 
12. Chandigarh 4.4 A & N Island 2.8 
13. Daman & Diu 4.4 West Bengal 3.2 
14. Delhi 4.2 Orissa 3.9 
15. Karnataka 4.7 Chhattisgarh 4.2 
16. Orissa 5.5 Punjab 4.4 
17. West Bengal 7.0 Chandigarh 4.6 
18. Gujarat 2.3 Mizoram 4.8 
19. Chhattisgarh 8.5 Jammu and Kashmir 5.5 
20. Tripura 9.1 Delhi 6.5 
21. Punjab 9.4 Uttarakhand 8.1 
22. Manipur 9.6 Gujarat 9.4 
23. Haryana 11.8 Madhya Pradesh 9.8 
24. Nagaland* 13.5 Haryana 12.3 
25. Mizoram 14.5 Jharkhand 12.6 
26. Madhya Pradesh 17.1 Assam 13.6 
27. Meghalaya 17.6 Rajasthan 14.8 
28. Uttarakhand 23.1 Bihar 16.7 
29. Assam 24.7 Manipur 19.4 
30. Arunachal Pradesh 27.5 Meghalaya 20.2 
31. Rajasthan 29.6 Uttar Pradesh 24.0 
32. Uttar Pradesh 36.2 Arunachal Pradesh 24.0 
33. Jharkhand* 45.6 Tripura 24.8 
34. Bihar 51.8 Lakshadweep 88.6 
35. Lakshadweep  Nagaland*  
 India : 19.8  11.3 

*DLHS 3 data for this state is not available. 
Note : Provisional data for DLH5 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-XI 
(Part-B NRHM Para 5.17)  
  This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor Genera l of India for the year ended March, 2008 containing the results of the 
Performance Audit of the implemention of the "Natio nal Rural Health Mission" has been prepared for sub mission to the 
President of India under Article-151 of the Constitution. 
  The Performance Audit was conducted between April , 2008 and December, 2008 through test check of rec ord of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare State and Dis tric Health Societies and health centres covering t he period 2005-06 to 
2007-08. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-XI (Continued)  
  To support the immunisation programme, cold chain  mainetance was visualised in all CHCs and PHCs. Ou t of 220 
audited CHCs, the essential equipment to maintain c old chain i.e.  ice lined freezers, refrigerators and deep freezer s were 
available in 205 CHCs (93 per cent), 156 CHCs (71 p er cent) and 209 CHCs (95 per cent respectively in 21 States/UTs (details 
in Annex 6.8-A). In none of the 12 sample test checked CHCs in Bihar, was cold chain equipment available. 
  While out of 217 PHCs test checked, ice lined fre ezers, refrigerators, and deep freezers were availa ble in 110 PHCs (51 
per cent), 90 PHCs (41 per cent) and 104 PHCs (48 p er cent) respectively (details in Annex 6.8-B). How ever, none of the cold 
chain equipment was available in any of the 124 tes t checked PHCs in Haryana, Meghalaya, Madhya Prades h, Puducherry and 
West Bengal (5 States/UTs). 

  Further, the equipment available was not put to e fficient use for want of continious power supply an d due to non-
functioning non-availability of standby power sourecs. Besides, in Bihar, Lakshadweep and Uttar Prades h, 31 to 60 per cent of 
cold chain equipment was non functional. 
  The Ministry stated that GOI provided budgetary s upport for maintenance of cold chain equipment to t he States/UTs 
under Strengthening of Routine Immunization as well as supplied spare parts. Further, in case of disruption of power supply, the 
GOI also provided for POL for generator for PHC/CHC  for alternate power supply which can be used for m aintance of cold 
chain. 
  However, it appears that SHSs were not utilizing the resources provided by the Ministry effectively.  The absance of cold 
chain management could adversely impact on the effe ctiveness of the Universal Immunization Programme, a high priority area 
under the Mission. 
  Each Sub Centre under the NRHM was to be run by t wo Auxiliary Nursing Midwives (ANM, female) and a Multipurpose 
worker (MPW, male). The Mission aimed to ensure two  ANMs at 30 per cent Sub Centres by 2007 and 60 per  cent by 2008 
with the second ANM being appointed on a contract b asis . While the ANMs were to be paid out of centra l grants, the MPWs 
were to be paid by the state Government. Among samp le units, 116 sub Sub Centres (9 per cent) of 20 St ates/UTs were 
functioning without an ANM. At 992 Sub Centres (77 per cent) of 29 States/UTs two ANMs were not posted  and in Himachal 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Meghal aya, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal  and 
Lakshadweep none of Sub Centres had two ANMs. The deployment of MPWs was inadequate and 775 Sub Centres (60 per cent 
of 27 States/UTs had no MPW. In Bihar, Uttar Prades h, Lakshadweep, Chandigarh and Puducherry none of t he test checked 
Sub Centres had an MPW. In contrast, in Meghalaya, Mizoram, Sikkim and Daman & Diu all the tested sub Centres  had an 
MPW. The State-wise status of non-availability of required staff at Sub Center is detailed in Annex 6.9. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-XI (Continued)  
Report No. 8 of 2009-10 
Infrastructure Development and Capacity Building 
Annex 6.8 
Refers to Paragraph 6.6.5 
A-Status of cold chain equipment in CHCs  
Name of the State/UT No. of     No. of CHCs with co ld chain equipment 
 audited CHCs Ice lined  Refrigerators Deep  

  Freezers  Freezers 
Madhya Pradesh 18 15 13 18 
Rajasthan 18 16 16 18 
Uttarakhand 9 8 7 9 
Chhattisgarh 9 8 6 8 
Jammu and Kashmir 12 16 8 11 
Manipur 5 2 5 3 
Meghalaya* 13 13 3 13 
Mizoram 3 3 3 3 
Himachal Pradesh 9 9 8 9 
Sikkim 3 3 1 3 
Andaman and Nicobar* 4 4 4 4 
Chandigarh 2 1 1 2 
Gujarat 12 11 9 9 
Haryana 12 11 9 12 
Karnataka 18 18 14 18 
Kerala 9 9 9 7 
Pudducherry 4 4 4 4 
Punjab 12 12 11 11 
Tamil Nadu 15 15 15 15 
West Bengal 15 15 19 14 
Uttar Pradesh 18 18 9 18 
TOTAL : 220 205 156 209 
*CHCs in audited districts 
B-Status of cold chain equipment in PHCs 
Name of the State/UT No. of     No. of PHCs with co ld chain equipment 
 audited PHCs Ice lined  Refrigerators Deep  
  Freezers  Freezers 
Uttarakhand 13 12 12 2 
Chhattisgarh 18 7 2 8 
Jammu and Kashmir 22 10 0 3 
Manipur 15 0 14 8 
Himachal Pradesh 18 8 4 11 
Sikkim 6 6 6 6 
Andaman and Nicobar 8 8 8 8 
Kerala 18 1 5 2 
Punjab 21 15 9 17 

Tamil Nadu 30 30 30 30 
Jharkhand 9 9 0 9 
Uttar Pradesh 36 4 0 4 
TOTAL : 217 110 90 104 
Source : Information collected form health Centres  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-XII 
(Part-B NRHM Para 5.18)  
Sl. States/UTs Allocation Export Utilization Alloca tion Expenditure Utilization 
No.  (08-09) (08-09) % (09-10) (09-10) % 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1. A & N Islands 89,000 115,560 129.8 42,000 37,126  88.4 
2. Andhra Pradesh 2,609,000 2,738,732 105.0 1,486,0 00 2,082,822 140.2 

3. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
366,000 NA  263,000 NA  
4. Assam 6,710,002 6,885,254 102.6 4,051,000 5,785, 717 142.8 
5. Bihar 11,770,000 727,145 6.2 5,000,000 4,993,498  99.9 
6. Chandigarh 50,500 20,167 39.9 25,000 21,900 87.6  
7. Chhattisgarh - - 0.0 - - 0.0 
8. D & N Haveli 13,000 11,100 85.4 14,000 5,300 37. 9 
9. Daman and Diu 22,000 1,200 5.5 20,000 7,275 36.4  
10. Delhi - - 0.0 140,000 2,053 1.5 
11. Goa 17,500 13,281 75.9 84,000 45,389 133.5 
12. Gujarat 660,000 2,339,257 354.4 886,000 1,178,6 81 133.0 
13. Haryana 501,500 148,566 29.6 509,000 367,542 72 .2 
14. Himachal 
Pradesh 
372,500 372,500 100.0 73,000 373,000 100.0 
15. J & K - 848,988 100.0 447,000 319,667 71.5 
16. Jharkhand 437,000 233,756 51.2 437,000 156,813 35.9 
17. Karnataka 1,658,500 3,918,000 236.2 3,464,000 2 ,590,000 74.8 
18. Kerala 1,000,000 939,000 93.9 1,000,000 614,000  61.4 
19. Lakshadweep 25,000 31,000 124.0 50,000 - 0.0 
20. Madhya Pradesh 1,583,500 742,000 299.5 1,252,00 0 968,000 77.3 
21. Maharashtra 2,078,000 605,175 29.1 1,576,000 33 1,000 21.0 
22. Manipur 179,000 NA  176,000 NA  
23. Meghalaya 202,000 72,156 35.7 203,000 26,331 13 .0 
24. Mizoram 110,000 - 0.0 123,000 - 0.0 
25. Nagaland 164,000 164,000 100.0 164,000 115,000 70.1 
26. Orissa 1,159,500 985,436 85.0 1,160,000 1,172,0 00 101.0 
27. Pondicherry 62,500 11,795 18.9 63,000 10,944 17 .4 
28 Punjab 472,000 219,242 46.4 472,000 83,528 17.7 
29 Rajasthan 2,592,800 896,234 34.6 2,640,000 107,8 51 4.1 
30. Sikkim 52,000 NA  - - 0 
31. Tamil Nadu - - 0.0 1,185,000 110,560 9.3 
32. Tripura 1,654,000 NA  387,000 NA  
33. Uttar Pradesh 5,955,000 1,886,000 31.7 3,806,50 0 946,790 24.9 
34. Uttarakhand 636,000 392,590 61.7 950,000 43,330  12.4 

35. West Bengal 3,000,000 1,743,681 58.1 515,000 1, 183,570 229.8 
 TOTAL : 46,201,802 31,051,805  67.2 32,313,500 23,679,686 73.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-XIII  
(Part-B NRHM Para 6.18)  
JE Vaccination Coverage 2009  
Sl.No. State District Target Children % Coverage 
    Children Immunized 
    (1-15 yr.)   
1 Andhra Pradesh Krishna 1385667 680000 49.07 

2 Andhra Pradesh Nellore 877689 370918 42.26 
3 Andhra Pradesh Medak 928450 467479 50.35 
4 Andhra Pradesh Adilabad 942266 22551 2.39 
5 Assam Lakhimpur 330555 315731 95.52 
6 Assam Sonitpur 650156 431387 66.35 
7 Assam Kamrup 501318 351040 70.02 
8 Bihar Gaya 1362508 1118579 82.10 
9 Goa Goa North 263736 70399 26.69 
10 Goa Goa South 209870 92173 43.92 
11 Haryana Panipat 362312 333424 92.03 
12 Haryana Yamunanagar 351532 285231 81.14 
13 Karnataka Dharwad 546352 474521 86.85 
14 Karnataka Bijapur 651610 464147 71.23 
15 Kerala Trivandrum 856885 340623 39.75 
16 Maharashtra Beed 581815 367886 63.23 
17 Maharashtra Latur 797452 220179 27.61 
18 Maharashtra Gadchiroli 1160086 137520 11.85 
19 Maharashtra Washim 370485 194921 52.61 
20 Tamil Nadu Thanjavur 780275 523404 67.08 
21 Tamil Nadu Thiruvannamalai 772111 567286 73.47 
22 Uttar Pradesh Allahabad 1953904 1673687 85.66 
23 Uttar Pradesh Pratapgarh 1028331 984230 95.71 
24 Uttar Pradesh Kanpur Nagar 1660800 1227209 73.89  
25 Uttar Pradesh Shahjahapur 953078 887267 93.09 
26 Uttar Pradesh Fatehpur 913749 681420 74.57 
27 Uttar Pradesh Jaunpur 1546931 1370141 88.57 
28 Uttar Pradesh Ghazipur 1202355 1007125 83.76 
29 West Bengal Hoogly 1693989 379295 22.39 
30 West Bengal Howrah 1524744 440379 28.88 
 TOTAL INDIA   27161011 16480152 60.68 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-XIV  
(Part-B NRHM Para 6.19) 
 
List of Sentinel Sites 
Sl. No. Name of the No. of 
Sites 
 Name of Sentinel sites/Institutes 
    State    
1 Andhra Pradesh 5 1.  Medical Collage, Kurnool 
   2.  VBRI Medical Collage, Hyderabad 
   3.  Govt. Hospital, Anantpur 

   4. MGM Hospital, Warangal  
   5.  Medical Collage, Mahboobnagar 
2 Assam 5 1.  Assam Medical College, Dibrugarh 
   2.  Sibsagar Civil Hospital 
   3.  Jorhat Civil Hospital 
   4.  Lakhimpur Civil Hospital 
   5.  RMRC, Dibrugarh/Medical College, Guwahati 
3 Goa 1 Goa 
Medical 
College, 
Goa 
 
4 Haryana 4 1.  District Hospital, Kaithal 
   2.  District Hospital, Karnal 
   3.  District Hospital, Kurukshetra 
   4.  District Hospital, Ambala 
5 Chandigarh 1 Chandigarh, 
PGI 
 
6  Karnataka 3 1.  SNR Hospital, Kolar 
   2.  VIMS, Bellary 
   3.  Chigateri General Hospital, Davanager 
7 Maharashtra 5 1.  District Hospital, Bhandara 
   2.  District Hospital, Gondia 
   3.  Indira Gandhi Medical College, Nagpur 
   4.  District Hospital, Wardha 
   5.  District Hospital, Gadchiroli 
8 Manipur 1 1.  J.N. Hospital Poompat, Impahl 
9 Tamil Nadu 5 1.  Christian Medical College, Vello re 
  (CRME), 
Madurai. 
2.  Centre for Research in Medical Entomology  
   3.  District Hospital,Thanjavur  
   4.  Govt. Hospital, Kallakurchi  
   5.  District Hospital,Cuddalore 
10 West Bengal 2 1.  School of Tropical Medicine, C alcutta 
   2.  Burdwan Medical College, Burdwan 
11 Bihar 2 1.  Patna Medical College & Hospital (PM CH)  
   2. Sri Krishana Medical College & Hospital 
   (SKMCH) 
Muzaffarpur 
 
 
12 Kerala 1 1. District Hospital Kottayam 
13 Uttar Pradesh 16 1.  District Hospitals, Sidhart hnagar 
   2. District Hospitals, Maharajganj 
   3.  District Hospitals, Kheri 
   4.  District Hospitals, Basti 

   5.  District Hospitals, S. Kabir Nagar 
   6.  District Hospitals, Saharanpur 
   7.  District Hospitals, Gorakhpur 
   8. BRD Medical College, Gorakhpur 
   9. District Hospitals, Bahraich 
   10.  District Hospitals, Kushinagar 
   11. District Hospitals, Gonda 
   12. District Hospitals, Balrampur 
   13. District Hospitals, Sultanpur 
   14. District Hospitals, Deoria 
   15.  KG Medical College, Lucknow 
   16. District Hospitals, Raibareli 
 T OTAL : 51   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-XV 
(Part-B NRHM Para 7.8)  
Expenditure from Apr. 2009 to Dec. 2009  
(Rs. in lakhs)  
Sl. No. State Name NGO Head 
1 Andaman Nicobar 0 
2 Andhra Pradesh 33.67 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 0 

4 Assam 4.13 
5 Bihar 13.29 
6 Chandigarh 0.77 
7 Chhattisgarh 0.90 
8 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0 
9 Daman & Diu 0 
10 Delhi 16.04 
11 Goa 0.03 
12 Gujarat 17.57 
13 Haryana 0 
14 Himachal Pradesh 0.08 
15 Jammu & Kashmir 0 
16 Jharkhand 0.68 
17 Karnataka 11.85 
18 Kerala 18.55 
19 Lakshadweep 0 
20 Madhya Pradesh 0 
21 Maharashtra 22.00 
22 Manipur 2.89 
23 Meghalaya 0.81 
24 Mizoram 1.50 
25 Nagaland 6.05 
26 Orissa 10.09 
27 Pondicherry 0 
28 Punjab 0.50 
29 Rajasthan 3.83 
30 Sikkim 0.05 
31 Tamil Nadu 12.44 
32 Tripura 0.68 
33 Uttar Pradesh 52.77 
34 Uttaranchal 0.52 
35 West Bengal 68.90 

 G RAND TOTAL : 300.99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexures-XVI  
(Part-B NRHM Para 8.10) 
 
National Leprosy Eradication Programme  
Number of Re-constructive Surgery (RCS) Ronducted in 2009-10  
Sl. No. Name of State/UT RCS conducted 
1           2 3 
1 Andhra Pradesh 617 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 0 

3 Assam 1 
4 Bihar 94 
5 Chhattisgarh 108 
6 Goa 0 
7 Gujarat 110 
8 Haryana 0 
9 Himachal Pradesh 0 
10 Jharkhand 29 
11 Jammu & Kashmir 0 
12 Karnataka 113 
13 Kerala 17 
14 Madhya Pradesh 282 
15 Maharashtra 451 
16 Manipur 0 
17 Meghalaya 0 
18 Mizoram 0 
19 Nagaland 0 
20 Orissa 259 
21 Punjab 7 
22 Rajasthan 15 
23 Sikkim 0 
24 Tamil Nadu 132 
25 Tripura 0 
26 Uttar Pradesh 376 
27 Uttarakhand 11 
28 West Bengal 101 
29 A & N Islands 0 
30 Chandigarh 1 
31 D & N Haveli 0 
32 Daman & Diu 0 
33 Delhi 132 
34 Lakshadweep 0 
35 Pudducherry 0 

 TOTAL : 2856 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexures-XVII 
(Part-B NRHM Para 8.10) 
 
NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME  
Statement showing payment of incentive for undergoing  
Reconstructive Surgery in 2009-10  
Period of Report- 2009-10 
(As on March 2010)  
Sl. No. Name of State/UT No. of LAPs 

  paid incentive 
1 Andhra Pradesh  
2 Arunachal Pradesh 0 
3 Assam 1 
4 Bihar  
5 Chhattisgarh  
6 Goa 3 
7 Gujarat  
8 Haryana  
9 Himachal Pradesh  
10 Jharkhand  
11 Jammu & Kashmir  
12 Karnataka 100 
13 Kerala  
14 Madhya Pradesh  
15 Maharashtra  
16 Manipur  
17 Meghalaya  
18 Mizoram  
19 Nagaland  
20 Orissa  
21 Punjab 7 
22 Rajasthan  
23 Sikkim  
24 Tamil Nadu  
25 Tripura  
26 Uttar Pradesh  
27 Uttarakhand 10 
28 West Bengal  
29 A & N Islands  
30 Chandigarh 0 
31 D & N Haveli 0 
32 Daman & Diu  
33 Delhi  

34 Lakshadweep  
35 Pudducherry  
 TOTAL : 121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-XVIII 
(Part-B NRHM Para 10.6) 
 
State/UT Total Districts Districts Endemic 
surveyed    
1 2 3 4 
Andhra Pradesh 23 12 11 
Arunachal Pradesh 11 11 11 

Assam 23 18 14 
Bihar 37 14 14 
Chhattisgarh 16 2 2 
Goa 2 2 2 
Gujarat 25 16 8 
Haryana 19 11 10 
Himachal Pradesh 12 10 10 
Jammu & Kashmir 15 14 14 
Jharkhand 22 9 8 
Karnataka 27 20 6 
Kerala 14 14 12 
Madhya Pradesh 48 14 14 
Maharashtra 35 29 21 
Manipur 9 8 8 
Meghalaya 7 4 4 
Mizoram 8 3 3 
Nagaland 8 7 7 
Orissa 30 8 7 
Punjab 17 3 3 
Rajasthan 31 4 4 
Sikkim 4 4 4 
Tripura 4 3 3 
Tamil Nadu 29 29 18 
Uttar Pradesh 71 29 23 
Uttaranchal 13 9 9 
West Bengal 18 5 5 
A&N Islands 2 2 2 
Chandigarh 1 1 1 
Daman & Diu 1 1 1 
D&N Haveli 1 1 1 
NCT Delhi 1 1 1 
Lakshadweep 1 1 0 
Puddicherry 4 4 2 
                       TOTAL : 582 324 263 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 