 
 
 
        
                                                                                       
 
 
 
 
                              
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2020/ Kartika 1942 (SAKA) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
124 
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE 
HUNDRED NINTEENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2020-
21(DEMAND NO. 43) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH  
(Ministry of Health & Family Welfare)  
  
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 21st November, 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 25th November, 2020) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail :  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
                                                             
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2020/ Karitka, 1942 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
On 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE 
HUNDRED NINTEENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2020-
21(DEMAND NO. 43) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH  
(Ministry of Health & Family Welfare)  
  
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 21st November, 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 25th November, 2020) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. PREFACE 
 
(ii) 
3. ACRONYMS 
 
(iii) 
4. REPORT 
 
 
 Chapter–I  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Ministry 
1 - 34 
 Chapter–II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of the Ministry's replies 
35 - 40 
 Chapter–III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Ministry have not been accepted by the Committee 
41 - 54 
 Chapter–IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Ministry have not been received 
 
55 - 63 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A  
GLANCE 
 
64 - 67 
6. MINUTES 
 
68 - 70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2020-21) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri A.K. Antony     
3. Shrimati Indu Bala Goswami 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh  
8. Shri K. Somaprasad 
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
11. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
12. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
13. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
14. Shrimati Maloth Kavitha 
15. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
16. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
17. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
18. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
19. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
20. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
21. Shri K. Navaskani 
22. Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
27. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepati 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu        Secretary 
2. Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary  
3. Shri V.S.P Singh    Director 
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                      Additional Director 
5. Shrimati Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
6. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma  Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Ms. Monika Garbyal   Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this One Hundred Twenty Fourth Report of the Committee on Action T aken by 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the One Hundred Nineteenth 
Report on Demands for Grants 2020-21 (Demand No. 43) of the Department of  Health Research 
(Ministry of Health & Family Welfare). 
 
2. The One Hundred Nineteenth  Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 3 rd March, 2020.  Action Taken Note of the Ministry on the recommendations 
contained in the Report was received from the Ministry on 28th September, 2020.   
 
3. The Committee had noted that the statement on the status of implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the 119 h Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha in pursuant to the direction of Chairman, Rajya Sabha dated 24 th 
September, 2004. 
 
4. The Committee made a total of 77 recommendations in its 119 th Report.  Out of the 77 
recommendations, a total number of 40 recommendations have been accep ted by the Ministry, 
has been  categorized under Chapter I and there are a total number of 8 recommendations, which 
the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Ministry’s replies,  has been categorized 
under Chapter II.  A total number of 12 rec ommendations/ observations in respect of which 
replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made 
further recommendations thereon, has been categorized under Chapter III while a total number of 
17 recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been 
received, has been categorized under Chapter IV.   
 
5. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 
the 17th November, 2020. 
 
NEW DELHI 
17 November, 2020  
Kartika, 3  1942 (Saka) 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
CHAIRMAN 
Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary                                                                                           
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
(ii)

 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AES    Acute Encephalitis Syndrome  
AMR    Anti-Microbial Resistance  
AMSP    Antimicrobal Stewardship Program  
AWC    Anganwadi Centre  
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy 
BCIL    Biotechnology Consortium India Limited  
BMHRC   Bhopal Memorial Hospital and Research Centre  
CAPI    Computer-Assisted Personal Interviewing  
CCHF    Crimean Congo Hemorrahagic fever virus  
CLD    Central Leprosy Division  
CPR    Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation  
CSR    Corporate Social Responsibility  
CTRI    Clinical Trial Registry of India  
DELHI   Delhi Emergency Life Heart-Attack Initiative 
DHR   Department of Health Research 
DHR-ICMR   Department of Health Research - Indian Council of Medical Research  
DIAMOnDS   DHR-ICMR Advanced Molecular Oncology Diagnostic Services  
EC    Executive Council  
FDEC    Foundation for Disease Control and Elimination  
GCLP    Good Clinical Laboratory Practices  
GCP    Good Clinical Practices  
HBCRs   Hospital Based Cancer Registries  
HSCT   Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
HTA    Health Technology Assessment  
HTAIn   Health Technology Assessment in India  
ICMR    Indian Council of Medical Research  
LRAC    Local Research Advisory Committee  
MBA    Management by Activities  
MBO    Management by Objectives  
MEDP   Malaria Elimination Demonstration Project 
MRHRUs   Model Rural Health Research Units  
MRUs    Multi-Disciplinary Research Units  
MRUs    Multi-Disciplinary Research Units  
NAFLD   Non- Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease  
NCDs    Non-Communicable Diseases  
NCOs    Nodal Communication Officers  
NCRP    National Cancer Registry Programme  
NIN    Nutrify India Now  
NIV    National Institute of Virology  
NLEP    National Leprosy Eradication Programme  
NLEP    National Leprosy Eradication Programme  
PBCR    Population Based Cancer Registries  
PBCR    Population Based Cancer Registries  
PHCs/CHCs   Public/Community Health Centres  
PKDL    Post-kala-azar Dermal Leishmaniasis  
PM-ASBY   Prime Minister’s Atmanirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana  
(iii) 

 
 
 
PMSSY   Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana  
PRC    Project Review Committee  
RESEARCH   Regional Enabler for South East Asia Research Collaboration for Health 
RMRC   Regional Medical Research Centre  
SAC    Scientific Advisory Committee  
SDG    Sustainable Development Goals  
SEAR    South East Asia Region  
SFGR    Spotted Fever Group Rickettsia 
SoEs    Statement of Expenditures  
ST    Scrub Typhus 
STWs    Standard Treatment Workflows  
TEC    Technical Evaluation Committee  
TGR    Typhus Group Rickettsiae  
THRCI   Tribal Health Research Consortium of India  
THRF    Tribal Health Research forum  
TRIHMS   Tomo Riba Institute of Health & Medical Sciences  
UCs    Utilization Certificates  
VL    Visceral leishmaniasis  
VRDL    Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratory  
VRDLS   Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories  
WHO    World Health Organization 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (iv)  

 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the Committee's One Hundred Nineteenth Report 
on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Demand No. 43) of the Department of  Health Research 
(Ministry of Health & Family Welfare). 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
 
                                                                                Total–      40                     (Chapter-I)  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Ministry ’s replies:   
 
                                                                       Total–       8                           (Chapter-II)  
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee:  
      Total–      12                     (Chapter-III)  
 
(iv)    Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry are   
still awaited:  
 
                                        Total-     17                      (Chapter-IV) 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
  
MACRO ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION TO THE DHR BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation 
  
1.1 The Committee finds that marginal increase in the budgetary allocation to DHR 
during the last two years is not commensurate with the responsibilities entrusted to the 
Department to deal with the magnitude and incidence of diseases in the country and 
considerable amount of fund required to broad -base the research a ctivities which 
facilitates the policy maker to formulate health policy in the right direction. The outcome 
of the health research also supports the executive to sketch suitable strategy in combating 
the health challenges. The Committee, therefore, recomme nds higher budgetary allocation 
to DHR to achieve the set objective missions enshrined in National Health Mission and 
National Health Policy, 2017. The Committee, in this regard, lend its support to DHR to 
approach the Ministry of Finance for seeking highe r budgetary allocation at the RE stage 
for promoting health and well being of the people of the country. 
(Para 2.1.5) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.2 The need for making higher allocation to the Department of Health Research especially 
in view of the COVID -19 pandemic and to mitigate its challenges will be taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. Department of Health Research (DHR)/Indian Council of 
Medical Research (ICMR) has been vigorously meeting the need by active expansion of testing 
strategy based on evidence of spread of the virus and development of vaccines. All this would be 
only possible with sufficient funds being made available. Meanwhile, proposals have been 
approved amounting to Rs.2475.00 crores  under World Bank Funded “India Covid -19 
Emergency Response & Health System Preparedness Package” for procurement of testing kits, 
testing machines, reagents, etc. for COVID-19.  Proposals amounting to Rs. 1998.00 crores have 
also been submitted under the “Prime Minister’s Atmanirbhar Swasth Bharat Yoj ana (PM -
ASBY)” for various activities pertaining to Bio -security preparedness and strengthening 
Pandemic Research and Multi -Sector National Institutions and Platforms for One Health, 
including setting up of Zonal Centers of National Institute of Virology ( NIV).  Additional 
allocations to meet the requirements in 2020-21 would also be sought at RE stage.  
 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.3 The Committee understands that underutilization of funds by the DHR not only 
reflects the lack of resilient monitoring mechanism over optimum utilization within 
stipulated timeframe work but also indicates lackadaisical approach of Department in 

2 
 
achieving the set objectives of the schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
DHR to improve the monitoring mechanism for timely execution of schemes/programmes 
undertaken that would give legitimate claim to approach the Ministry of Finance for 
higher budget ary allocation as per the projected demand to meet the expenditure on 
projects pertaining to research activities as originally conceived at the projection stage. 
 
(Para 2.4.4) 
Action Taken 
 
1.4 A comprehensive Monitoring Mechanism is already in place in th e Department of Health 
Research comprising of assessments through periodical reports from VRDLs/MRUs/MRHRUs, 
field visits to the units, holding review meetings/ conferences etc. Release of funds under the 
schemes is based strictly on assessments of Utiliza tion Certificates and Statements of 
Expenditure. This will be further strengthened to improve the utilization of funds.  
 
Recommendation 
 
1.5 The Committee expresses its displeasure over non -achievement of physical targets 
set in establishment of MRHRUs du e to delay in processing of the proposals for technical 
evaluation. Against the physical target for setting up of 25 MRHRUs during 2018 -19 only 
18 MRHRUs were set up and while during 2019 -20 against the target of 7 MRHRUs, 5 
MRHRUs have been set up. The Co mmittee was apprised that two proposals, one each in 
A&N Islands and Telangana are already in the pipeline. The Committee understands that 
MRHRUs provide a platform for interface amongst patient and health researchers which 
helps in providing latest and so phisticated technology for diagnosis and management of 
diseases in rural areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends that DHR, while 
considering to enhance the objective of setting up of larger number of MRHRUs in the 
rural areas make realistic assessment of financial requirement for the purpose and 
accordingly, approach the Ministry of Finance for allocating the requisite fund. 
(Para 2.5.3) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.6 The following details of financial and physical progress in Establishment of Model Rural 
Health Research Units (MRHRUs) in States has been shared with the Committee:  
 
I. Financial Performance  (Rs in crores) 
BE 2019-20  15.00 
RE 2019-20  19.00 
Actual Expenditure (upto 31.1.2020)  9.43 
II. Physical Performance:  
Total Scheme Target:  25 MRHRUs 
Already Achieved upto 2018-19  18 MRHRUs 
Target for 2019-20  7 MRHRUs 
Achievement during 2019-20  5 MRHRUs 
 

3 
 
1.7 The MRHRUs are required to operate in the near vicinity of the Public/Community 
Health Centres (PHCs/CHCs) and the designated Medical Colleges. The designated mentoring 
Institutes of the ICMR are also required to maintain close contact with the MRHRUs. The  
exercise for setting up a new MRHRU and the pace of implementation of the scheme, therefore, 
depends substantially on timely allotment of suitable land by the concerned State Governments. 
 
1.8 Under the scheme of MRHRUs, the target of sanctioning 7 new MR HRUs in 2019 -20 
was achieved in full including those at A&N Islands and Telangana.   
 
Recommendation 
   
1.9 The Committee notes with concern that the DHR has made actual expenditure to 
the tune of Rs. 4.16 crore against the BE allocation of Rs. 7.35 crore that was reduced to the 
tune of Rs. 6.00 crore at RE stage. The Committee understands that budgetary allocation is 
reduced at the RE stage keeping in the light of the progress of the scheme. The Committee 
observes that had the DHR been able to make expenditure commensurating to the progress 
of the scheme as per allocated fund at BE stage, the Ministry of Finance would not have 
reduced the allocation at RE stage. The actual expenditure is only to the tune of Rs. 4.16 
crore till 31st January, 2020 which is again a matter of concern to the Committee. 
(Para 2.5.5) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.10 The allocated budget of Rs.6.00 crores under the head “Development  of tools to prevent 
outbreaks of epidemic” has been fully utilized by 31 st March, 2020. The said budget was utilized 
to combat the COVID -19 outbreak which was eventually declared as pandemic by WHO on 
March 11, 2020. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.11 The Committee underlines the need of inter -sectoral convergence and coordination 
for promotion and guidance on health research and recommends that DHR must make all 
efforts to identify the existing knowledge gap and promote research projects that would 
yield in extracting the health leads which would ultim ately translate into deliverable 
products. Since the physical achievement of target set under the scheme is dependent upon 
the availability of budget and number of quality applications received, the Committee, 
strongly recommends the DHR to approach the Ministry of Finance for allocating requisite 
fund for the scheme and also encourage/induce the health researcher to undertake the 
research projects. 
(Para 2.5.7) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.12 The department acknowledges the recommendation of the committee for identify ing the 
existing knowledge gap and ensure that under the Grant -in-aid scheme, the projects yielding the 

4 
 
deliverable products are duly considered. In order to promote research projects that would yield 
in extracting the health leads which would ultimately t ranslate into deliverable products, the 
DHR has identified 11 areas viz. Innovation in health technologies, Health Technology, GIS 
based disease mapping/surveillance, Health Informatics, Biomedical imaging and processing, 
Clinical trials for newer drugs/ v accines/ devices/ kits and tools, Disease modelling, Health 
System Research, Health Economics, Health Policy, and Environmental Health during 2019 -20. 
The proposals were invited in these areas through advertisement and after review by experts, 
nearly 28 pr ojects which are having translational potential were supported and similar efforts 
will be continued in current financial year and in future. 
 
1.13 The Committee is given to understand that Health Technology Assessment in India 
(HTAIn) undertakes activitie s to analyze evidence related cost effectiveness and clinical 
effectiveness for deployment of health technologies covering medicines, devices and health 
programmes, which in turn ensures effective and optimal utilization of health budget and 
easy access to  quality healthcare at the minimum cost. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends optimal utilization of allocated funds in order to minimize the cost for quality 
healthcare, especially in rural, urban slums and tribal areas. 
 
(Para 2.5.8) 
Action Taken 
 
1.14 The Health Technology Assessment program under DHR has undertaken studies to 
recommend optimal utilization of the allocated budget. Total 13 studies have been approved by 
the Board for implementation. These policy guidelines have been issued to the State a nd Central 
Government for implementation. Total 32 Health Technology Assessment studies are ongoing 
Some of the studies are as follows: 
 
(i) Cost Effectiveness of Therapeutic Use of Safety Engineered Syringes in Healthcare 
Facilities in India 
(ii) Health Technology Assessment of intraocular lenses for treatment of age -related 
cataracts in India  
(iii) Health Technology Assessment of Long Acting Reversible Contraceptives in India 
by.  
(iv) Validation of Diagnostic efficacy of digital hemoglobinometer (TrueHb), HemoCue 
and non-invasive devices for screening patients for anemia in the field settings.  
(v) Health Technology Assessment of Strategies for Cervical Cancer Screening in 
India.  
(vi) Cost effectiveness analysis Hypothermia detection devices (BEPMU, Thermospot 
and fever Watch) for pre-mature and low birth weight neonates in India  
(vii) Health Technology Assessment of Uterine Balloon Tamponade for Management of 
Postpartum Haemorrhage in India. 
(viii) Health Technology Assessment of Portable automated ABR Neonatal Hearing 
Screening Device  

5 
 
(ix) Rapid Health Technology Assessment for incorporating TrueNat as a diagnostic 
tool for tuberculosis under RNTCP in India  
(x) Evaluation of Pulse Oximeter as the Tool to Prevent Childhood Pneumonia related 
Mortality and Morbidity  
(xi) Health Technology A ssessment of Automated Resuscitation Device for Neonatal 
Resuscitation at point of delivery in Indian healthcare system  
(xii) Health Technology Assessment of various RT -PCR kits for the diagnosis of 
Influenza A/H1N1pdm09 virus in all age patients in India.  
(xiii) Health Technology Assessment on population based screening for Type 2 Diabetes 
and Hypertension in India  
(xiv) National Costing Study for healthcare system in 16 States in India. 
 
1.15 A HEALTH TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT BOARD BILL, (2019) has been proposed 
to institutionalize the structure and function of the HTAIn body.   The Bill is to provide for the 
constitution of a Board for providing evidences related to cost -effectiveness, clinical - 
effectiveness and safety of medicines, devices, vaccines and health programmes undertaking 
Health Technology Assessment (HTA) studies for decision making. It will evaluate affordability, 
appropriateness and cost effectiveness of the available and new health  technologies in India. It 
will work on the objectives of maximizing health, reducing out of pocket expenditure and 
reducing inequality so that maximum people can have access to quality healthcare at minimum 
cost in the country. The Bill has been approved by Hon’ble HFM and placed for pre legislative 
consultation with States. 
 
Recommendation 
   
1.16 The Committee is of the view that international cooperation in medical and health 
research provides an opportunity and platform for the indigenous health resear cher to 
interact with the health researchers in various parts of the world and therefore it helps in 
bridging the knowledge gap and skill development in the field of the health research. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends for encouraging the fellow healt h researchers to 
participate in the international conference to understand the global standard and practices 
in the health research that would in turn up -scale the health research in the country. 
Accordingly, provision for adequate fund be made to meet the  expenditure incurring on 
international cooperation in the field of health research. 
(Para 2.5.10) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.17 Provisions under this Head of Account are made for to facilitate and accelerate 
international cooperation in medical and health research by providing contributions for 
international conferences, participations in conferences/seminars abroad, organizing international 
conferences in India, and meeting foreign travel expenses on official visits abroad. In 2019 -20, 
the BE allocation of Rs.1.00 crores under this Head was increased to Rs.6.00 crores at RE stage 
towards payment of share amounting to Rs.5.00 crores the Department of Science & Technology 
for organizing the India International Science Fair -2019 at Kolkata. The International 

6 
 
Conference schedule on 27 -28 February, 2020 on Health Technology Assessment has been 
postponed due to travelling restrictions of international participants due to Corona Virus 
epidemic. Depending upon the situation of COVID -19 outbreak, the Department would 
Endeavour to organize the international conference during 2020 -21 and would also encourage 
health researchers to participate in international conferences.  An allocation of Rs.6.00 crores has 
already been for international cooperation in 2020 -21 and if need arises  more funds would be 
sought at RE stage.  
 
Recommendation 
   
1.18 The Committee is of the firm view that the Government should formulate a concrete 
contingent plan for managing epidemics that do not outbreak with prior notice and for 
which the state of preparedness must be resilient enough to contain the outbreak of 
epidemics and calamities so that lives of people be saved. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends the government to undertake measures to strengthen the contingent 
plan for managing epidemic and National calamities. In this regard, the Committee 
recommends that each VRDL must be trained in Good Clinical Laboratory Practices 
(GCLP). The Committee further recommends the government to undertake bio-
security and bio -safety measures so that any new and emergent virus is contained and 
controlled within shortest span of time. The Committee further recommends that the 
personnel engaged in handling the virus must be trained in bio -safety modules that include 
acquainting workers about wearing personal protective equipment to protect them from 
exposure to unknown virus. 
(Para 3.1.7) 
Action Taken 
 
1.19 Specific trainings like Good Clinical Laboratory Practices (GCLP), Bio -security and 
bio-safety measures have already been in place. These activities are being undertaken in phase 
manner to cover the entire networ k. NIV, Pune is the resource center of VRDL network, is 
mandated for capacity building of the staff involved in viral diagnosis. Various training modules 
focused on different serological/molecular techniques to diagnose Risk Group -1 to Risk Group - 
3 or H igh Risk viral pathogen are in place. In continuation different specific modules on 
biosafety, use of personal protective equipments (donning and doffing exercises) will be 
developed. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.20 The Committee acknowledges the vital role of VRDLs in surveillance diagnosis and 
detection of outbreaks of epidemics and calamities. The Committee notes that most of the 
VRDLs provide diagnosis within 24 to 48 hours, however, it is felt that turnaround tim e 
may further be reduced with the use of latest technology and medical device. 
(Para 3.1.8) 
 
 
 

7 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.21 Turnaround time depends on the type of test involved in diagnosis. Latest technologies 
like automated machines are being deployed as well as VRDLs are encouraged to develop lateral 
flow assays, point of care devices, etc. 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE FOR PROMOTION OF HEALTH 
RESEARCH 
   
Recommendation 
 
1.22 The Committee observes that establishment of MRUs in government medical 
colleges and Model Rural Health Research Units in the rural areas are two pillars of basic 
infrastructure for biomedical research schemes in the country. The Committee finds that 
the MRHRU scheme is comparatively more diversified in its approach towards Bio -
medical Research as it intends to transfer the requisite technology also to the rural areas to 
serve the affected persons as they do not, otherwise, have access to such technologies. The 
Committee, therefore, is of the firm view that there is urgent need for strengthen ing of 
basic infrastructure for health research in the country by allocating the fund as investment 
through budgetary provision to strengthen the network of research institutes for carrying 
out bio -medical research for ensuring bio -security not only agains t the emerging and re - 
emerging life threatening viruses but also providing a protecting umbrella against bio - 
terrorism. 
(Para 3.2.9) 
Action Taken 
 
1.23 As acknowledged by the Hon’ble  Committee, MRU/MRHRU schemes have been 
formulated with a view to create and strengthen research environment in State Government 
Medical Colleges and in rural areas in States. Under the Scheme, proposals for establishing 
MRUs/MRHRUs are called for from the  State Government on regular basis. Since, these are 
Central Sector Schemes, 100% financial grant is given by the Central Government for recurring 
expenditure (salaries, consumables, contingency etc.) and non-recurring expenditure (equipment, 
civil work. B ased on the assessment of requirement of funds for the existing and the new 
proposals, projections are made in the annual Demands for Grants.  
 
1.24 The Committee’s recommendation has also been noted for future guidance and 
compliance. In fact, a separate allocation for supporting research activities in the VRDLs, 
MRUSs and MRHRUs has also been proposed under the PM-ABSY Package.  
 
Recommendation 
 
1.25 The Committee strongly recommends the DHR that the allocated funds for 
development of infrastructure for promotion of Health Research must be optimally utilized 
by adhering the following strategy in order to achieve the physical target: - 

8 
 
 
i. Simplification of procedure and processes for sanctioning and release of 
funds for the various projects. 
ii. Proper planning,  efficient coordination and effective financial controlling 
while executing the scheme. 
iii. Strengthening of monitoring mechanism and organizing workshops and 
review meetings for addressing the issues in the implementation of the 
schemes. Adherence also to das hboard for online monitoring of progress of 
Scheme/ Programme. 
iv. Regular field visits for onsite appraisal of progress of implementation of the 
schemes.  
 
(Para 3.3.4) 
Action Taken 
 
1.26  
(1) The procedure under Research Governance for Health Technology Asse ssment has been 
streamlined as follows: 
   
i. The funds are directly transferred to the institutes. 
ii. Proper planning and effective controls for release of grant after the Utilization 
certificates are obtained from the institutes 
iii. Continuous monitoring on the timelines of the Studies approved. Updation of the 
dashboard on quarterly basis. 
 
(2) With respect to VRDL Scheme: 
 
i. Virtual site visit inspections for reviewing the existing Department of 
Microbiology so that Viral Research and  Diagnostic Laboratories should be 
established in this current scenario of COVID-19 pandemic. 
ii. In addition to this monitoring of all research projects as well as handholding of 
laboratories are being done through video conferencing. 
iii. In order to address the issues specific other resources are being used like 
WhatsApp Groups as well as emails as a communication way out to resolve those 
issues. 
 
(3) Regarding MRUs and MRHRUs, following mechanism is already in place:  
 
i. Under the current m echanism, research proposals are approved by the Local 
Research Advisory Committee (LRAC). These proposals are subsequently 
considered in the Department of Health Research (DHR) by the Technical 
Evaluation Committee (TEC) consisting of Experts and thereaft er, approved by 
the Approval Committee headed by Secretary, DHR.  

9 
 
ii. Once approved, admissible grant -in-aid for recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure is released to MRUs/MRHRUs for undertaking research activities.  
iii. As far as financial controlling is concern ed, it is stated that funds are released 
after minute scrutiny of Utilization Certificates (UCs) and Statement of 
Expenditures (SoEs) to ensure that funds have been utilized for the activities for 
which they were sanctioned. 
iv. The Department also has a robus t monitoring mechanism to ensure proper and 
effective implementation of MRU/MRHRU scheme. Under this mechanism, 
periodical review meetings with Directors of ICMR Mentoring Institutes, Nodal 
Officers of MRUs and Administrative Staff of the Research Units ar e held to 
evaluate progress of research proposals besides monitoring achievement of 
physical and financial targets of the units.  
v. Workshops are also organized by the Department of Health Research periodically 
on subjects like “Scientific Paper Writing Skil ls” and “Research Methodology” at 
the Head Quarter and also in different regions of the Country primarily with the 
objective of sharpening skills of Scientists in these areas and also to update them 
about latest National and International trends in the are as of Scientific Paper 
Writing and different Research Methodologies. Such workshops have greatly 
helped Scientists to sharpen their skills and updating their knowledge. 
Accordingly, better results are expected in these areas in future.  
vi. Regular field visits are also undertaken by a team of Scientists and Administrative 
Officers from the Department of Health Research to physically monitor the 
progress of work in the units. Besides, monitoring progress, on the spot 
suggestions/recommendations are also provided to the units to the extent possible 
to solve their problems/issues.  
vii. As a result, as on date 80 MRUs and 25 MRHRUs have been established across 
the Country where a total of 656 research projects are undergoing. 
 
1.27 The Committee’s re commendation has also been noted for future guidance and 
compliance. In fact, a separate allocation for supporting research activities in the VRDLs, 
MRUSs and MRHRUs has also been proposed under the PM-ABSY Package.  
 
HUMAN RESOURCE AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT 
 
Recommendation 
   
1.28 The Committee does not agree with Department’s plea for lower projection at RE 
level on account of reduction in receipt of less number of proposals from the NER. The 
figures of actual expenditure to the tune of Rs. 62.70 crore  in 2019-20 under the head are 
also not encouraging. The Committee disapproves the casual approach of the DHR for not 
adhering the desired cannons of fiscal discipline. The Committee is of the considered view 
that unless there is adequate budgetary allocat ion followed by optimal utilization of 
allocated fund, the DHR would not be in a position to constitute a pool of talented and 
trained medical researchers. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that DHR 
must approach the Ministry of Finance for ade quate budgetary provision for Human 

10 
 
Resource and Capacity Development. The Committee further underlines the importance of 
capacity building by providing financial assistance to health researchers in various areas of 
bio-medical/health science. 
(Para 3.4.2) 
Action Taken 
 
1.29 The Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) in the brainstorming meeting discussed the 
issue of receipt of less number of proposals from the NER and gave their recommendations to 
ensure that the human resource development matches the evolv ing needs of the North East 
Region. 
 
1.30 The TEC committee identified the areas to support specific training programs in NER, 
targeting the local problems focusing on the prevalent diseases, emerging and re -emerging 
diseases, projects to explore herbal formulations etc. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.31 The Committee is of the considered view that DHR must devise robust strategy for 
the capacity building of the global standard for its manpower to ensure better achievement 
of set objectives. The Committee, in this connection, recommends the DHR to have rea listic 
assessment of the requirement of health care systems and of bio -medical science and 
accordingly devise appropriate strategies for imparting trainings / exposure visits / 
workshops in various reputed international organisations. Moreover, the Committ ee 
recommends for upgrading the existing knowledge of human resources in the various fields 
of biomedical/ health sciences in various areas viz. Toxicology, Genomics, Proteomics, 
Geriatrics, Stem Cell Research, Clinical Trials, Good Clinical Practices (GCP ), 
Biotechnology, Genetics, Operational Research, Health Informatics, Medical Ethics, Health 
Economics, Health Policy, Biomedical imaging and processing, Health Informatics, 
Environment and Health etc.  
 
(Para 3.4.8) 
Action Taken 
 
1.32 The department ackno wledges the recommendation of the committee and based on the 
recommendations organized a brainstorming discussion with the experts of Technical Evaluation 
Committee (TEC) of HRD scheme of DHR, which comprises of the experts of biomedical areas 
from various leading health institutions of India. The TEC identified several research areas as per 
the country's requirement of health care systems and of bio -medical science including the areas 
mentioned by the committee for various categories of the HRD scheme incl uding Short term and 
long term training programs and support to institutes for providing training to biomedical 
researchers categories. Based on the recommendations the proposals will be invited in these 
areas through advertisement in current financial year and in future. 
 

11 
 
Recommendation 
   
1.33 The Committee acknowledges the major achievements of ICMR in the specified 
areas viz. health research, nutrition, tribal health, tradition medicine and publication and 
dissemination of information and hopes that ICMR would continue to achieve the 
milestones in these battle fields. The Committee recommends that the mobile app on 
‘Dietary Guidelines for Indians’ must be popularized especially in rural, urban slums and 
tribal areas. Nutrition Surveillance System need to be further strengthened and must yield 
result on the grass -root level. The Committee recommends the Government to undertake 
Fortified Food to fight malnutrition as the flagship progamme for which the Government 
should transform the research activity in ICMR into Government policy and a suitable 
course of action must be chalked out for its implementation on the ground level. The 
Committee also recommends that the Mission SHAKTI be incorporated in school syllabus 
to educate students about the healthy lifestyle following the ideology and philosophy of 
Mahatma Gandhi like cleanliness, Hygiene, sanitation, nutrition, physical fitness, mental 
health, etc 
(Para 3.5.8) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.34 DIETARY GUIDELINES: 
 
1. Dietary guidelines for Indians app has  been put online on NIN’s website and was also 
popularized through social media. The Dietary Guidelines for Indians are under revision now. A 
more interactive app is being planned for popularization after the revised guidelines are released. 
 
2. In addition, ICMR_NIN also launched another app, Nutrify India Now (NIN) which can 
provide information on over 500 commonly consumed Indian foods and 400 recipes. This is also 
available for free download on Google Play store. Apart from this, NIN’s efforts to reach out  to 
people in rural, areas, urban slums and all parts of the country, 14 e -learning modules on 
Nutrition have been developed as part of POSHAN Abhiyaan and these are available for free on 
NIN’s website and in POSHAN Abhiyaan. These modules currently availa ble in Hindi, can be 
accessed for free and module completion certificates can be generated online.  As on date, over 
2.43 lakh certificates have been generated from across all states in the country with highest in UP 
followed by Maharashtra, Bihar, Rajasthan and so on. 
 
3. As regards the implementation of the Nutrition Surveillance System, ICMR -NIN is 
extremely thankful to the committee for this suggestion. ICMR-NIN will spearhead any initiative 
of ICMR/Govt. to scale it up. As regards the ongoing efforts, dig itization of ICDS reporting 
system for real time reporting of data has been taken up in six   states –   Telangana, Madhya   
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Kerala, Odisha, Meghalaya as model. Anganwadi Workers have been 
trained and empowered with tablet PCs enabled with Computer-assisted personal interviewing 

12 
 
(CAPI) system to record data at their Anganwadi Centre (AWC). Real time data (unique - 
developed by NIN- Can work offline), the AWC data would   be   accessible   at   various   levels   
-   District, State   and    at   ICMR-NIN   for assessing nutrition status of children at single child 
level to make appropriate and immediate intervention. 
 
 
Mission SHAKTTI  
 
1.35 The activity related to incorporation of healthy practices has already been initiated. 
ICMR has already coordinated with the Department of Education and NCERT for inclusion of 
Gandhian philosophy towards health in school syllabus. Effort would be made to e xpand the 
activity to include more areas of best health practices especially with reference to Mahatma 
Gandhi’s teachings.  
 
Specific Areas to be funded in respect of ICMR 
 
Recommendation 
   
1.36 The Committee takes into account the Annual Action Plan of I CMR for the year 
2020-21 enveloping research projects in 13 specific areas for which an amount to the tune 
of Rs. 1795.71 crore has been earmarked. The Committee believes that ICMR would 
undertake National TB Prevalence Survey and implement TB vaccine and indigenous 
molecular diagnostic kit ‘TruNat’ in order to eliminate TB by 2025. The Committee also 
believes that research activity directed towards elimination of vector borne diseases would 
yield desired outcome. The Committee considers the research activi ties undertaken by 
ICMR pertaining to climate change impact on human health, especially vector borne 
diseases would go a long way in containing the life threatening diseases. The Committee 
feels that ICMR must undertake extensive clinical trials on new ind igenous, cost effective, 
safe and efficacious drugs for treatment of VL, PKDL an co -infected cases. The Committee 
expects ICMR to continue for strengthening public health emergency operation centre for 
epidemic management like nCov, Zika, Nipah, etc. The C ommittee desires the ICMR to 
have HIV estimation in India and undertake research activities for its treatment. The 
Committee believes that ICMR would achieve the ‘End Cholera’ goals in India by 2030. 
The Committee strongly believes that the outcome of rese arch activities undertaken by 
ICMR in the field of Oncology, Cardiovascular diseases, Neurology, Diabetes, Mental 
Health, Disablity, Gastroenterology would relieve large chunk of people through assured 
treatment. The Committee would like ICMR to undertake new initiatives to improve the 
position of India in global hunger index and address issues pertaining to iodine deficiency 
disorder, POSHAN Abhiyan, nanomedicine, pharmacology/rare diseases, reproductive 
biology, maternal and child healthcare. The Committe e recommends the ICMR to 
galvanize the Tribal Health Research forum (THRF) activities and to setup a nation -wide 
research program in the form of Tribal Health Research Consortium of India (THRCI). 

13 
 
The ICMR also needs to strengthen medical device and diagno stic mission secretariat and 
ensure clinical validation of medical devices. The Committee recommends the ICMR to 
promote the traditional medicine, promote participation in international health conference 
to have a glance over global health index and parame ters and to implement the same in 
India. The call for “centre for one health” would require a network of new infrastructure 
development. The Committee would like the dissemination of collected research 
information/ analysis and outcome to the lower rungs o f the country for the benefit of the 
general masses. 
(Para 3.5.10) 
 
Action Taken 
 
Visceral leishmaniasis (VL)/ Post-kala-azar Dermal Leishmaniasis (PKDL):  
 
1.37 The following clinical trials are ongoing: 
 
 Phase III clinical trial of three single dose treatment regimens of FungisomeTM (either 
alone or in combination with miltefosine) compared with a single dose treatment regimen 
of AmBisome® for treatment of VL. [Sponsor: Life Care] 
 Phase II clinical trial o f two regimens to assess the safety and efficacy for treatment of 
PKDL. [Sponsor: DNDi] 
 Assessment of the safety and efficacy of AmBisome® in the dose of 5 mg/kg for three 
injection with miltefosine for six weeks vs. miltefosine alone for 12 weeks in PKDL 
patients.  
 The following trials have recently been concluded: 
 Assessment of Safety and efficacy of Liposomal Amphotericin B (AmBisome) Vs 
Miltefosine 12-weeks therapy in patients with PKDL. 
 A randomized trial of Ambisome® monotherapy and combination of Amb isome® and 
miltefosine for the treatment of VL in HIV positive patients. [Sponsor: MSF] 
 Some bioequivalence studies that have been concluded recently are: 
 A Multi -Center, Open -Label, Randomized, Two treatment, Parallel, Single period, 
Multiple-Dose, Steady state, Global Bioequivalence study of Amphotericin B Liposome 
for Injection 50mg /vial (Test) of Auromedics Pharma LLC, USA and AmBisome® 
(Amphotericin B) Liposome for Injection 50mg/vial (Reference) of Astellas Pharma US, 
inc. in patients with Visceral L eishmaniasis under fed (non -high fat breakfast) condition. 
[Sponsor: Aurobindo Pharma Limited, Hyderabad] 
 A multicenter, open label, randomized, two treatments, parallel design, steady state study 
to compare the bioavailability of the Test product [Amphote ricin B (Liposome for 
injection) 50 mg/vial, Cipla Ltd., India] with Reference product [AmBisome® 
(Amphotericin B) Liposome for injection 50 mg/vial), Gilead life sciences, USA] in adult 
patients with visceral leishmaniasis. [Sponsor: Cipla] 

14 
 
 A Multi-Centre, Randomized, Double Blind, Parallel -Group, Comparative Clinical Trial 
to evaluate the Safety and Clinical Equivalence of Generic Clotrimazole 
Troche/Lozenges USP, 10mg (manufactured by Unique Pharmaceutical Laboratories, 
India) to Clotrimazole Troche/Loze nges® 10mg (Roxane Laboratories Inc., USA) in 
subjects with Oropharyngeal Candidiasis. [Sponsor: ThinQ Pharma] 
 It is to mention that outcomes of various clinical trials conducted earlier have been 
translated into the National Kala -azar Elimination Pogramme  viz. domiciliary use of 
miltefsoine for treatment of VL and PKDL, paromomycin, single dose ambisome, 
combination therapies, amphomule, etc.     
 
Public health Emergency Strengthening:  
 
1.38 ICMR being the implementing agency for the scheme “Setting up of  Nation-wide 
Network of Laboratories for Managing Epidemics and National Calamities” has setup a robust 
network of virus release and diagnosis laboratory. Network comprises 107 VRDL (10 RL, 22 
SL, 95 MCL) across the country able to provide timely diagnosis  of infectious disease caused by 
various viral etiologies like Dengue, H1N1, nCoV, Zika, Nipah etc. ICMR is continuously 
working for further expansion of the VRDL network. 
 
1.39 Further, ICMR-NIV, Pune has standardized and validated a point -of-care diagnostic test 
for Nipah virus disease which was successfully used during the 2019 outbreak of Nipah in 
Ernakulum, Kerala. 
 
Other Issues: 
 
1.40 ICMR is committed towards providing sustainable solutions to the health challenges of 
our nation. ICMR has planned a number of flagship programmes in the areas of maternal and 
child health, tribal health and medical devices. Apart from this, the Council is  working 
continuously towards setting up Centre for One Health at Nagpur. 
 
1.41 A communications Unit have been set at headquarters with its nodal officers in every 
ICMR institute. The Unit ensures that the research findings are disseminated widely to reach 
each and every corner of the country. Dissemination activities in the form of press release, Op -
Eds, Featured articles in newspapers, popular articles in magazines, social media posts and 
exhibitions/Films are undertaken. 
 
Major Achievements of ICMR 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.42 The Committee appreciates ICMR for publishing 823 research papers /research 
documents during 2018 -19 including 17 patents filed out of which 7 were granted and 13 
technologies were developed. Similarly, during 2019 -20 (till December, 2019) 567 research 
documents were published, 18 patents were filed, 4 patents were granted and 23 

15 
 
technologies were developed. The Committee hopes that research conclusions would be 
disseminated to the ground level and benefits reach to the patient at the primary health 
centre. The Committee applauds the achievements of ICMR in exploring major research 
leads that have been translated to various health products in the interest of health benefits 
of the public. The Committee further believes that the technolo gies as developed through 
major research activities undertaken by ICMR, sooner than later, would foster into 
commercialization and thereby yield the desired results in maintaining the public health.  
 
(Para 3.5.15) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.43 ICMR has forged partnerships with industry for smooth technology transfer. Technology 
readiness templates have been prepared and website advertisements prepared and placed on 
ICMR website for seeking potential collaborators to further upscale/commercialization the 
technology. A transparent process seeking collaboration by private/ public sector companies was 
followed through website advertisement. In response to website advt., the proposals received 
from companies are shortlisted on the basis of company selection criteria and evaluated by the 
technology transfer committee. 
 
New initiatives 
 
• 6 technologies are under pipeline of tech-transfer process (through in-house efforts) 
• Monitoring of tech transfer under HTAC program with support from FICCI 
• Technology incubation under collaboration with SCTIMST 
• Monitoring of technology up -scaling/ commercialization through Biotechnology 
Consortium India Limited (BCIL). Technology evaluation reports have been reviewed 
and technical data provide to revise the reports. Regular follow up wit h inventors and 
BCIL representatives is being carried to monitor the tech transfer process.   
• Revision of IPR policy is in process. 
 
 
BHOPAL MEMORIAL HOSPITAL AND RESEARCH CENTRE, BHOPAL 
 
Recommendation 
   
1.44 Recapitulating the recommendations of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Health & Family Welfare in its 111 th Report on the Functioning of 
new AIIMS (Phase-I) under the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY), the 
Committee noted that BMHRC has witnessed seven hando vers in 10 years. The Committee 
notes the view of the High Power Committee, constituted with the terms of reference for 
deciding the fate of BMHRC, in order to achieve the goal for improving the functioning of 
BMHRC in conjunction with ICMR, there is urgen t need for enhancing the capacity 
building by way of improved availability of Doctors, commencement of PG courses in 

16 
 
medical education, optimal utilization of resources, undertaking new activities etc. The 
Committee believes that efficient and effective operational and functional synergy would be 
integrated between BMHRC and ICMR for multiplying professional proficiency of 
BMHRC. The Committee appreciates that DHR has already undertaken initiatives for the 
filling up of the vacant posts and procurement of t ools and equipments for proper patient 
care. The Committee, however, would like to be apprised of the cost benefits analysis and 
ultimate outcome of transfer of BMHRC to ICMR alongwith performance audit report 
indicating the operational ratio and other accounting practices. 
(Para 3.6.10) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.45 BMHRC provides state -of-the-art super -specialty medical facilities to all registered 
gas victims and their entitled dependents as well as the public at large. Basic, clinical and 
epidemiological research  is carried out in all disciplines in the hospital. The existing 
infrastructure is also utilized to train doctors, nurses and paramedical personnel.  
 
1.46 The administrative control of BMHRC was transferred from DHR to ICMR in 
November 2019 following recom mendations of High Powered committee with the ultimate 
objective of making it an institute of Excellence. Action taken / achievements made after 
transfer of Bhopal Memorial Hospital and Research Centre (BMHRC), Bhopal to Indian 
Council of Medical Research (ICMR), within a short span of nine months, which is 
inclusive of two months of lock down due to COVID pandemic are as follows:  
 
a. Recruitment of faculty doctors (Specialists and Super specialists): Recruitments of faculty 
doctors were carried out in the month of February, 2020 and eight faculties (Specialists and 
Super specialists) were selected. Six of them have already joined BMHRC. One is likely to 
join BMHRC in November 2020. Subsequently, vacant posts of faculty (Specialists and 
Super specialists) we re re advertised for walk -in-interview to be held in the last week of 
March, 2020.  However, due to the ongoing COVID 19 pandemic, it was decided to hold the 
interviews at a later date.  
 
b. Due promotions of doctors (faculties and specialists) were carried ou t. This has helped in 
improving morale and retaining the senior and experienced doctors. 
 
c. Commencement of medical post graduate courses: In order to further strengthen the much 
needed human resource in the field of medicine, efforts were made to initiate p ost graduate 
courses in BMHRC.  In this regard: 
 
1. BMHRC has been accredited with the National Board of Examinations for DNB 
courses in Ophthalmology. Two seats have been included in the seat matrix for DNB 
seats for January, 2020 Admission session's counselling as follows:  
 
i. DNB Ophthalmology (Post MBBS) : 1 seat.  

17 
 
            ii.  DNB Ophthalmology (Post Diploma): 1 seat.  
 
The accreditation of the above seats for BMHRC with the National Board of Examinations 
is valid up to December, 2024.  Selections o f DNB students has been carried out through 
NEET for the present academic year. 
 
2. In order to initiate MD courses in BMHRC, the letter of permission has been received 
from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to start MD course in Anaesthesia, with 4 
seats per year.   
  
d.Upgradation and procurement of medical equipments:  The process for upgradation  and 
procurement of life saving medical equipments has been expedited.  Orders for 82 
equipments have been placed and tender procedure for 130 equipments through CPP 
portal/GeM is under process. 
 
e. Setting up of a diagnostic virology Laboratory: A diagnostic  virology laboratory 
was set up with support from ICMR. The laboratory was utilised for carrying out diagnostic 
molecular testing for Corona virus.  
 
1.47 The laboratory has so far provided testing for nearly 80,000 samples received from the 
hospital and t he community for COVID 19.  Additional staff on contractual basis has been 
sanctioned by ICMR for the purpose. 
1.48 BMHRC is mandated to provide free treatment to the victims of Bhopal Gas Disaster. All 
gas victims and their dependents are provided health care services free of cost. All medical, 
surgical, interventional and investigative diagnostic services are provided free of charge. 
 
1.49 Earlier separate budget provision made for BMHRC in the budget of DHR.  Now, since 
BMHRC would function as one of the  constituents of ICMR, its budgetary requirements would 
be met from within the overall allocation of ICMR.   
 
1.50 It would be pertinent to mention here that the Hon'ble Supreme Court had constituted a 
Monitoring Committee chaired by a former Judge of the Hon'ble High Court of Madhya Pradesh, 
which is mandated to oversee the functioning of BMHRC as well as other Government Hospitals 
dealing with gas victims. The Monitoring Committee regularly visits BMHRC, Bhopal and 
provides its report to the Hon'ble High Court of Madhya Pradesh.   
   
1.51 The administrative control of BMHRC has been transferred to ICMR only about 9 
months back.  ICMR will take up the matter of Performance audit of BMHRC with CAG as 
directed by the Hon’ble Committee.   
 
1.52 As regards acco unting practices, the BMHRC would follow the prescribed accounting 
system as an ICMR constituent and will be subject to the C & AG Audit also. 
 
1.53 Autonomy to the hospital will facilitate quick decision on proposals and filling up of 
vacant posts of doctors and other staff at the hospital level and BMHRC will also be able to put 
in greater efforts into Research and innovations in medical education and public health areas. 
 

18 
 
NORTH EASTERN AREAS 
 
Recommendation 
   
1.54 The Committee is constrained to exp ress its displeasure over lower actual 
expenditure to the tune of Rs. 88.14 crore as on 10 th February, 2020. The Committee hopes 
that projects/schemes undertaken during 2019 -20 viz. establishment of network of VRDLs, 
MRUs, MRHRUs and Human Resource Develop ment for Health Research would yield the 
desired outcome in the interest of maintaining public health in NER. The Committee also 
hopes that allocation would be fully utilized for the intended purpose on the projects 
already sanctioned in the interest of public health in NER. 
(Para 3.7.3) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.55 The actual expenditure under NER component is Rs.91.44 against the BE provision of 
Rs.103.00 crores and RE allocation of Rs.101 crores. While the entire provision of Rs.80.00 
crores for the ICMR was released, the utilisation under the DHR schemes was Rs.11.44 crores 
against the RE allocation of Rs.21.00 crores. 
 
1.56 Currently, the following VRDLs, MRUs and MRHRUs are sanctioned in the NER States: 
 
(1) Establishment of VRDLs: 
  
S.No. Name of 
State 
Name of Viral Research & Diagnostic 
Laboratory (VRDL) 
1 Assam 1.Regional Medical Research Centre 
(RMRC), Dibrugarh (ICMR)  
  2.Guwahati medical College, Guwahati 
  3.Tezpur Medical College & Hospital, 
Tezpur 
  4.Jorhat Medical College & Hospital, Jorhat 
 
  5.Fakruddin Ali Ahmed Medical College, 
Barpeta 
  6.Silchar Medical College, Silchar 
2 Manipur 7.Regional Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Imphal 
  8.J N Institute of Medical Sciences, Imphal 
3 Meghalaya 9.North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional 
Institute of Health & Medical Sciences, 
Shillong 
4 Tripura 10.Government Agartala Medical College, 
Agartala 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
(2) Establishment of MRUs:  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the State Name of the Medical College 
sanctioned the MRU 
1 Assam 1.Silchar Medical College and 
Hospital, Silchar 
  2.Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed Medical 
College, Barpeta 
  3.Jorhat Medical College, Jorhat 
2. Manipur 4.Regional Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Imphal 
3. Tripura 5.Agartala Govt. Medical College, 
Agartala 
 
 
(3) Establishment of MRHRUs:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State Location of 
MRHRU 
ICMR mentor 
Institute/Centre 
Linked 
Medical 
College 
1. Assam PHC Chabua RMRC, Dibrugarh Assam 
Medical 
College and 
Hospital, 
Dibrugarh 
2. Tripura Kherengbar 
Hospital 
Khumulwung 
RMRC, Dibrugarh Agartala 
Government 
Medical 
College 
 
 
3. Nagaland PHC, Niuland, 
Dist: Dimapur 
RMRC, Dibrugarh -- 
4. Meghalaya Sohra CHC 
,East Khasi 
Hills 
RMRC, Dibrugarh District 
Surveillance 
Officer 
EKH(IDSP) 
5. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
CHC Sagalee 
Papum Pare 
RMRC, Dibrugarh Tomo Riba 
Institute of 
Health & 
Medical 
Sciences 
(TRIHMS), 
Neharlagun 

20 
 
1.57 The position of sanctioning of fellowships under the HRD scheme is as follows: 
 
2013-14 to               
2017-18 
2018-19 
 
2019-20 
Name 
of the 
State 
No. of 
Fellowships 
granted 
Name of 
the State 
No. of 
Fellowships 
granted 
Name 
of the 
State 
No. of 
Fellows
hips 
granted 
Assam  8 Assam  5 Assam 2 
Tripur
a 
1 Tripura  1   
Manip
ur  
5 Nagaland  3   
Nagala
nd  
1     
Total 15  9  2 
 
INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH: 
 
1.58 ICMR has a permanent Institute, namely, the Regional Medical Research 
Centre (RMRC) at Dibrugarh for addressing various health issues of the regional 
importance. Besides, it has a NIMR Field Station at Guwahati. Also, Three Task 
Force projects have been initiated recently in north east by ICMR as mentioned 
below: 
 
1.59 As a part of the efforts to improve the expenditure profile on health research activities in 
the NE region, it has been decided to establish a Bio Medical Research Centre at Guwahati.  
 
1.60 The network of  MRHRUs has been created in the NER for transfer of technology at the 
rural level for providing better treatment to the local population.  This infrastructure is also 
undertaking research on local disease burden and will take the technology from lab to the field.  
The Multi -Disciplinary Research Units (MRUs) in the government medical colleges are also 
engaged in research on non -communicable diseases which will ultimately benefit the patients in 
the area.  The network of viral research and diagnostic laborato ries are engaged in identification 
of new and emerging viruses for managing epidemics /outbreaks.  
 
1.61 Meeting with all stakeholders including Health and WCD officials, local communities, 
North East Hill Council, Ministry of DONER, etc will be held not o nly to disseminate the 
findings of research but also to brainstorm and prioritise areas for health research in 
collaboration with them. Also focus will be on the following: 
 
(i) Reduction of risk factors for cancer and lifestyle related diseases (diabetes, and  
Cardiovascular diseases) 
(ii) Hypertension control by reduction of salt consumption. 
(iii) Improving maternal and child health 

21 
 
(iv) Effort to halt and spread of Antimicrobial drug resistance 
(v) Reduction of TB in NE, elimination of malaria and food borne diseases 
(vi) Developing network for data sharing platform for Surveillance and early containment 
of outbreaks.  
 
1.62 The Regional VRDL at ICMR-RMRC, Dibrugarh, over and above its regular surveillance 
on human respiratory viruses and other viral infections, is providing training  on sample 
collection, transportation, donning & doffing of PPE, sample processing, molecular diagnosis of 
respiratory viruses to the Health care workers, Laboratory technicians, faculties of Medical 
Colleges of North East region, Post graduate students an d PhD scholars of various Universities. 
All efforts will be made to utilize the allocations for NE made for ICMR during the financial 
year 2020-21. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.63 The Committee has been given to understand ICMR is playing the pivotal role in 
NER and three task force projects viz. Rickettsial diseases, Acute Encephalitis Syndrome 
(AES) and Monitoring of insecticide resistance in Malaria vectors are underway. The 
Committee, in this connection, recommends DHR that the decision to establish Bio -medical 
Research Centre at Guwahati be implemented on the ground level without delay.  
(Para 3.7.7) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.64 Rickettsial diseases are emerging as important public health problem in NE region. The 
project on Rickettsial diseases study confirmed the presence of three rickettsial etiologies viz., 
scrub typhus (ST), spotted fever group rickettsia (SFGR) and typhus group rickett siae (TGR) in 
the states of Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram. ST was found to be predominant followed by 
SFGR and TGR.  
 
1.65 Systematic study of acute encephalitis syndrome (AES) in north -eastern states of India 
for clinical, etiological and epidemiological aspects has shown encouraging results on the role of 
Doxycycline in treatment for JE. Moreover, ST and Leptospira have been found to contribute 
substantially to AES and Doxycycline is the drug of choice for both these bacterial infections. 
Project on Monitoring of insecticide resistance in malaria vectors in endemic states of India  
aimed to monitor and update the susceptibility/resistance status of malaria vectors of NE India 
against discriminatory dosage of insecticides. 
 
Status of work of Construction o f Centre for Bio -Medical Research a peripheral unit of 
ICMR-RMRCNE, Dibrugarh at Guwahati (Assam): 
 
1.66 Executing Agency of the project is  CPWD, Assam Aviation Division, Guwahati. Work 
was started in February, 2019 and was scheduled for completion by Febr uary, 2021. However, 
cap and piling work is stooped due to sudden imposition of lockdown due to COVID -19 

22 
 
Outbreak. CPWD are trying to make necessary arrangements to cope up with General Guidelines 
& SOP’s issued by the Central & State Government. They will  start the work, as soon as the 
workers will be able to join the site. ICMR-RMRCNE is constantly in touch with CPWD, Assam 
Aviation Division, Guwahati to initiate the work for timely completion of the project.  
 
ISSUE RAISED 
 
SEPARATE BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR COMMON DISEASES LIKE KIDNEY 
DISEASES, DIABETES, CANCER, HIGH BP, ETC. 
 
Recommendation 
    
1.67 Taking into account various budgetary provisions and institutional arrangements 
meant for combating common diseases Kidney Diseases viz. Diabetes, Cancer, High BP, 
etc, the Committee recommends that DHR, in tandem with ICMR, would make concerted 
efforts for undertaking research activities to translate its outcome to develop product for 
treatment of common diseases for up -keeping of public health. The Committ ee would like 
the ICMR-NICPR to undertake further research to develop device for early detection of 
various emerging forms of Cancer. 
(Para 4.2.1) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1. Molecular Genetics lab at NICPR is exploring a Homeopathy drug against 
cervical cancer in vitr o and if found useful, the same may be studied in human 
subjects.  
 
2. An indigenous point-of-care HPV testing device for cervical cancer screening has 
been validated by NICPR. Results are under publication.  
 
24X7 CRISIS MANAGEMENT TEAM AT NATIONAL LEVEL FOR  ADDRESSING THE 
SITUATIONS DURING OUTBREAK OF EPIDEMICS 
 
Recommendation 
  
1.68 The Committee is of the considered view that in order to have 24x7 Crisis 
Management team at National Level for addressing the situations during outbreak of 
epidemics, there is an urgent need to strengthen the government’s preparedness plan and 
to galvanise the role of NIV, Pune - a resource centre for VRDLs, NCDC, Delhi and 
enhancing the capacity building of VRDLs. The Committee, in this regard, recommends 
that VRDLs can be re -oriented to detect the dreaded high -risk pathogens that can be used 
in bio -terrorism. The Committee, in this context, appreciates the proposal of ICMR to 
develop modules and create pool of master trainers in Bio -simulation, who, in turn, can 
propagate the tr aining to researchers engaged in VRDL labs. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends that adequate budgetary allocations be made to ICMR for expansion 

23 
 
of VRDLs to undertake research on fungi and certain bacteria as the antimicrobial 
resistance as anti microbial resistance is said to be emerging major cause of death. The 
Committee calls upon the government to direct the research institutes to be proactive in 
their approach and act upon before an outbreak of epidemics rather than acting post 
aftermath of the outbreak. 
(Para 4.3.4) 
1.69 Action Taken 
  
1. NIV, Pune  is the resource center of VRDL network, playing pivotal role in capacity 
building of the staff involved in viral diagnosis. Various training modules focused on 
different serological/molecular techniques to diagnose Risk Group -1 to Risk Group - 3 
or High Risk viral pathogen are in place. 
 
2. ICMR will develop modules and create pool of master trainers in Bio -simulation. 
Training on Bio-simulation will also be organized in due course.  
 
3. As per the scheme guideline, more than 25 viral etiologies are in the list which can be 
diagnosed at VRDL.  In addition to that two non -viral etiologies i.e. Scrub and Lepto 
have also been incorporated. ICMR will further assess the necessity for inclusion of fungi 
and bacterial agents for diagnosis & research.  
 
4. A total of 4 Mycology (fungal) labs have been established at AIIMS, Jodhpur, AIIMS, 
Bhopal, JIPMER, Puducherry and LHMC, Delhi. All the fungal labs have been 
established in collaboration with the VRDLs. 
 
AWARENESS ABOUT PREVENTIVE MEASURES AGAINST THE SPREAD OF VIRAL 
OUTBREAKS AND OTHER COMMUNICABLE AND NON-COMMUNICABLE DISEASES 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.70 The Committee recommends that there is a need to undertake awareness program 
about the preventive mea sures like hand -washing, sterilization, smoking, weight loss, 
dietary habits, etc. against the spread of viral outbreaks and other communicable and non -
communicable diseases. In this connection, the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
of Human Resource Development may consider to incorporate the study material in the 
curriculum of school children. 
(Para 4.4.1) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.71 ICMR took an initiative to incorporate various important health and hygiene practices in 
the curriculum of school children. Fo r this, NCERT was approached and ICMR - NCERT 
activities has been already conducted and details as follows; 
 

24 
 
(i) A book chapter on “Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) and its relevance” in 8 th and 
10th std of NCERT textbooks has been included. 
(ii) QR Code material  has been compiled for NCERT textbooks on different health and 
hygiene related topics, such as: 
 
a) Tuberculosis: Causes, Symptoms and Control 
b) Diabetes: Causes, Symptoms and Control 
c) Cancer and: Causes, Symptoms and Control 
d) Vector borne diseases: Causes, Symptoms and Control. 
 
 The QR material was Bilingual (Hindi and English) and more in pictorial form for 
understanding of school children and has been already incorporated in different 
standards. These are available in the NCERT Website also and is opened for public. 
 
(iii) An Audio – Visual awareness programme on ‘Proper Hand wash techniques’ for children 
was designed with the help of AIIMS, Delhi and NCERT. The video is being telecast on 
“NCERT Free to Air Channel”. It is also uploaded on NCERT YouTube channel and a vailable 
on ICMR website.  
 
Future plans/ongoing activity:  
 
1.72 ICMR is conducting an intramural study on food habits among adolescents and study 
findings will be shared with different concerned divisions/departments. 
 
Need to develop policies to stop irrational use of antibiotics 
 
Recommendation 
   
1.73 The Committee has been given to understand that reducing antimicrobial use is the 
necessity of the day keeping in view the intrinsic relationship between hospital and 
community infections. In this regard, the Committee applauds the treatment guidelines and 
antimicrobial Stewardship Programme of ICMR that aims to rationalize and reduce 
antimicrobial use in hospital. Keeping into consideration the given fact, the Committee, 
strongly recommends formulation of policy both in hospitals and communities to reduce 
antimicrobial use in the Health Care System. 
(Para 4.8.2) 
Action Taken 
 
1.74 ICMR has initiated Antimicrobal Stewardship program(AMSP) in 30 tertiary care 
hospitals in India. All the hospitals have form ulated treatment guidelines for antimicrobial use 
based on their hospital’s antibiograms. In the next phase these hospitals will work with local 
nursing homes and district hospitals to train them on AMSP. This effort will considerably 
improve and rationali ze antimicrobial prescriptions thus reducing inappropriate antimicrobial 
use. 

25 
 
Mission DELHI (Delhi Emergency Life Heart-Attack Initiative) 
  
Recommendation 
  
1.75 The Committee strongly recommends that “Mission DELHI (Delhi Emergency Life 
Heart-Attack Initiative)’’ launched by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) as 
a Pilot Project should be extended to other States as well for it has the capacity to save lives 
of many needy persons. 
(Para 4.10.1) 
Action Taken 
 
1.76 The investigators of Mission Delhi project are conducting analysis of data collected so 
far. Based on lessons learnt from this project, we will expand to other sites. ICMR has also 
recently initiated ‘STEMI ACT ‘project in 5 districts of 5 different States  for improving 
thrombolytic therapy. The investigators of Mission Delhi project are conducting analysis of data 
collected so far. Based on lessons learnt from this project, we will expand to one district/State of 
the country. Budget required for covering a t least one district per State in a phase wise manner. 
Phase I: 4 districts (will be approximately Rs 20 crore); Phase II: 15 districts (Rs 75 Crore) and 
Phase III (Rs 50 Crore). ICMR has also recently initiated ‘STEMI ACT ‘project in 5 districts of 
5 different States for improving thrombolytic therapy. 
 
Advanced medical technologies to people’s doorsteps. 
  
Recommendation 
  
1.77 The Committee underlines the need to extend the benefits of scientific and 
technological advancement accessible and affordable to  all, especially the people living in 
rural and tribal areas for which the advance medical technologies under MRHRUs can be 
made available at the people’s door steps. 
(Para 4.11.1) 
Action Taken 
 
1.78 ICMR is committed towards providing affordable and acces sible technologies. Efforts 
will be made to develop technologies under MRHRU and bring them to people’s door. 
 
Recommendation 
   
1.79 The Committee understands the utility of Standard Treatment Workflows (STWs) 
in Public Health Care and recommends that str ategic course of action with regard to 
dissemination to the Primary Health Centers, Community Health Centres & the District 
Hospitals must be translated on the ground level in the interest of patients, doctors, etc 
 
(Para 4.12.1) 

26 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.80 Department of Health Research and ICMR being the research agencies developed the 
Standard Treatment Workflows as a model to be adopted for implementation by the agencies 
responsible for health care delivery. The outcome was shared with Department of Health  & 
Family Welfare, GOI for taking further course of action. The Primary Health Centres, 
Community Health Centres & the District Hospitals are connected directly through the National 
Health Mission under DoHFW. 
 
PFIZER AS A PARTNER FOR ITS COLLABORATION TO COMBAT 
ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE (AMR) 
 
Recommendation 
   
1.81 The Committee observes that though the Pfizer company has contributed from 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) fund under an MoU as a partner for its 
collaboration to combat Anti -Microbial Res istance (AMR) with ICMR, still the DHR 
should ensure that the company is not allowed as lobbying group to influence the decision 
of the policy maker and no rights on the intellectual property arising out of the project be 
claimed by Pfizer. 
(Para 4.21.2) 
Action Taken 
 
1.82 An independent committee of experts has been constituted by approval of DG, ICMR to 
review the activities being carried out under the MoU. Pfizer will not claim any IPR or 
publications out of the work carried out with funding received und er this MoU. A document 
towards ensuring the same has been provided by Pfizer. 
 
STEM CELL THERAPY 
 
Recommendation 
   
1.83 The Committee takes note of the fact that ICMR has been entrusted with the 
responsibility of formulating evidence based Stem Cell Ther apy guidelines. It is felt that 
there is an urgent requirement for facilitation of safe and regulated translational and 
clinical stem cell research. The Committee is of the view that while framing the guidance 
document, utmost care needs to be taken to ens ure that stem cell research does not in any 
way compromise the safety of patients and vulnerable individuals. The Committee also 
feels that the guidelines would need harmonization with existing rules and regulations with 
a view to frame a comprehensive document specifying that every use of stem cell in patients 
outside an approved clinical trial is unethical, and therefore, shall be considered as 
malpractice and henceforth punishable under the relevant law.  
(Para 4.22.4) 
 

27 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.84 ICMR has completed the task of framing Guidelines for Hematopoietic Stem Cell 
Transplantation (HSCT). The same will be soon placed in public domain for comments and 
suggestions from the stakeholders. HSCT is the only approved use of stem cells in hematolog ical 
cancers and disorders including immuno -myeloid conditions. Use of stem cells for other disease 
conditions is still experimental or investigational. Hence the use of stem cells in such conditions 
has to be done only under the framework of clinical tria ls with appropriate regulatory approvals. 
ICMR initiated drafting evidence based stem cell therapy guidelines taking into consideration 
reported scientific evidences in peer reviewed journals in consultation with the experts in the 
field and is in process of finalizing the Evidence based status for different disease conditions 
where the unethical and unscientific use of stem cell is rampant in the country.  Soon same will 
be placed on ICMR website for comments and suggestions before finalization. This will help to 
create awareness and educate general public regarding the present status of use of stem cells in 
various disease conditions. 
 
TREATMENT OF CORONAVIRUS 
 
Recommendation 
  
1.85 At a time when rapid spread of Coronavirus  raises fear of global pandemic with 
deaths and infection engulfing Europe, the Middle East and Asia, there is urgent need for 
in-depth research activities for treatment and containment of the Coronavirus. The 
Committee, in this regard, feels that the Coro navirus has the potential to have an adverse 
impact on the global economy, thereby, affecting the international trade. The Committee 
hopes that ICMR would play pivotal lead role to deflect the impact of the virus on the 
Indian economy through international collaboration and cooperation.  
(Para 4.23.1) 
Action Taken 
 
1.86 ICMR has been actively involved in the COVID -19 pandemic, by setting up laboratories 
for COVID-19 testing across the country.  This has helped in early detection, contact tracing, and 
isolation. ICMR has also been involved in the validation of indigenous diagnostic kits for use in 
COVID-19 testing. ICMR -NIV, Pune isolated the SARS -CoV-2 virus which paved the way for 
development of indigenous vaccines, diagnostics and screening antivirals. ICM R has developed 
diagnostic kit for antibody detection, which can be used for serosurveys in population to 
understand the infection rate in the population. In addition, ICMR is also currently involved in 
the development of vaccines for COVID -19. All these e fforts has/will play an important role in 
the control of COVID -19 in India, which has a direct impact on the economy of the country. In 
future, ICMR may plan research studies in collaboration with countries of the South East Asian 
Region to better understand the impact of the disease in this region. 

28 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.87 The Committee is in agreement with the plea of the Secretary to give impetus to the 
issue of Bio -security which in turn need the immediate attention of the Government. The 
Committee, in thi s regard, recommends DHR to formulate National Bio -security Policy, 
encompassing potential threat of various viruses, its implications on human beings and on 
the economy in general, course of action required to combat the menace of bio -warfare and 
requirement of fund to implement the various components of the program on bio -security, 
etc. 
 
(Para 4.24.2) 
Action Taken 
 
1.88 In the backdrop of outbreaks of highly pathogenic viruses like Nipah, SARS-CoV-2 etc., 
which are also identified as agents of biological warfare, DHR/ICMR has realized the need to 
formulate a National biosecurity policy. The needful will be done soon. 
   
Establishment of RESEARCH (Regional Enabler for South East Asia Research 
Collaboration for Health) platform 
 
Recommendation 
   
1.89 The Committee is confident that ICMR, through (RESEARCH) platform would 
provide leadership to effectively combat emerging and re -emerging infectious diseases in 
South –East Asia region. The Committee, however, recommends that ICMR should 
formulate definite cou rse of action and circulate the same among all partners of 
RESEARCH in order to achieve the objective of combating against the infectious diseases. 
The Committee believes that ICMR would make the country bio -secured and play the role 
of a global leader in biomedical and health research for tackling emerging infections.  
(Para 5.4.3) 
Action Taken 
 
1.90 ICMR along with WHO SEAR countries has established a regional research platform 
named Regional Enabler for South East Asia Research Collaboration on Health (RESEARCH). 
WHO South East Asia Region (SEAR) comprises of eleven countries: Bangladesh, Bhutan, 
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, India, Indonesia, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri 
Lanka, Thailand and Timor Leste. This regional research platform will work to identify and 
resolve problems of infectious diseases in the South -East Asia region. Countries that are part of 
the SEAR could facilitate various functions of the platform such as data sharing, access to 
vaccines and ensure that research was based on ethical principles. This platform will enable the 
countries to identify the broad areas of collabora tion research, discuss ethical and regulatory 
issues, governance framework and possible solutions to the problem of emerging infectious 

29 
 
diseases. The regional platform will allow a cross pollination of ideas, information and 
knowledge sharing and provide a ccess to quality assured tools available with different member 
countries. Guiding principles for the platform should include high ethical standards, using 
quality-assured regulatory practices and equal partnership based on the principles of public good 
to achieve equitable positive impacts in a short span of time. ICMR -NIV, Pune is the WHO 
regional collaborating center for emerging / re -emerging viral infections. The Institute provides 
regional leadership to all countries of the SEAR and provides training, capacity building as well 
as reagents to many countries of the SEAR. With a strong regional biosecurity platform of highly 
equipped VRDLs alongwith NIV, Pune, it is envisaged that India will provide regional 
leadership to the SEAR countries.   
 
Support to Ayushmaan Bharat: Standard Treatment Workflow: INFOGRAPHICS: 
  
Recommendation 
  
1.91 The Committee believes that since Ayushman Bharat is a flagship program of the 
government which will get its expression and expansion throughout the country in due 
course of time. The Committee feels that there would be need for percolation and 
proliferation of Standard Treatment Workflow: INFOGRAPHICS on the ground level for 
ensure treatment of the people. The Government has to undertake requisite steps for 
adherence to st andard treatment workflow INFOGRAPHICS to assist/help in the 
implementation of Ayushman Bharat. 
(Para 5.4.5) 
Action Taken 
 
1.92 An MoU has been signed with National Health Authority to undertake requisite steps for 
adherence to standard treatment workflows . The STW infographics developed have been 
DHR/ICMR are being linked with the Ayushman Bharat program. An app has also been 
developed and the infographics are made available to all medical professionals. 
 
Expanding role of Multi -Disciplinary Research Units  (MRUs) in Government Medical 
Colleges/Institutes 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.93 The Committee feels that since the scheme aims at creating requisite infrastructure 
and environment Government Medical Colleges for undertaking research in Non - 
Communicable Diseases, therefore, the Committee recommends intensification of the role 
of MRUs. The Committee observes that Major Health Research activities initiated by the 
MRUs in the domain of Cancer, Diabetic Mellitus and hypertension, cardiovascular 
disease, Mental Health, Environmental Health/ occupational health, Stroke and 
neurological disorder, Diabetes, Metabolic disorders, Chronic Kidney disease and liver 
disorders are vital for treatment for these diseases. 
(Para 5.4.6) 

30 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.94 With a view to create research infrastructure and environment in the country, so far 80 
MRUs have been approved by the Department of Health Research for establishment in various 
State Government Medical Colleges/Institutions. Presently, 528 Research Studie s are underway 
on different aspects of Non -Communicable Diseases (NCDs) such as Cancer, Hypertension, 
Cardiovascular disease, Maternal Child Health, Diabetes, Mental Disorder etc. The 
recommendation has also been noted for future guidance and compliance. 
 
 
Establishment of Network of VRDL during 15th Finance Commission Period (2020 -21 to 
2024-25) 
 
Recommendation 
   
1.95 The Committee is of the considered view that the scheme would broad -base the 
coverage nationwide for timely diagnosis/identification of vir uses during outbreaks of 
epidemics, generation of data about viral diseases for facilitating quick deployment of 
resources and measures to save the human lives.  
(Para 5.5.7) 
Action Taken 
 
1.96 The established network of VRDLs are conducting testing of vir al etiologies of a broad 
spectrum and generating data thereof which is being fed into an online system and help is in 
taking appropriate measures for quick deployment of resources and measures to save the human 
lives. Efforts would be made to increase the number of VRDLs in the country while proposing 
extension of the scheme during the 15th Finance Commission period. 
 
Human Resource Development for Health Research during 15th Finance Commission 
period (year-wise) 
Recommendation 
 
1.97 The Committee appreciates concerted efforts of the government in creation of a pool 
of talented health research personnel with upgraded skills of faculty of medical colleges, 
mid-career scientists, medical students, etc. The Department, however, needs to chalk out 
specialized tr aining course and support the trainees to take up research projects for 
addressing critical national and local health problems. 
(Para 5.5.9) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.98 The TEC committee of HRD identified the specialized training courses for the clinicians 
and biomedical researchers and also suggested the ways for promoting the HRD scheme. 
 

31 
 
Grant-in-aid Scheme for Inter -Sector Convergence & Promotion and Guidance on Health 
Research 
 
Recommendation 
   
1.99 The Committee recommends that the scheme must focus on encouraging innovation, 
its translation and also the implementation of research so that there is a better utilization of 
available knowledge. The Committee believes that the country will be benefitted once the 
initiative taken under the scheme result into integrated solutions for the promotion of 
health; generation of joint inter -departmental/inter-agency projects on health problems; 
and development of more affordable and cost effective technologies for public health use; 
besides developing indigenous technologies for advanced health care.  
(Para 5.5.11) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.100 These aspects are already being taken care of while funding the research projects. The 
following inter-sectoral type of projects are already funded under the grant in aid scheme: 
Inter-sectoral kind research projects: 
 
i. Nationwide survey of Crimean Congo Hemorrahagic fever virus (CCHF) in 
domestic animals & epidemiology, risk factors & sero -prevalence of CCHF 
infection among humans in rural population in Gujarat 
ii. To determine the prevalence  of rickettsial disease and Q fever and identify the 
vectors transmitting these diseases in urban and rural communities in Northern 
Tamil Nadu 
iii. Burden of scrub typhus disease, its determination and spatial distribution in 
Madhya Pradesh. 
iv. Development of an Atlas of Cancer in Haryana State. 
 
1.101 Besides, 16 major Projects related to development of cost –effective 
technologies/kits/devices; 5 Projects related to search of markers for Diagnosis and Prognosis of 
Diseases; 28 Projects related to study the Health System Research and 4 Projects related to 
technology assessment have also been funded. The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee 
is noted for giving further emphasis on funding of inter-departmental/ inter-agency projects on 
health problems; and development of more affordable and cost effective technologies for public 
health use; besides developing indigenous technologies for advanced health care. 
 
Progress towards Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 
  
Recommendation 
  
1.102 The Committee believes that ICMR can significant contribute in achieving  the 
objectives set in Sustainable Development Goals through proper planning, standard 

32 
 
formulation, smooth coordination, effective implementation and perceptile promotion of 
biomedical and Health Research. The Committee would like the ICMR to undertake 
biomedical and health research aimed to improving health services, health policies, newer 
modalities of diagnostics, guidelines for management of infectious and non -communicable 
diseases etc. with public, public-private and NGO partnerships, etc.  
(Para 5.7.1) 
Action Taken 
 
1.103 ICMR has undertaken a number of projects aimed to improve health services, health 
policies, newer modalities of diagnostics, guidelines for management of diseases with public, 
public-private and NGO partnerships, etc. 
 
(i)  ICMR's Tri bal Health Research Consortium in India will take into account 
networking with various academic institutes, government institutes (like Tribal 
Research Institutes in various states, Anthropological Survey of India, etc.) and 
NGOs proactively working on tri bal populations (like SEARCH in Gadchiroli, 
Maharashtra, TATA Trusts, Karuna Trust etc.) 
(ii)  ICMR -NIRTH, Jabalpur is already working in collaboration with a private 
organization - Foundation for Disease Control and Elimination (FDEC) - a wing of 
Sun Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. and State Govt. of Madhya Pradesh in PPP mode for 
demonstrating malaria elimination strategy in tribal district of Mandla, M.P. in the 
Malaria Elimination Demonstration Project (MEDP). 
(iii)  Tata Trusts has provided the grant for res earch under TB Consortium, which 
includes all thematic areas of diagnostics, therapeutics, vaccines and 
Implementation research. 
(iv)  Several technologies like TrueNAT, Nipah POC diagnostic kits have been 
developed in collaboration with industry. 
 
Upcoming Legal frame-work of the Department of Health Research 
  
Recommendation 
  
1.104 The Committee believes that the intention of Department of Health Research in 
setting up of Health Technology Assessment Unit (HTAIn) is to evolve guidelines for 
evaluation of  appropriateness and cost effectiveness of available and new health 
technologies in the country. The Committee is also of the view that scheme has the potential 
for development of standardized cost effectiveness guidelines/interventions to reduce the 
cost and variations in patient care and streamline the medical reimbursement procedures. 
The Committee is of the considered view that institutionalization of the process and 
structure in DHR would lead to assured accomplishment of the set mission objectives and  
actualization of visions of the Department. 
(Para 5.8.6) 
 

33 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.105 Health Technology Assessment in India is a program supporting a National Costing 
Study of Healthcare system in 16 States. The results of the study have been supporting the 
revision of the Ayushmann Bharat -PMJAY health insurance program. The Program is also  
supporting Central and State Health Department in implementation   of newer technologies as 
well as revision of existing policy documents. The program has completed 13 topics related to 
healthcare systems and 31 topics are ongoing. As a process for instit utionalization of the process 
and structure, an HTA Bill has been drafted and approved by the Hon’ble HFM. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.106 The Committee has also been given to understand that the DHR is in the process 
introducing a Bill on HTAIn for constitution of  Board thereon to streamline its 
functioning. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
(Para 5.8.7) 
Action Taken 
 
1.107 The Health Technology Assessment Board Bill was circulated for inter -ministerial/State 
consultation. The Cabinet Note is being finalized based on the comments received from the 
stakeholders.  
   
Other Key Areas 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.108 Taking cognizance of the key priority areas of DHR for bio -medical and health 
research and new areas of research, the Committee believes that higher budgetary 
allocation for the said purpose is essential. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
that the Department of Health Research must make realistic assessment of requirement of 
budgetary allocation in the light o f future outlook of Health Research in the country and 
chalk-out specific course of action for transforming and advancing the bio -medical and 
health research to global quality and standard in order to yield desired results. 
(Para 5.15) 
Action Taken 
 
1.109 The need for making higher allocation to the Department of Health Research will be 
taken up with the Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. Meanwhile, proposals have been approved 
amounting to Rs.2475.00 crores under World Bank Funded “India Covid -19 Emergen cy 
Response & Health System Preparedness Package” for procurement of testing kits/machines, 
reagents, etc for Covid -19. In addition, proposals amounting to Rs. 1998.00 crores have also 
been submitted under the “Prime Minister’s Atmanirbhar Swasth Bharat Yo jana (PM-ASBY)” 
for various activities pertaining to Bio -security preparedness and strengthening Pandemic 
Research and Multi -Sector National Institutions and Platforms for One Health. Considering the 

34 
 
future outlook of health research in the country and for  advancing the biomedical research to 
global standard, the proposals under PM -ASBY package inter alia include setting up of (I)  
Regional Research Platform of the WHO -South East Asia Region Countries;  (2) Setting up of 
Zonal Institutes of NIV (NIV-East at Dibrugarh; NIV-North at Punjab NIV-South at Bangalore);  
(3) Satellite Centre for One Health at  Nagpur for undertaking research on Zoonoses;(4) Division 
for Outbreak Investigation & Disease Control at NARI -Pune and (5)  Support to MDMS 
(Medical Devices M ission Secretariat) Division for  fostering holistic development of medical 
device sector in India by supporting development of commercialize technologies in a mission 
mode. Additional allocations to meet the requirements in 2020 -21 under these packages as well 
as for other intra -mural and extra mural research activities of ICMR  and  for the various 
schemes of DHR would also be sought at RE stage. 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation 
   
2.1 The Committee takes into account the cherished objectives of setting up of 
Department of Health Research for translating modern health technologies and 
innovations into public health system through in -depth research and investigation 
pertaining to diagnosis treatment methods and transforming the same into the products. 
The Committee believes that the Department would perform its enshrined functions and 
responsibilities through Management by Objectives (MBO) and not me rely through 
Management by Activities (MBA). The Committee, however, recommends that the 
Department must keep on evaluating its performance vis -a-vis entrusted responsibilities 
and introduce organizational interventions for substantial performance improvem ent in 
order to accomplish its set vision and mission. 
(Para 1.2.3) 
Action Taken 
 
2.2 The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.3 The Committee, while taking into account the financial and the physical 
achievement under various schemes of DHR, recommends the following interventions for 
improvements: - 
 
i. Advance planning to be made for completion of various formalities so that 
the process of sanctioning and release of funds for the various projects  be 
started in the beginning of the next financial year. 
ii. More workshops and review meetings to be organized for addressing the 
issues in the implementation of the schemes. 
iii. More field visits to be organized for onsite appraisal of progress of 
implementation of the schemes. 
iv. Dashboard for online monitoring of schemes and programmes. 
 
(Para 2.6.2) 
Action Taken 
 
2.4 The recommendation is noted for compliance. Dashboard for online monitoring of 
schemes and programmes is already functional.  
 

36 
 
 
 
INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH, NEW DELHI 
 
 
Recommendation 
  
2.5 The Committee acknowledges the pivotal role of Indian Council of Medical 
Research (ICMR) as an apex body in the field of bio -medical and health research in the 
country, however, the lower allocation/release of fund to ICMR viz -a-viz its projected 
demand is a matter of great concern. The figures of actual allocations against the projected 
demands of Department during last five years have witnessed a huge gap and the 
Department could not get its justifiable share of budget. The Committee terms the said 
allocation highly inadequate keeping in view the vast responsibilities entrusted to ICMR. 
The Committee cautions the Government that it is only through the in -depth health 
research, the country can be free from life threatening diseases, therefore, strongly 
recommends for higher budgetary allocation to ICMR keeping in view its projected 
demand so that ICMR can implement its originally conceived schemes/programmes 
without any procrastination. At the same time, the Committee also recommends the ICMR 
for enhancing t he absorption capacity of its schemes and programmes so that allocated 
fund is optimally utilized during the same financial year, otherwise, the Ministry of 
Finance may not express its willingness for higher allocation to ICMR despite the dire 
necessity of the schemes/programmes rolled out by ICMR even if that are meant for life 
saving. 
(Para 3.5.6) 
Action Taken 
 
2.6 ICMR has been able to utilize its maximum budgetary allocation (97 -99%) as evident 
from the information relating to the last five years as follows: 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.7 Based on the financial performance and optimal utilization of funds, the allocation for 
ICMR during 2020 -21 has been already been increased to Rs.1795.71 crores, which is about 
Rs.243 crores more than the allocation for 2019-20.  
 
  
Year Allotted(RE) 
(Rs. In Cr.) 
Utilised 
(Rs. In Cr.) 
% of 
expenditure in 
respect of 
(RE) 
2015-16 893.74 879.33 98.38% 
2016-17 1094.00 1062.97 97.16% 
2017-18 1413.60 1390.46 98.36% 
2018-19 1447.85 1436.62 99.22% 
2019-20 1552.22 1521.70 98.03% 

37 
 
Major Achievements of ICMR 
 
Recommendation 
    
2.8 Keeping in view the overall functioning of ICMR vis -à-vis its financial and physical 
achievement, the Committee recommends suitable and adequate measures by way of 
regular monitoring of ongoing activities and ut ilization of funds earmarked; creating 
dashboard of major ongoing activities and periodical analysis for specific recommendations 
for corrections and incentivizing/rewarding good performers be taken to improve the 
financial and physical performance of ICMR. 
(Para 3.5.16) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.9 
 ICMR has a well -structured monitoring mechanism to review its physical and financial 
performance. This is being done through Governing Council, Scientific Advisory Board 
(SAB), Executive Council (EC), Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC), Project Review 
Committee (PRC), etc.  
 ICMR has already created a dashboard on DARPAN platform and major 
activities/achievements are uploaded and monitored on a regular basis. 
 ICMR recognize the biomedical research excellence through quality awards. In 2019 -
2020, 46 scientists were awarded for excellence in biomedical research. 
 
Elimination of TB by 2025 
 
Recommendation 
   
2.10 The Committee feels that there is a trumpet call for intensification of research work 
under ‘India TB Research Consortium’ of ICMR for development of new pools for 
diagnostic treatment to enable the Department of Health and Family Welfare to achieve 
the target of elimination of TB by 2025 i.e. ‘Desh Jitega, TB Harega.  
(Para 4.5.1) 
Action Taken 
 
2.11 India TB Research Consortium has intensified efforts for the development of new tools 
for diagnosis, treatment and prevention of the TB. After the allocation of the Budget in January 
2018, a total of 38 proposals have been sanctioned in different thematic areas and are indifferent 
stages of completion. The major achievements have been: 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
Diagnostics: 
 
1. Adoption of Indigenous molecular test TrueNat for diagnosis of TB and rifampicin 
resistance use under programme after validation and recommendation by ICMR 
 
2. Completion of Global multi -country study coordinated by ICMR and FIND and 
recommendation of TrueNat for use for detection of TB/MDR-TB by WHO 
3. Completion of Study on validation of Paediatric Pulmonary TB and Extra-pulmonary TB. 
Analysis ongoing. 
4. Successful validation of ‘TB detect’ for improved microscopy for TB detection and TB 
concentration and transportation kit for bio -safe transfer of sputum samples from rural 
areas to Labs. 
 
Vaccine: 
 
2.12 ICMR’s Prevention of disease vaccine trial with 2 vaccines VPM1002 and Immuvac 
ongoing at 7 sites in 6 states. A total of 4000 of 12000 subjects recruited.  Recruitment likely to 
be completed by year end and follow -up will continue. Capacity of 14 sites bu ilt up for 
undertaking regulatory trial. 
 
Therapeutics: 
 
1. Multisite study on all oral 4 drug shorter regimen for XDR-TB ongoing 
2. study using Metformin as adjunct therapy to ATT completed enrollment; good 
results will help in better cure rate. 
3. High dose (25mg /kg BW and 35 mg/Kg) Rifampicin found to have better cure 
rate and tolerability. FU remaining. 
4. Study with Re-purposing econozole for MDR-TB ongoing 
5. Study with clofazimine in 1st line ATT to shorter duration of treatment of DS -TB; 
ongoing 
6. Nanoformulation of ATT to shorter frequency of treatment; ongoing 
7. Study with Piperine and rifampicin for better cure rate; ongoing 
8. Early bactericidal activity with Feropenum and cefdinir in DS-TB; 
9. Other studies on Pk of MDR-TB drugs, Transitmycin, etc. are ongoing 
 
Implementation Research 
 
1. Active case finding in children admitted to Nutritional rehabilitation center and in 
Institutional settings ongoing 
2. RATION study on effect of food on cure rate in TB cases and prevention of TB in 
contacts is ongoing 

39 
 
3. Ready to use therapeutic food was found to be acceptable with minimal side 
effects and effect of RUTF on cure rate of is ongoing. 
 
Most of the studies would be completed next year in all areas which can then be 
recommended for use under programme after review of results by Experts. 
 
Recommendation 
   
2.13 The Committee, taking into account the Criteria for establishment of Viral 
Research & Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLS), recommends that procedure for 
establishment of VRDLS must be simplified and transparent. The proced ure should not 
take undue time to be completed. 
(Para 4.15.2) 
Action Taken 
 
2.14 Sanctioning of VRDL is a very simple and transparent process, involving submission of a 
well drafted proposal by the concerned State Government/Medical College in the prescrib ed 
format.   On receipt of viable proposal, a site visit is conducted by the experts for assessment of 
infrastructure & feasibility and discussion with faculty members. Based on the report of the 
experts, the proposal is submitted for evaluation by Technic al Evaluation Committee. Any 
shortcomings in the proposal are conveyed to the concerned State Government/Medical Colleges 
for rectification.  Proposal found suitable are submitted for final approval by the Approval 
Committee, Chaired by Secretary, DHR.  De pending on response from the respective State 
Government/ Head of the institution, the entire process takes between 15 days to 30 days only. 
 
NESTLE CASE 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.15 The Committee notes that the Clinical Trial Registry of India (CTRI) has 
terminated NESTLE’s sponsorship of a five hospital study on violation of Section 9(2) of 
the Infant Milk Substitutes Act on the recommendation of Committee constituted by ICMR 
for the purpose. 
(Para 4.18.1) 
Action Taken 
 
2.16 The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted.  
 
  

40 
 
ANIMAL FREE TEST METHODS 
 
Recommendation 
  
2.17 The Committee takes note of the White Paper prepared by Expert Group set up by 
ICMR on development of alternatives to animals in key areas of bio -medical research and 
regulatory toxicology. The Committee, however, recommends that DHR may constitute an 
Executive Group to formulate guidelines in consonance with the recommendation of White 
Paper Roadmap for harmonization across various research institutions of the country. The 
Committee is of the considered view that there is an urgent need for promotion of general 
awareness for making use of alternative to animals in all bio -medical research process. The 
Committee also recommends that DHR must evolve the monitoring mechanism to oversee 
the regulation of the same guidelines. The Committee further desires that necessary follow 
up action be undertaken, as and when required, to pursue the mission provisions as 
contained in the White Paper and guidelines on the subjects pertaining to animal fre e test 
method. 
(Para 4.20.3) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.18 Efforts are being undertaken to implement committee’s recommendations. 
 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.1 The Committee observes that the Department of Health Research has been 
entrusted vital responsibilities that need to be accompanied by adequate, efficient and 
effective staff and professionals in order to carry out those responsibilities. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Department to evaluate and assess the requirement of human 
resources and project the requisite budgetary allocation to meet the revenue expenditure in 
consonance with requirement of manpower. 
(Para 1.5.6) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
3.2 The Department of Health Research is engaged in research activates and over the time its 
responsibilities has increased manifolds. Moreover, presently, the Department is also managing 
COVID-19 related activities. Keeping the increased role of research activates, the manpower 
strength of the department was assessed as 74 number of post at various levels. The 
required/existing strength of the Department is tabulated below: 
 
    Name of the post Total 
sanctioned 
strength 
Incumbenc
y position 
Vacant Number of 
posts 
required 
Joint Secretary 2 2 - - 
Director/Deputy Secretary 4 4 - 1 
Scientist ‘E’ 2 - 2 - 
Under Secretary 4 4 - 3 
Assistant Director (OL) - - - 1 
Section Officer 6 2 4 6 
Assistant Section Officer 11 6 5 13 
Sr. Principal Private Secretary - 1 - 1 
Scientist ‘D’ 2 - 2 - 
Principal Private Secretary - 2 - 3 
Scientist ‘C’ 2 - 2 5 
Scientist ‘B’ - - - 7 
Private Secretary 2 3 - 8 
Personal Assistant 2 - 2 6 
Stenographer ‘D’ 2 - 2 12 
Upper Division Clerk/ Senior 
Secretariat Assistant - - - - 
Lower Division Clerk/ Junior  
Secretariat Assistant 1 - 1 - 
Senior Hindi Translator - - - 1 
Junior Hindi Translator 1 - 1 1 
Typist (Hindi) 1 - 1 - 
Multi-Tasking Staff - 1 - 6 
Total 42 25 22 74* 
                                      * The above would entail an expenditure of Rs 8.34 crores 

42 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3 The Committee understands that DHR undertakes various medical & health related 
research activities pertaining to prevention, diagnosi s and control of outbreaks of 
epidemic/Pandemic, which require adequate manpower strength in the department. The 
vacancy of 22 posts against the sanctioned strength of 42 posts is a matter of concern given the 
vital responsibilities entrusted to DHR. The C ommittee would like the Government to fill up 
the vacant posts on priority basis. The Committee also recommends the Government to 
consider the proposal of DHR for approval to the proposal of creation of 74 Posts entailing an 
expenditure of Rs. 8.34 crore t o enable DHR to perform the entrusted responsibilities 
effectively and efficiently. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.4 The Committee is perturbed to observe underutilization of allocated funds by DHR 
which reflects weakened absorption capacity of implementing agencies of the scheme and 
programmes being executed under DHR. The Committee notes subtle underutilization of 
funds during 2019-20 with respect to projects like establishment of network of VDRLs for 
managing epidemics (74.01% of BE; Establishment of MRUs i.e. (72.50% of BE); 
Establishment of MRHRUs (49.63% of RE); HRD for Health Research (80.72% of BE); 
Grants in Aid Scheme (55.64% of BE); Research Governance (80.72% of  BE); 
International Cooperation (6.33% of RE); thus indicating overall utilization of 72.52% of 
BE allocation and 78% of RE allocation over the total DHR schemes. The Committee 
further observes that whil e ICMR has been able to spend upto 95% of BE allocation the 
revenue expenditure is to the tune of 46.74% of RE and BE allocation. It is worth 
reminding here that the DRSC on Health & Family Welfare has consistently recommended 
higher allocation to DHR keep ing in view of the incidence of diseases in the country 
affecting large chunk of population. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that 
DHR must strengthen the absorption capacity of the implementing agencies of the schemes 
and programmes for optim al utilization of the allocated funds at BE stage so that the 
Ministry of Finance does not reduce allocated fund at the RE stage. 
 
(Para 2.4.1) 
Action Taken 
 
3.5 The updated position of expenditure in respect of DHR schemes upto 31.3.2020 is as 
follows: 
 
Rs. In crores  
S.No. Name of the 
Scheme 
BE 
2019-
20 
RE 
2019-
20 
Expend
iture 
% of expr. against 
BE RE 
1. VRDLs 80.00 73.00 69.37 86.71% 95.03% 
2. New Tools 7.35 6.00 6.00 81.63% 100.00% 

43 
 
2. MRUs 58.00 55.00 55.00 94.83% 100.00% 
3. MRHRUs 15.00 19.00 17.50 116.67% 92.11% 
4. HRD scheme 33.00 30.00 27.48 83.27% 91.60% 
5. GIA scheme 28.00 18.00 16.00 57.14% 88.89% 
6. Research 
Governance-
HTA 
25.00 23.00 22.75 91.00% 98.91% 
7. International 
Cooperation  
1.00 6.00 5.58 558.00% 93.00% 
Total 247.35 230.00 219.68 88.81% 95.51% 
 
3.6 It would be observed that the overall expenditure in respect of the schemes was 88.81% 
of BE allocation and 95.51% of RE allocation. However, as recommended by the Committee, 
efforts would be made to improve the expenditure level in the first two quarters by making 
advance planning and suitably advising the implementing agencies in the matter to avoid 
reduction of allocation at RE stage.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.7 The Committee finds that the funds allocation to various schemes of the DHR at BE 
stage is much lower Vis-à-vis its projected demand as a result of which the Department clamp 
down its cherished mission of each scheme against the originally conceived physical targets of 
the scheme at the projection stage. However, due to various reasons, includin g the lower 
absorption capacity of implementing agencies and taking into account the volume and trends 
of expenditure, the Ministry of Finance rationalizes/reduces further the allocation on various 
schemes at RE stage when the physical targets are further curtailed thus nose -diving of the 
scheme of DHR aimed to setting up of VRDLs, development of new tools to prevent outbreaks 
of epidemics, promotion of Health Research, Human Resource & Capacity Development and 
research and health infrastructure. The efficacy of the schemes get further deteriorated due to 
under utilization of allocated funds at RE stage. The cumulative implications is indicative of 
the fact that the Ministry of Finance is conservative in allocating funds to schemes as per the 
projected demand in the next financial year when the trend of expenditure at BE & RE Stage 
is assessed. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates its recommendation made in the 
Para 2.4.1 of its 119 th Report to DHR to come out of such circuitous vicious circle and mu st 
act promptly in strengthening the ‘absorption capacity’ of implementing agencies and 
undertake all appropriate steps for ensuring optimal utilization of funds earmarked at the BE 
stage. This would help the Ministry of Finance to consider allocating fund s as per the 
projected demand of DHR so that each scheme is executed with the intent to achieve the 
objectives and mission of the scheme as conceived at the projection stage.  

44 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.8 The Committee was given to understand that the main reasons for shortfall in 
achieving the set physical target for establishing Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories 
(VRDLs) include time taken by State Government to submit proposals and MoUs, long 
time taken by the concerned Institutes/medical colleges in identifying the requisite space, 
etc. The Committee is constrained to observe that though there was a backlog in 
establishment of VRDLs, the proposals for establishment of 5 additional VRDLs are under 
various stages of consideration. The Committee, strongly recommends the DHR for 
persuading the State Government to submit their proposals for resolving the problem of 
undue delay in identifying the requisite place for establishing VRDLs. The Committee 
strongly believes that DHR would not leave any stone unturned in achieving the physical 
target of establishing VRDLs from now onwards. 
(Para 2.5.1) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.9 Till date, out of the total target of establishment of 125 VRDLs, 110 VRDLs (10 
Regional Labs, 22 State Level Labs and 78 Medical College Level Labs) have already been 
sanctioned. Out of the proposals for establishment of 5 new VRDLs, as mentioned by the 
Committee, all 5 have been sanctioned and virtual site visit inspections for  9 new labs had been 
done in month of September till date in order to know the feasibility for establishment of a Viral 
research & Diagnostic Laboratory. To meet the physical target s, all possible efforts are being 
undertaken. In order to expedite the approval for new VRDLs from the states and for have effect 
linkages with the State Governments, Regional Advocacy Workshops have been conducted with 
the State Govt. authorities. However, due to ongoing Covid-119 pandemic scenario, the requisite 
protocol is being followed by holding the virtual site visits and trainings.  
 
3.10 The first months of the 2020 decade have witnessed the emergence and rapid increase of 
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) epidemic across the globe. The virus was identified as 
belonging to the family of Coronaviruses that are enveloped RNA viruses. Because of its rapid 
rate of spread and the number of people infected, it was declared as a pandemic by the World 
Health Organization (WHO) on 11th  March 2020. Key strategy adopted by the Government of 
India is to test -track-treat which became a challenge during initial days.  Department of Health 
Research - Indian Council of Medical Research (DHR -ICMR) has played an acti ve role in the 
public health response to COVID -19 in India due to the established network of Viral Research 
and Diagnostic Laboratories across the country. This network proved to be fruitful during this 
pandemic as this network have been trained for biosaf ety and biosecurity aspects, diagnosis of 
viral and few bacterial etiologies, trained manpower and most important that is set up for 
molecular diagnosis which is prerequisite for COVID-19 diagnosis. 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
 
3.11 The Committee appreciates the pivotal role of the established network of Viral 
Research and Diagnostic Laboratories across the Country in combating COVID -19 for 

45 
 
molecular diagnosis is a prerequisite for COVID -19 diagnosis. Keeping this fact into 
consideration the Committee reiterates its recommendation as contained in Para 2.5.1 of 119 th 
Report to overcome the shortfall in achieving the set physical targets for establishing VRDLs 
through proper consultation/persuasion with State Governments. The Committee h opes that 
holding of ‘Regional Advocacy Workshops’ with the State Government would help expediting 
the approval to the proposal of the State Government for setting up of new VRDLs. The 
Committee desires that DHR would also undertake suitable course of acti on to achieve the 
target of setting of VRDLs in the country once the adverse impact of Pandemic COVID -19 is 
contained and combated.  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.12 The Committee observes that the main reason for delay in establishing MRUs in 
government medical coll eges is the undue time taken by State Governments in submitting 
proposals and MoUs and longtime taken by the concerned Institutes/medical colleges in 
identifying the requisite space. The Committee takes note of the proposals for 
establishment of 18 new MRUs that are at various stages of consideration. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that DHR should play pro -active role in persuading the State 
Government for submitting proposals for establishing MRUs on time after signing MoUs. 
The Committee also recomm ends that the Government should give green signal for 
approving 18 new MRUs that are at various stages of consideration. 
(Para 2.5.2) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.13 The Department of Health Research continuously remains in touch with the State 
Governments and State Government Medical Colleges for allocation of land/ space in the State 
Medical College and signing of MoUs for establishing research units. Receipt of prop osals for 
setting up MRHRUs/MRUs from States/State Government Medical Colleges is an ongoing 
process. As such at any given point of time, some proposals remain in pipeline. These proposals 
are considered in the Department of Health Research as per the sche me guidelines. Once 
proposal is complete in all respects, requite approval is accorded for establishing MRHRU/MRU. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
 
3.14 The Committee believes that efforts of DHR in persuading the State Government/State 
Government Medical College s would result into allocation of space/land for setting up of 
MRHRUs/MRUs and State Government would prefer forwarding their proposals to that end. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of 18 new MRUs that were at various 
stages of consideration.  
 
Output-Outcome Framework for Schemes 2020-21 
 
Recommendation 
   
3.15 The Committee takes note of the various details of output -outcome framework for 
the schemes 2020-21. The Committee hopes that the financial outlay earmarked for various 

46 
 
schemes would create the enabling environment and bring forth catalectic change in the 
basic infrastructure for carrying out bio -medical and health research. The Committee is of 
the considered view that network of VRDLs, MRUs and MRHRUs would definitely 
enhance the operational and professional efficiency of health researchers. The Committee 
believes that all the projects undertaken during 2020 -21 would be completed without time 
and cost overrun. The Committee recommends DHR to strengthen the monitoring 
mechanism to oversee the execution of research projects and to ensure that physical targets 
set during the year must be achieved. The Committee also recommends DHR to undertake 
annual performance evaluation of each scheme and programme through cost benefit 
analysis and SWOT analysis. The Committee desires that DHR should formulate output -
outcome framework for remaining years of 15 th Finance Commission in order to have a 
holistic overview of the schemes under DHR. 
(Para 2.6.1) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.16 Scheme-wise det ailed projected requirements have been furnished to the 15 th Finance 
Commission for the period 2021-22 to 2025 -26. The output -outcome framework under the 
schemes would be prepared based on the actual financial allocations made by the Ministry of 
Finance on year to year basis as per the extant instructions of the Ministry of Finance and NITI 
Aayog. The information is also uploaded on the concerned portal of NITI Aayog and updated on 
quarterly basis.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.17 The Committee appreciates the Financial Vision Document of DHR prepared for the 
period of 15th Finance Commission i.e. the period of 2021 -22 to 2025-26 wherein the outcome 
framework under the scheme is purposed based on the actual financial allocations made by 
the Ministry of Finance on year to year basis as per the guidelines of Ministry of Finance and 
the NITI Aayog. The Committee, however, recommends the DHR to strive for optimal 
utilization of allocated funds so as to enable the Ministry of Finance & NITI Aayog to allocate 
funds to all the schemes of DHR as per the projected demand at the BE Stage. This would thus 
ensure that all physical targets of the schemes, as originally conceived at the projection stage, 
are achieved in toto for successful execution/implementation of the sc heme. The Committee 
also desires the DHR to furnish a Status note on the implementation/projected requirement of 
output–outcome framework for remaining years of 15 th Finance Commission for the 
consideration of the Committee.   
 
MICRO ANALYSIS OF CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.18 The Committee expresses serious concern over decrease of funds for setting up of 
nationwide network of laboratories for managing epidemics and national calamities. The 
Committee finds that Budgetary allocation to the tune of Rs. 80.00 crore in BE 2019-20 was 
reduced to Rs.73.00 crore in RE 2019 -20 and the actual expenditure incurred as on 7th 

47 
 
February, 2020 is to the tune of Rs. 59.21 crore. The Committee understands that lower 
budgetary allocation for erecting nationwide network of basic infrastructure pose a serious 
challenge in managing epidemics and national calamities that result into loss of mankind. 
The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that the stumbling blocks in the wake 
of successful implem entation of the project viz. non -receipt of viable proposals from 
implementing agencies adhering to conditionality of scheme guidelines; long -time taken by 
State Govt. signing of MoUs and in identifying the space, undertaking civil works, 
procurement of equipment and engagement of staff etc. by the concerned Institutes/medical 
colleges need to be tackled through administrative acumen by the executive concerned with 
the implementation of the scheme. At the same time, the Committee recommends that the 
DHR must project its demand for the scheme keeping in view the width and breadth of the 
country, size of population of the country vulnerable to epidemics and national calamities 
and frequency of incidence of epidemics and calamities for efficient management and 
effective control. 
 (Para 3.1.3) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.19 Actual expenditure of Rs.69.37 crores was achieved upto 31.3.2020 against the RE 
allocation of Rs.73.00 crores (95.03%). 
 
3.20 Till date, out of the total target of establishment of 125 VRDLs, 110 VRDLs (10 
Regional Labs, 22 State Level Labs and 78 Medical College Level Labs) have already been 
sanctioned.  
 
3.21 The sanction of total above 110 VRDLs include the 3 VRDLs sanctioned during this 
financial year. Further, proposals for establishment of 4 more VRDLs are also under 
consideration and virtual site visit inspections for the same will take place in the month of 
September in order to know the feasibility for establishment of a Viral research & Diagnostic 
Laboratory. Efforts would be made to further expand the network while proposing continuation 
of the scheme for the 15th Finance Commission period.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.22 The Committee is of the considered view that the outbreak of Pandemic COVID -19 
has driven home the need for setting up of nationwide network of laboratories for 
management of incidence of epidemics and national calamities. In this regard, the 
rationalization of budgetary allocation from Rs. 80.00 Crore in BE 2019 -20 to the tune of Rs. 
73.00 Crore in RE 2019 -20 could be due to the lower absorption capacity of implementing 
agencies. The actual utilization to the tune of Rs. 69.37 Crore during 2019 -20 indicates lower 
capacity of fund utilization of the implementing agency which means the set target of setting 
up of 125 VRDLs will be missed. The Committee, therefore, recommends DHR to make 
concerted efforts towards setting up of VRDLs as per set target and till the mission of setting 
up of VRDLs in all parts of country is not achieved to ensure that the scheme continue 
throughout the duration of 15th Finance Commission with adequate budgetary provision.  
 

48 
 
Major research projects on traditional medicine undertaken  by ICMR and follow -up 
action for bringing the achievements thereof 
  
Recommendation 
  
3.23 The Committee notes the details of major research projects on the traditional 
medicine undertaken by ICMR alongwith  timeframe for the completion of the undertaken 
projects such as (i) evaluation of the safety and efficacy of an Ayurveda formulation PJ7 in 
the management of the Dengue fever funded by the Ministry of AYUSH and to be 
completed by March, 2020 (ii) evaluati on of analgesic and anti - inflamatory activities of 
Plumbago zeylanica root paste in osteo -arthritis patients, funded by ICMR under 
extramural provision and (iii) non - alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) – A double blind 
randomized control clinical study, funded by Ministry of AYUSH. The Committee is of the 
view that research projects on the traditional medicine would go a long way for the 
treatment of various diseases and therefore, all on -going projects must be completed 
without time and cost overruns. Again the projects that could not be commenced be 
initiated on priority basis so that desired outcome can be harnessed without cost overrun 
and further delay. 
(Para 3.5.12) 
Action Taken 
 
3.24   
(i) Evaluation of the safety and efficacy of an Ayurveda formulati on PJ7 in the management 
of the Dengue fever, funded by the Ministry of AYUSH has been carried out. 
 
 The treatment of 150 patients with the formulation PJ7 has been completed. A 
few immunoassays and Rt -PCR assays are in process. Report will be submitted 
soon. 
 
(ii) Evaluation of analgesic and anti -inflamatory activities of Plumbago zeylanica root paste 
in osteo-arthritis patients, funded by ICMR under extramural mode. 
 
 The trial on 120 patients has been completed and the paste has shown good 
promise in the management of pain in the osteoarthritis of knee joints. The 
preparation of the final report is in progress and will be submitted soon. 
 
(iii) Non- Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) – A double blind randomized control 
clinical study, funded by Ministry of AY USH. Though the proposal has been approved, 
the release of funds is awaited. Communication is on with CCRAS for release of funds to 
initiate the project at the earliest. 
 
  

49 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.25 The Committee appreciates that Ayurveda formulation PJ 7 in the management of the 
Dengue fever has been carried out and 150 patients with formulation of PJ7 have been 
treated. The Committee would, however, like to be apprised of the status of clinical trial of 
analgesic and anti -inflamatory activities of Plumb ago zeylanica root paste in osteo -arthritis 
patients and progress made in clinical study of Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD). 
 
DHR-ICMR Advanced Molecular Oncology Diagnostic Services (DiaMonds) 
 
Recommendation 
   
3.26 The Committee understands that DHR -ICMR Advanced Molecular Oncology 
Diagnostic Services (DIAMOnDS) is vital for the treatment of cancer. The Committee is of 
the view that in-depth research in the field of molecular onco -pathology diagnostic services 
and molecular onco -pathology research would go a long way in the elimination of cancer. 
The Committee is of the view that the expansion of the network of DIAMOnDS in various 
States of the country requires the budgetary allocation. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends DHR to make assessme nt of the financial requirement for the said purpose 
and accordingly approach the Ministry of Finance for requisite allocation. 
(Para 4.16.2) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.27 The DHR-ICMR Advanced Molecular Oncology Diagnostic Services (DIAMOnDS) 
have been established in 9 Centres across the country. These centres will be diagnostic 
centres for advanced oncopathology. More centres will be added after these centres are 
completely established and assessment of financial requirement will be done. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.28 The Committee appreciates that 9 Centres of DHR -ICMR Advanced Molecular 
Oncology Diagnostic Services (DIAMOnDS) have been established throughout the Country 
and the Government is planning to establish more number of Centres of DIAMOnDS.  The 
Committee, however, recommends that ICMR should chalkout a definite timeframe to open 
the requisite number of DIAMOnDS Centres in the Country so that the incidence of Cancer is 
contained and eradicated within set timeframe. In this regard, the Committee reiterates its 
recommendations requiring DHR to assess the financial requirement for the said purpose and 
take up the requisition to the Ministry of Finance for immediate consideration, as the 
incidence of cancer is huge in the country and its treatment not only push es the whole family 
under psychological trauma but make them poorer as well due to high ‘out of pocket 
expenditure’. 
   
  

50 
 
REGISTRATION OF CANCER CASES 
 
Recommendation 
   
3.29 The Committee underlines the need of registration of each and every case of cance r 
by the ICMR to assess actual disease burden. In this regard, the data collected by 
Population Based Cancer Registries (PBCR) and 236 Hospital Based Cancer Registries 
(HBCRs) would be quite useful. The Committee believes that the data so collected would be 
used in the further research work for developing products for treatment of cancer. 
(Para 4.19.2) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.30 There are 36 population and 236 hospital based cancer registries which collect data on 
cancer from different parts of the country, and cover about 10% of the Indian population. The 
NCRP data serves an important role in cancer prevention, control and resear ch. If Cancer is 
made a Notifiable Disease, it would be possible to register each and every case of cancer to 
improve assessment of actual disease burden. ICMR-NCDIR has been in touch with several state 
governments trying to make cancer notifiable. Attempt  is also being made to integrate data from 
Aayushman Bharat into the Registry data. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.31 The Committee notes with concern that cancer in India has fast emerged as a vital 
reason of morbidity and mortality. Although, the National Ca ncer Registry Programme 
(NCRP) was launched by ICMR way back in 1981 still the Cancer has not been identified ‘a 
Notifiable Disease’, as a result, the assessment of actual cancer burden is missing and efforts 
made towards cancer prevention, control and res earch go awry. The Committee, therefore, 
believes that once the cancer is made ‘a Notifiable disease’, the 36 Population Based Cancer 
Registries (PBCR) and 236 Hospital Based Cancer Registries (HBCR) would help the actual 
assessment of incidence of cancer patients and comprehensive cancer research in country, 
enabling its treatment, prevention and containment. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends the ICMR - NCDIR to persuade all the State Government to make cancer ‘a 
Notifiable Disease’ for broadbase research on treatment of the Cancer.  
 
Recommendation 
 
3.32 The Committee notes that the vision of the DHR provides “to bring modern health 
technology to the people through innovations related to diagnostics, treatment methods and 
vaccines for prevention; to translate them into products and processes and in synergy with 
concerned organizations introduce these innovations into public health systems.” The 
Committee opines that the course of actions outlined above need to be focuss ed to achieve 
the vision of DHR. Needless to say, the Government urgently needs creation and expansion 
of infrastructure for promoting research in medical colleges and rural areas, creating 
trained human resources in various areas of health research, inter ventions for containing 
outbreaks/epidemics through establishment of network of viral research and diagnostic 
laboratories across the country and support for pursuing research in areas relevant to the 

51 
 
health priorities of the nation. The Committee recommen ds concrete action for effective 
and efficient research governance, regulatory and evaluation framework through 
development of appropriate regulations, guidelines, authorities to protect and strengthen 
ethic based biomedical research and to develop experti se to assess cost effective 
technologies for reduction in out-of-pocket expenses on health care. 
(Para 5.3.2) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.33 DHR is already in process of strengthening health infrastructure in Medical Colleges 
through setting up Multi -Disciplinary Hea lth Research Units –MRUs (90) and Model Health 
Research Units -MRHRUs (25) in rural areas for transfer of technology from lab to field. A 
network of Viral Diagnostic and Research Laboratories -VRDL (125) is also being rolled out in 
the Country to deal with outbreak and epidemics. DHR is also involved in Human Resource 
Development and Governance and have initiated robust programs for the same. So far, 80 
MRUs, 25 MRHRUs and 107 VRDLs have already been sanctioned.  
 
3.34 To deal with out -of pocket expenditure and provide affordable health care to the 
population Health Technology Assessment has been initiated which help in evaluation and 
implementation of cost effective technologies through NHA and MoHFW. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.35 The Committee is of the considered view that all research activities in the health sector 
are undertaken by DHR and the outcome/conclusion drawn through their research activities 
must be integrated into the public health system to minimize out of pocket ex penditure for the 
common masses. The Committee, therefore, desires that DHR must work in tandem with 
Department of Health and Family Welfare especially with NHA for  integration of cost -
effective technologies & innovation into public health system. The Com mittee, therefore, 
strongly reiterates its recommendation as made in Para 5.3.2 of the 119th Report.  
 
Vector Borne Diseases: MERA India 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.36 The Committee recommends the Government to launch National Leprosy 
Vaccination Program nationwide  to free India from leprosy within the set time frame and 
help remove the social stigma being faced by the patient suffering from leprosy.  
(Para 5.4.10) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.37 To introduce MIP vaccine in different higher leprosy endemic states in phased mann er 
ICMR conducted a study entitled “Programmatic Implementation and Comparison of MIP 
Vaccine Immunoprophylaxis and Rifampicin Chemoprophylaxis for contacts of Persons 

52 
 
Affected with Leprosy under the National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP) in High 
Endemic Settings”. The project was initiated from four districts of Gujarat (Navsari, Narmada, 
Tapi, and Bharuch) on 1.5.2017 (for three years).  
 
-ICMR JALMA, Agra along with Central Leprosy Division (CLD) collected data. In the district 
of Narmada (1027) and Navsari (165) a combination of Rifampicin Chemoprophylaxis and MIP 
Immunoprophylaxis was given to the contacts (total 1192) of 455 ‘Persons Affected with 
Leprosy’. All the contacts (1192) who received first dose of MIP vaccine were followed for their 
booster dose after six months. A total of 712 out of 1192 contacts of ‘Persons Affected with 
Leprosy’ received their scheduled booster dose.  Preliminary analysis showed that there was no 
major side effect observed in any of the contacts who received MIP vaccine.   
-Applied value of Project -MIP has been tried and found to be safe and acceptable in large field 
and programme conditions. Its use as an immunoprophylaxis  is being investigated in high 
endemic pockets so as to understand the effects on the reduction on the prevalence of disease in 
high endemic districts and eventually strive towards the goal of elimination of leprosy in all the 
high endemic pockets of the country. 
 
Way forward:  
 
 India achieved elimination (<1/10,000 population) of Leprosy goal at National level in 
2005. 
 
 However, State and District level elimination is yet to be achieved.  Five States/UTs 
(Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha, D&  N Haveli, Lakshadweep) have not yet 
achieved the goal and prevalence is still more than 1/10,000 population (NHP-2019). 
 
 It is planned to initiate the vaccination program to Bihar, Chhattisgarh and D&N Haveli  
because of high er endemicity for leprosy being  reported under the National Leprosy 
Eradication Programme (NLEP)  
 
 Subsequent to the development of the revised manuals and provision of the vaccine being 
made the NLEP was requested to write to the State of Bihar for initiating the vaccine as 
per the protocol. 
 
 A meeting will be planned in presence of DG, ICMR and other stakeholders to chalk 
out the plan to introduction of MIP vaccine to Bihar and Chhattisgarh and D&N 
Haveli endemic states, once COVID 19 emergency is over.  
 
 It is expected to start the project soon in these states once the permission from the higher 
authority is granted. 
 
 

53 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.38 The Committee expresses concern over the continued prevalence of Leprosy in five 
States/UT’s Viz. Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha , Dadra & Nagar Haveli, 
Lakshadweep where the prevalence is still more than 1/10,000 population as per record of 
NHP 2019. The Committee would like the ICMR to convene meeting with all stakeholders and 
senior officers concerned to chalk out specific strate gy/course of action for introduction of 
MIP Vaccines in these States/UTs under the National Leprosy Eradication Programme 
(NLEP) on priority basis so that social stigma attached to the disease is eradicated within set 
timeframe under the said programme.  
 
Revisiting the role of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) 
 
Recommendation 
  
3.39 The Committee appreciates ICMR’s global recognition and brand value with 
significant contribution during outbreak of epidemics and in -depth investigation in the 
field of bio-medical research and health research. However, the Committee expects ICMR 
to make SWOT - analysis of its working in order to capitalize on its strength and 
opportunities and make strategy to overcome its weaknesses and threats. The Committee 
believes that ICMR should chalk out strategies/course of action in the areas requiring 
improvement viz. focus on development of new technologies, new drugs and devices; more 
effective use of communication tools such as social media, mass media, public exhibitions, 
wide spread research dissemination initiatives and ICMR website; the other policy 
prescription for ICMR could be greater engagement with private sector, need to strengthen 
facilities and opportunities for medical research in the country and emphasis on ope rations 
research to strengthen health infrastructure. 
(Para 5.6.3) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.40 ICMR had outsourced the SWOT analysis of the organization by Thomson Reuters (now 
Clarivate Analytics) in 2016 which pin -pointed the strength opportunities and weak area s of 
ICMR. As per the SWOT analysis the recommendation was to strengthen and streamline the 
communication and brand building of ICMR.  Based, on the same a Communication Unit was set 
up at ICMR aligned with all the ICMR Institutes through identifying Nodal  Communication 
Officers (NCOs). A regular training program and sensitization helped in better communication 
and dissemination of ICMR Research outputs at various media platform. This also helped in 
brand building activities and resulted in developing a new  and prominent logo of ICMR, 
bringing out a Coffee Table Book ‘Touching Lives” showcasing milestone achievements of 
ICMR and enhanced use of Social Media platform like Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube 
etc. ICMR has also expanded its participation in m ega exhibitions like Indian Science Congress, 
Vibrant Gujarat, India International Science Festival IISF), etc to showcase ICMR activities and 
achievements. Various films/ documentaries on ICMR activities have been made and are being 

54 
 
used. Website has also  been revamped and made more informative. Efforts are underway to 
improve it further.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
 
3.41 The Committee takes note of efforts made by ICMR towards strengthening and 
streamlining the communication and brand -building of the organization through enhanced 
use of social media, training programme and sensitization and participation in mega 
exhibitions. The Committee, however, reiterates its recommendation for active engagement 
with private sector and other research institutes for medical research focussed on development 
of new technology, new drugs/vaccines and devices on life threatening diseases or outbreak of 
virus. The Committee calls upon ICMR to carry forward its Research Projects pertaining to 
insurmountable/lethal diseases and life -threatening emerging diseases so that not only the 
lives of common masses is said but would also broad -base and st rengthen the medical 
research infrastructure in the Country.  The Committee, therefore, desires that ICMR must 
make concerted efforts to make in -depth investigation in the field of bio -medical research and 
health research to consolidate health infrastructu re under ‘One Health System/Policy’ in the 
Country.   

55 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.1 The Committee expresses its deep concern over lower budgetary allocation during 
2020-21 vis -à-vis projected demands under various components of DHR schemes/ICMR. 
Against the projected demand of Rs. 305.50 crore over various schemes, the actual 
allocation in BE 2020-21 is to the tune of Rs. 262.29 crore thus leaving a shortfall of Rs. 
43.21 crore. Similarly, against the projected demand of ICMR and BHMRC to the tune of 
Rs. 2465.22 crore, actual allocation in BE 2020 -21 is to the tune of Rs. 1795.71 crore  thus 
leaving a considerable budgetary gap of Rs. 669.51 crore. Only the revenue outlay to the 
tune of Rs. 42.00 crore for the DHR Secretariat expenditure is as per the projected 
demand. Thus as a whole, against the projected demand of Rs. 2812.72 crore on ly Rs. 
2100.00 crore in BE 2020 -21 has been earmarked for DHR thus there is huge financial gap 
of Rs. 712.72 crore. The shortfall in allocations under the schemes would sever impact the 
establishment of new Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories; Multi -Disciplinary 
Research Units in Medical Colleges (MRUs), Model Rural Health Research Units 
(MRHRUs) in States and funding of projects under the schemes of Human Resource & 
Capacity Development. Similarly, shortfall of Rs. 669.51 crore in BE 2020 -21 in respec t of 
ICMR would affect the number of research projects which inter -alia includes Medical 
Device Mission Secretariat to be set up at IITs, assistive Technologies Centres with AIIMS 
and IITs, India Cancer Research Consortium, India TB Research Consortium, Nu trition 
Related Programmes, Technological Innovations, Vector Borne Disease like Dengue and 
Chikungunya, etc. The Committee laments inadequate budgetary allocations to DHR 
meant for the financial year 2020-21. 
(Para 2.2.4) 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.2 The need for making higher allocation for the schemes of Department of Health Research   
and for ICMR’s research activities will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance at the RE stage.  
 
Recommendation 
  
4.3 The Committee understands that Department of Health Research, mainly through 
the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and its 26 research institutes engaged in 
promoting health research and innovations in the priority areas of national health, by way 
of strengthening health research infrastructure and human resource and capacity 
development programs/activities across the country. However, the Committee is 
constrained to express its concern that the allocations for Health Research have been 
lowest compared to the allocations for similar departments engaged in R&D activities. 
 
(Para 2.3.1) 
  

56 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.4 The Department appreciates the concern expressed by the Committee in the matter.   
 
Recommendation 
  
4.5 The Committee is in agreement with the recommendation of General Council of 
NITI Aayog that Central outlay on health research needs be suitably increased for meeting 
the national health priorities and development of new technologies, diagnostics and 
treatments including development of new vaccines, etc. 
(Para 2.3.3) 
Action Taken 
 
4.6 This point will also be brought to the notice of Ministry of Finance while projecting the 
additional requirements at RE stage.  
 
Comparative Position of allocations for Health Research vis -a-vis other Scientific 
Departments: 
 
Recommendation 
  
4.7 The Committee expresses deep anguish over lower projection of Rs. 7.35 crore in 
BE 2019 -20 by DHR for an important healthcare scheme envisaging development of 
tools/support to prevent outbreak of epidemics. Unfortunately, the same was further 
reduced to Rs. 6.00 cr ore as a result of which DHR had no alternative financial options to 
undertake new initiatives but adhering to imprudent priortisation of the expenditure on 
essential activities and postponing the crucial new activities to the next financial year. The 
Committee notes with concern that against the projected demand of Rs. 8.00 crore only an 
allocation of Rs. 7.29 crore has been earmarked for the said purpose. Needless to say, the 
DHR should appreciate that epidemics possess the potential for large scale casua lties in 
case the same is not controlled and contained in time. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends the DHR to approach the Ministry of Finance for higher allocation for 
development of tools/support to prevent outbreaks of epidemics. 
 
(Para 3.3.3) 
Action Taken 
 
4.8 The need for higher allocations for this scheme would be emphasized to the Ministry of 
Finance at RE stage.  
 
Recommendation 
 
4.9 The Committee also recommends for dissemination of benefits of health research in 
NER to the local dwellers by providing cost effective healthcare services. The Committee, 

57 
 
in this regard, recommends that DHR should formulate strategy for focusing on the 
following course of action in NER: 
 
i. Reduction of risk factors for cancer and lifestyle related diseases 
(diabetes, and Cardiovascular diseases). 
ii. Hypertension control by reduction of salt consumption. 
iii. Improving maternal and child health. 
iv. Effort to halt and spread of Antimicrobial drug resistance. 
v. Reduction of TB in NE, elimination of malaria and food borne 
diseases. 
vi. Developing network for data sharing platform for Surveillance and 
early containment of outbreaks. 
(Para 3.7.8) 
Action Taken 
 
4.10 The ICMR has bee n supporting mission mode projects aimed at identification of risk 
factors and various intervention and implementation research projects in the area of non -
communicable and communicable diseases, maternal and child health. These projects are being 
implemented by the medical college hospitals and research institution and ICMR Regional 
Medical Research Institute Dibrugarh. 
 
4.11 It is proposed to convene regional meetings with various stakeholders like state health 
officials, programme managers and policy makers for sharing/ dissemination of research findings 
and further scale up of interventions.  
 
4.12 First meeting was planned in April 2020, but had to be postponed in view of current 
pandemic situation.  
 
4.13 However, RMRC -NE is addressing the regional health issues of North -East and has 
undertaken a number of projects addressing risk factors of cancer and life -style related diseases, 
hypertension, maternal and child health etc. A Viral research and diagnostic lab has been setup at 
the institute for surveillance and  early containment of outbreaks. 
 
Making availability of TB Van in Rural Areas 
 
Recommendation 
   
4.14 The Committee takes note of the efforts made by ICMR for innovating mobile TB 
diagnostic vans fitted with digital X -rays and smear microscopy and handing over to the 
Centre TB Division for use by the State Government with almost zero impact on out of 
pocket expenditure by the TB cases. The Committee hopes that under the National Tb 
Prevalence survey, to estimate the national as well as state level of prevalence of TB, would 
use the state of Art buses fitted with digital Chest X -rays and Molecular TB diagnos tic test 

58 
 
in all the identified 625 clusters that would cover select rural, urban, semi urban, tribal 
areas across the country with support from CTD and WHO. 
(Para 4.6.2) 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.15 National TB Prevalence survey, using the state of Art 25 buses fitted with digital Chest 
X-rays and Molecular TB diagnostic test in identified 625 clusters covering select rural, urban, 
semi urban, tribal areas across the country with support from CTD and WHO is ongoing. It has 
been put on hold due to Covid -19 pandemi c and lockdown leading to low community 
participation. A total of 110 clusters have been completed. The study will be restarted soon. 
 
India at 102 position in the Global Hunger Index, 2019 out of 117 countries 
 
Recommendation 
   
4.16 The Committee draws satisfaction from the fact that DHR has constituted an Expert 
Committee to examine the appropriateness of the indicators used in Global Hunger Index, 
methodological issues in the computation of GHI and to suggest a way forward. In 
addition, the ICMR Expert Committee is also working on the ‘White Paper’ on Global 
Hunger Index. The Committee would like to be updated on the recommendations of the 
said Expert Committee alongwith the response of DHR thereon. 
(Para 4.7.3) 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.17 The ‘White Paper’ on Global Hunger Index has been prepared. However, final 
deliberations could not be done due to COVID-19 pandemic.  
 
Telemedicine and tele -radiology as well as taking the Mobile CTs and Mobile MRIs to 
rural sectors 
  
Recommendation 
  
4.18 The Committee appreciates the efforts being made by ICMR in developing the 
artificial intelligence tools for screening TB using chest x -ray in rural areas. The 
Committee, in this connection, recommends that efforts should also be made to give a 
nationwide rural coverage of screening TB through the artificial intelligence. The 
Committee further recommends that the successful model of pilot project, as initiated at 
Tejpur and Dibrugarh at Assam, to verify the feasibility of using a mobile CT scan in semi - 
urban and rural areas can be replicated in all semi and urban rural areas in the country. 
The Committee would, therefore, like the ICMR to make assessment of financial 
requirement and approach the Ministry of Finance for allocation. 
(Para 4.9.1) 

59 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.19 An indigenous AI tool for detection of TB using chest X -rays has been jointly developed 
by Institute of Plasma Research under Department of atomic Energy, Govt. of India and I CMR, 
DHR, MOHFW. The tool would be taken -up for validation under national TB prevalence survey 
including the urban, semi-urban and rural areas after the situation of Covid -19 improves and the 
survey restarts. The tool does not require internet and can be p laced in the desktop or laptop at 
the local place and would be highly suitable for rural and semi-urban areas. 
 
Mobile CT Scan (Mobile Stroke Unit-MSU) 
 
4.20 The pilot project at Dibrugarh and Tezpur, to verify the feasibility of mobile CT scan in 
semi urban and rural areas has been initiated. A ‘State of Art’ mobile stroke unit was fabricated 
and has reached Tezpur.   Dry runs have  been done. Stroke units have been established at BCH, 
Tezpur and AMC, Dibrugarh. The MSU will be doing active cases after COVID  situation has 
resolved. Approvals for procurement of MSU at AMC, Dibrugarh have been obtained from State 
Health department and the MSU will be procured shortly.   ICMR is reviewing two similar 
projects one from AIIMS, New Delhi and another from CMC, Ludhia na. Punjab Government is 
keen on taking up this activity. Once these 4 centres indicate the effectiveness of MSU in these 
areas, we will initiate similar projects in one district per State/UTs in the country (Around 15 in 
Phase II (Rs 180 Crore) and 10 in Phase III (Rs 120 Crore). 
 
Collaboration with other Ministries, including AYUSH to come up with certain cheaper 
drug options for cancer treatment 
 
Recommendation 
   
4.21 The Committee is of the considered view that collaboration with the other ministries 
including AYUSH would help to invent cheaper drug option for treatment of various 
diseases, including cancer. The Committee, in this regard, appreciates the joint efforts of 
ICMR, CSIR and DBT in taking initiatives and facilitation of innovative research on 
Phytopharmaceuticals. The Committee feels that the Randomized Controlled Clinical 
Study to evaluate the Safety and Efficacy of an Ayurveda formulation - PJ7 would go a 
long way in the management of Dengue fever. 
(Para 4.17.1) 
Action Taken 
 
4.22 The treatment of 150 patients with the formulation PJ7 has been completed. A few 
immunoassays and RT -PCR assays are in process and will be completed soon. Report will be 
submitted soon. Since the trial is double blind study results of the trail will be known once the 
codes are opened. 
 
 

60 
 
SUBMISSION OF SECRETARY, DHR 
 
Recommendation 
   
4.23 The Committee took into consideration the submission of the Secretary, DHR made 
on 13 th February, 2020 regarding enhancement of budgetary allocation for implementing 
the schemes by the department. The Committee has already recommended for 
enhancement of budgetary allocation to DHR under various programmes in the preceding 
chapter and allocation of b udgetary support as per the projected demand of DHR for 
implementation of schemes during 15 th Finance Commission in the succeeding chapter.  
The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Finance would consider the recommendations of 
the Committee, positively. 
(Para 4.24.1) 
Action Taken 
 
4.24 The need for additional allocations for the DHR would be projected at the RE stage.  
 
FUTURE OUTLOOK OF HEALTH RESEARCH 
   
Need for enhancing budgetary allocation to DHR 
 
Recommendation 
   
4.25 The Committee takes into account that the budgetary allocation to the Health 
Research is merely about 3% of budgetary allocation of Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare which is abysmally low compared to requirement of funds needed for Health 
Research. The Committee is of the view that Health Research is vital component to make 
the country disease free and therefore, expenditure on Health Research needs to be much 
higher compared to present allocation. Keeping in view the large population of the country 
and need for further investment on the health research, the Committee recommends the 
government to earmark atleast 10% of allocation be made to the Department of Health & 
Family Welfare. 
 
(Para 5.2.1) 
Action Taken 
 
4.26 The requirement of additional allocation for DHR would be projected at the RE stage. 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.27 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central outlay on health research 
needs be suitably increased for meeting the national health priorities and development of 
new technologies, diagnostics and treatments including development of new vaccines, etc. 
 
(Para 5.2.2) 
  

61 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.28 The requirement of additional allocation for DHR would be projected at the RE stage.  
 
New initiatives of Department of Health Research &  Indian Council of Medical Research 
to make country Biosecure 
 
Recommendation 
   
4.29 The Committee believes that with expanding network of VRDLs, ICMR would serve 
as an important platform for diagnosis and surveillance of existing as well as emerging 
viral infections and thus make the country bio -secured against life-threatening viruses and 
the menace of bio-terrorism. 
(Para 5.4.1) 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.30 The observation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted.  
 
Recommendation 
 
4.31 The Committee believes that the country is in the need for best possible, affordable 
and viable solutions to fight the double burden of malnutrition in the form of persistent 
under-nutrition and coexistent obesity through convergence of multi-sectoral interventions. 
Several studies  addressing problems of under -nutrition, flurosis, IDD, Vitamin A 
deficiency have already been initiated in over 70 districts of the country. Studies have also 
been initiated to tackle adolescent anaemia and developing nutri -smart villages under 
inter-sectoral collaboration. The Committee recommends the Government for making the 
scheme a flagship program.  
 
(Para 5.4.7) 
Action Taken 
 
4.32 The studies are at their completion stage. The data is being entered and analyzed 
simultaneously. Once the study reports are finalized, a programme can be developed based on 
findings of the studies.  Work has been put on hold due to COVID-19 pandemic 
Vision of DHR the 15th Finance Commission period (2020-21 to 2024-25) 
 
Recommendation 
    
4.33 The Committee is of the considered view that the Scheme would result into creation 
of necessary infrastructure in the Government Medical Colleges and also encour age and 
strengthen an environment of research. The network of MRUs will also bridge the gap in 
the infrastructure and improve the health status of the population by creating evidence 
based application of diagnostic procedures/processes/methods. 
(Para 5.5.2) 

62 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.34 Observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. 
 
Establishment of MRHRUs in the States 
  
Recommendation 
  
4.35 The Committee understands that the scheme would provide special support for 
creating infrastructure at the periphery level fo r transfer of technology to the rural level 
for improving the quality of health services to rural population. The Committee believes 
that implementation of new and modern technologies in the rural settings and taking 
technologies from Lab to field would result in a better health care to the rural population. 
 
(Para 5.5.4) 
Action Taken 
 
4.36 Observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. 
 
EMERGING PRIORITY AREAS OF DHR 
   
Forging National  
 
Recommendation 
 
4.37 The Committee believes that in order to strengthen the health research capacity of 
the nation, there is need to engage with multiple stakeholders (national and international; 
public and private) viz.: 
 
Inter-ministerial collaborations  
 
(i) ICAR: in the areas of zoonosis, antimicrobial resistance and nutrition  
(ii) MHRD: in the areas of innovation and technology development.  
(iii) DBT: in the areas of bio ethics, stem cell research, commercialization of 
technology, innovation.  
(iv) ISRO: in the areas of early warning systems and impact of climate 
change on health.  
(v) AYUSH: in the areas of traditional medicine  
 
Public Private Partnerships  
 
(i) Tata Trusts: in the area of TB  
(ii) Sun Pharma: in the area of malaria  
(iii) Pfizer: in the area of anti-microbial resistance  

63 
 
(iv) Emami Limited: in the area of herbal product development for 
sleepdisorder and pre-diabetes  
 
(Para 5.12) 
Action Taken 
 
4.38 The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
 
 
  

64 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS- AT A GLANCE 
  
ESTABLISHMENT EXPENDITURE OF THE CENTRE (SECRETARIAT) 
 
 The Committee understands that DHR undertakes various medical & health related 
research activities pertaining to prevention, diagnosis and control of outbreaks of 
epidemic/Pandemic, which require adeq uate manpower strength in the department. The 
vacancy of 22 posts against the sanctioned strength of 42 posts is a matter of concern given 
the vital responsibilities entrusted to DHR. The Committee would like the Government to 
fill up the vacant posts on priority basis. The Committee also recommends the Government 
to consider the proposal of DHR for approval to the proposal of creation of 74 Posts 
entailing an expenditure of Rs. 8.34 crore to enable DHR to perform the entrusted 
responsibilities effectively and efficiently. 
(Para 3.3) 
NORTH EASTERN AREAS 
 
 The Committee finds that the funds allocation to various schemes of the DHR at BE 
stage is much lower Vis -à-vis its projected demand as a result of which the Department 
clamp down its cherished mission of each scheme against the originally conceived physical 
targets of the scheme at the projection stage. However, due to various reasons, including 
the lower absorption capacity of implementing agencies and taking into account the volume 
and trends of expendit ure, the Ministry of Finance rationalizes/reduces further the 
allocation on various schemes at RE stage when the physical targets are further curtailed 
thus nose-diving of the scheme of DHR aimed to setting up of VRDLs, development of new 
tools to prevent outbreaks of epidemics, promotion of Health Research, Human Resource 
& Capacity Development and research and health infrastructure. The efficacy of the 
schemes get further deteriorated due to under utilization of allocated funds at RE stage. 
The cumulative  implications is indicative of the fact that the Ministry of Finance is 
conservative in allocating funds to schemes as per the projected demand in the next 
financial year when the trend of expenditure at BE & RE Stage is assessed. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates its recommendation made in the Para 2.4.1 of its 
119th Report to DHR to come out of such circuitous vicious circle and must act promptly in 
strengthening the ‘absorption capacity’ of implementing agencies and undertake all 
appropriate steps for ensuring optimal utilization of funds earmarked at the BE stage. This 
would help the Ministry of Finance to consider allocating funds as per the projected 
demand of DHR so that each scheme is executed with the intent to achieve the objectives 
and mission of the scheme as conceived at the projection stage.  
(Para 3.7) 
 
 The Committee appreciates the pivotal role of the established network of Viral 
Research and Diagnostic Laboratories across the Country in combating COVID -19 for 
molecular diagnosis is a prerequisite for COVID -19 diagnosis. Keeping this fact into 
consideration the Committee reiterates its recommendation as contained in Para 2.5.1 of 
119th Report to overcome the shortfall in achieving the set physical targets for establishing 
VRDLs through proper consultation/persuasion with State Governments. The Committee 
hopes that holding of ‘Regional Advocacy Workshops’ with the State Government would 
help expediting the approval to the proposal of the State Government for setting up of new 
VRDLs. The Committee desires that DHR would also undertake suitable course of action 

65 
 
to achieve the target of setting of VRDLs in the country once the adverse impact of 
Pandemic COVID-19 is contained and combated.  
(Para 3.11) 
 
 The Committee believes that effort s of DHR in persuading the State 
Government/State Government Medical Colleges would result into allocation of space/land 
for setting up of MRHRUs/MRUs and State Government would prefer forwarding their 
proposals to that end. The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of 18 new 
MRUs that were at various stages of consideration.  
(Para 3.14) 
 
OUTPUT-OUTCOME FRAMEWORK FOR SCHEMES 2020-21 
 
 The Committee appreciates the Financial Vision Document of DHR prepared for 
the period of 15 th Finance Commission i.e. the period of 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 wherein the 
outcome framework under the scheme is purposed based on the actual financial allocations 
made by the Ministry of Finance on year to year basis as per the guidelines of Ministry of 
Finance and the NITI Aayog. The Committee, however, recommends the DHR to strive for 
optimal utilization of allocated funds so as to enable the Ministry of Finance & NITI Aayog 
to allocate funds to all the schemes of DHR as per the projected demand at the BE Sta ge. 
This would thus ensure that all physical targets of the schemes, as originally conceived at 
the projection stage, are achieved in toto for successful execution/implementation of the 
scheme. The Committee also desires the DHR to furnish a Status note on  the 
implementation/projected requirement of output –outcome framework for remaining years 
of 15th Finance Commission for the consideration of the Committee.   
(Para 3.17) 
 
MICRO ANALYSIS OF CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS 
 
 The Committee is of the considered view that the outbreak of Pandemic COVID-19 
has driven home the need for setting up of nationwide network of laboratories for 
management of incidence of epidemics and national calamities. In this regard, the 
rationalization of budgetary allocation from Rs. 80.00 Crore in BE 2019 -20 to the tune of 
Rs. 73.00 Crore in RE 2019 -20 could be due to the lower absorption capacity of 
implementing agencies. The actual utilization to the tune of Rs. 69.37 Crore during 2019 -20 
indicates lower capacity of fund utilization of the implementing agency which means the set 
target of setting up of 125 VRDLs will be missed. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
DHR to make concerted efforts towards setting up of VRDLs as per set target and till the 
mission of setting up of VRD Ls in all parts of country is not achieved to ensure that the 
scheme continue throughout the duration of 15 th Finance Commission with adequate 
budgetary provision. 
(Para 3.22) 
  
  

66 
 
MAJOR RESEARCH PROJECTS ON TRADITIONAL MEDICINE UNDERTAKEN BY 
ICMR AND FOLLOW-UP ACTION FOR BRINGING THE ACHIEVEMENTS 
THEREOF 
 
 The Committee appreciates that Ayurveda  formulation PJ7 in the management of 
the Dengue fever has been carried out and 150 patients with formulation of PJ7 have been 
treated. The Committee would, however, like to be apprised of the status of clinical trial of 
analgesic and anti-inflamatory activities of Plumbago zeylanica root paste in osteo -arthritis 
patients and progress made in clinical study of Non -Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease 
(NAFLD). 
(Para 3.25) 
 
DHR-ICMR ADVANCED MOLECULAR ONCOLOGY DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES 
(DIAMONDS) 
 
 The Committee appreciat es that 9 Centres of DHR -ICMR Advanced Molecular 
Oncology Diagnostic Services (DIAMOnDS) have been established throughout the Country 
and the Government is planning to establish more number of Centres of DIAMOnDS.  The 
Committee, however, recommends that I CMR should chalkout a definite timeframe to 
open the requisite number of DIAMOnDS Centres in the Country so that the incidence of 
Cancer is contained and eradicated within set timeframe. In this regard, the Committee 
reiterates its recommendations requirin g DHR to assess the financial requirement for the 
said purpose and take up the requisition to the Ministry of Finance for immediate 
consideration, as the incidence of cancer is huge in the country and its treatment not only 
pushes the whole family under ps ychological trauma but make them poorer as well due to 
high ‘out of pocket expenditure’. 
(Para 3.28) 
 
REGISTRATION OF CANCER CASES 
 
 The Committee notes with concern that cancer in India has fast emerged as a vital 
reason of morbidity and mortality. Althou gh, the National Cancer Registry Programme 
(NCRP) was launched by ICMR way back in 1981 still the Cancer has not been identified 
‘a Notifiable Disease’, as a result, the assessment of actual cancer burden is missing and 
efforts made towards cancer preventi on, control and research go awry. The Committee, 
therefore, believes that once the cancer is made ‘a Notifiable disease’, the 36 Population 
Based Cancer Registries (PBCR) and 236 Hospital Based Cancer Registries (HBCR) would 
help the actual assessment of i ncidence of cancer patients and comprehensive cancer 
research in country, enabling its treatment, prevention and containment. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends the ICMR - NCDIR to persuade all the State Government 
to make cancer ‘a Notifiable Disease’ for broadbase research on treatment of the Cancer. 
  
(Para 3.31) 
 
 The Committee is of the considered view that all research activities in the health 
sector are undertaken by DHR and the outcome/conclusion drawn through their research 
activities mus t be integrated into the public health system to minimize out of pocket 
expenditure for the common masses. The Committee, therefore, desires that DHR must 

67 
 
work in tandem with Department of Health and Family Welfare especially with NHA for  
integration of c ost-effective technologies & innovation into public health system. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates its recommendation as made in Para 5.3.2 of the 
119th Report.  
(Para 3.35) 
 
VECTOR BORNE DISEASES: MERA INDIA 
 
 The Committee expresses concern over the continued prevalence of Leprosy in five 
States/UT’s Viz. Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, 
Lakshadweep where the prevalence is still more than 1/10,000 population as per record of 
NHP 2019. The Committee would like the ICMR to convene meeting with all stakeholders 
and senior officers concerned to chalk out specific strategy/course of action for 
introduction of MIP Vaccines in these States/UTs under the National Leprosy Eradication 
Programme (NLEP) on priority basis so that social stigma attached to the disease is 
eradicated within set timeframe under the said programme.  
(Para 3.38) 
 
REVISITING THE ROLE OF INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH (ICMR) 
 
 The Committee takes note of efforts made by ICMR towards strengthening and 
streamlining the communication and brand -building of the organization through enhanced 
use of social media, training programme and sensitization and participation in mega 
exhibitions. The Committee, however, reiterates its recommendation for active engagement 
with private sector and other research institutes for medical research focussed on 
development of new technology, new drugs/vaccines and devices on life threatening diseases 
or outbreak of virus. The Committee calls upon ICMR to carry forward its Research 
Projects pertaining to insurmountable/lethal diseases and life -threatening emerging 
diseases so that not only the lives of common masses is said but would also broad -base and 
strengthen the medical research infrastructure in the Country.  The Committee, therefore, 
desires that ICMR must make concerted efforts to make in -depth investigation in the field 
of bio -medical research and health research to consolidate health infrastructu re under 
‘One Health System/Policy’ in the Country. 
(Para 3.41) 
  

68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 

69 
 
III 
 
THIRD MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 17 th November, 2020 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA       
2. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
3. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
4. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
5. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon   
6. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya  
7. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
8. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
9. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
10. Shri Anurag Sharma 
11. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
12. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
13. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
    
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri J. Sundriyal   Joint Secretary 
Smt. Harshita Shankar                   Under Secretary 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
Representatives of Department of Health Research  
 
1. Prof. Balram Bhargava, Secretary, Department of Health Research 
2. Smt. Geeta Narayan, Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. R. S. Sharma, Scientist ‘G’ Head RBMH&CH, ICMR 
4. Dr. Kavitha Rajsekar, Scientist ‘E’ 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that 
the meeting has been convened to consider and adopt draft 123rd Report on the Outbreak of 
Pandemic Covid-19 and its Management  and 124th Report on Action Taken by Government on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One Hundred Nineteenth Report on 

70 
 
Demands for Grants 2020 -21 of the Department of Health Research. The Committee, after a 
brief deliberation, adopted both the Reports without any modification. 
3. The Chairman also apprised the members that his term will end on 25 th November and 
due to the uncertainty in convening of the winter session, the four Reports of the Committee, 
namely, 121st , 122nd, 123rd, and 124th Reports will have to be presented to the Hon’ble Chairman 
Rajya Sabha. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to approach the Hon'ble Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha for presentation of the aforesaid Committee Reports.  *** 
 
4. ***  
5. The Chairman also acknowledged the unflinching support extended by the Members of 
the Committee by way of their valuable suggestions on various issues within the domain of the 
Committee. He also expressed de ep sense of appreciation for the valuable assistance and 
steadfast support extended by the officers and staff of the Committee through their commitment 
and devotion to duties which enabled the Committee in completing its deliberations and 
producing quality reports on the Bills, subjects and DFGs within the scheduled timeframe. 
 
6. *** 
7. *** 
8. ***  
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10. The Committee then adjourned at 4:15 p.m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Relates to other matter 
 
**** 