 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2025/ Pausha, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
   166 
 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE 111TH REPORT ON “FUNCTIONING OF NEW AIIMS 
(PHASE-I) UNDER PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA 
SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY)” 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11 December, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11 December, 2025) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2025/ Pausha, 1947 (Saka) 
 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
111TH REPORT ON FUNCTIONING OF NEW AIIMS (PHASE-I) 
UNDER PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJANA 
(PMSSY) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11 December, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11 December, 2025) 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. PREFACE (iii) 
3. ACRONYMS (iv)-(vi) 
4. REPORT (vii) 
 Chapter–I   Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government 1-91 
 
Chapter–II  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Government 
92-109 
 
Chapter–III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
110-196 
 Chapter–IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government have not been received 197-201 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A  GLANCE 202-226 
6. MINUTES* -- 
*To be appended at later stage 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee  
3. Dr. Ajeet MadhavraoGopchade 
4. Dr. Sikander Kumar  
5. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
6. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
7. Shri Ashok Singh  
8. Shri RameswarTeli 
9. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
10. Shri C. Sadanandan Master 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri 
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri MukeshkumarChandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara 
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya 
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira  
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K.S. Somashekhar     Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhasker Director 
4. Shri Vivek Chandra Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Renu Sreekanth Under Secretary 
6. Shri Roshan Lal Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee   
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi 
4. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
5. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade  
6. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
8. Shri Ashok Singh  
9. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
10. Shri Rameswar Teli 
 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri 
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri MukeshkumarChandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara 
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya 
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira  
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K.S. Somashekhar     Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhasker Director 
4. Shri Vivek Chandra Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Renu Sreekanth Under Secretary 
6. Shri Roshan Lal Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 

iii 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and 
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Rep ort on its behalf, 
present this 166th Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 1 11th Report on ―Functioning of New AIIMS 
(Phase-I) under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY)‖.  
2. The One Hundred Eleventh Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table 
of the Lok Sabha on  28th December, 2018. However, due to Covid -19 pandemic and certain 
discrepancies in the Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry, the preparation of Action Taken 
Report was delayed. The Action Taken Notes  of the Ministry was returned on a number of 
occasions with a request to furnish a consolidated, compreh ensive and updated Action Taken Notes  
on the recommendations contained in the Report which were finally received from the Departments 
in the Month of May, 2025.   
3.  The Committee made a total of 253 recommendations in the 1 11th Report, out of which 145 
recommendations have been accepted by the Government and have been categorized under 
Chapter- I. There are 23 recommendations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the  Government‘s replies that have been categorized under Chapter-II. The re are  78 
recommendations/ observations, in respect of which replies of the Government, have not been 
accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon and has 
been categorized under Chapter-III. While 07 recommendations/observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government have not been received, have been categorized under Chapter-IV. 
4. The Committee, in its meeting held on the 24th September, 2025 considered the Draft Report 
and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV  
24th September, 2025                                    CHAIRMAN 
Ashwin, 1947 (Saka)     Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
      Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
 ACLS Advanced Cardiac Life Support 
 AERB   Atomic Energy Regulatory Board 
 AI    Artificial Intelligence  
 AMTZ   Andhra Pradesh MedTech Zone 
 ATLS   Advanced Trauma Life Support 
 CCRYN   Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy 
 CIB    Central Institute Body 
 CMC                       Comprehensive Maintenance Contract 
 CPMS   Computerized Patient Management System 
 CPP    Central Public Procurement Portal 
 CPWD   Central Public Work Department  
 EAs    Executive Agencies  
 EoT    Extension of Time 
 EPC    Engineering, Procurement and Construction  
 ESRD       End Stage Renal Disease  
 GiA     Grants in Aid  
 HVAC   Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning 
 ICU    Intensive Care Unit 
 IDPL   Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
 INI    Institution of National Importance 
 IPD    In Patient Department 
 JIPMER   Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research 
 LoR    List of Requirement  
 MGPS   Medical Gas Pipeline System 
 MOTs    Modular Operation Theatres  
 NBC   National Building Codes 
 NICU   Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
 OPD   Out Patient Department 
 OT  Operation Theatre  
 PFMS  Public Financial Management System 
 PSA   Procurement Support Agent 
 RCC  Reinforced Cement Concrete 
 RIMS  Regional Institute of Medical Sciences 
 RPGMC  Dr. Rajendra Prasad Government Medical College  
 SFC   Standing Finance Committee . 
 SSB   Super Specialty Blocks  
AHU   Air Handling Units   
AIIMS  All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AiMED  Association of Indian Medical Device Manufacturers 
ASHA  Accredited Social Health Activist 
AYUSH  Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and HomoeopathY 
BIS   Bureau of Indian Standard  
BMHRC  Bhopal Memorial Hospital and Research Centre 
BoQ   Bills of Quantities  
CAG   Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CCEA  Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CIB   Central Institute Body 
CPPP  Central Public Procurement Portal  
CPWD  Central Public Works Department 
CRC   Consignee Receipt Certificate  

v 
 
CTVS  Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgeons  
DDPRC  Design and Detailed Project Report Consultant  
DM   Doctorate of Medicine 
DPR   Detailed Project Report 
EA   Executing Agencies  
ECBC  Energy Conservation Building Code) 
EFC   Expenditure Finance Committee 
GB   Governing Body  
GFR   General Financial Rules  
GiA   Grants-in-Aid  
GMC  Government Medical College 
GMCIs   Government Medical Colleges/Institutions 
HDU   High-Dependency Unit   
HEFA  Higher Education Financing Agency  
HEMS  Heli Emergency Medical Services  
HITES  HLL Infra Tech Services Limited 
HSCC             Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation 
IDPL   Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited 
INI    Institution of National Importance 
IPD   In Patient department  
LC   Line of Credit  
M.Ch   Master of Chirurgiae 
MCI   Medical Council of India 
MD   Doctor of Medicine 
MGPS  Medical Gas Pipeline System 
MoHFW  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MOT   Modular Operation Theatres 
MRI   Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
MS   Master of Surgery 
MTaI  Medical Technology Association of India  
NABH  National Accreditation Board for Hospitals 
NHSRC  National Health Systems Resource Centre 
NIRF  National Institutional Ranking Framework  
NOA   Notification of Award  
NORCET  Nursing Officer Recruitment Common Eligibility Test 
NTPC  National Thermal Power Corporation  
OBD   Outbound Dialing   
OSCE  Objective Structured Clinical Examination  
OT   Operation Theatre 
PERT  Program Evaluation Review Technique  
PG   Post Graduate 
PMC   Project Monitoring Committee   
PMG   Project Monitoring Group  
PMSSY  Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana 
PSA   Procurement Support Agency  
QRM  Quarterly Review Meeting  
RCE   Revised Cost Estimates  
SECC  Socio-economic Caste Census  
SMS   Short Message Service  
SPC   Stores Purchase Committee  
SSB   Super Specialty Blocks  
TPQA  Third Party Quality Assurance  

vi 
 
TSCs   Technical Specialization Committees  
UPS   Uninterrupted Power Supply  
USBIC  The U.S.-India Business Council  
USFDA  U S Food and Drug Administration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vii 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by  the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 1 11th Report on ―Functioning of New AIIMS 
(Phase-I) under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY)‖ . The Report on the subject 
was presented to the House on 28th December, 2018. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Gov ernment: 
2.14, 2.19, 2.21, 2.30, 2.32, 2.36, 2.47, 3.9, 3.10, 3.15, 3.18, 3.20, 3.21, 3.26, 3.28, 
3.30, 3.32, 3.39, 3.40, 3.41, 3.49, 3.52, 3.53, 4.4, 4.5, 4.8, 4.10, 4 .13, 4.15, 4 .17, 
4.19, 4.22, 4.24, 4.29, 430, 4.38, 4.44, 4.46, 4.47, 4.49, 4.52, 4.54, 4.59, 4.61, 4.68, 
4.69, 5.4, 5.5, 5.7, 5.9, 5.20, 5.21, 5.33, 5.34, 5.37, 5.65, 5.67, 5.70, 5.74, 5.76, 5.77, 
6.6, 6.7, 6.13, 6.31, 6.32, 6.38, 6.39, 6.43, 6.48, 7.15, 7.17, 7.19, 7.21, 7.24, 7.26, 
7.28, 7.34, 7.37,7.40, 7.42, 7.47, 7.51, 8.11, 8.12, 8.16,  8.17, 8.23, 8.30, 8.32, 8.33, 
8.41, 8.51, 8.58, 8.60, 8.67, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 9.6, 9.7, 9.10, 9.11, 9.12, 9.13, 9.15, 9.21, 
9.22, 9.23, 9.24, 9.25, 9.26, 9.27, 9.28, 9.29, 9.30, 9.31, 9.37, 9.38, 9.39, 9.40, 9.41, 
9.42, 9.43, 9.46, 9.47, 9.49, 9.50, 9.51, 9. 52, 9.53, 9.54, 9.57, 9.58, 9.60, 9.61, 9.62, 
9.63, 9.64, 9.65, 9.66, 9.68, 9.69, 9.70 and 9.71 
       Total– 145 (Chapter-I)  
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's replies: 2.6, 2.7, 2 .8, 2.17, 2.23, 2.51, 2.54, 3.17, 4.53, 
4.55, 5.10, 5.12, 5.13, 5.16, 5.17, 6.29, 6.36, 6.41, 7.13, 7.14, 7.49, 8.66 and 9.9. 
         Total– 23 (Chapter-II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been ac cepted by the Committee: 2.27, 2.28, 2.33, 2.35, 2.40, 2.41, 2.43, 2.45, 
2.49, 2.60, 2.61, 3.34, 3.37, 3.38, 3.46, 3.56, 3.57, 4.26, 4.35, 4.39, 4.41, 4.51, 4.63, 
4.66, 4.67, 5.27, 5.28, 5.29, 5.35, 5.36, 5.39, 5.41, 5.42, 5.44, 5.45, 5.46, 5.50, 5.51, 
5.52, 5.55, 5.56, 5.58, 5.63, 5.72, 6.12, 6.19, 6.21, 6.23, 6.24, 6.27, 6.28, 6.34, 6.46, 
6.47, 7.8, 7.9, 7.12, 7.33, 7.36, 7.45, 7.54, 7.55, 8.10, 8.28, 8.29, 8.42, 8.43, 8.44, 
8.46, 8.47, 8.52, 8.55, 8.65, 9.18, 9.34, 9.35, 9.36 and 9.55. 
       Total– 78 (Chapter-III)  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: 5.60, 5.61, 5.78, 6.16, 6.20, 8.62 and 8.64  
       Total– 7 (Chapter-IV)  
3.  The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the Report. 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER–I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A. AIIMS BHOPAL 
 
1.1 STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION WORK 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.1.1 The Committee observes that the delay in the cons truction work was mainly due to 
non-performance by the selected construction agencies along with improper planning and 
ineffective monitoring. Though the construction status is near completion in the first three 
Packages, under Package IV only 60% of the w ork is complete. It is high time that the 
Institute should strengthen the existing infrastructure and strive to complete the remaining 
work within the stipulated time limits as it has been six years since the Institute has been 
operationalized and the cons truction work is still incomplete. The Committee is inclined to 
observe that the selection of construction agencies was devoid of merit and transparency 
resulting in substantial time and cost overrun. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
stringent monitoring mechanism should be put in place to ensure timely completion of work 
to avoid time and cost overruns. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take 
necessary steps to take possession of the area which is under encroachment. The Committee is 
concerned to note that the project consultant HLL has miserably failed in proper monitoring 
of the project and its entire approach reflects unprofessionalism. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends suitable remedial action including fixing accountability a nd appropriate action 
keeping in view the observations of the CAG. 
(Para 2.14 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.2 The observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for 
future guidance. It is submitted that the main reasons for the de lay in construction was due to 
preparation of erroneous Bills of Quantities (BoQ), delays in issue of drawings by original 
design consultants and delays in clearance of deviations, extra items and substituted items by 
original Project Consultant. The progr ess of DPR works is being reviewed regularly at the 
Institute level and in the Ministry, through the online dashboard.  The progress of DPR works 
of all the AIIMS is also reviewed in the CIB meetings. Considerable progress has been 
achieved since the visit made by the Committee. The present progress under various packages 
of civil construction work as in December‘ 2021 is as below: 
Sl.no. Package Status of work as on 
13.12.2021 
Expected date of Completion 
1 Package - I 100% Completed 
2 Package - II 100% Completed 
3 Package - III 100% Contract of M/s C&S Electric Ltd has 

2 
 
been determined on 02.08.2019 due to 
non-performance and balance minor 
works undertaken at Institute level 
4 (a)  Package – IV  40.00% Terminated 
(b)  Balance work 100% Completed 
 
1.1.3 The Work for Estate Services under Package IV was awarded to M/s IVRCL which 
could execute only 40 % of the assigned scope of work, got terminated on 10.08.2016 due to 
non-performance. Subsequently, the balance work of Estate Services (Package IV) was 
assigned to CPWD, which completed the balance scope of 60%. 
1.1.4 The horticulture work has also been completed.  The system of assigning the 
construction work to executing agencies on turnkey basis with empowerment to handle all 
contractual matters at their end has been introduced. The executing agencies have been 
mandated to deploy and use Project Management Software to bring about improved project 
management at their end. The Ministry has also developed an online dashboard to facilitate a 
closer and more ef fective monitoring. The functional AIIMS have been empowered with 
greater delegation of powers in construction, procurement upto Rs 5.00 crore in cases and also 
in administrative matters. The matter regarding removal of encroachment and taking 
possession of the balance land from the state Govt will be persuaded with the State Govt. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.1.5 The Committee fails to understand that no cost -benefit analysis was undertaken by the 
Institute before procuring medical equipment in AIIMS,  Bhopal. The Committee wonders 
how AIIMS, Bhopal procured equipment without ascertaining the availability of space, 
manpower and infrastructure required for installation , etc. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends to the Ministry that proper assessment with  respect to cost -benefit analysis 
should be done before the purchase of any equipment. 
(Para 2.19 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.6 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for  
future guidance. As the institute is being est ablished, the procurement of medical equipment 
is being done for the first time and is in line with usual equipment available in similar 
departments across other similar INIs. No formal cost -benefit analysis has been done for 
procurement of medical equipme nt. However, whenever department requests for an 
equipment, it does an internal exercise regarding its requirement / essentiality patient care. 
The assessment committee, then thoroughly evaluates the cost justification, the proposed 
benefit for healthcare and a proper justification for expenditure over other competing 
requirements of other departments. It is only after a thorough deliberation & discussion that 
the assessment committee approves the purchase of each and every equipment.  

3 
 
1.1.7 All Procurement is rationalized based on multiple level of assessment such as proper 
justification, Need assessment, utilization, life cycle cost and thoroughly examined at each 
level with the existing committees in place such as SPC, Prioritization, infrastructure 
rationalization committee, negotiation committee etc. Further, the pre offer inspection and site 
readiness certificate has been ensured before the supply in order to mitigate the delay in 
installation and commissioning the equipment. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.1.8 The Committee would like to be apprised of the circumstances under which the 
process and procedure of single bid system was adhered to in purchasing three equipment viz. 
(i) endobronchial ultrasound system (ii) Portable RO/WTU and (iii) Hemodialy sis machine. 
The Committee, in this connection, strongly recommends for procurement of equipment on 
multiple bidding basis in future so as to have fair competitive pricing and availability of more 
options for procurement of best and economical equipment. 
(Para 2.21 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.1.9 The observation/recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for future 
guidance. It is submitted that the new procurement policy announced by Ministry in March 
2017, clearly states that multiple vendo r participation should be encouraged. Similar 
condition has also been incorporated in Agreement with Procurement Support Agency (PSA).  
Most of the Purchase is through M/s HLL -HITES (PSA)/GeM. The purchase made outside 
these mode, the tenders are published  in CPPP/Tender wizard portal/Institute website to 
ensure enough /wider participation. However, tender which end up in single bid subject to 
evaluation by the SPC and disposed of accordingly as per the recommendation. 
1.1.10 The stores purchase committee i s also in place to ensure the procurement is done in 
line with extant policy of Government of India (GFR 2017, Manual of procurement of Goods,  
etc). Usually single bids purchases are discouraged.  A procurement proposal passing through 
various committees Su ch as TSEC committee, Tender Committee and CPC before going to 
platform of approval for publishing of document for participation which ensure the proposal 
is aligned with existing public procurement policy of GOI . AIIMS Bhopal has been 
processing tender fo r both national and global enquiry with bid submission period of 
minimum 21 and 28 days respectively, to encourage wider participation from potential 
vendors. Further, technical bid has been opened after ensuring the compliance with Rule 173 
(XX) of the GFR 2017in the event of a single-bidder scenario. 
1.2 STATUS OF FACULTY/NON FACULTY STRENGTH 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.2.1 The Committee is displeased over the fact that the AIIMS, Bhopal engaged an agency 
for provision of manpower without tendering in violation of General Financial Rules. This 
lapse deprived the Institute from the benefit of the competitive bidding while making 

4 
 
provision for requisite manpower. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to 
ensure effective monitoring of the  whole process of tendering in compliance with GFR 
provisions. 
 (Para 2.30 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted  for 
future guidance. Further, it is submitted that w.e.f. 1 st May 2015 a  new Agency named M/s 
Security Solution and Manpower Services, NOIDA was engaged for providing Manpower 
services, after following due tendering process.  It is also submitted that AIIMS Bhopal 
published e -Tender for ―Hiring of Manpower on outsourcing basis at AIIMS, Bhopal and 
selected M/s Broadcast Engineering Consultants India Limited, New Delhi who is presently 
providing service w.e.f. 1 st January, 2021].  To streamline security system, Now AIIMS 
Bhopal is floating a fresh tender for Manpower Services time  to time at Gem portal in 
accordance with rules and regulations. It is also submitted that AIIMS Bhopal published 
Tender at Gem portal and hire the agency for ―Hiring of Manpower on outsourcing basis at 
AIIMS, Bhopal and selected M/s world class services N ew Delhi who is presently providing 
service w.e.f. 16 June, 2024 to continue.  Additionally, M/s HSCC on nomination basis as per 
Government Guideline and GFR rule 2017 [providing their services from 01-01-2024]. 
 
1.3 SPECIALTY/SUPER SPECIALTY DEPARTMENTS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.3.1 The Committee reprimands the AIIMS, Bhopal management over the fact that 
Departments of Rheumatology, TB & Chest, Gastroenterology, Surgical Gastroenterology, 
Urology, Medical Oncology, Clinical Haematology and Neonatology are still not functional at 
the Institute. The Committee is of the view that these are key Departments in providing 
medical aid and in some cases these Departments can provide lifesaving assistance to people. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Institute to start these Specialty and Super 
Specialty Department as early as possible to address sufferings of patient. 
 (Para 2.32 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.3.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted for 
future guidance. All the 26 specialty departments and 16 Super Specialty departments are 
fully functional at AIIMS Bhopal. 
 
1.4 MEDICAL EDUCATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.4.1 The Committee expects AIIMS, Bhopal to deliver quality medical education in all its  
Departments so that passing out students serve the society in an excellent manner. For this, 

5 
 
basic infrastructure at the Institute is required apart from improved student faculty ratio to 
produce well trained doctors. The Committee also believes that the retention rate of passing 
out students in the Institute would determine the standard of quality medical education being 
imparted in the Institute. 
(Para 2.36 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.4.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted  for 
future guidance.  The MBBS graduates passing out from AIIMS Bhopal are offered Junior 
Residents (Non-academic) post in the Institute. It is submitted that significant percentage of 
students, passing from AIIMS, Bhopal get admissions in MD/MS and DM/M.Ch courses in 
various medical colleges & INIs  of the country including AIIMS, Bhopal and also secure 
admission in Internationally acclaimed Institutions, abroad.  AIIMS Bhopal offers a 
comprehensive range of undergraduate, postgraduate, and doctor al programs, including 
MBBS, MD, MS, DM, M.Ch, and various paramedical courses. Many students passing out 
from AIIMS, Bhopal get admission in MD/MS and DM/M.Ch courses both at AIIMS, Bhopal 
and other INI‘s, and  Medical Colleges. Students also secure admis sion in internationally 
acclaimed Institutions, abroad.  However, the admissions/posts are on competitive basis and 
fill on the basis of the existing vacancies 
 
1.5 STATUS OF BEDS AND WARDS STRENGTH 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.5.1 The Committee is constrained to express its displeasure that functional bed strength is 
approximately 50 percent of the sanctioned bed strength at the Institute. In Private and 
Ophthalmology wards there are 16 beds out of which only 2 are occupied. It was noted that 
there is no separate ward for Cardiology, Nephrology or Oncology at the Institute.  Given the 
high incidence of number of patients under these categories, the existing facilities are quite 
inadequate. Further, the occupancy rate is less than fifty percent in almost all the wards except 
medical, orthopaedics, surgical, and ICUs. The Committee is concerned to note the abysmally 
low level of bed occupancy for a tertiary care institute of the level of AIIMS. The Committee 
expects AIIMS Bhopal to improve its perception as  a health care provider so that bed 
occupancy/utilization increases substantially. Needless to mention, the Committee is of the 
considered opinion that the merger of BMHRC with AIIMS, Bhopal assumes critical 
importance to ensure optimum utilization of the tertiary healthcare facilities in AIIMS, 
Bhopal. 
(Para 2.47 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.5.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted for 
future guidance. The present status of bed strength / functional wards / ICUs is at tached as 
Annexure –II (l). As of now, the average bed Occupancy at AIIMS Bhopal is 98%. 

6 
 
B. AIIMS RISHIKESH 
 
1.6 Budgetary Allocation 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.6.1 The Committee is anguished to observe there has been underutilization of funds till 
the year 2016 -17 in AIIMS, Rishikesh. The Committee notes that out of a total budget 
estimate of Rs. 426.50 crores during 2018-19, only Rs. 165 crores of funds have been released 
till 15th October, 2018. The Committee also notes that under GIA (CCA) alloca tion has been 
slashed to Rs 250 crores from the projected demand of Rs 1186.96 crores in BE 2018 -19. The 
Committee is of the opinion that AIIMS, Rishikesh has set up over ambitious  targets for itself 
and therefore, needs to reconsider these demands. A cost  benefit analysis also needs to be 
done vis-à-vis availability of other tertiary care services in the adjoining area. The Committee 
recommends that a common criterion along with a rational approach towards utilization of 
financial allocation for each AIIMS  needs to be done. The Committee is not convinced with 
the justification for overall projected demand to the tune of 1363.46 crores which is far above 
the expenditure incurred in other similar tertiary care center with much higher OPD/IPD load. 
Needless to say the Committee is concerned at the audacious projection which alone is almost 
equal to the sum total of all the remaining five regional AIIMS under study. The Committee 
recommends that suitable benchmark for AIIMS standards be formulated by the Central  
Institute Body (CIB) so that fiscal discipline and prudence in the utilization of the resources is 
done under all circumstances. The Committee recommends that AIIMS, Rishikesh should 
review its projections to a more realistic level. 
(Para 3.9 of the report) 
 
1.6.2 The Committee observes that in -principle approval of many important centers like 
Cardiac Science Center, Neuroscience Center, Ad vance Eye Center, Lung Center  with 
estimated expenditure to the tune of Rs. 100 crores each has been given by the Gov erning 
Body but the construction work could not be started due to unavailability of funds. Besides, 
the Committee is concerned to note that when there has already been a construction of a full -
fledged hospital to seek Rs. 97.61 crore for Administrative blo ck, Rs. 100 crore for the 
academic block, Rs. 100 crore for research block and Rs. 383 crore for residential 
accommodation gives an impression that there is no need for optimum/rational utilization of 
scarce resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to monitor the 
utilization of funds given to AIIMS, Rishikesh with utmost caution and justification. The 
Committee also recommends for a comparative cost -benefit analysis of AIIMS, Rishikesh 
with other regional AIIMS specifically AIIMS, Bhubaneswar in this regard, as the Committee 
finds it to be the better managed in terms of investment outcome scale and rational utilization 
of limited resources. The Committee is of the opinion that regional AIIMS should provide 
tertiary health care in the n eglected region but should not merely duplicate the facilities 
available with AIIMS Delhi. The Committee recommends that setting up of advanced centers 
should be done only when AIIMS Rishikesh achieves at least 50% of the OPD footfall of 
AIIMS Delhi and th e existing infrastructure is put to optimum usage. Availability of 

7 
 
faculty/Super Specialists to run these advanced centers should also be kept in consideration. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends for consideration of all matters regarding setting up 
of advanced centers by the CIB and also to take into account the budgetary implications if 
these centers are to be setup replicated in all existing and proposed AIIMS. 
(Para 3.10 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.6.3 The observations/recommendation of the Hon‘ble  Committee has been noted  for 
future guidance. In fact, the Ministry was also concerned with the overambitious 
infrastructure expansion plans of AIIMS Rishikesh and had truncated the budget to Rs. 250 
crore and advised AIIMS Rishikesh to prioritize and res trict capital works. The Ministry has 
also put in place a system where all capital expenditure projects costing more than Rs. 100 
crore would come before CIB for consideration. Deliberations before CIB will bring about 
needed policy directions and fiscal d iscipline. It was decided that all major capital investment 
proposals of AIIMS Rishikesh would be reviewed by the Ministry while considering 
financing through the Higher Education Financing Agency (HEFA) and for prioritization of 
investments. HEFA loan san ctioned earlier was subsequently cancelled as the HEFA funding 
was discontinued with effect from September, 2020. Now, the focus has been maintained on 
completion of DPR works and essential works related to consolidation of existing services.  
1.6.4 With r eference to the  observation/recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee, it is 
further stated that AIIMS Rishikesh is projecting budget demand based on a realistic Annual 
Assessment Committee of equipment procurement and Engineering Works. It is further 
ensured that during the Financial Year 2023 -24, the TSA has been implemented and under 
TSA unutilized amount automatically gets lapsed on 31st March. It is further stated that during 
last financial year, the budget/expenditure details are hereunder: 
FY Budget Al lotted                  
In Cr 
 Expenditure        In Cr  
23-24 757.00  757.00  
24-25 612.12 
As on date 
  567.30 
As on date 
 
 
1.6.5 With reference to above, the demand has been projected very realistically and 
accordingly, the utilisation has also improv ed. It is further submitted that during the last 03 
financial years no capital projects above 100 crores has been implemented. With reference to 
the observation/recommendation of the Hon'ble  Committee it is further submitted that DPR 
works of Auditorium, T rauma and Nursing college have been completed. It is further 
submitted that realistic budget estimates are prepared by the institute and monitored by the 
Ministry during review meetings of BE/RE and SFC. Currently, only the proposal for 
Advance Eye Centre is under consideration. Balance projects will only be undertaken with the 
approval of PMSSY during the next extension of the PMSSY Scheme by the Government of 
India. 
 
 

8 
 
1.7 STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION WORK 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.7.1 The Committee obser ves that there has been a delay in the construction of almost all 
projects and the target date of completion for most of the projects has been further extended. 
The Committee also notes that in most of the cases, delay in the work is due to the non -
performance of construction agency. Such instances have led to delay in construction 
activities implying poor assessment on part of the Institute in selecting the project 
development agency/contractor. The Committee believes that time overruns of 4 -5 years 
cannot be justified on any grounds and this implies poor planning and lackadaisical approach 
on the part of implementing agency. The Committee is of the considered view that project 
contractor with a proven track record of successful and timely completion of wor k should be 
deployed for such important projects. The Committee therefore, recommends that Institute 
must rationally evaluate the projects and plan and chalk out future course of actions, 
accordingly, by prioritizing the projects on the basis of urgency to  avoid delay in completion 
of the projects. 
(Para 3.15 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.2 The recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for further guidance. 
It is apprised to the esteemed committee that a system of execution through Executing  
Agency (EA) has been adopted for setting up of new AIIMS and upgradation projects of 
GMCs now. The EAs are fully empowered to take decision on all contractual matters. 
Further, all new AIIMS projects are executed in Engineering, Procurement and Constructi ons 
(EPC) mode in which the construction agency also handles the design matters. In this way the 
coordination issues and consequent delays would be obviated systematically. Construction of 
DPR projects of Trauma Center, Nursing College and Auditorium has b een completed.  
Additionally, at present AIIMS Rishikesh is executing projects under EPC Model for AIIMS 
Satellite Center at Kichha and 150 bedded CCHB at AIIMS Rishikesh. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.7.3 During its visit to AIIMS, Rishikesh, the Commi ttee came across a lot of space 
wastage due to structural design faults. The Committee was given to understand that the 
Institute took undue time in correcting the structural deficiencies and thus the development 
work lagged behind. The Committee, therefor e, strongly recommends that the project 
consultants must be held accountable for such serious lapse in the designing and construction 
projects of the Institute. The Committee is alarmed at almost 150 times deviation in the 
original quantities and the actua l quantities as compared to the quantities given in the Bill of 
Quantities (BoQ) of the Contract as pointed by the CAG in its Report. The Committee is of 
the opinion that AIIMS, Rishikesh in itself is a case study of mismanagement, lack of 
foresight and wa stage of public funds. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that 

9 
 
the structural/designing faults in AIIMS Rishikesh be corrected to the extent feasible and new 
expansion be done with utmost caution with strict monitoring. 
(Para 3.18 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.7.4 The observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted for 
further compliance. A few alterations within the existing hospital building have been made for 
better utilization of the space. Ex -post facto sanction of th e competent authority from the 
central government for the deviations has been taken for most of the projects.  
 
1.8 STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION WORK 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.8.1 The Committee notes that there is limited land available for expansion as only 101 
acres is available for construction of hospital, academic and residential blocks. The space 
crunch is limiting the expansion of services at the institute. The Committee recommends for a 
comprehensive space audit of the Institute by any independent  agency so as to ensure 
optimum land utilization, within six months of the presentation of this report. The Committee 
during the course of its study visit saw for itself wastage of land in ancillary areas like parking 
etc. Possibility of vertical expansion  of residential/hostel facilities may be explored. The 
Committee recommends for an expeditious decision on transfer of 200 acre IDPL land to 
address the space crunch for AIIMS, Rishikesh after ensuring optimum/rational utilization of 
the available land. 
(Para 3.20 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.8.2 The observations/recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee including space audit 
has been noted for future compliance. The Hon‘ble Committee is informed that as per 
byelaws of local authorities of the government of  Uttarakhand, the limit set for vertical 
expansion of existing residential /hostel buildings has been exhausted. The matter of 
transferring the land to AIIMS has been taken up with State Government of Uttarakhand. The 
Hon‘ble Committee is apprised that not ification of allocation of 200 acres of IDPL lands to 
AIIMS Rishikesh has been issued. Online application has already been submitted. Land was 
supposed to be transferred from Ministry of Fertilizer to Uttarakhand Forest department in 
month of November 2021 which is still not transferred to Uttarakhand Forest department. The 
process for transfer of land in name of AIIMS Rishikesh shall be taken off after the transfer of 
land to Uttarakhand Forest department from Ministry of Fertilizers.  The matter of transferring 
the land to AIIMS has been taken up with State Government of Uttarakhand. Land has been 
transferred from Ministry of Fertilizers to Uttarakhand Forest department.  Now, the case has 
been taken up with Uttarakhand Forest Department for transfer of 200 Acres of land. 
 
 

10 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.8.3 The Committee is of the considered view that the hospital staff, the workforce and the 
students deserve suitable accommodation facilities in carrying out their respective tasks. The 
Committee would lik e the AIIMS, Rishikesh to take necessary steps in consultation with 
construction agency to expedite the on -going construction of hostels without time and cost 
overruns. 
(Para 3.21 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.8.4 The recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for further 
compliance. Further it is submitted that all pending hostels works have since been completed. 
The expansion of accommodation facilities would be taken up in the new area of IDPL land  
expected to be acquired soon. The institute  is taking all necessary steps to ensure that 
remaining work to be completed at the earliest possible time without further delay. The work 
for 550 bedded boy‘s hostel & 36 Nos. Type -V Qtrs have been sanctioned by the Ministry on 
18 Dec 2024. The tender for  construction of above two projects is under planning for 
execution by CPWD. 
1.9 PROCUREMENT OF EQUIPMENT 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.9.1 The Committee, while examining the rationale forwarded by the Institute for the 
procurement of da vinci Robotic Arm is of the opinion that conventional laparoscopic surgery 
takes much lesser time and does not involve usage of expensive consumables. The Committee 
is of the opinion that these resources could have been better utilized in strengthening other 
important ar eas at this nascent stage. The alibi, given regarding training and extended 
warranty as a justification for higher prices, fails to appeal to the Committee, as similar terms 
have been given to other corporate hospitals by the Company across the country. Th e 
Committee is not convinced by these woolly arguments to procure prohibitively expensive 
equipment for a budding Institution like AIIMS. The Committee notes that it has been over 15 
years since the da vinci system (robotic surgery) is being used, but the evidence that it beats 
laparoscopic (minimally invasive surgery) is still lacking. The Committee notes that Robotic 
surgery is several times more expensive than the traditional laparoscopic surgery and engages 
the OT and the surgeon for much longer duratio n. The Committee strongly believes that 
robotic surgery should be used only in centers of excellence like AIIMS Delhi where the 
Institute is in a position to evaluate the efficacy, economics, efficiency and utility of these 
types of surgical intervention a s more research is needed to assess the benefits of robotic 
surgery. The Committee is also concerned that the da vinci system still has monopoly in the 
market and there is every possibility of the company dictating the price and indulging in 
unfair monopol istic practice. The Committee, thus, recommends to the Institute to ensure 
transparency besides appropriate cost/benefit analysis in the procurement of equipment to 
avoid such prohibitively expensive procurement in future. The Committee would like to have 

11 
 
a quarterly report on the usage of the DA Vinci Robotic Arm in both Rishikesh and Jodhpur 
so as to enable it to arrive at a final conclusion in the matter. 
(Para 3.26 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for further guidance. Quarterly 
Reports on the uses of DA Vinci Robotic Arm in AIIMS, Rishikesh is enclosed at Annexure -
III (c). Till date more than 976+ robotic surgeries have been done in the institute.  
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.9.3 The Committee is  not satisfied by the reply given by the Institute regarding the 
procurement of equipment on a single bid/proprietary basis as such practices eliminate 
competition resulting in higher procurement costs. The Institute should go for competitive 
tendering to defeat monopolistic tendencies. The Committee, further, feels that the 
notification of tender should get wider reach so that more and more bids are received.  The 
Committee, further, desires a thorough investigation into all single bid and propriety 
purchases. The Committee may be apprised of the conclusions drawn out of the investigation. 
(Para 3.28 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.4 The new procurement policy announced by Ministry in March, 2017 clearly states that 
Multiple Vendor Participation should be e ncouraged. Similar condition has also been 
incorporated in Agreement with the Procurement Support Agency (PSA) Procurement. 
Further as per directions of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, if has been decided to 
refer all single bid cases to internal aud it wing of Institute for detailed investigation. AIIMS 
Rishikesh has been advised to send a detailed report in this regard. As per directions of the 
Hon‘ble Parliamentary Standing Committee conveyed by the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare vide letter no. H -1103/01/2019-PMSSY-V/EO dated 25 th March, 2019, AIIMS 
Rishikesh was directed to investigate all single bid cases through a Committee. Accordingly, 
a committee consisting of HoDs, F&CAO under the Chairmanship of Medical Superintendent 
investigated all such cases and submitted its report. The Committee concluded that all such 
cases of single tender procurement were done in full compliance of the extant rules of GFR. 
The observation/recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for compliance in 
future. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.9.5 The Committee finds the reply submitted by the Institute as evasive, as the reasons for 
the procurement of equipment with USFDA certification is not submitted. The Committee 
finds that even some of the basic eq uipment have been purchased with USFDA certification. 
The Committee feels that price of equipment with USFDA certification is quite high which 
increases the procurement cost. The Committee feels that the Institute should insist on 
purchasing equipment with  Generic CE/BIS standards so as to promote the "Make in India" 
campaign. The Committee, thus, recommends to the Institute to go for equipment with 

12 
 
CE/BIS standards in future and recommends to the Ministry to issue strict guidelines for the 
procurement of equipment with these standards. 
(Para 3.30 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.6 The observation/recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for 
compliance in future. The Ministry issued guidelines  dated 20.02.2018 for allowing of BIS 
standards with other standards like USFDA/CE certification, etc in procurement of medical 
devices equipment which has been circulated by the PMSSY Division of the Ministry of 
HLL/HITES (Procurement Support Agency)/HSCC and all functional AIIMS. PSA has 
intimated that t hey are following the standards of BIS on European CE or US FDA for 
PMSSY procurement and BIS is not an additional requirement for Indian Manufacturer who 
is having any of the certification stated above. Further AIIMS Rishikesh is following the 
Rules, regulations & guidelines of Government of India (GFR-2017) in letter & spirit. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.9.7 The Committee was given to understand that the Institute procured equipment without 
ascertaining the availability of space, manpower and infrast ructure required for installation. 
Due to non-installation of medical equipment, patients were deprived of the benefits. Further, 
operationalization of key diagnostic and in -patient facilities would also have been adversely 
affected. The Committee also fee ls that delay in the installation of equipment may also result 
in lapse of warranty/guarantee of the equipment procured. The Committee recommends to the 
Institute to procure equipment only when there is adequate infrastructure and manpower 
required for the  functioning of the equipment, so that there is no scope for idling or non -
installation of procured equipment. 
(Para 3.32 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9.8 The observation/recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for future 
guidance. It is s ubmitted that the delays in construction adversely impacted the equipment 
delivery schedule leading to delays in support and installations of equipment. The concerns 
highlighted in the CAG report have been noted. In fact, realizing the problems of delays i n 
installation of equipment, procurement orders have been synchronized with progress of 
construction and progress of manpower recruitment since 2016. The human resource has also 
been engaged in almost all cases. Presently, there are very few cases where th e installation of 
medical equipment is being delayed or the same is lying unused. Presently, there is no 
equipment lying idle or uninstalled for want of space and infrastructure. It is submitted that 
Institute is in the process of installing following equipment's from PSA. 
1. PET CT 
2. PACS 
3. Bone Densitometer (DEXA) 
 

13 
 
1.10 STATUS OF FACULTY/NON FACULTY STRENGTH 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.10.1 The Committee during its study visit to AIIMS, Rishikesh observes that the Institute 
has created a serious regional im balance in the State of Uttarakhand by taking faculty from 
adjoining medical colleges, creating a deficit/vacuum in that area. The idea behind setting up 
of AIIMS in these areas was to create additional capacity and bring the AIIMS, Delhi like 
facilities and services at the tertiary level health care centres in these areas. However, it is 
distressing to note that the Institute has created a serious deficit of medical 
professional/faculty in the entire State of Uttarakhand. The Committee strongly recommends 
that recruitment from adjoining medical colleges in the same state should be done only after 
obtaining NOC from their parent Department. The Committee also recommends that efforts 
should be made to recruit faculty from AIIMS, Delhi so as to create AIIMS li ke culture in the 
regional AIIMS. The Committee is distressed to note that there are hardly any Head of 
Departments/Professors from premier Institutes like AIIMS Delhi/JIPMER/PGI etc. in the 
Institute. Almost 25% of the faculty has been taken with teaching  experience in private 
Institutions and not from any premier Institute. The Committee would also like to have 
detailed information with respect to applicants with adequate teaching experience from large 
tertiary premier Government Institutes/hospitals who have applied for faculty posts till date in 
AIIMS Rishikesh and the reasons for their being not found suitable. 
 (Para 3.39 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.10.2 It is submitted that selection of faculty is done by Standing Selection Committee 
followed by app roval of HR Subcommittee/Governing Body.  Applicants from premier 
Government Institutes are also given due weightage. However, in case of non -selection of 
such candidate, reasons of same are not recorded by Standing Selection Committee.  Keeping 
in view the observations, a detailed report with respect to applications with teaching 
experience, etc. is enclosed at Annexure-III (i). The faculty recruitment advertisement is being 
done at national level and wide publicity is given through employment news / Nationa lize 
newspapers/ website. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.10.3 The Committee also recommends that faculty from AIIMS, Delhi or equivalent 
Institute be encouraged to impart teaching at AIIMS, Rishikesh as visiting/ guest faculty on a 
regular basis. 
 (Para 3.40 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.10.4 The recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for future guidance.  
Further, it is submitted that a number of visiting/guest faculty are being invited to AIIMS 
Rishikesh. Visiting faculty / guest faculty is being invited from time to time. 
 
 

14 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.10.5 The Committee takes serious note of the discrepancies in the information submitted by 
AIIMS, Rishikesh with reference to its queries. As an illustration, the sanctioned faculty 
strength was quoted as 321 in the Power Point Presentation during the study tour of 
Committee but later on, it was reduced to 305 in the information submitted by the Institute. 
While the sanctioned strength for Group A non-faculty posts was stated as 782 posts as on 5th 
November, 2018 but later it was reproduced as 924 posts on 6th December, 2018. The 
Committee advises the Institute to exercise due caution and diligence in submitting 
information to the Parliamentary Standing Committee in future. 
 
 (Para 3.41 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.10.6 The observation/recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted for 
future guidance. Noted for future compliance. 
 
 
1.11 INTENSIVE CARE UNITS (ICUs) 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.11.1 The Committee observes that there are only 47 beds, with 18 ventilators and 31 
monitors in ICUs in seven Departments, thereby indicating that the number of monitors and 
ventilators are not commensurate with the number of beds in ICUs if there is 100% 
occupancy at any given point in time. Such inadequate critical care facility at the Institute that 
is a tertiary level care institute indicates a dismal state of affairs with respect to intensive care 
facilities for critical patients. The Committee apprehends that the Institute is no t equipped, 
adequately, to deal with complicated cases that require hospitalization and critical care. The 
Committee therefore, is of the considered view that more intensive care units must be set up 
in various departments to have distinct and specialized medical care facilities. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Institute should expand the scope of 
critical care services to best possible extent with adequate infrastructure and equipment. It is 
also a matter of grave concern to the Comm ittee that the Institute has started a fellowship 
programme in ICU/Critical care without a properly functional ICU. The Committee is of the 
considered view that fellowship programmes are run in Centres of Excellence once they are 
well established so that the standards of these programmes are not lowered. 
 (Para 3.49 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.11.2 Matter of Record. The observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee have 
been noted for compliance.  It is submitted that 46 beds will become operati onalized soon  
which will double the current strength of beds. Beds without ventilation are considered as 
Level I ICU beds as they have facilities of short term ventilation by AMBU/ Non Invasive 
Ventilators.  At AIIMS Rishikesh 200 ICU beds with Ventilators  are available.  It is further 
submitted that 150 beds CCHB is under construction. 

15 
 
1.12 OPERATION THEATERS (OTS) AND TRAUMA & EMERGENCY CENTER 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.12.1 The Committee takes cognizance of the defective design project of the modu lar OTs 
that had many flaws although the same have been re -designed but not without time and cost 
overruns. The Committee wants to highlight the short -sightedness of the Institute in 
approving the design and floor plan of AIIMS, Rishikesh and therefore, de sires that the 
responsibility must be fixed for defective design of modular OTs in the hospital set up. The 
Committee also notes the steps being taken by the Institute in accelerating the construction of 
OTs. The Committee in this regard recommends that th e Institute should ensure timely 
completion of the construction of OT complex, recruitment of specialists and the procurement 
of equipment, simultaneously, so as to have a ready to use functional OT units within the 
stipulated timeframe. The Committee stro ngly recommends for a cohesive, well planned time 
bound action plan to rectify the designing faults in AIIMS Rishikesh. 
 (Para 3.52 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.12.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted for  
future guidance. The initial designing of the OT space, as part of Civil Construction was done 
by the DDPRC. Initially, the Institute was not involved in approving, design, drawings, 
including designated areas of Modular OT as the position of Director, MS etc. we‘re not filled 
up by that time. Presently, the Institute is pro -actively involved in these matters and meetings 
and meeting of all stakeholders relating to construction of MOT like vendors of MGPS, MOT, 
Integrated OT, Construction agencies are being convened frequently for better coordination 
and appropriate designing and to expedite construction of OTs. 
 
1.12.3 In all new AIIMS Projects the Ministry has been appointing OSD and Mentor 
Institutes right from the initial stage so that user‘s expert inputs for des ign aspects are 
available at the time of initial designing stage itself so that designing flaws are avoided. 
Expert faculty from various Institutes is also associated in the deliberations.  As on date 54 
OTs including 25 MOTs, 29 Minor OT/procedures room ar e fully functional.  Yes, 
rectification of defects has been done by construction agency. However, no major structure 
design default has been noticed. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.12.4 The Committee has not been able to assess the number of surgical pro cedures carried 
out in AIIMS Rishikesh due to variation in the data furnished by the Institute and the 
Ministry. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that precise data with respect to 
major and minor surgeries done (patient wise and Department wis e) till date since inception 
of the Institute may be submitted to the Committee, within three months of presentation of 
this Report. 
 (Para 3.53 of the Report) 

16 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.12.5 The observations/ recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted for 
compliance. The data in this regard has been re -verified. However, as already mentioned in 
Chapter-1, Para no. 1.19, it is submitted to Hon‘ble Committee that there is no variation in the 
data provided by the Ministry and the Institute.  
 
C. AIIMS JODHPUR 
 
1.13 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.13.1 The Committee is constrained to express its concern that total 
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for future guidance. 
Utilization budgetary allocation in respect  of AIIMS, Jodhpur picked up very slowly. The 
Committee wonders that the percentage utilization was nil in the year 2011 -12, 39.48% in 
2012-13, 47.64% in 2013 -14, 61.56% in 2014 -15, 32.53% in 2015 -16, 50.63% in 2016 -17, 
74.16% in 2017 -18 and 70.09% in 2018 -19 (up to 15.10.2018). The Committee berates that 
Jodhpur management failed to monitor over the implementing agencies during the course of 
execution of construction projects resulting into under -utilization of funds in the initial years 
for Grants-in-Aids (capital). The Committee laments that the trend of expenditure witnessed 
an increase only after the year 2016 -17 that speaks of limited absorption capacity of 
implementation agencies. 
 (Para 4.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.2 In the initial phase all  the departments became operational gradually depending upon 
the availability of the faculty, equipment, etc. It is also stated that budget estimate under GIA -
General and Salaries were estimated on higher side with the expectations of recruitment of 
faculty and other staff being in place, higher footfall in IPD and OPD and implementation of 
7th CPC. However, a good number of faculty position remained unfilled due to non -
availability of suitable candidates. Due to this, all the departments could not be 
operationalised as envisaged resulting in underutilization of funds under GIA -Salaries and 
GIA-General. However, more faculty and other supporting staff being on board w.e.f. 2016 -
17 and almost 90% departments being operational by 2017 -18 and implementation of 7th 
CPC for Faculty and Non-faculty, budget utilization position has improved substantially since 
2017-18 as brought out in Para 4.3 above in the later years.  
 
1.13.3 The releases have always been made based on the demand of the respective AIIMS 
only after obtaining the utilization certificates. Larger amount of funds were released to the 
AIIMS to enable them to complete the remaining DPR works and to expand the healthcare 
services. As regards underutilization of funds under GIA -Creation of Capital, it is submitted 
that the details of expenditure as provided in the aforesaid table contains only the expenditure 

17 
 
made towards procurement of medical equipment by AIIMS, Jodhpur. The expenditure on 
construction activities was booked by  MoHFW. It was only in the y ear 2015 -16 that all 
payment related to RA Bills of construction activities was transferred to AIIMS, Jodhpur vide 
MoHFW letter No. Z. 28016/267/2 014-SSH dated 31.08.2015. Thus, depicting gradual 
increase in the budget utilization over the years. The Insti tute and Ministry shall take 
necessary action for optimum utilization of funds and shall also ensure effective financial 
monitoring mechanism in future.  Effective financial monitoring and optimum utilization of 
funds are now being ensured as would be seen from the updated status given in Para 4.3. It is 
also evident that total utilization of the funds during the financial years 2019 -20 and 2020-21 
is up to 90.91% and 92.49% respectively. Therefore, the Institute has ensured optimum 
utilization of the funds as per GFR norms. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.13.4 The Committee was given to understand by the Ministry/Institute that the funds 
received were sufficient to meet the construction activities and on-going development projects 
at the Institute. The Com mittee believes that the problematic aspects relate to timely 
execution of the projects. The Committee, therefore, arrives at the conclusion that had the 
implementing agencies executed all segments of the projects in time, with required absorption 
capacity, there would have been optimum utilization of allocated funds and lesser delays. The 
Committee is of the considered view that had the Institute and the Ministry undertaken proper 
planning and periodic monitoring of the project work there would have been o ptimal and 
judicious utilization of resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to 
institute an enquiry to assess the actual reasons for under -utilization of allocated funds for 
execution of construction projects and accordingly apprise  the Committee of the action taken 
against the implementing agencies as per terms and conditions of the contract. 
 (Para 4.5 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.5 It is submitted that the major reasons for delay in Project is due to delay in 
construction activities happened on account of systematic issues. These delays are attributed 
due to delay in release of GFC drawings and delay in approval of variation, work on hold in 
want of non -finalization of MGPS, Modular OT, CSSD, Kitchen equipment & delay on 
approval due to change in layout or original plans of D&T OT 2nd to 6th Floor. The matter 
has been resolved and  at present the work of modular OT is in progress by M/s MDD & 
accordingly civil work is also in progress as per revised drawing by M/s L&T. Institute  shall 
also ensure proper planning and periodic monitoring with coordination of implementing 
agencies leading to optimum and judicious utilization of funds. All efforts are being made to 
complete the remaining work, at the earliest. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.13.6 The Committee is not convinced with the reasons given for underutilization of funds 
as these routine activities are often faced in the functioning of any institution. The delay in the 

18 
 
completion of projects has an adverse impact on the health care services to be provided by the 
Institute. The Committee expects the Department to uphold the principles of fiscal discipline 
and sound financial management by judiciously utilizing the remaining funds. Needless to 
say, that only proper planning, co -ordination with implementing agencies and suitable 
monitoring mechanism could have ensured optimum utilization of funds. 
 (Para 4.8 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.7 The observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted  for 
future guidance. With proper planning, coordination with implementing agencies and close 
monitoring, it has been possible to substantially improve the fund utilization position in 2018 -
19 as brought out in Para 4.3 above. Attempts have been made by Ministry to furt her fine-
tune the releases using PFMS so as to maintain a fund balance of about 03 months 
requirement. The Institute and Ministry shall take necessary action for optimum utilization of 
funds and shall also ensure effective financial monitoring mechanism in future. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.13.8 The Committee opines that diversion of funds is a result of lack of effective financial 
control and monitoring of actual utilization. Such diversion amounts to misappropriation of 
allocated fund for the intended purpose. The Committee, thus, recommends framing of proper 
guidelines to control such diversion. The Committee, in this connection, strongly recommends 
for strengthening of financial management, effective monitoring mechanism and adoption of 
proper accounting procedure for an effective internal financial control. 
 (Para 4.10 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.13.9 The observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted 
carefully and Institute would ensure due care for utilization of GIA f or the intended purpose 
only and avoid diversion of funds from one head to another by exercising  effective financial 
control and budget monitoring.  It is however stated here that for aforesaid diversion noticed 
by the Hon‘ble Committee happened in earlier year due to the reason that sufficient funds 
under the particular GIA Head were not provisioned as in the budget and diversion had to be 
resorted to meet urgent fund requirements. 
 
1.14 STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION WORK 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.14.1 The Committee expresses its anguish to observe faulty drawings in the construction 
project and subsequent shifting of OT from 2nd floor to 6th floor in AIIMS, Jodhpur as the 
same constituted the reasons for delay in the completion of construction projects. Th e 
Committee wonders that the faulty design in the original drawing was not taken seriously at 
the initial stage. The Committee, therefore, recommends that accountability for such faulty 

19 
 
design should be fixed and a detailed report on the reasons for the de lay in the 
operationalization of the OTS be submitted to the Committee for its consideration. The 
Committee also recommends that the remaining work of package II be completed within the 
specified deadline. The Ministry in tandem with institute management m ust oversee and 
ensure timely execution of all projects. 
 (Para 4.13 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.14.2 The observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted  for 
future guidance. The Institute is working to ensure that remaining work to be completed at the 
earliest possible without further delay.  It is submitted that the Operation Theatres (MOT) 
were not shifted from 2nd to 6th floor. The Operation Theatres at AIIMS Jodhpur are from 
2nd to 6th floor and further only internal changes in drawing were made keeping the 
functionality in mind. As the drawings of the construction project were completed well before 
the tender of modular operation theatres were envisaged/planned at All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Jodhpur. The bas ic modular operation theatre designs and the 
tender requirement for Modular operation theatres necessitated the following changes: - 
 
1. Provision for Dedicated Air Handling Units (AHU‘S) for individual operation theatres 
is a mandatory part of Modular ope ration theatre with each modular theatre requiring a fine 
control of both the temperature and humidity as per the revised guidelines for air conditioning 
in operation theatres issued by NABH (Extract of relevant page of Guidelines is enclosed for 
reference). This was not provided for in the original drawings and needed to be added as per 
the requirements for modular operation theatres. 
 
2. Setting up of Modular operation theatre also required the creation of Uninterrupted 
Power Supply (UPS) for each operati on theatre complex to ensure continuous trouble free 
service. This was not provided in the original drawings and needed to be added as per the 
requirement for modular operation theatres. 
 
3. There is also a requirement for an internal passage/connectivity between the Intensive 
Care Units and the operation theatres to allow for movement of sick patients between these 
two interdependent and critical areas of the hospital. The connectivity was not provided for in 
the original drawings necessitating modifications. 
 
4. Due to the above mentioned mandatory provisions for AHU, UPS and ICU 
connectivity, a partial rework of the floor plan and drawings was extremely vital and 
indispensable. Only the vital and necessary changes were incorporated. 
 
1.14.3 At present, al l 30 Nos Modular OTs have been completed in all respect and are fully 
functional. The works awarded to all the 04 packages of AIIMS Jodhpur have already been 
completed. 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.14.4 The Committee would like to draw the attentio n of the Institute to the recent 
observation by the CAG in context of AIIMS Jodhpur, where it has mentioned about price 
escalation in violation of contract, repeated grant of time extension, release of payment 
despite poor workmanship, excess release of mo bilization advance and avoidable/extra 
contractual payments. The Committee is also of the view that replies of the Ministry are not at 
all acceptable and the difference between the original and the final cost cannot be considered 
beyond the purview of cost  escalation. From the information provided by the Ministry, it is 
evident that there has been cost overrun of Rs. 9.00 crore under package I and Rs. 18.00 crore 
under package II. Even if the cost of construction of these projects did not increase during th e 
staggered period of six years, it implies that cost evaluation/calculation was inflated to such a 
great extent in the initial stage itself. The Committee wonders as to how the original cost -
estimation of the projects was done. The Committee, therefore, s eeks reasons/explanation 
over the cost-estimation of the projects in all the four packages. 
 (Para 4.15 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.14.5 It is submitted that the work under package I and Package II AIIMS Jodhpur had been 
executed as per Good for Constru ction (GFC) drawings issued by the Design DPR. The 
increase in completion cost of Package-I is due to variations. These variations occurred due to 
erroneous BOQ and difference in BOQ & GFC drawings. There was no escalation clause 
existed in package I contr act agreement and hence accordingly no payment toward escalation 
had been allowed.  The sanction for package II was based on tendered BOQ cost only, the 
escalation to be paid as per in built clauses of contract was left out from the sanctioned cost, 
may be due to an oversight. The escalation had been allowed in package II as per contract 
agreement only after Financial Advisor AIIMS Jodhpur scrutiny & concurrence.  There has 
been saving in package III & package IV completion cost. The total project cost of all the four 
packages together is within permissible limits of 10%. 
 
1.14.6 The works were in progress so provisional extensions were granted to keep the 
contract alive without prejudice to the right of the government to levy compensation in 
accordance with the provisions under clause 2 of contract agreement and also as per provision 
of CPWD Works Manual.  The works had been executed as per approved drawings, 
specifications and contract agreement. The original cost estimation of all the four packages 
had been p repared by Design DPR consultant through in house consultant M/s HLL.  As has 
been apprised to the CAG, the additional mobilization advance was paid to the respective 
contractors due to financial crunch being faced by them. Several firms in the civil 
construction business were facing liquidity crunch during that period. 
 
1.14.7 It would be relevant to bring out here that the Government charged market rate interest 
from the contractors and hence the advance may not be viewed as a financial assistance. 
Further, the mobilisation advance including first mobilisation advance was sanctioned to 
contractors against a bank guarantee. The advances were recovered in full along with interest. 
It would also be a relevant consideration that this intervention did actually h elp in completion 

21 
 
of the Medical college package in the respective Institutes. The Ministry might have landed 
up with contractual complications and incomplete works as has actually happened with 
respect to many other packages, if the Ministry had not suppo rted the contractors facing the 
financial crunch. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.14.8 The Committee, further, observes that under package III and package IV, there has 
been time overrun of approximately three years. The Committee feels that the delayed 
execution of the projects in turn, has severely hampered the healthcare services to the patients 
during this period. Such delays have impaired the capacity of the Institute to provide the 
envisaged levels of treatment, health care and medical education. Th e Committee desires the 
Ministry to assess the genuine reasons for delay in the execution of the projects under 
construction and apprise the Committee in this regard. The Ministry must conduct detailed 
site investigation, hold regular meetings and formulat e effective monitoring mechanism to 
ensure that the project is managed efficiently after meticulous scheduling of work. 
 (Para 4.17 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.14.9 The observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for 
future guidance. The delay in completion of Package -III and Package-IV were mainly due to 
non – availability of work front from Package -I & Package -II. However, the institute 
functioning was not hampered as the required engineering services under package III & IV 
were made available in the completed physical infrastructure from 2012 onwards. As of now, 
package – III & package IV works have been completed as brought out in the following table: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.14.10 The Committee calls upon the Ministry to expedite the process of granting 
necessary approvals for the construction of proposed accommodation facilities. The Ministry 
may approve the Advanced Centres for Transplant, Oncology, Cardiac Sciences, Neuro 
Sciences and Ophthalmology, Department of Biostatics, Department of Bio -technology only 
after opti mum utilization of existing infrastructure and ensuring availability of adequate 
human resources. The Committee is of the view that the establishment of advance centers 
should only be considered when the Institute achieves at least 50% of the OPD footfall of 
AIIMS Delhi subject to approval by CIB. However, the Committee would like to emphasize 
to undertake expansion of School of Public Health and a Dharmshala for the relatives of the 
patients admitted at AIIMS, Jodhpur. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to ensure 
S.No. Package Status of Work  Date of Completion as per Current 
Progress 
1 Package- I 100% completed 
2 Package- II 100% completed 
3 Package- III 100% completed 
4 Package- IV 100% completed 

22 
 
completion and optimum utilization of the originally envisaged projects in a time bound 
manner before approving any new project. 
 (Para 4.19 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.14.11 The observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee reg arding 
starting advanced centres etc. has been noted for future guidance. As per recommendations of 
the committee, the matter of initiating any new project was taken up in the 3 rd CIB meeting 
and appropriately conveyed to all AIIMS.  Each proposal for Advanced Centre is examined in 
the SFC and GB meeting of the respective Institutes. The Institutes have been sensitized about 
the observations/recommendations of the Committee. Further, all investment proposals above 
Rs.100 crores are also brought before the Ce ntral Institute Body (CIB). However, as advised 
by the Committee, the various proposals regarding establishment of Advanced Centres will be 
brought before the CIB for consideration, approval. 
 
1.15 Procurement of Medical Equipment 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.15.1 The Committee appreciates the role played by the Assessment Committee in 
procurement of medical equipment. However, the Committee is constrained to note that no 
separate analysis has been done for the procurement of equipment, thus indicating  that the 
equipment have been purchased without analysing the cost of the equipment vis -à-vis its 
actual utility. The Committee is of the view that procurement of equipment without proper 
cost-benefit analysis may result in underutilization/non -utilization/ duplication of equipment 
and procurement of equipment at higher prices. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the 
Institute/Ministry that proper cost -benefit analysis must be done by the Assessment 
Committee before the procurement of the equipment so t hat the utility of the equipment is 
explicit commensuration to its cost leading of effective delivery to health services. This 
analysis should form the part of the procurement process. The Committee also reiterates its 
observation made in context of AIIMS,  Rishikesh (para 3.26) for the procurement of da -vinci 
robotic arm. The Committee also recommends that the Assessment Committee must go into 
the details of reasons for proprietary/ single bid purchases and submit a status Report to the 
Committee along with a quarterly update on the usage of da-vinci robotic arm. 
 (Para 4.22 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.15.2 The observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for  
future guidance. As the institute is being established, the procurement of medical equipment 
is being done for the first time and is in line with usual equipment available in similar 
departments across other similar INIs. No formal cost -benefit analysis has been done for 
procurement of medical equipment. However, whenever depa rtment requests for an 
equipment, it does an internal exercise regarding its requirement / essentiality patient care. 
The assessment committee, then thoroughly evaluates the cost justification, the proposed 

23 
 
benefit for healthcare and a proper justification  for expenditure over other competing 
requirements of other departments. It is only after a thorough deliberation & discussion that 
the assessment committee approves the purchase of each and every equipment.  However, the 
institute wishes to put on record t hat the other AIIMS were established with a mandate to 
establish a centre of excellence in healthcare and to reduce the workload on AIIMS Delhi. 
The recommendation that high -end equipment should only be limited to AIIMS Delhi goes 
against the mandate of th e new AIIMS and is likely to be counterproductive by stymieing the 
future growth of the institution. Till date 104 robotic surgeries have been done in the Institute. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.15.3 The Committee is anguished to observe the delay in installation of equipment on the 
account of procrastination in the construction of new OTs. This is a peculiar situation when 
equipment has been purchased without ascertaining a place for its installation. The Committee 
believes that delay in installation of equipment may lead to expiry of guarantee/warranty of 
the equipment, service period. The Committee, thus, recommends that equipment should be 
procured only when space for their installation is ready so as to avoid undue delay in the 
installation and allay the fear of expiry of guarantee/warrantee of the equipment. Not just this, 
equipment should not be allowed to remain idle / unutilized. The Committee, further, 
recommends that the Ministry should expedite the process of construction of new OTs 
immediately so that the installation of procured equipment is ensured at the earliest. 
 (Para 4.24 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.15.4 The observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted for  
future guidance. Anaesthesia work stations pending installation (HLL/PCD/PMSSY/AIIMS-
II/03/14-15/7344) were received at AIIMS Jodhpur in January 2018 and OT table for CTVS 
department (HLL/PCD/PMSSY/AIIMS -II/21/15-16/6428) in March 2016. The procurement 
process for the above medical equipment was done by M/ s HLL Life Care Ltd. based on the 
directions of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for all the new AIIMS including 
AIIMS, Jodhpur way back in 2014 -2015 and 2015 -2016 respectively. AIIMS, Jodhpur 
ensures that the procured instruments are installed pr omptly and in time as soon as the 
site/user department is ready for installation. 
 
1.15.5 It is also stated that the delays in construction also adversely impacted the equipment 
delivery schedule leading to delays in supply and installations of equipment's . The concerns 
highlighted in the CAG report have been noted. In fact, realizing the problems of delays in 
installation of equipment's, since 2016 the procurement orders have been synchronized with 
progress of construction and progress of manpower recruitm ent. The human resource has also 
been appointed in almost all cases. Presently, there are hardly any cases where the installation 
of medical equipment's is being delayed or the same is lying unused.  Guarantee/ warranty and 
service period usually starts fro m the date of installation of machines/ medical equipment. 
Hence, it will not affect the guarantee/ warranty period. AIIMS, Jodhpur is committed to early 
installation of procured equipment and the same will be done as soon as the new OTs is ready 

24 
 
for use.  As regards, Procurement done by AIIMS Jodhpur, it is informed that the institute 
procured the equipment only when the required expertise, adequate space and patient load 
was there. Both the items have been installed, Details are as below: 
 
S. 
No. 
Item NOA No Quantity Supplier Remarks / Status 
1 Anaesthesia 
Workstation 
with monitor 
and ventilator 
HLL/PCD/P
MSSY/AII
MS-
II/03/14-
15/7344 
 
5 
Drager Medical 
India Pvt. Ltd. 
All Anaesthesia workstations 
with monitor and ventilators 
are already installed during 
July-19 
2 OT Table -
Electro 
Hydraulic 
HLL/PCD/P
MSSY/AII
MS-
II/21/15-
16/6428 
 
1 
Bet Medical The OT Table -Electro 
Hydraulic is already installed 
during April- 2019 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.15.6 The Committee understands that AIIMS, Jodhpur is meant for t he needy and poor 
patients requiring tertiary health care facilities  where quality of equipment can be lifesaving 
for the patients. The Committee, however, observes that since basic equipment like OT Light 
System, Laparoscopic Set, Suction Machine, Multipa ra Monitor and many others are easily 
available with European and also with Indian manufacturers. The procurement of these 
medical equipment with USFDA certification should have been resorted to only in the rarest 
of circumstances, after ensuring, in writi ng, that no alternative with CE/BIS certification is 
available. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for procurement of the above 
mentioned devices with USFDA certification when equivalent quality and lower price 
CE/BIS certified equipment were available. 
(Para 4.29 of the Report) 
 
1.15.7 The Committee is of the considered view that procurement of equipment with BIS 
certification will encourage companies to manufacture their products in India and also 
increase their investment. This will also  contribute to ―Make in India‖, programme of the 
Government of India to promote domestic manufacturers. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends to the Ministry to issue strict directions to all AIIMS like institutions to procure 
equipment with wider certification standards so as to promote competitive pricing and also to 
encourage ―Make in India‖ scheme. 
 (Para 4.30 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.15.8 It has been submitted by AIIMS Jodhpur that the OT Lights, Laparoscopic sets, 
suction machines for operation t heatres, multipara monitors etc are high end equipment and 
are critical components towards providing quality care especially in Intensive Care Units, 
Operation Theatres and for emergency services. Especially, All India Institute of Medical 

25 
 
Sciences, Jodhpur, being an apex tertiary care Institution in the country, has the mandate to 
provide the best healthcare to the needy population being served by it and never attempts to 
dilute the patient care being provided to them by procuring substandard equipment. Regarding 
the use of USFDA, the technical committee evaluated the requirement for quality 
certifications and used USFDA only in following circumstances –  
 
1.  Required circumstances on advice of technical committee. 
 
2. The committee is of the opinion that optimal quality of medical equipment will be diluted 
in case of utilizing any other quality certification. 
 
 3. Or in cases where adequate indigenous medical device certifications have not been laid 
down for a particular medical equipment in India. 
 
1.15.9 It may also be mentioned here that the Ministry vide OM dated 20.02.2018 has issued 
guidelines for adopting the BIS standards also as an option to bidders, wherever available, and 
since then procurement is being made accordingly. The Ministry has already initiated action 
in this regard. Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide letter dated 7 th May, 
2018 to Director General, Bureau of Indian Standards requested formulation of specifications 
for all the commonly procured medical equipment to pro mote ‗Make in India‘ policy of the 
Government of India. Bureau of Indian Standards has already started creation of BIS 
standards for Medical Equipment and Devices. As per information available with the Ministry 
around standardization list for around 1000 medical devices have almost been completed. 
 
1.16 Super Speciality Services 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.16.1 The Committee is displeased to note that three Departments i.e. Medical 
Gastroenterology, Medical Oncology and Nuclear Medicine are not functio nal at AIIMS, 
Jodhpur. These Departments are important branches of medicine and are indispensable part of 
any Institute providing health care services to the people. The Committee would like the 
Institute to make these Departments functional without much procrastination. 
 (Para 4.38 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.16.2 Department of Medical Gastroenterology, Medical Oncology and Nuclear Medicine 
are functional at AIIMS Jodhpur. The Current faculty strength (Without APS) in these 
departments are as follows- 
 
Name of 
Department 
Post Sanctione
d 
Filled Vacant Remarks 
Medical 
Gastroenterology 
Professor 1 0 1  
Additional Professor 1 1 0  

26 
 
 
1.16.3 Regular faculty recruitment drives to recruit faculty members in vari ous departments 
is ongoing including Medical Gastroenterology, Medical Oncology and Nuclear Medicine. 
The Current status (for year 2024) of OPD and IPD in these departments are mentioned 
hereunder- 
Sr. No. Name of Department OPD IPD 
01 Medical Gastroenterology 26450 816 
02 Medical Oncology  21397 12487 
03 Nuclear Medicine 1003 NA 
 
1.17 Medical Education 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.17.1 The Committee notes that in AIIMS, Jodhpur there has been 100% admissions in 
MBBS and nursing courses. Meanwhile, the number of seats in PG course has increased from 
56 to 114 in the year 2018. However, out of 114 seats, only 84 seats have been filled up. The 
Ministry has not furnished reasons to the Committee as to why the remaining PG course seats 
could not be fille d up. The Committee would like the Ministry to furnish a note apprising 
reasons for not filling up of PG course seats along with steps taken to address faculty shortage 
and other benchmarks required for a Medical college of AIIMS standard. 
 (Para 4.44 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.17.2 In July 2024 session for post -graduate students (MD/MS/MDS/DM/MCh), 121 seats 
were sanctioned and 100 percent seats were filled after counselling at AIIMS, Jodhpur.  
Presently, for January 2025 session, 133 PG (MD/MS/MDS/DM/ MCh) seats were advertised, 
out of which 84 seats have been filled till now and for remaining seats the counselling is in 
process.   
 
S. No. Department Open Seats Filled Vacant* 
1 Anesthesiology & Critical Care(MD) 12 8 4 
2 Anatomy(MD) 1 0 1 
Associate Professor 1 0 1  
Assistant Professor 1 1 0  
Medical 
Oncology 
Professor 2 0 2  
Additional Professor 2 0 2  
Associate Professor 2 0 2  
Assistant Professor 2 1 1  
Nuclear Medicine 
Professor 1 1 0  
Additional Professor 1 0 1  
Associate Professor 1 1 0  
Assistant Professor 2 1 1  

27 
 
3 Biochemistry(MD) 2 2 0 
4 Community Medicine(MD) 5 2 3 
5 Dermatology & Venereology (MD) 3 3 0 
6 Emergency Medicine(MD) 4 4 0 
7 Family Medicine(MD) 3 0 3 
8 Forensic Medicine and Toxicology(MD) 2 0 2 
9 General Medicine(MD) 4 4 0 
10 General Surgery(MS) 4 4 0 
11 Microbiology(MD) 3 1 2 
12 Nuclear Medicine(MD) 2 2 0 
13 Obstetrics & Gynecology(MD) 6 6 0 
14 Ophthalmology(MS) 4 4 0 
15 Orthopedics(MS) 4 4 0 
16 Otorhinolaryngology (MS) 2 2 0 
17 Pediatrics(MD) 5 4 1 
18 Pathology(MD) 4 3 1 
19 Pharmacology(MD) 3 1 2 
20 Physiology(MD) 2 2 0 
21 PMR(MD) 1 1 0 
22 Psychiatry(MD) 4 3 1 
23 Radiology(MD) 5 5 0 
24 Transfusion Medicine & BloodBank (MD) 1 0 1 
25 Dentistry- Endodontics & Conservative Dentistry(MDS) 0 0 0 
26 Dentistry-Oral & Maxillo facial Surgery(MDS) 0 0 0 
27 Dentistry-Orthodontics &Dent facial Orthopedics(MDS) 0 0 0 
TOTAL 86 65 21 
 
*Counselling for this session is going on 
 
S.No. Course Name Open Seats Filled Vacant* 
1 Critical Care Medicine(DM) 3 1 2 
2 Burns and Plastic Surgery(M.Ch) 2 1 1 
3 Cardiology(DM) 3 1 2 
4 Cardiothoracic &Vascular Surgery(M.Ch) 2 0 2 
5 Interventional Radiology(DM) 4 4 0 
6 Endocrinology and Metabolism(DM) 2 2 0 
7 Forensic Pathology(DM) 0 0 0 
8 Gastroenterology(DM) 0 0 0 
9 Infectious Diseases(DM) 4 0 4 
10 Medical Oncology(DM) 1 0 1 
11 Neonatology(DM) 3 3 0 
12 Nephrology(DM) 2 1 1 
13 Neurology(DM) 2 0 2 

28 
 
14 Neurosurgery(M.Ch) 3 1 2 
15 PediatricSurgeryM.Ch 0 0 0 
16 Medical Genetis DM 2 0 2 
17 Pediatric Pulmonology (DM) 1 1 0 
18 Haematopathology (DM) 1 1 0 
19 Clinical Pharmacology DM 1 0 1 
20 Pulmonary Critical Care & Sleep Medicine (DM) 3 1 2 
21 Surgical GastroenterologyM.Ch 0 0 0 
22 Surgical Oncology(M.Ch) 2 2 0 
23 Trauma Surgery &Critical Care(M.Ch) 2 0 2 
24 Urology (M.Ch) 2 0 2 
Total 45 19 26 
     
1 Hospital Administration (MD) 2 0 2 
 
*Counselling for this session is going on 
 
1.17.3 AIIMS Jodhpur takes its responsibility for training PG students very seriously, 
offering a well - structured program across preclinical, preclinical, and clinical department s. 
This broad-based and flexible approach ensures that students receive the essential education 
needed to meet the healthcare demands of our country. PG students at AIIMS Jodhpur receive 
training that is adapted to the evolving needs of society, equipping them to effectively assume 
the responsibilities of various service roles in healthcare.  In line with its mandate, AIIMS 
Jodhpur adopts a holistic approach to PG student training, upholding  the highest standards of 
teaching, research, and patient care. Our goal is to ensure that our institution ranks alongside 
other Institutes of National Importance, such as AIIMS  Delhi, PGI, and JIPMER, and we 
continuously strive to achieve this. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.17.4 The Committee apprehends that inadequat e faculty as well as limited clinical training 
could be one of the reasons for PG seats not being filled up in the year 2018. The Committee 
believes that exposure of students to proper clinical training would help enriching their skills 
and experience in m edical education. The Committee, therefore, expects the Institute to 
improve the level of its faculty as well as clinical standards and ensure that from next session, 
henceforth, that all the PG seats are filled up. The Committee also recommends to the 
Institute to start the newly approved PG courses after assessing availability of adequate 
faculty and requisite patient load. The Committee has been apprised of a abysmally low level 
of clinical exposure to PG students in AIIMS, Jodhpur specifically MD (Anaes thesiology). 
The Committee recommends that a quarterly status note be submitted to the Committee on the 
clinical exposure of PG Students (discipline -wise) so as to ensure that educational standards 
are not diluted. 
 (Para 4.46 of the Report) 

29 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.17.5 AIIMS Jodhpur has made significant strides in its postgraduate (PG) medical 
education program, demonstrating a strong commitment to providing high -quality education 
and training to its students. For the July 2024 session, all 121 sanctioned seats fo r PG courses 
(MD/MS/MDS/DM/MCh) were filled following the counselling process. For the current 
January 2025 session, 133 PG seats were advertised, and as of now, 84 seats have been filled, 
with the remaining seats still being allocated through ongoing coun selling. In addition to 
expanding the number of seats in various broad and super specialty courses, AIIMS Jodhpur 
has also introduced new PG courses, including Post -doctoral fellowship courses, which have 
been well-received by students pursuing them with e nthusiasm. AIIMS Jodhpur is committed 
to providing PG students with a well -rounded education, offering a comprehensive and 
structured program that spans preclinical, preclinical, and clinical departments. This broad -
based, flexible approach equips students  with the essential skills and knowledge required to 
meet the healthcare demands of the country. The institution places great emphasis on training 
that aligns with society's evolving healthcare needs, ensuring students are well -prepared for 
roles in health care service delivery. Students at AIIMS Jodhpur gain extensive clinical 
exposure through exposure to a wide range of cases and diseases that they encounter during 
their time at the institute. 
 
1.17.6 With a high patient volume across both outpatient and e mergency services, AIIMS 
Jodhpur offers PG students a robust clinical and academic training experience. The hospital 
sees approximately 5,000 patients daily in the OPD, with around 250 patients admitted to 
trauma and emergency care each day. The institutio n typically admits over 200 patients daily 
in the inpatient department (IPD) and performs an average of 33 major surgeries each day, 
totalling nearly 18,500 major surgeries in the past year. AIIMS Jodhpur also manages 140 
ICU beds dedicated to the care of critically ill patients and managed by the Department of 
Anaesthesia and Critical Care. These high levels of clinical activity ensure that PG students, 
especially MD (Anaesthesiology), receive substantial hands -on experience, allowing them to 
develop the skills needed for real-world medical practice. In addition to clinical exposure, the 
PG Orientation Program at AIIMS Jodhpur spans one and a half months and aims to offer a 
holistic learning experience. Students participate in training sessions on research 
methodology, biostatistics, and the integration of artificial intelligence (AI) in medicine. The 
institution also hosts a PG Inaugural Ceremony for newly joined residents, which includes 
motivational guest speakers to inspire and guide the students as they  embark on their 
postgraduate journey. 
 
1.17.7 The recruitment of faculty at AIIMS Jodhpur is an ongoing process, with a focus on 
maintaining the highest standards of quality. As of now, the institution employs 220 medical 
faculty members and 43 nursing fa culty members. However, some senior faculty positions 
remain vacant in certain clinical departments, due to a lack of applicants. Despite these 
challenges, AIIMS Jodhpur assures the committee that it continues to work diligently to fill 
these faculty posit ions and improve its academic infrastructure.  AIIMS Jodhpur continues to 
be a leading institution for postgraduate medical education, providing students with a 
dynamic and well -rounded experience that prepares them for the challenges of medical 

30 
 
practice. The institution remains committed to its goals of enhancing the quality and scope of 
medical education and training, ensuring the best outcomes for its students and the healthcare 
system as a whole. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.17.8 The Committee opine s that an effective and relevant training module expands the 
capacity building of the medical and nursing students and it therefore, plays an important role 
in their career development. Clinical trainings help the healthcare professionals to better 
understand the subject and prepare them for the challenges they will face in their career. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Institute must start clinical training programmes 
for the students and ensure that there is adequate faculty at the Institute to support these 
programmes. 
 (Para 4.47 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.17.9 AIIMS Jodhpur is well -equipped to offer a comprehensive and robust clinical and 
academic training experience for its students. With the high patient volume, both in OPD and 
emergency services, along with significant numbers of major surgeries and ICU beds, the 
clinical exposure for Postgraduate students seems extensive. Approximately 5,000 patients 
visit the OPD daily, with around 250 patients presenting in the trauma and emergency  
departments each day. The daily IPD admissions typically exceed 200 patients, and an 
average of 33 major surgical interventions are carried out each day. In the past year, nearly 
18,500 major surgeries were performed. Additionally, we have 140 ICU beds de dicated to 
managing critically ill patients. The infrastructure and laboratory facilities are state of the art 
for training PG students in all aspects and crucial in helping students build a strong 
foundation. This kind of exposure is vital in ensuring tha t students are well -prepared for the 
challenges of medical practice. 
 
1.17.10 The structured programs like the "Preparation for Interns" (PRINT) program 
and PG Orientation Program for one -and-a-half-month period, also demonstrate a clear effort 
to provide a holistic learning experience, including aspects like research methodology, 
biostatistics, and AI integration. Additionally, we organize a PG Inaugural Ceremony for 
newly joined residents, featuring a guest speaker to motivate and inspire our Post graduat e 
students. Faculty recruitment at AIIMS Jodhpur is progressing at a fast pace, with regular 
hiring processes that maintain a strong focus on the quality of selections. However, despite 
repeated efforts, senior faculty positions in certain clinical departments remain vacant due to a 
lack of response from applicants. Nonetheless, AIIMS Jodhpur assures the Hon‘ble 
Committee that every possible effort is being made to fill these vacancies, and the Institute 
will continue to work diligently to address this issue. 
 
 
 

31 
 
1.18 Status of Operation Theatres 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.18.1 The Committee is dismayed to note that 3 major and 2 minor OTs in Trauma OT 
complex do not have medical gas pipe line at present and the supply of gas is ensured by 
using Cylinders. The Committee is of the view that MGPS is a life -supporting element crucial 
to life of a patient. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to ensure that all 
the OTs are equipped with MGPS and make them fully equipped with the latest equipm ent 
without any delay especially in trauma complex so as to cater to the critical patients. 
 (Para 4.49 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.18.2 The Medical gas pipeline system has been installed in trauma OT complex and it has 
been made functional. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.18.3 The Committee during the course of its study visit to Jodhpur found that not a single 
modular OT was functioning. The 9 major OTs and 3 Minor OTs were make shift OTs in the 
OPD blocks and not were in consonance with the original drawings submitted by the DDPRC 
which had been duly approved. These OT designs were arbitrarily changed on the pretext that 
there were designing faults. The Committee has been further apprised that there was no 
provision for AHU in the original drawing. Th e Committee is constrained to observe that the 
matter was not taken up with the DDPRC and nor was it penalized or its contract terminated. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry against the 
DDPRC and also whether the Mi nistry had provided for the provision of Modular OTs in the 
initial design itself. The Committee is of the opinion that this negligence has led to severe 
delays with great financial implications in the form of arbitration claims submitted by the 
contractor L&T in this case besides creating structural stability concerns. The Committee 
strongly recommends for a thorough probe in the entire matter including fixing responsibility. 
The Committee would also like to be apprised whether this has resulted in any cos t/time 
overruns besides creating grounds for arbitration and submit the same to the Committee 
within three months of submission of this report. 
 (Para 4.52 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.18.4 The work of modular OT was delayed in want of tender finalizatio n from HLL. 
However, on arrival of modular OT agency M/s. MDD at site, space/site were made available 
to them and accordingly necessary changes in civil work. Presently 34 Modular OTs are 
functional at AIIMS, Jodhpur. 
 
 
 

32 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.18.5 The Committee also recommends AIIMS Jodhpur to expedite the construction of OTs 
in a time bound manner and reduce the waiting time period for patients awaiting surgical 
procedures thereby reducing their distress and out of pocket expenditure. The Commit tee 
would also like the Institute to submit a quarterly report on the number of procedures done per 
OT per day in order to gauge the optimum utilization of the functional OTs. 
 (Para 4.54 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.18.6 The observations / recommendatio n of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted  for 
future guidance.  The scheduled operation theatre timings of the functional OTs are from 8 
A.M. to 5.00 P.M. However, the OT timings regularly over  shoots the scheduled time. The 
emergency operation theatre is b eing run round the clock.  Regarding the number of 
procedures per OT, it is pertinent to point out that number of cases being done in an operation 
theatre is dependent on the nature and complexity of cases with the more complex cases 
taking a much longer ti me. However, it is informed that total 9687 surgical procedures were 
performed at AIIMS Jodhpur in 2018. 
S. No. Time Period 
Total Nos. procedures 
Major  Minor 
1 Jan-24 1482 1635 
2 Feb-24 1474 2454 
3 Mar-24 1384 2277 
4 Apr-24 1453 2451 
5 May-24 1647 9129 
6 Jun-24 1506 7363 
7 Jul-24 1731 10556 
8 Aug-24 1395 8800 
9 Sep-24 1639 10377 
10 Oct-24 1592 10562 
11 Nov-24 1557 8506 
12 Dec-24 1636 8733 
Total for Year - 2024 101339 
 
1.19 Status of ICUs, Trauma & Emergency Services and Wards 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.19.1 The Committee observes that availability of 17 ventilators against 19 beds would not 
cater in case of 100 percent occupancy at any given time. Even 100 percent bed occupancy 
with mere 19 beds in the ICUs in normal circumstances wou ld not cater to emergency 
situations because all units would be fully occupied. The Committee recommends that the 

33 
 
number of bed in ICU be increased to accommodate all critically ill patients visiting the 
hospital. The Committee also notes that emergency services have not yet started on 24x7x365 
days basis and only referred cases are being taken inspite of the fact that the trauma building 
was completed in 2014 -15. The Committee however appreciates the integrated approach of 
the Institute to have a synergy with the Indian army so as to cater to emergency situations and 
recommends the institute to start 24 X 7 X 365 days' trauma/emergency care. 
 (Para 4.59 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.19.2 Intensive Care Unit (ICU ) is fully functional and occupied  with 160 b eds. Trauma & 
Emergency is operational 24*7*365 and catering both adult and pediatric patients. The 
Trauma & Emergency Department has experienced a 72% increase in patient load, from 
25,240 in 2019 to 89,707 in 2024. To address this surge, a 12 -bed Trauma High-Dependency 
Unit (HDU) was established in June 2024, providing critical intensive care for major trauma 
cases and significantly improving patient outcomes. As a result, patient referrals have been 
reduced to negligible levels since 2024. Additionally, the Paediatric Emergency Unit is also 
efficiently managing all complex paediatric emergency referrals, ensuring comprehensive 
care for critically ill children. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.19.3 The Committee finds the figure of 684 functional beds, 70%  of the total sanctioned 
bed strength (960) in 20 different wards functional at the Institute. The lower number of 
functional beds and even further lower level of bed occupancy reflects poor perception of 
healthcare services being provided by the Institute . The Committee is concerned that existing 
beds are insufficient to cater to the growing health needs of the people. Such inadequacies 
have forced people across socio -economic strata to unaffordable private healthcare facilities. 
The Institute needs to urg ently increase the bed occupancy by improving its perception to 
address the health services for the people of the region. 
 (Para 4.61 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.19.4 The sanctioned bed strength of AIIMS Jodhpur is 960 beds. However, the institute is 
operating with 1046 functional beds to cater to the needs of the patients. The present bed 
occupancy is more than 90%. IPD  admissions have increased to 60% from 31212 in 2019 to 
78257 in 2024 with significant rises observed in all the departments. 
1.20 Governing Body 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.20.1 The Committee during its deliberations and visit to AIIMS, Jodhpur found that the 
meetings of the Governing Body at the Institute were not being held on a regular basis. The 
Members of the Governing Body are not consulted while taking decisions during the meeting 
and all the decisions are taken by few incumbents. The Committee is of the firm view that the 

34 
 
meetings of the Governing Body at the Institute should be conducted on time and 
participation of all membe rs of the body should be ensured while taking important decisions. 
All AIIMS like institutions should strive to conduct regular meetings and participation of all 
members be encouraged while taking important decisions of the Institute. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that AIIMS, Jodhpur must give due importance to all the Members 
of the Governing Body while taking any important decision to make it democratically 
decentralized. All out efforts must be made for strengthening of Governing Body and other 
Committees for better functioning of AIIMS, Jodhpur. 
(Para 4.68 of the Report) 
 
1.20.2 The Committee is of the considered opinion that autonomy and accountability need to 
be balanced. The Committee welcomes the appointment of the Presidents of the Institut e and 
the constitution of the CIB at the Central level. This will ensure a sense of responsibility in 
the decision making process. 
 (Para 4.69 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.20.3 The observation/ recommendation of committee has been noted for future guidan ce. 
The Central Government had constituted the Institute Body through vide notification dated 
18th May, 2020. Subsequently, Governing Body and other important committees were 
constituted through vide Order No. 2363 dated 31/08/2020 that facilitated holding  of Institute 
Body and Governing Body meetings on regular basis, whenever required.  It is further noted 
that 09th Meeting of the Governing Body of the Institute was held on 07th November, 2024. 
 
D. AIIMS PATNA 
 
 
1.21 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.21.1 The Committee expresses its deep concern that the percentage of underutilisation with 
respect to total Grants-in-aid of AIIMS, Patna has been 64.72% in 2012 -13, 37.98% in 2013 -
14, 47.15% in 2014-15, 32.33% in 2015-16, 42.86% in 2016-17 and 62.61% in 2017-18. The 
closing balance was as high as Rs. 195.95 crore for the year 2015 -16 and 208.70 crore for the 
year 2016-17 that express low absorption capacity of implementing agencies. The Committee 
also observes that in the year 2014 -15, the percentage of utilization under GiA (capital) was 
18.73% which further decreased to 12.93% in 2015 -16. In 2016 -17, the opening balance 
under capital grants in aids was 140.73 crore implying that out of the total 161.63 crore 
allotted under GiA (Capital) on ly Rs 20.90 crore were spent in capital formation in 2015 -16. 
All these date speak volume of poor financial planning estimation and control execution of 
construction scheme. 
(Para 5.4 of the Report) 
 

35 
 
1.21.2 The Committee laments the fact that AIIMS Patna t hat is envisaged as an apex 
institute of medical learning and affordable tertiary health care has failed miserably in 
optimum utilization of its budget. The budgetary expenditure pattern of AIIMS Patna exposes 
the lackadaisical attitude of the Institute an d brings to the foreground the Institute‘s 
incompetency to use the financial resources to its fullest potential. This gross underutilisation 
of resources is a grave matter of concern especially when AIIMS Patna lags behind on many 
fronts and struggles to provide quality healthcare to the citizens. 
(Para 5.5 of the Report) 
 
1.21.3 The Committee takes cognizance of CAG‘s view on unutilized funds by AIIMS, Patna 
holds the Ministry equally responsible for the utter idling of funds and increase in capital 
costs. The Committee, in this connection, recommends that the Ministry should immediately 
develop a mechanism for monitoring the budget estimates and ensure utilization of funds by 
AIIMS Patna and other new AIIMS so that obstacles and hindrances, if any, are ide ntified at 
an early stage and the cost and time overrun are avoided, while implementing the project 
under PMSSY. 
 (Para 5.7 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.21.4 The main reason for under -utilisation of funds was delay in construction work related 
with hospi tal. The delays in construction also adversely impacted the equipment delivery 
schedule leading to delays in supply and installations of equipment.  Procurement of medical 
equipment‘s was also got delayed due to non -availability of faculty for most of the 
departments, leading to under -utilization of fund under GIA -capital. Substantial progress 
towards utilization of funds was made in the year 2017 -18. The unutilized balance has been 
brought down to Rs.31.37 Cr (Capital) as on March, 2018. Attempts have been made by 
Ministry to further fine -tune the releases using PFMS so as to maintain a fund balance of 
about 03 months‘ requirement.  The utilisation of funds and tracking of actual expenditure is 
being regularly monitored by the Ministry and depending on the ut ilisation, the funds are 
released. The Institute and the Ministry are taking necessary action for optimum utilization of 
funds and for effective financial monitoring mechanism.  All packages including package –I, 
II, III & IV are already completed. The pres ent progress under various packages of civil 
construction work is as below:- 
 
Sl. 
No Package Status of Work  
Date of Completion as per 
Current Progress 
1 Package-I 100% Completed 
2 Package-II 100% Completed (on 23.05.22) 
3 Package-III 100% Completed 
4 Package-IV 100% Completed (on 28.02.22) 
 

36 
 
1.22 STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION WORK 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.22.1 The Committee deprecates the slow pace of construction activities at AIIMS Patna. As 
per the information given by AIIMS Patna, the constructio n of hospital complex under 
Package II was originally deemed to be completed by 10th September, 2012 but even after 6 
years, the project is incomplete. Under package III and IV, the work of electrical services and 
Estate services were to be completed by De cember, 2012 and February, 2013 respectively but 
it is yet to be completed. The Committee wills to attribute the delay in execution of 
construction projects to mismanagement on the part of AIIMS, Patna. 
 (Para 5.9 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.22.2 It is submitted that the main reasons for the delay in construction was due to 
preparation of erroneous Bills of Quantities (BOQ), delays in issue of drawings by design 
consultants and delays in clearance of deviations, extra items and substituted items by Proje ct 
Consultant. Slow progress of work by contractors and abandonment of works by project 
consultants engaged initially were the other reasons for delay.  Later on, the MoH&FW 
engaged M/s HLL as the Project Consultant which helped in picking up the pace of 
construction.  At present, it is nearing completion by end of January 2022. For monitoring the 
progress of the project, MoH&FW appointed Project Consultants M/s HITES for assisting in 
timely completion of the project.  All packages including package –I, II, III & IV are already 
completed. 
1.23 EXPANSION PROGRAM OF AIIMS PATNA 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.23.1 The Committee while scrutinizing the expenditure pattern of funds in AIIMS Patna 
finds that between 2013 and 2018, the Institute had unspent balance  under Grants -in-Aid 
Capital Head. The Committee understands that construction activities require substantial 
amount of funds and approval in advance, but at the same time the Committee cannot ignore 
the poor track record of the Institute wherein inordinat e delays have caused huge time and 
cost overrun under different packages of construction activities. The Committee is of the firm 
view that the demand for funds should be realistic and should also commensurate with the 
trend of utilization. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare must evaluate the demand of AIIMS Patna on realistic grounds and forward 
the same to the Ministry of Finance for consideration. 
 (Para 5.20 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.23.2 The present  progress under various packages of civil construction work is given 
below:- 

37 
 
Sl Package Status of Work  Date of Completion as per Current Progress 
1 Package-I 100% Completed 
2 Package-II 100% Completed (on 23.05.22) 
3 Package-III 100% Completed 
4 Package-IV 100% Completed  (on 28.02.22) 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.23.3 The Committee understands that land is critical for the expansion program of the 
institute. Therefore, the Committee urges upon the Ministry to take up the matter with the 
State Go vernment to provide the required amount of land to the Institute. The Committee 
while underlining the need for allocation of required funds to AIIMS Patna for infrastructure 
construction also advises the Ministry to hold regular review meetings to monitor the new 
construction projects so that the mistakes committed in the first phase of construction 
activities are not repeated at all costs. The Ministry should also carry out regular inspections 
and seek monthly report from the Institute on the status and progress of the projects. 
 (Para 5.21 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.23.4 The observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for  
future guidance. The Ministry has also taken up the various issues, as arose from time to time, 
with the S tate Governments in meetings, through D.O. letters to senior officials and also in 
the PMC meeting. The issues and hindrances were also flagged in the Ministerial level 
interactions with the States at the level of Hon‘ble Health & Family Welfare Minister a nd 
Hon‘ble Union Minister of State for Health & Family Welfare. 
1.24 PROCUREMENT OF MEDICAL EQUIPMENT 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.24.1 The Committee fails to understand that why even simple items such as museum jar 
and LED TV were procured through sin gle bid. The Committee notes that multiple bids were 
received in these two cases but were rejected on the basis of technical specifications. The 
Committee strongly feels that technical requirements should not be misused as a means to 
limit the number of bi ds or minimize competition as is evident by the data submitted by 
AIIMS Patna. The Committee recommends that the institute should clearly specify the 
minimum technical and financial requirements ensuring an equal and fair chance to all the 
bidders. 
 (Para 5.33 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.24.2 The observation/recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted for future 
guidance. It is submitted that the new procurement policy announced by Ministry in March 

38 
 
2017, clearly states that multiple vendor pa rticipation should be encouraged. Similar 
condition has also been incorporated in Agreement with Procurement Support Agency (PSA).  
Most of the Purchase is through M/s HLL -HITES (PSA)/GEM. The purchase made outside 
these mode, the tenders are published in C PPP/Tender wizard portal/Institute website to 
ensure enough/wider participation. However, tender which end up in single bid subject to 
evaluation by the Stores Purchase Committee (SPC) and disposed of accordingly as per the 
recommendation. The Stores Purch ase Committee is also in place to ensure the procurement 
is done in line with extant policy of Government of India (GFR 2017, Manual of procurement 
of Goods, etc). Usually single bids purchases are discouraged. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.24.3 The Com mittee also observes that the price at which the equipment were procured 
may not have been the best price as the Institute failed to hold a competitive procurement 
process. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the number of bidders, the reasons for  
the rejection of their proposal and the compliance proposal of the winning bidder in each case 
for procurement of museum Jar, LED TV, Co2 Laser, Carl Zesis OPMI Vario and 
Computerised Virtual Dissection Table. The Committee desires AIIMS Patna to submit a  
written technical evaluation summary for each case of proprietary/ single bid procurement till 
date to it within three months from the presentation of this Report. The Committee also 
recommends that the Director of the Institute should be made accountable for all cases of 
single bid/proprietary procurement wherever irregularities are reported /observed in future. 
 (Para 5.34 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.24.4 The observation/recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted for future  
guidance. As des ired by the Hon'ble Committee, the details of bidders, the reasons for 
rejection of their proposal, etc. in each case of procurement of the items are given separately 
in the Annexure-V(d). 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.24.5 The Committee is shocked at the audacity of the Institute by its claims to have 
purchased beds with cushions, equipment for PMR Department, two battery operated hand 
drill accessories etc with US FDA certification. As per the information submitted by AIIMS 
Patna, it procured 250 fowl er beds with cushion at a price of Rs.1.1 crore with an extra 
Comprehensive Maintenance Contract (CMC) price of Rs 24 lakhs, two battery operated hand 
drill accessories at Rs. 46 lakhs with CMC price of 7.9 lakhs, equipment for PMR Department 
at Rs. 14 lakhs with CMC price of 4.6 lakh. This superfluous spending by AIIMS Patna raises 
serious concern over the lack of monitoring of the procurement Policy. The Committee 
recommends for an enquiry into the procurement of fowler beds with cushions as these are 
easily available with Indian manufacturers at a much lower price paid by AIIMS, Patna. The 
Committee senses large irregularities in the procurement process of the Institute and seeks a 
detailed probe of all the equipment that have been procured in the last tw o years. The 

39 
 
Committee desires AIIMS Patna to submit a detailed report on the same, within three months 
of the presentation of this report to the Parliament. 
 (Para 5.37 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.24.6 The observation/recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted for future 
guidance. A detailed report in this regard was sent separately earlier. The  details of 
Equipment procured in the last two years are shown separately in the Annexure -V(e). 
1.25 AVAILABILITY OF BEDS AT AIIMS PATNA 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.25.1 The Committee observes with deep concern that the numbers of beds in some 
important Departments are very low. The low bed strength in each Department also reflects 
the Institute's lack of preparedness in case of an unforeseen disaster/natural calamity. Even the 
distribution of beds for various Departments appears faulty. The Committee is surprised to 
observe that Urology Department has 5 beds but the Department is not yet functional in the 
Institute. This again highlights the In stitute's failure to make optimum utilization of the 
available resources. The Committee also notes that the number of patients in Ayush 
Department is comparatively low when compared to other Departments. The Committee 
therefore is of the opinion that the b eds under Ayush Department can be used for other 
Departments on a need basis. The Committee strongly recommends that AIIMS Patna should 
carry out a detailed assessment of the patient load in different Departments and accordingly 
carry out the distribution of beds in each Department. This will certainly help in better 
management of the wards and facilitate better bed occupancy in each Department. The 
Committee recommends that the construction activities should be expedited so that the 
sanctioned bed strength of 960 is achieved in the Institute at the earliest. 
 (Para 5.65 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.25.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for  
future guidance. Urology Department has currently 30 Functional beds. Total N o of 
sanctioned beds = 960, Total no of functional beds = 1234, The Occupancy Rate is 76.78 %. 
 
1.26 OTHER INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.26.1 The Committee is surprised to note that minor issues like non installation of 
centralized AC and procurement of equipment has stalled the progress of mortuary service in 
AIIMS Patna which is critical for preservation and forensic/pathological investigation of the 
dead body. AIIMS Patna, therefore, must accelerate the remaining work in the  Mortuary 
building and immediately place the proposal for inspection of the building. All equipment 

40 
 
must be procured and installed in time so that Mortuary Service is provided in time. AIIMS 
Patna should also ensure that the timeline for completion of Burn s & Plastic surgery 
Department is met and unwarranted delays do not hamper the functioning of the Department. 
 (Para 5.67 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.26.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for  
future guidance.  Mortuary services started form 08 January 2021.  Burn & Plastic Surgery 
Department in AIIMS is fully functional. A new burn Centre under CSR from NTPC is under 
construction. The building work (Civil, Elect, MEP) has 90 % completed. As per CPWD, the 
expected timeline for project completion is in April 2025. 
1.27 MEDICAL IMAGING MODALITIES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.27.1 The Committee is shocked at the long waiting period for Ultrasound, CT scan, and 
MRI OPD Cases. The Committee during its study visit to Patna also came across patients with 
waiting period as long as one year. The medical imaging facilities are fundamental for the 
correct diagnosis of any disease but such long waiting period render the whole medical care 
process futile and life threatening. The  Committee is not at all convinced by the plea of 
AIIMS Patna's management that shortage of MRI machines led to such long waiting period 
for MRI scans. The Committee also notes that AIIMS Patna on an average conducted only 5 
MRI per day, 2 Mammography and 18 CT scan which is very low when compared to the 
available infrastructure and manpower. The Committee believes that even with one MRI 
machine at its disposal, the Institute could have easily carried out more than twenty scans in 
one day as is being done i n other AIIMS and private hospitals. The grim data furnished by 
AIIMS Patna clearly reflects gross underutilization of the available resources and sheds light 
on the failure of the institute to work in its full capacity. The Committee during its earlier 
study visit observed that RIMS Imphal conducted 30 MRI scans per day on a very old 
machine and also carried out over 50 CT scans. The Committee desires a quarterly update 
from AIIMS Patna on the per day usage of MRI machine along with the daily pending cases . 
The Committee strongly recommends that the procurement of second MRI machine should 
only be done when the present MRI machine is optimally utilized. 
(Para 5.70 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.27.2 As per recent records, the following is the concerned data: 
CT Scan : We have 2 CT machines out of which 1 machine is in trauma centre which runs 
24x7 of the week and has no waiting period. An average of 90-100 cases is being done on this 
machine daily. The scans being done on this machine are non -contrast studies. This machine 
is running at maximum capacity. The second machine is in the indoor department. Contrast 
studies are done on this machine which takes longer time. Average number of cases done on 
this machine is 45 -50. There is no waiting period for admitt ed or emergency patients. For 

41 
 
OPD patients, Average waiting period is 2 months. This machine is running at optimal 
capacity. 
Mammography: There is no waiting period for mammography. Cases are done on average 
between 4 to 10 cases. Patients are served as they come with no waiting period. 
MRI: Average number of cases being done is 10 -11. By virtue of AIIMS Patna being the 
highest referral centre in the region, complex studies are being performed including  cases 
which need sedation/anaesthesia and these cases require longer turnover time. 
 
1.28 COMMUNITY OUTREACH SERVICES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.28.1 The Committee appreciates AIIMS Patna in its initiative of providing medical 
consultation through telecommunications and holding of medical camps in remot e areas 
which has benefited patients from far flung areas of the State. The Committee feels that 
AIIMS Patna has set an example for other AIIMS like Institutions for their initiative with 
respect to community outreach programs like telemedicine and accordi ngly recommends that 
other new AIIMS to start similar programs and mobile applications for their respective 
regions. 
 (Para 5.74 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.28.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted  for 
future guidance. 
1.29 GOVERNING BODY 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.29.1 The Committee strongly recommends that the meetings of the Governing body, 
Academic Committee and Standing Finance Committee should be held frequently to 
discharge its entrusted responsibilities. The Committee also notes that the course of action 
decided for some agenda in the first meeting of the Governing Body had not been 
implemented even after one year and was again taken up in the second meeting of the 
Governing Body. The Committee, therefore,  feels that the Ministry must devise a follow up 
plan for the agenda discussed in such meetings. The Ministry must ensure that the decisions 
of the Governing body/Academic Committee/Standing Finance Committees are speedily 
implemented at the ground level and undue delays are avoided. The Committee also urges the 
State Government of Bihar to play a more active role in making AIIMS Patna a centre of 
excellence in medical learning and healthcare treatment. 
 (Para 5.76 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.29.2 On th e basis of observations of the Committee the meetings of Governing Body, 
Academic Committee are held at regular intervals.  

42 
 
1.30 MONITORING MECHANISM 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.30.1 The Committee is of the considered view that the success of any proj ect lies in 
effective implementation and evaluation. State Project Monitoring Committee (State PMC) 
were entrusted with the responsibility to monitor the progress of new AIIMS in the State. This 
Committee was required to meet at least once in a quarter to review the progress of AIIMS. In 
the State of Bihar no such State project Monitoring Committee (State PMC) has been 
constituted and in the absence of the required mechanism, no meetings could be conducted. 
The Committee feels that the various issues plagui ng AIIMS Patna could have been easily 
solved had the concept of State PMC was implemented on ground. 
 (Para 5.77 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.30.2 It is mentioned here that the State level project monitoring mechanism has been got 
activated through inten se engagements with the State Governments for the new AIIMS  and 
upgradation works under Phase-III and later Phases works. Presently with respect to Phase III 
and later Phases works, Project Monitoring Group (PMG) meetings under the chairmanship of 
Chief Se cretary of respective State are being held to review progress and resolve State 
specific local issues. 
E. AIIMS RAIPUR 
1.31 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.31.1 The Committee observes with concern that the objectives of the PMSSY sche me are 
not being realized in AIIMS, Raipur because of massive underutilization of funds in the initial 
years. The utilization of the fund has constantly remained below 50 percent in all the years 
except for the year 2017 -18 where it was 56.19 percent. The Committee, further, observes 
despite the fact that there was no dearth of funds in the initial years of construction activities 
because of lack of absorption capacity of implementing agencies, technical problems and non-
availability of project consultants,  the construction work got delayed. The released funds 
under the head GIA (CCA) for two years i.e. 2015 -16 and 2016-17 were more than the funds 
sanctioned to the Institute. The main problem does not seem to be inadequate budget outlay 
but poor utilization of funds by the Institute. The Committee observes that the main reason for 
unspent funds was the slow progress of construction work. It is a matter of great concern and, 
therefore, requires introspection to assess the reasons for inability of the Institute  in judicious 
utilization of funds. 
 (Para 6.6 of the Report) 
 
 
 

43 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.31.2 Strict Monitoring has been implemented. The budget utilization has been significantly 
improved till 2023 -24. The updated position of expenditure (Utilization Certificate of F.Y. 
2023-24) is enclosed as Annexure – 6.6. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.31.3 The Committee believes that the under -utilization of plan outlays by the Institute can 
be attributed to the institutional and procedural bottlenecks in the process of imp lementation 
of planned activities. The Committee also take into cognizance the observation of the CAG 
Audit Report (2018) that pointed out the Ministry had not formulated any operational 
guidelines for PMSSY, thereby, lacking in overall framework for schem e implementation. 
Approval and adoption of ad-hoc approach in term of project planning and fund management, 
delay in selection of consultant led to delay in establishment of the AIIMS. The institute did 
not obtain clear title over the land provided by the State Government for construction of 
residential complex and some Departments and centre of Institutes, that left the institute open 
to further land disputes and encroachment. Needless to say, deficiencies in the planning 
process and poor financial managem ent in the Institute caused all these sorry state of affairs. 
The Committee is of the view that effective financial management along with prudent 
budgetary projection would have enabled optimum utilization of funds. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the  Institute to strengthen its financial management for optimum 
utilization of financial resources at the Institute. The Committee, further, recommends to the 
Institute to have effective monitoring and supervision over the implementing agencies so as to 
avoid underutilization and idling of funds. 
 (Para 6.7 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.31.4 Observation / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for  compliance. 
Document and clear title pertaining to land of main Hospital Complex and Residential 
Complex at Kabir Nagar are available with the Institute and the same have been provided to 
CAG Audit.  Importantly, there is no encroachment in any of the allotted land.   
The State Government has already allotted 50 acres of land at Atal Nagar, Nawa Raipur to 
AIIMS Raipur on free of cost and possession of land has been taken by AIIMS, Raipur. 
Transfer of ownership and lease agreement has been done with the State Government. The 
construction of perimeter wall has been completed to prevent any encroachment.  The State 
Government is yet to hand over the land at Sarona.  The recommendation made by the 
Committee regarding strengthening financial management for optimum utilization of financial 
resources and effective monitoring and supervision over the implementing agenc ies so as to 
avoid underutilization of funds released and idling of funds in future projects/scheme is noted. 
 
 
 

44 
 
1.32 STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.32.1 The Committee notes that major delay have taken place on the account of 
abandonment of work by the implementing agencies. The engagement of HSCC/CPWD also 
cannot be construed as a remedy because these agencies have also not been able to perform 
within the quality, cost and time parameters. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
engagement of only those construction agencies with a proven track along with a reputation of 
delivering work in time and within the sanctioned cost. 
 (Para 6.13 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.32.2 The recommendation made by the Hon‘ble Committee for engagemen t of only those 
construction agencies with a proven track along with a reputation of delivering work in time 
and within the sanctioned cost is noted. It is however, brought out that it was viewed that 
private Project Consultants (PC) were very unlikely to come forward for taking up the PC 
assignment for the remaining work in the face of severe construction complexities with the 
DDPRC and other contractors. In view of this, HSCC and CPWD were appointed on 
nomination basis. As of now, the construction work under all the packages are on the verge of 
completion as brought out in above Para. It is further brought out that the Ministry has been 
getting all new AIIMS works executed in EPC mode since 2016. In fact the works of AIIMS 
Gorakhpur, AIIMS Bathinda, AIIMS Guwahati and AIIMS Bilaspur have been awarded 
under EPC mode and construction agencies having very good market reputation have been 
awarded the work as brought below: 
AIIMS Gorakhpur M/s L&T 
AIIMS Bathinda M/s NCCL 
AIIMS Guwahati M/s NCCL 
AIIMS Bilaspur M/s NCCL 
 
1.33 PROCUREMENT OF EQUIPMENT 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.33.1 The Committee observes that majority of 159 types of medical equipment during the 
last two years have been purchased with USFDA certification. The Committee is concerned at 
the substantial number of procurement done in AIIMS, Raipur with USFDA certification. The 
Committee apprehends that some of them may be available with European/Indian 
manufactures. The Committee, in this connection, reiterates its recommendation made on 
other AIIMS that the Institute must give preference to general CE/BIS certification to increase 
competitive bidding. The Committee feels that where the equipment with BIS certification is 
available, the Indian manufacturers should be given priority over the USF DA or other 
certifications. The Institute should make efforts to contribute to the ―Make in India‖, scheme 
of Government of India to give boost to Indian manufacturers. Further, USFDA certification 

45 
 
involves higher cost of equipment which would unfortunatel y be passed on to the patients 
seeking treatment and care and thereby increasing their out of pocket expenditure. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that USFDA certification may be resorted to only 
in exceptional circumstances where other manufa cturers do not match the high parameters or 
urgency of equipment with higher standard is called for. The Committee desires that the 
Institute should submit a status report on a ll medical devices/equipment procured with 
USFDA certification /single bid/propr ietary certification alongwith  reasons for doing so, 
within three months of presentation of this report to the Parliament. 
 (Para 6.31 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.33.2 The Institute follows the Public Procurement System, GFR -2017 in the procurement 
process as reiterated by it in the past and the Institute and the Ministry support the purview of 
"Make in India" policy of the Government and only in rare cases (when the equipment is not 
Make in India) the Global Tender Enquiry is resorted to by M/s H&LL. 
Recommendations/Observations 
  
1.33.3 The Committee hopes that AIIMS Raipur is adhering to procedure of multiple 
tendering in the purchase of medical equipment and avoiding single bid purchase to ensure 
transparency and public trust in procurement system of medical equipment. 
 (Para 6.32 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.33.4 AIIMS Raipur is adhering to the process of multiple tendering in the purchase of 
medical equipment and avoiding to the extent possible single bid purchase to ensure 
transparency and public trust in procurement system of medical equipment. The Institute 
follows the guidelines laid in the GFR -2017 in this respect.  Moreover, the institute is strictly 
adhering to procurements on GEM.  The Ministry issued guidelines for allowing of BIS 
standards with other standards like USFDA/ CE certification, etc. in procurement of medical 
devices/ equipment dated 20.02.2018 which has been circulated by the PMSSY Division by 
the HLL/ HITES (Procurement Support Agency)/ HSCC and all functioning AIIMS. PSA has 
intimated that they are following the standard of BIS or European CE or US FDA for PMSSY 
procurement and BIS is not an additional requirement for Indian Manufacturer who is having 
any of the certification stated above.  
1.34 STATUS OF OPERATION THEATRE (OTs)  AND INTENSIVE CARE UNIT 
(ICUs) 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.34.1 The Committee is of the view it is unfortunate that even after a lapse of considerable 
period of time, only 8 operation theatres have been made functional. AIIMS, Raipur was 
established with the aim of providing economical and reliable health care services to the 
people visiting the hospital. Thus, the limited availability of OTs will definitely have an 

46 
 
adverse effect on the services provided by the Institute. The Committee hopes that the  
Institute will expedite the process of construction of the remaining OTs to ensure that all OTs 
are made functional without procrastination. 
 (Para 6.38 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.34.2 AIIMS, Raipur is continuously developing its health care services for the people 
visiting the Hospital. Currently, AIIMS Raipur has 28 functional Modular Operation Theatres 
and 13 departmental Minor Operation Theatres. This  facility will surely lead to enhanced 
numbers of surgeries of various surgical departments. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.34.3 The Committee has not been able to assess the number of surgical procedures carried 
out in AIIMS Raipur due to the variation in the data furnished by the Institute and the 
Ministry. The Committee, therefore, strongly recomme nds that precise data with respect to 
major and minor surgeries done (patient wise and Department wise) till date since the 
inception of the Institute, may be submitted to the Committee within three months of 
presentation of this Report. 
 (Para 6.39 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.34.4 AIIMS Raipur regularly furnishes the data related to patient OPD, IPD, Surgery 
details, manpower and other activities of AIIMS Raipur to Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare.  AIIMS Raipur also uploads its progress report on th e portal of PMSSY Division of 
the Ministry, regularly. 
 
1.35 DIALYSIS FACILITIES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.35.1 The Committee believes that Nephrology Department constitutes an important part of 
any health institution in providing Super Specialty he alth care services to the patients. 
Absence of the faculty would mean that patients requiring dialysis or treatment related to 
renal diseases would be turned away due to non -functioning of the Department. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Institute to recruit the faculty as early as possible so 
that dialysis services become functional at the Institute without any delay. 
 (Para 6.43 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.35.2 Department of Nephrology headed by Associate Professor, is fully functional. Dialysis 
facility is available and is being utilised optimally. Renal transplant is regularly performed at 
AIIMS Raipur. The department also runs DM Nephrology programme and presently six DM 
Residents are getting trained in the department. 
 

47 
 
1.36 AYUSH 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.36.1 The Committee finds AIIMS, Raipur to be lacking behind on almost all parameters. 
However, the Committee would be taking AIIMS, Raipur for detailed examination and will 
conduct a study visit which could not be done this time due to time constraints. 
 (Para 6.48 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.36.2 AIIMS Raipur started functioning from 24.09.2012.  The facilities related to 
Medical/Nursing education and various clinical services are being enhanced. AIIMS Raipur 
will continue to str ive for establishing high standards of Medical/Nursing teaching and high 
ended Patient Care and Research. AIIMS Raipur looks forward to the visit of the Committee 
members and gain from their very valuable guidance and immense wisdom. 
 
F. AIIMS BHUBANESWAR 
1.37 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.37.1 The delay in the completion of the project has also been attributed to services by 
former Project Consultant. The Committee believes that the track record of delivery of 
projects of the contr actor as well as Project Consultant must be taken into account before 
awarding such important project work to them. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to examine the reasons for delay in the construction projects and fix responsibility 
and accountability for delayed work in all four packages. The Committee further recommends 
to the Ministry/Institute to engage other professional agencies or other reputed construction 
majors for upcoming new AIIMS to ensure cost effective and timely execution of projects 
especially in projects where implementing agencies have failed to ensure timely completion. 
 (Para 7.15 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.37.2 Noted for future compliance, as already emphasized in Para 6.12 , it is mentioned that 
since the project consultants (PC) appointed had abandoned work and efforts to get them back 
on the project were not successful, new project consultants were appointed in January, 2016. 
The DDPRCs and Project Consultants have unilaterally terminated the contract in 2014 and  
abandoned the sites and no action on the part of MoHFW was taken at that time. Legal action 
cannot be initiated at this stage against the DDPRCs or by DDPRCs as the same are also 
barred by the limitations.  For construction in future AIIMS, Ministry has no w introduced the 
system of assigning the construction work to single Executing Agencies (CPSUs) which in 
turn handle all the matters including design and drawings on turnkey basis. These Executing 
Agencies are selecting the reputed construction agencies on  bidding basis for construction of 

48 
 
New AIIMS in EPC Mode. In recent past following construction Agencies have been 
entrusted/awarded the projects: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.37.3 The system of award of tender in EPC mode has been continued to be followed for the 
tenders of later new AIIMS  as well. In this manner, again reputed construction agencies have 
been awarded work to later AIIMS also has brought out in the table below: 
AIIMS, Guwahati (Assam)                    : NCCL 
AIIMS, Bilaspur (Himachal Pradesh)    : NCCL 
AIIMS, Deoghar (Jharkhand)                : NKG Construction 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.37.4 The Committee is happy to note that management of AIIMS Bhubaneswar has 
explored the idea of private residential accommodation in the adjoining areas. The Committee 
understands that new AIIMS, still facing infrastructure constraints can easily avoid undue 
stress through arrangement of private accommodation in the nearby areas and the limited 
resource can better be utilized on creation of much needed physical infrastructure. The 
Committee acknowledges AIIMS Bhubaneswar for its sound judgment and right emphasis on 
the more important requirements and demands of the Institute. The Committee also 
appreciates the Institute for completing all the construction projects under the four Pac kages. 
The Committee recommends the Institute to expedite and monitor the other construction 
activities and work on creating the required infrastructure for accommodating all its 
Departments. 
 (Para 7.17 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.37.5 The observation / recommendation of the Committee has been noted  for future 
guidance. The institute has been monitoring the progress of other non -DPR construction work 
for creating required infrastructure to avoid any delay taking into consideration the 
availability of fund. 
 
 
Name of AIIMS work Awarded to Construction  Company 
Hospital and Medical College, Mangalagiri M/s L&T in March-2018 
Hospital and Medical College, Nagpur M/s Ahluwalia Construction 
 (India) Ltd. in April-2018 
Hospital and Medical College, Kalyani M/s Ahluwalia Construction 
 (India) Ltd. in April-2018 
Complete construction on EPC mode for 
AIIMS Gorakhpur 
M/s L&T in April-2018 
Complete construction on EPC mode for 
AIIMS Bathinda 
M/s Nagarjuna Construction  
Company Ltd. (NCCL)in June, 2018 

49 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.37.6 The Committee is given to understand that the present infrastructure of the Institute is 
not sufficient to accommodate all Departments within the Institute. The Committee, however, 
emphasizes the necessity of hav ing a Burns Unit and Trauma Center in the Institute on a 
priority basis. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Institute to take necessary steps 
to expedite the process of formulating necessary plans, prepare DPR and seek administrative 
approvals for projects to be undertaken under the expansion programme to accommodate the 
construction of Burns Unit, Trauma Centre, Rural Training Complex at Tangi, Centre of 
excellence in various super -specialty Department, high -end simulation laboratory and 
computer lab, examination hall and new Administrative building within set timelines and at 
the estimated cost. The Committee would specifically like to point out that setting up of 
centres of excellence in various Super Specialty should only be done when there is a mple 
availability of faculty/super -specialists and keeping in mind the budgetary implications. 
However, the final decision regarding setting up of advanced centres of super specialty should 
be taken by the CIB. 
 (Para 7.19 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.37.7 It is submitted that the following non DPR projects are completed in AIIMS, 
Bhubaneswar: - 
1. New Level-I Trauma Centre 
2. Burn Unit 
3. Multi Utility building for EHS and CRS facilities 
4. Dharmsala 
5. 164 seated Hostel tower 
6. 24 Nos. Of type-V Quarter 
7. Temporary Examination Hall 
 
It is also to mention that the new Administrative building is on the verge of completion and 
the Critical Care Hospital block is targeted to be completed by 31.12.2025. 
1.38 PROCUREMENT OF MEDICAL EQUIPMENT 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.38.1 The Committee takes cognizance of the problems highlighted by the Institute in the 
procurement of the equipment. The Committee observes that sometimes even after multiple 
floating of tender, only single bid is received and there are few cases when multipl e bids are 
received but only single bid gets qualified on technical grounds. The Committee believes that 
there is a need to advertise the tender to be floated on a large scale so that more and more 
manufacturers submit their bids leading to competitive pri cing and availability of many 
options for procurement of equipment. The Committee, thus, recommends to the Institute to 
advertise their tenders in the national dailies and also integrate into the system of the Central 

50 
 
Public Procurement Portal for wider di ssemination of information regarding the floating of 
tender so as to make it accessible to large number of manufacturers. The Committee, further, 
recommends to the Institute to list out the technical requirements more clearly by making 
them generic so that there are fewer chances of bids getting disqualified on technical grounds. 
The tendency to deliberately design specifications to ensure that procurement is done on 
proprietary / single bid basis should be avoided under all circumstances. The Committee 
would like to highlight that the problem areas as identified by AIIMS, Bhubaneswar are 
welcome since it would help the procedural hurdles and help in overall streamlining of the 
whole process of procurement of medical equipment. The idea of finalizing uniform  technical 
specification for requirement especially high end equipment is certainly a step in the right 
direction. The Committee strongly supports and recommends for appropriate time bound 
action on the suggestions of AIIMS, Bhubaneswar for improving the procurement process. 
 (Para 7.21 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.38.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for  
future guidance.  All applicable provisions of the GFR are complied with during the 
procurement process. There ar e only some cases of single bid tender against open tenders. 
However, the same have been processed strictly as per the provision of Rule -173 (xx) of 
GFR-2017 after ascertaining that the procurement was satisfactorily advertised, and that 
sufficient time wa s given for submission of bids, the qualification criteria were not unduly 
restrictive and prices were reasonable in comparison to market values as provided under the 
Rules. Broad based technical specifications are being formulated vis -à-vis the requirement of 
the user to ensure optimal patient care.  It is further submitted that the CIB in its 2 nd meeting 
held on 10.12.2018 under Agenda No. CIB -2/7 has already approved to permit a Technical 
Expert from AIIMS/PGIMER/JIPMER/Other INIs as external experts in place of Nominee of 
DGHS for finalising technical specifications of various equipment s having estimated value of 
more than Rs.30 lakh and above.  This initiative will help to speed up the procurement 
process. Regarding the issues of finalising uniform tech nical specifications for equipment 
especially high-end equipment, it is submitted that CIB has decided to centrally procure all 
such equipment through AIIMS Delhi.  Specifications for high end equipment have been 
issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. There is no proposal now to procure 
equipments centrally through AIIMS Delhi. All Institutes are mandated to procure them on 
their own. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.38.3 The Committee observes that AIIMS, Bhubaneswar has been using Tender Wiza rd for 
e-tendering for procurement of medical equipment. The Committee, therefore, desires that the 
Institute should implement/use the Central Public Procurement Portal of Government of India 
along with Tender Wizard for procurement of medical devices and equipment. The 
Committee believes that both the portals may help in facilitating all the Central Government 
Organizations to publish their tender enquiries, corrigendum and award of contract details. 
These portals bestow a single point access to the inform ation on procurements made across 
various Central Government organizations. This enables the manufacturers of the medical 

51 
 
devices and equipment to have access to the information regarding the floating of the tender 
by the Government. The Committee is of th e view that the main idea of using both the portals 
is to disseminate information about the tenders on a wide platform. 
 (Para 7.24 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.38.4 Keeping in view the observations made by the Hon‘ble Committee, AIIMS 
Bhubaneswar has already implemented the same  and now the e -tenders are also being posted 
on the Central Public Procurement Portal (CPPP), Govt. of India in addition to being 
published on Tender Wizard, institute‘s Website and in newspapers as applicable.  We have 
completely shifted to CPPP and GeM for all the procurement of Medical Devices/Equipment. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.38.5 The Committee appreciates that AIIMS Bhubaneswar has procured 130 types of 
equipment with ISO/BIS certification and encourages AIIMS Bhubane swar to carry out all 
the necessary procurement from non USFDA/Indian manufacturers. The Committee, 
however, recommends AIIMS Bhubaneswar to avoid inappropriate procurement of medical 
devices/equipment with USFDA certification for basic equipment such as B ipolar Forceps, 
Microscope etc. The Committee believes that standard of quality, price and other basic 
requirements should be reviewed closely along with the endorsing the Make in India 
campaign. 
 (Para 7.26 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.38.6 Drugs Regula tion Section of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare had issued 
guidelines dated 20.02.2018 regarding requirement/ non -requirement of USFDA/ CE 
certification, etc. in procurement of medical devices/ equipment.  The guidelines were 
circulated by the PMSSY Division of the Ministry to the HLL/ HITES - Procurement Support 
Agency (PSA)/ HSCC and to all functioning AIIMS. The PSA has intimated that they are 
following the standard of ―BIS or European CE or US FDA‖ for PMSSY procurement. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.38.7 The Committee is dismayed to note that three equipments under the Cardiothoracic 
and Vascular Surgeons (CTVS) Department remained uninstalled for a period ranging from 12 
to 24 months due to non -availability of the personnel under the Departm ent. The Committee 
takes serious note of such delay in installation of equipment which may have resulted in lapse 
of warranty/guarantee of the equipment. The Committee, therefore, chides the Institute for 
delayed installation of the equipment. The Committe e, in this regard, recommends that in 
future, equipment should be procured only when the required faculty and infrastructure for the 
functioning of the equipment is available. 
 (Para 7.28 of the Report) 
 

52 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.38.8 The observation / recommendatio n of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for  
future guidance. Further, the PSA has been advised to place order for medical equipment in 
synch with the construction progress.  Presently, all this equipment s in CTVS Department 
have presently installed.  
1.39 STATUS OF FACULTY AND NON-FACULTY STRENGTH 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.39.1 The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons for large number of vacancies at the 
Institute. The Committee believes that special attractive package and incentives should b e 
offered by the Institute to attract the required talent at the super specialty level. The vacancies 
should be advertised in national dailies so that it has wider reach and larger number of 
candidates should apply for the posts. Moreover, manpower plannin g needs to be reoriented 
to determine the requirement of adequate numbers of medical specialists to meet the future 
demand of medical personnel for all healthcare. The Committee desires the Institute to 
expedite the process of recruitment commencing from r e-advertising the vacant posts for 
selection of faculty and non -faculty staff without further procrastination. The Committee also 
recommends for a common all India examination for all the non -faculty posts through a third-
party recruitment agency for all A IIMS which will make the selection process more 
transparent and objective. 
(Para 7.34 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.39.2 The Institute made all efforts by advertising all its recruitment advertisement in two 
National daily (English), two National daily (H indi), several local News Papers, Employment 
News/ Rojgar Samachar besides hosting it on its website in order to give wider publicity. 
AIIMS Bhubaneswar also engaged EdCIL (a mini Ratna PSU under the Ministry of Human 
Resources Development) as a Third -Party Recruitment Agency to make recruitment against 
all Group ‗B‘ & ‗C‘ posts. The agency is in the process of carrying out recruitment exercise 
against all vacant posts. In pursuance of the Hon‘ble Parliamentary Standing Committee‘s 
observations, the Central  Institute Body (CIB) in its 3 rd meeting held on 24.01.2019 advised 
all AIIMS to conduct recruitments for Non -faculty (Technical) cadres on centralized basis by 
applying the following measures:  
 AIIMS Delhi will conduct centralised recruitment for all AIIM S in case of Nursing 
Cadres. 
 AIIMS Delhi will conduct the CRE for Group -B and Group- C post in the near future 
for filling up the vacant posts.  
 
 
 
 

53 
 
1.40 SPECIALITY/SUPER SPECIALITY DEPARTMENTS 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.40.1 The Committee observes t hat Surgical Gastroenterology Department is not functional 
at the Institute. Undoubtedly, this amounts to utmost neglect of the patients suffering from 
diseases related to the human gastrointestinal tract. The Committee, therefore, calls upon the 
Institute to start the Surgical Gastroenterology Department at the Institute with adequate 
manpower and infrastructure without any delay. 
 (Para 7.37 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.40.2 At AIIMS Bhubaneswar, the Dept. of Surgical Gastroenterology is functional sinc e 
2020 with one Associate Professor and two Assistant Professors. 
1.41 MEDICAL EDUCATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.41.1 The Committee observes that while there has been 100% admission in MBBS and 
nursing course, only 45 seats have been filled up out  of the 86 sanctioned PG seats. It is 
indeed a saddening affair to observe the vacant PG seats at an Institute of national importance 
as it indicates sheer wastage of resources. The Committee, however, recommends to the 
Institute to ascertain the detailed reasons for not filling up of the PG seats  at the Institute and 
take immediate steps to remove obstacles if any, in filling up of the PG seats with immediate 
effect. 
 (Para 7.40 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.41.2 Currently out of 351 PG (MD/MS) seats 300 seats have been filled. In addition to this 
the MD/MS counselling for January 2025 session process is going on. Additionally, out of 
174 allotted DM/MCh (super specialization) seats 125 seats have been filled. In addition to 
this the DM/MCh counselling for January 2025 session process is going on. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.41.3 The Committee observes that the present strength of faculty at the Institute is not 
sufficient to offer clinical training to the students. The Committee feels that deficient c linical 
training may be one of the reasons for not filling up the PG seats at the Institute. The 
Committee is of the view that clinical training is crucial for emphasizing the overall 
development of the medical insight of the students. A medical student wi ll become more 
efficient and productive if he/she is trained well. The Committee, thus, recommends to the 
Institute to make the clinical training programme more effective with sufficient faculty and 
adequate infrastructure for training to the students. 
 (Para 7.42 of the Report) 

54 
 
Action Taken 
1.41.4 AIIMS, Bhubaneswar makes all efforts to impart quality clinical training to all PG 
students besides training them in soft skills such as communication, ethical and professional 
conduct, rational prescribing, patient safety etc. Research methodology and basic biostatistics 
is also taught to them and they are mandated to undertake research in the form of a thesis in 
partial fulfilment of their degree. Undergraduate medical students have evening clinics in 
addition t o their routine postings, clerkship and first aid classes in surgery and conduct 
deliveries (in final year and in internship) both at AIIMS Bhubaneswar and at the District 
Hospital, Kurdha, so that they are fully confident to conduct normal deliveries inde pendently. 
In order to ensure that undergraduates have tolerant the necessary competencies, an exit 
Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) is held during the last month of internship 
in which students rotate through 25 stations wherein their clin ical skills are tested. This was 
started in December 2017 for the first batch of interns and is continuing since. Recently, small 
grants as incentives for student research have been approved by CIB to be given to PG and 
UG students. All academic activity, besides clinical training is done by the faculty of the 
Institute and the infrastructure is adequate for such training. The UG curriculum has been 
modified to include communication skills, patient safety, ethics, and professionalism and 
changes made to tea ching-learning activities and assessment formats. The PG curriculum is 
also being modified at present to make it competency -based.  The institute is taking all steps 
to ensure that students of AIIMS Bhubaneswar have stimulating, constructive, well -rounded 
training during their stint here. In addition, as the Institute has advertised 125 vacant faculty 
posts to deploy more faculty members, this will further improve the clinical training. 
1.42 STATUS OF OPERATION THEATRES AND WARDS/BEDS 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.42.1 The Committee is not satisfied with the functional status of the Institute as only 32 
wards with 716 beds are functional at the Institute. The Institute is also not properly equipped 
to cater to the need for a quick and responsive care in m edical emergency. Good trauma care 
means getting the patient to the right place at the right time for appropriate care. The 
Committee, thus, recommends to the Institute to step up the strength of wards and beds as per 
the sanctioned strength. It also needs to expedite the process of construction of remaining OTs 
equipped with latest equipment, specialized resources, and a specially trained trauma and 
emergency team for quality and timely care. It is more so required for treatment of the 
patients suffering f rom life threatening illnesses and traumatic injuries. The Committee, 
therefore, expects that concerted efforts will be made in this regard and the matter should be 
taken up on a priority basis. 
 (Para 7.47 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.42.2 At present, 1370 are functional at AIIMS Bhubaneswar. 

55 
 
Functional Beds 
960 including 112 ICU beds (out of sanctioned beds 960) + 42 Trauma 
Centre beds including 12 ICU beds (out of sanctioned beds 86) + 17 Burn 
Centre beds including 06 ICU beds (out of sanctioned beds 3 6) = 1,019 
beds 
Temporary Beds 351 Beds (Dialysis, Day Care, Emergency, OPD Procedure, Endoscopy, 
etc.) 
TOTAL: 1,019+351= 1,370 Beds 
 
At present, the State of Art Trauma Centre with 86 bed capacity is functional since Feb 2024, 
providing 24x7 services attends to the needs of the emergency patients. 
1.43 DIALYSIS FACILITIES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.43.1 The Committee recommends that AIIMS, Bhubaneswar should expedite the setting up 
of dialysis unit especially in the wake of rising demand for dialysis services. 
 (Para 7.51 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.43.2 AIIMS-BBSR has started dialysis services in Sept 2018 with 13  haemodialysis 
stations (10 for non -infectious seronegative patients and 3 for infectious seropositive patients 
like HBV, HCV and HIV  positive). We also provide round the clock bedside dialysis service 
to the critically ill patients admitted in various ICUs. 
 
G. UPGRADATION OF GOVERNMENT MEDICAL COLLEGES (GMCs) / 
INSTITUTIONS 
1.44 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION AND FUNDING PATTERN 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.44.1 The Committee is of the view that the funds allocated to the project should be 
effectively and efficiently utilized and not remain idle or underutilized as that would 
otherwise adversely impact the smooth execution of the project. Mor eover, such instances 
reflect faulty planning and improper administration with regard to utilization of the allocated 
funds. The Committee views this as a matter of concern. The Committee observes that 
upgradation of GMCs is under the direct supervision of  the Central Government , therefore, 
underutilization of the allocated funds should not become a routine affair as the same would 
lead to further delays in completion of projects causing time and cost overruns. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry must act promptly and monitor 
the effective and timely utilization of funds. 
 (Para 8.11 of the Report) 
 

56 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.44.2 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance . 
It is submitted that the release  of funds to Executing Agencies (EA) for various projects are 
made only after obtaining utilization certificates from the respective EA. Further, regular 
review meetings are being held with project authorities, including the executing agencies for 
timely utilization of funds. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.44.3 The Committee views diversion of funds as criminal misappropriation of allocated 
fund and violation of fiscal discipline.  Such trend not only results in the shortfall of the funds 
for completion o f construction activities but is against the provisions of the MoU signed 
between the Ministry and the States.   Effective monitoring and accountability need to be 
ensured so that funds released are utilized for the intended purpose.   The Committee expects 
the Ministry to issue strict advisories against the diversion of funds and fixing of 
responsibility of GMCs/ State Government for the same. 
  (Para 8.12 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.44.4 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for  compliance. 
It is submitted that the permissible diversion will be accounted for by modifying the DPR 
accordingly and States will be asked to refund the amount spent on impermissible diversions 
at the time of closure report of an upgradation project. It i s submitted that, the Ministry has 
taken up with the respective State Governments /   Institutes for completion and settlement of 
the matter.  State Governments have also been advised to send proposal for seeking 
modification of DPR with proper justification. Presently, with a view to prevent recurrence of 
such cases as above, as a Policy construction / procurement matters are now being dealt 
through EA / PSA appointed by the Govt. of India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
only. The Ministry has already  taken needed systemic measures to ensure that the issues 
highlighted by the Committee are adequately addressed.  Further learning from the past 
experience of Phase I and II works, the Ministry now gets all procurement (except small value 
items below Rs.30 lakh) made through a PSA appointed by the Ministry. The provision to this 
effect has been incorporated in the MOU signed with the State Governments. This has given 
better control in the hands of the Ministry to ensure that the money is spent only for the 
purpose for which it is sanctioned and any possibility of diversion of fund is obviated. 
 
1.45 KEY CONCERN AREAS 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.45.1 The Committee takes note of the key concern areas of GMCs upgradation. The 
Committee observes that the Mi nistry has put the entire onus on the State Governments for 
successful implementation of the scheme. The Committee is of the view that the Central 
Government has a key role in planning, guiding and monitoring the scheme. The Ministry 
needs to consider Stat e Governments as its partner in resolving the constraints being 

57 
 
encountered in administration of projects and sort out practical difficulties faced in 
implementation thereof. There is a need for an efficacious monitoring mechanism to avoid 
inordinate delays in completion of upgradation projects. The Committee, thus, recommends to 
the Ministry to make a realistic assessment of the challenges faced and formulate suitable plan 
of action in active coordination with the State Governments to overcome the same. Al l out 
efforts must be made by both the Central Government and the State Governments to strive 
towards completion of upgradation of GMCs within specified time line. 
  (Para 8.16 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.45.2 Observations / Recommendations of the Commi ttee have been noted for compliance.  
The key concern areas and challenges faced in up -gradation of the GMC Projects are (i) 
Timely availability of Encumbrance free site in the GMCs, time taken in deciding on the 
scope of the Up -gradation projects in terms of the physical facilities and difficulty faced by 
the GMC/ State Government to firm up the scope of the Project resultantly the process of gap 
analysis, DPR Preparation and tendering had to be carried all over again in such cases. 
Commitment by the State Government is also a key concern and also the delay in releasing 
the State Government‘s share (40%) despite the commitment in the MOU signed by Ministry 
of Health with the State Government. The issue has been taken up at senior level of the State 
Governments through letters and over phone and the States have also been taking action for 
early release of the Share. However, Ministry has released timely of the Central Share to the 
Executing Agencies and to the Procurement Support Agency. The Ministry has also taken up 
with the State Governments in meetings, Video -Conferencing and through DO Letters and 
also in the PMC Meetings. The issues and hindrances were also flagged in the Ministerial 
level interactions with the States at the level; of Hon‘ble Health & Fam ily Welfare Minister 
and Hon‘ble MOS at present all issues pertaining to all the 39 Phase III up -gradation projects 
have been sorted out and the construction is progressing well.  As of now, all the State 
Governments have released their share of funds eithe r partially or fully.  Out of 39 GMC 
projects under Phase III 32 have been completed and another 06 expected to be completed by 
2021-22 and 01 in 2022-23. In addition to the information earlier provided, it is stated that all 
39 projects covered under Phase-III of the Scheme have now been completed. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.45.3 The attention of the Committee has been drawn to the CAG findings wherein serious 
areas of concern have been highlighted especially w.r.t non -compliance of codal and contrac t 
provision and awards of work at higher cost. The Committee is of the firm view that strict 
compliance with codal and contract provision need to be adhered in all circumstances and 
award of work should be assigned on merit and proven track record. 
  (Para 8.17 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.45.4 It has already been submitted to CAG that the appointment of the Consultants on 
nomination basis for the different works has been made in the light of the provisions under 
GFR 176 and as per Rule 1.5.3 of the Manua l of Policies and Procedure for selection of the 

58 
 
Consultants and under the CPWD Manual. Due approval of the Hon‘ble Minister was also 
obtained for this purpose. Accordingly, the action on the part of the Ministry was proper as 
per the extant rules. Accordi ngly, HLL/HITES/HSCC as 100% owned PSUs of the Ministry, 
have been assigned roles of Project Consultant/Procurement Support Agent/in House 
Consultant/Executing Agency in the PMSSY Project after careful consideration in the given 
circumstances with a view to achieve the objective. Engaging a private or another party would 
not have provided same efficiency and flexibility as could have been obtained by having these 
PSUs. Both the PSUs have required experience in Hospital Projects. It has already been 
submitted to CAG that the appointment of the Consultants on nomination basis for the 
different works has been made in the light of the provisions under GFR 176 and as per Rule 
1.5.3 of the Manual of Policies and Procedure for selection of the Consultants and under  the 
CPWD Manual. Due approval of the Hon‘ble Minister was also obtained for this purpose. 
Accordingly, the action on the part of the Ministry was proper as per the extant rules. 
Accordingly, HLL/HITES/HSCC as 100% owned PSUs of the Ministry, have been ass igned 
roles of Project Consultant/Procurement Support Agent/in House Consultant/Executing 
Agency in the PMSSY Project after careful consideration in the given circumstances with a 
view to achieve the objective. Engaging a private or another party would not  have provided 
same efficiency and flexibility as could have been obtained by having these PSUs. Both the 
PSUs have required experience in Hospital Projects. 
 
1.46 SELECTION OF THE GMCs FOR UPGRADATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.46.1 The Committee fe els that the Ministry has not devised scientific criteria/parameters 
for the selection of GMCs under PMSSY. The Committee feels that the criteria of socio -
economic indicators, mainly the presence of already existing tertiary healthcare facilities, 
should also be taken into account. The Committee also take into cognizance that many GMCs 
have been selected without consulting the respective States and even without considering their 
financial condition and even without entering into any MoU with the State Gover nments. 
Further, the selection of the consultancy agencies was purely arbitrary and no past record of 
the agencies has been taken into consideration. To consider HLL/HSCC as a panacea for all 
execution is an area of serious concern as these agencies are be ing given preferential 
treatment just because they are PSUs of the Ministry not because of their proven track record. 
The Committee, thus, recommends to the Ministry to formulate set parameters for selection of 
GMCs to ensure that the GMCs which actually r equire upgradation are selected in 
consultation with State Governments. The Committee, further, recommends that the Ministry, 
while appointing consultancy agencies, should also take into consideration past reputation and 
good track record of the agencies i n order to avoid time and cost overruns. Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends for involvement of better professional agencies or other reputed 
construction majors to ensure cost effective and timely execution especially in projects where 
HSCC has failed t o ensure timely completion of the construction projects. The Committee 
also takes a serious note on part of the PSA in undertaking a proper gap analysis in GMCs 
where requisite medical equipment were not provided on a timely basis. 
  (Para 8.23 of the Report) 
 

59 
 
Action Taken 
1.46.2 It is submitted that, PMSSY aims at correcting the regional imbalances in the 
availability of the tertiary healthcare and medical education in different parts of the country. 
In fact, there is deficiency in availability of overall quality tertiary healthcare and medical 
education facilities in the country. The Ministry has its own database under National Health 
Mission on penetration and reach of healthcare throughout the country. Each State in the 
country also vies for central assi stance in setting up of more medical facilities in their 
respective States.  The Ministry has, while finalizing the upgradation projects given higher 
priority to the States generally considered ―backward‖ with respect to the broad socio -
economic indicators. The State has to agree to operate and maintain the facilities created, so 
willingness of the State to contribute it‘s share and participate in the scheme is also important 
apart from backwardness. As per the EFC notes available with the Ministry, all proj ects have 
been selected on the basis of demands raised by States and therefore the States were fully 
involved in the selection process. 
 
1.46.3 It is further submitted that while allocation of the works in Phase III of up -gradation, 
the past performance of  the agencies were considered. The fact is that the Ministry has been 
closely interacting and monitoring the progress of the works and performance of Ministry‘s 
own PSUs. Every year an MOU is signed with these CPSEs and their performance is carefully 
appraised against MOU parameters in a structured review, ultimately resulting in MOU 
ratings which are well documented. For every decision there is no need to depict the 
performance detail separately as, being Ministry‘s own PSUs, their performances had always 
been under scrutiny in the Ministry.  Even in case of Phase -III works assigned to the above 
two PSUs, their performance as Executing agency has been satisfactory. In almost all cases, 
these PSUs have been prompt in awarding the contracts and good progress h as been achieved 
by them. PSA is responsible for survey, gap analysis and preparation of list of requirements in 
consultation with the concerned Institution. Therefore, the Institutions are also involved in the 
process of gap analysis.  It is also brought o ut here that the delays in Phase -III works have 
primarily occurred due to delays on the part of the State Government/ GMCs in making 
available the encumbrance -free sites. In some cases, delay has occurred due to the State 
Government insisting on changes in  the already approved scope of the project or shifting the 
already approved sites.  
 
1.47 SITE SELECTION AND STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES IN 
GMCs 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.47.1 The Committee takes serious note of issue of awarding of tender at  the cost higher 
than the approved cost indicating financial irregularities. The Committee believes that the 
whole process should be objective and on merit rather than on any other consideration so that 
the agency with the most economical and best offer of  services is awarded the tender for 
completion of the projects. 
  (Para 8.30 of the Report) 
 

60 
 
Action Taken 
1.47.2 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.47.3 The Committee believes t hat the Ministry cannot in any way justify the inordinate 
delays in the completion of the projects. Procedural and preparatory exercises need to be done 
before hand including availability of encumbrance free site by the respective State 
Government. The Com mittee also recommends to the Ministry to frame operational 
guidelines that would guide and regulate implementation of the scheme across the States and 
take steps to expedite the completion of remaining work by better monitoring of the projects. 
The Commit tee apprehends that such delays will increase the work load at the flag end of 
completion schedule. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that priority should 
be given to such projects for which there is imminent need to expedite the process of granting 
necessary approvals only to avoid time and cost overruns are avoided. The Committee also 
strongly recommends that no new project be taken before completion of these 73 projects. 
  
 (Para 8.32 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.47.4 The Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for guidance. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.47.5 The Committee understands that there may be certain practical difficulties that are 
encountered on work sites during the course of upgradation project. However, the 
considerable delays in planning and commencement of works in all phases of upgradation of 
GMCs under PMSSY and the slow progress, both at the stage of planning and contracting 
indicates that both planning of works and contract management were inadequate and  
improper, thus causing adverse impact in the delivery of services. The Committee is of the 
firm view that the Ministry/Central Government, instead of taking the responsibility, has 
shifted the blame on the State Governments for the delay in the commenceme nt of 
upgradation of GMCs under PMSSY. The Committee feels that instead of blame game, the 
Ministry should work in tandem with the State Governments and help in ironing out problem 
areas so that the objectives of the scheme is not defeated by delays and fa ulty planning. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to review the status of construction 
timelines and set realistically achievable targets in consultation with the State Governments 
concerned. 
  (Para 8.33 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.47.6 The Status/Progress of construction time lines and deadlines are being reviewed by the 
Ministry in Project Monitoring Committees and other review meetings. Review Meetings held 
from time to time with the concerned stakeholders by the Ministry. The PMC h eld many 
meetings for effective monitoring and, supervision and coordination of GMC Upgradation 

61 
 
Projects. Also, the State Level Project Monitoring Committees also monitor the progress of 
the GMC Projects. The Ministry has actively engaged with the State Go vernments through 
meetings, discussion and written communication, Video -conferencing with States.  PMC 
Meetings were also held to resolve issues and hindrances on part of State Government.  
 
1.47.7 Presently, with respect to Phase III and later Phase works , Project Monitoring Group 
(PMG) meeting under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary of respective States are being held 
to review progress and resolve local issues. The progress of the Projects is also being 
monitored through a Dashboard created in the Mini stry for all PMSSY works. Further, 
fortnightly review meetings are also being held with the Executing Agencies (EAs) to review 
the progress of works.  Construction timeline have been reviewed and realistic timelines 
drawn.  
 
1.48 PROCUREMENT OF EQUIPMENT 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.48.1 The Committee notes with concern the observations of CAG regarding improper gap 
analysis, lacunae in CMC provisions and procurement of equipment which did not fall in the 
approved list of medical equipment of the Minist ry. The CAG Report further highlights that 
against the procurement orders for 818 equipment costing Rs. 482.21 crore for 11 GMCs, 191 
equipment costing Rs. 51.72 crore were yet to be made available. The Committee is 
concerned to note that there are several  tenders which are pending since very long and are 
being retendered again and again. The Committee notes that the basic purpose of having a 
PSA stands defeated if such delays are going to occur. The Committee, in this connection, 
strongly recommends for a properly monitored mechanism, so as to ensure that time and cost 
overruns in the procurement process are avoided. The Committee is surprised to note that a 
total of 141 tenders for the procurement of equipment are pending under phase III of the 
upgradation project under PMSSY. The Committee observes that these 141 tenders have been 
retendered by the Ministry in the year 2018. Out of these, 4 tenders for surgical loupes, extra 
corporeal membrane oxygenator, head saver and surgical xenon head light and light sources 
have again been floated. Also, 24 types of equipment under phase I and II and 7 types of 
equipment under phase III have been procured on a single bid basis. The Committee desires 
the PSA to submit a status note in all the procurement carried out on single bid basis in Phase-
I and Phase -II including reasons for the same, within three months of presentation of this 
report. 
 
  (Para 8.41 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.48.2 It is submitted that the progress of procurement of Medical Equipment by PSA has 
been monitored closely.  Considerable progress has been achieved in the procurement of 
medical equipment for Phase I, II and III up -gradation project. Almost all the medical 
equipment under Phase I and II have since been procured and installed also.  For Ph ase III 
also the procurement activities are in a very advanced stage as brought out below: 
 

62 
 
As per information supplied by the Procurement Support Agency, all the equipment which 
was ordered for 11 GMCs referred to in the said para of CAG report has alread y been 
delivered and installed. Further, Integrated Purchase Committee meetings are regularly held 
along with review with Institutes. The delivery and installations in many instances depends on 
site clearance for installation, availability of faculty to ch eck the installed equipment and 
other factors. 
 
1.49 SUPER SPECIALTY BLOCKS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.49.1 The Committee is distressed to observe that out of the GMCs (58) approved under first 
three phases of the upgradation project, nine GMCs do n ot have Super Specialty Services. 
These are Institute of Medical Sciences, BHU, Varanasi (Ph.I), Jawaharlal Nehru Medical 
College, AMU, Aligarh (Ph.II), Srinagar Medical College (Ph.I), B.J. Medical College, 
Ahmadabad (Ph.I),Grant Medical College, Mumbai ( Ph.I), GMC, Nagpur (Ph.II), Govt. 
Medical College, Malda (PH III), Vijayanagar Institute of Medical Sciences, Bellary (PH III), 
Pt. B.D. Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak (Ph.II). The Committee, further, notes that none of the 
GMCs approved under phase I, II and III ha s all the Super Specialty facilities as originally 
envisaged under the upgradation project. The Committee apprehends that unless the 
upgradation projects under the phase III is not completed, the Ministry would not be in a 
position to focus on GMCs in the later phases. The Committee is of the considered view that 
the scheme would be successful only when Super Specialty Blocks (SSB) envisaged under the 
scheme are functional in all the GMCs approved for upgradation. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to focus on the non-functional SSBs of GMCs for capacity building 
to provide super -specialty services to suffering patients. The Committee also strongly 
recommends for a gap analysis in the availability of super -speciality services in GMCs in 
locations where there are functional regional AIIMS or new ones are proposed. 
  (Para 8.51 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.49.2 The Committees recommendations have been noted for compliance.  The upgradation 
programme under PMSSY broadly envisages improving infra structure through Super 
Speciality Block/Trauma Care Centre etc. and procurement of medical equipment for existing 
as well as new facilities. Trauma Centres have been created in Eight Medical Colleges, except 
PGIMS, Rohtak where OT Complex covering 16 OTs is being constructed.  Further under 
Phase V, SSB is being constructed at IMS, BHU, Varanasi. 
 
1.50 MONITORING MECHANISM 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.50.1 The Committee is dissatisfied with the response of the Ministry regarding the existing 
institutional arrangement for monitoring the implementation of upgradation Scheme of 
Government Medical Colleges under PMSSY. The existing monitoring mechanism to review 
the progress through an online dashboard and Project Management Software by the executive 

63 
 
agencies is not effective enough to ensure timely execution of upgradation projects. In this 
regard, the Committee also notes with concern the observation of CAG made in its report that 
in eight GMCs mandatory State PMCs under the Chairmanship of Principal Secret ary 
(Health/Medical Education), to review the progress of upgradation scheme have not been 
constituted. Similarly, in many States, a State Level Steering Committee, under the 
Chairmanship of Chief Secretary, required to meet each quarter to review progress  and 
resolve local issues were either not constituted or if constituted were not active. Utmost to the 
surprise of the Committee, the Ministry has no record about the working of these Committees. 
Moreover, the Ministry's direction to have a system of Third Party Quality Assurance (TPQA) 
has also not been complied with in 15 GMCs. The Committee during its visit to West Bengal 
and Bihar found the absence of these Committees in various GMCs, therefore, the Committee 
concludes that ‗all is not well‘ with the mo nitoring system over the execution of programmes 
for upgradation schemes of GMCs under the PMSSY. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that mandatory provision of constitution of PMCs, State Level Steering 
Committees must be complied with and the system of Third Party Quality Assurance (TPQA) 
be placed in order to make resilient monitoring mechanism for efficient and effective 
execution of upgradation projects in all GMCs. 
  (Para 8.58 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.50.2 It is submitted that the S tatus/Progress of construction time lines and deadlines are 
being reviewed by the Ministry at Project Monitoring Committee Meetings held from time to 
time with the concerned stakeholders by the Ministry. The Monitoring and Evaluation of the 
progress of the GMCIs are done by the Project Monitoring Committee. The PMC held many 
Meetings for effective monitoring, supervision and coordination of GMC Projects. Also, the 
State Level Project Monitoring Committees monitors the progress of the GMC Projects. The 
Ministry has actively engaged with the State Governments through meetings, discussion and 
written communication, Video -conferencing with States. PMC Meetings were also held to 
resolve issues and hindrances on part of State Government. With respect to Phase III and later 
Phase works, Project Monitoring Group (PMG) meeting under the Chairmanship of Chief 
Secretary of respective States are also being held to review progress and resolve local issues. 
The progress of the Projects is also being monitored through a Das hboard created in the 
Ministry for all PMSSY works. Further, fortnightly review meetings at the Ministry level are 
also being held at the Executing Agencies (EAs) to review the progress of works.  It is a fact 
that the Independent Third Party Quality Assura nce Audit in GMCIs system was not put in 
place in the Phase I and II works. However, from Phase -III works onwards, independent 
TPQAs have been appointed under PMSSY to have independent assessment and evaluation of 
quality of construction works being executed by the executive agencies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 
1.51 STUDY VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.51.1 The Committee, therefore, is of the view that actual condition of the upgradation 
project in GMCs is totally different from what is reflected on pa per. The Committee feels that 
even after the utilization of the allocated funds there is no perceptible change at the ground 
level which clearly means the Government funds have not been properly utilized under the 
project. The Committee, therefore, recomme nds to the Ministry to ensure adherence to 
contract provisions in execution of work and provision of services. The Committee feels that 
accountability needs to be fixed for expenditure without adequate justification or where 
Government funds have not been utilized properly or when there is misappropriation of funds. 
Moreover, the Committee would like to reiterate that professional agencies with a proven 
track record must be involved in the construction process so as to avoid building flaws 
leading to wasteful expenditure. 
  (Para 8.60 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.51.2 These observations of the Committee pertain to the super -speciality block which was 
getting constructed under the ―Forward linkage scheme‖ under NHM. The building had 
remained incomplete due  to exhaustion of the sanctioned funds. The construction of this 
super-speciality block was being done by a State Government agency. The concerns 
/observations of the Committee have been forwarded to the State Government for future 
guidance and for taking remedial action. So far as the construction of the Super -Speciality 
Block (SSB) under the PMSSY scheme is concerned, the funds have been properly utilized. 
The super-speciality block is completed.  
 
1.52 CONCLUSION 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.52.1 The Committee observes that upgradation project of GMCs under PMSSY has failed 
to provide the desired results which were expected from the project. The Committee opines 
that there is a big gap between planning and the execution of the project due to lack of 
synchronization and coordination of activities and serious gaps between planning and 
implementation of the scheme. The Committee feels that the inadequate project management 
and related delays impacted the delivery of envisaged benefits in terms of improve ment in 
health infrastructure. The reasons for delay in upgradation project are mainly due to non -
availability of encumbrance free land, delays in getting clearances for excavation and tree 
cutting and other site related conditions, changes made in the sco pe and quantum of work, 
delay in finalization/tendering of medical equipment. Apart from all these, poor planning and 
coordination contributed to delays in upgradation of GMCs. The Committee appreciates the 
potential in the scheme to transform the Governme nt Medical Colleges in providing quality 
health services to the people. The Committee is therefore of the firm view that projects 

65 
 
require meticulous planning and consistent efforts for timely execution/completion. The 
Committee believes that preparatory ac tivities should be completed beforehand which should 
include realistic assessment of requirement of equipment, availability of site, analysis of 
manpower and utilization of funds for the purpose it is earmarked. The Committee 
recommends to the Ministry to work in tandem with the State Governments to work in a  
coordinated manner to accomplish the objective and mission of up - gradation of GMCs as 
envisaged in PMSSY. 
  (Para 8.67 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.52.2 As per Memorandum of Understanding signed be tween the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare and the concerned State Government for upgradation of GMCIs under the 
PMSSY, the responsibility of providing encumbrances -free land rests with the concerned 
State Government. Given the fact that the State Gov ernment is advised to provide the land for 
development of campus, invariably some hindrances, both natural and manmade like nalah, 
road, pipelines, etc are encountered. As the delay in land availability and securing all statutory 
clearances for the project s are critical conditions precedent for the start of any project, the 
Ministry actively coordinates with the concerned State Government authorities for  timely 
resolution of such land related issues and statutory clearances.  
 
H. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ON COMMON ISSUES 
 
1.53 FINANCIAL ASSESSMENT 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.53.1 The Committee is taken aback at this skewed financial assessment of the 
Government‘s flagship health care service programme. This fluctuating assessment speaks 
volume of the Ministry‘s lack in planning and failure to formulate any operational guidelines 
for AIIMS like Institutions. The Committee also notes that the approval of the revised cost 
was obtained in March, 2010 i.e. after four years of the initial approval in 2006.  This 
represents a 188% and 145% increase in capital costs since 2004 and 2006 respectively. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must undertake proper and practical 
financial assessment with respect to the capital cost of new AIIMS like institutions in the 
subsequent phases. 
  (Para 9.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.53.2 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
compliance. However, as per the Revised Cost Estimates (RCE) approved by CCEA in 2010 
the reasons for cost escalation provided for are tabulated below: 
Sl. Items considered for cost 
escalation Justification for escalation 
(i) 
Increase in cost index over 
cost approved by EFC in 
2004 
Increase in cost index resulted in an additional impact of 
approximately Rs.70 crore. 

66 
 
(ii) Change of Scope 
Increase in bed strength from 850 to 960 and area requirement per bed 
from 60 -65 sqm to 100 sqm resulting in an additional financial 
implication of approximately Rs.175 crore. 
(iii) 
Adoption of best practices 
in g reen building concept 
and compliance of Energy 
Conservation building 
Codes (ECBC) 
Additional financial implication was approximately Rs.45 crore. 
However, this was expected to be offset within 3 -4 years by energy 
savings of 15-20% per annum. 
(iv) Addition of items not 
envisaged in earlier EFC 
Additional impact on inclusion of additional items which were not 
envisaged in the earlier EFC was  approximately Rs.145 crore. 
(v) Work Contract Tax 
Work contract Tax was not considered in the earlier EFC proposal. At 
4%, the financial implications worked out to be approximately Rs.23 
crore per site. 
 
(vi) Up-gradation of medical 
equipments 
As per EFC / CCEA, the cost of medical equipments was Rs. 104.50 
cr. Subsequently medical experts of AIIMS, New Delhi / PGIMER 
(Chandigarh) worked out minimum requirement of medical 
equipments including other service equipments, required for each 
institution, cost of which is estimated at Rs. 200 crore. 
(vii) Contingencies @3% Due to the cost impact on the above aspects contingen cy expenses 
will increase by approximately Rs 9 crore. 
 
As may be seen from the above, the change in scope and inclusion of additional items, in 
facilities and medical equipment were the major contributors to the cost escalation. To 
prevent occurrence of such cost escalation, the Ministry has standardized the facilities as well 
as Medical equipment in each AIIMS, the DPR, are also prepared with greater rigor after 
carrying out of soil surveys and topographical survey. 
1.54 SITE SELECTION OF AIIMS LIKE INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.54.1 The Committee is of the view that site selection for any AIIMS like Institution 
requires a detailed assessment of the geographical location and the demographic distribution. 
Easy accessibility and transportation availability is one major concern. The Committee is also 
concerned at the duplication and concentration of tertiary care services at a particular place. 
The Committee notes that at several places like Guwahati, Patna and now in Madurai (where 
a new AIIM S has just been announced) the Government had already selected GMCs for 
upgradation programme under PMSSY. In the places that have been selected for setting up of 
AIIMS like Institutions, the critical gap in the tertiary health care is already being filled  by 
private sector. The Committee strongly believes that AIIMS should be located in an area with 
low Human Development Index that lags behind in tertiary health care. 
  (Para 9.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.54.2 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
guidance. The Ministry while finalizing the upgradation projects has given higher priority to 
the States generally considered ―backward‖ with respect to the broad socio -economic 
indicators. The State has also agreed to ope rate and maintain the facilities created, so 

67 
 
willingness of the State to contribute its share and participate in the scheme is also important 
factor apart from backwardness. As per the EFC notes available with the Ministry, all projects 
have been selected on the basis of demands raised by States and therefore the States were 
fully involved in the selection process. 
 
1.54.3 The Ministry has its own database under National Health Mission on penetration and 
reach of healthcare facilities throughout the country . Each State in the country also vies for 
central assistance in setting up of more medical facilities in their respective States.  The 
Ministry has also adopted the ―Challenge method criteria‖ as conveyed by Cabinet Secretary 
(vide D.O. 272/1/3/2016 – CA.V dated 20.9.2017) for selection of sites so that most suitable 
sites get selected for setting up of AIIMS.  ―Gaps in the availability of tertiary healthcare 
facilities is also a consideration under the ―Challenge method‖ in selection of Sites. However, 
the M inistry is also dependent on the States in this matter as, in the first place, the States 
offers alternative sites and a site can only be selected out of the sites offered.  The ―Challenge 
method Criteria‖ referred above is being strictly followed in the ma tter of selection of sites 
out of the sites offered by the State Governments. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.54.4 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to a strange criterion for selection of 
site for AIIMS like Institute. Air connectivity to t he place has been one of the major basis for 
site selection for AIIMS. It has been reasoned out that airport services will facilitate 
employment of better trained human resources as most doctors are reluctant to serve in remote 
areas. 
 
(Para 9.5 of the Report) 
 
1.54.5 The Committee observes that all the six AIIMS under Phase I are well connected and 
are major cities in their respective States but still these new AIIMS are plagued by acute 
shortage of manpower. There is no faculty from AIIMS Delhi or other p remier Institutes 
working full time as Head of Department or as Professors in the new AIIMS. Therefore, the 
Committee is of the opinion that the perception that availability of an airport facility results in 
faculty retention is based on a false premise. T he Ministry and the Institute could have 
addressed this issue with better manpower planning rather than focusing on feasibility of 
airport. 
 
  (Para 9.6 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.54.6 AIIMS is a tertiary care Institute hence quality of doctors and me dical personnel is of 
paramount importance. It is also a fact, that availability of quality faculty, medical personnel, 
engineering and others is the most crucial impediment in functionalization of the AIIMS. 
Considering that most of the faculties and othe rs are recruited from existing Institutes of 
National Importance (INIs) / prestigious Institutes; they are not based in site locations of 

68 
 
respective AIIMS. Hence to facilitate their movement one of the criterions for setting up of 
AIIMS considers air connectivity of that particular location.  
 
1.54.7 In new AIIMS, most of faculty who have joined are trained in INIs like AIIMS, New 
Delhi/PGIMER/JIPMER/NIMHANS and other reputed Institutes like SGPGI & CMC, 
Vellore at their PG level or as SR / Faculty or in ot her capacity. Many of the Head of the 
Department in AIIMS are from different INIs or from other reputed Institutes.  Air 
connectivity is one of the many issues plaguing the availability of faculty in these Institutes. 
From the faculty perspective, there are  other constraints like availability of quality 
infrastructure like Schools, Colleges and Higher Education etc. at par with metros. Hence, 
faculties from AIIMS, Delhi or other premier Institutes do not generally prefer to join these 
Institutes as facilit ies are not at par with Delhi. Hence, there are multiple reasons for which 
availability of faculty suffers. Attracting the best Talent for the Medical faculty positions is of 
paramount necessity and apart from the aspects like Air connectivity being one of t hem, best 
Schooling facilities and Higher Education facilities, Infrastructural facilities/support systems, 
recreational and Entertainment facilities are important for life beyond office hours. 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.54.8 The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry while deciding the location of 
the new AIIMS must take note of the already existing healthcare infrastructure in the vicinity 
of the earmarked area so that duplication of healthcare facilities are avoided. The healthcare 
system should be such that delivery of medical facility and care is regionally distributed and 
even the remotest region is well within its outreach so as to address regional imbalances in 
provision of health care facilities. 
  (Para 9.7 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.54.9 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future  
guidance. Under the challenge method, the availability of already existing Health 
infrastructure is also taken into consideration. 
 
1.55 SELECTION OF PROJECT CONSULTANTS/CONTRACTORS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.55.1 The Committee during the examination of the Demands for Grants has repeatedly seen 
unprofessionalism and delay in almost all the projects being executed by HSCC. During the 
course of its study visit to Gu wahati the Committee had a firsthand view of the manner in 
which improper planning by HSCC had resulted in major design flaws. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly feels that the Ministry should follow a fair and transparent method for the 
selection of the p roject consultants and ensure that the agencies involved are technically 
competent to complete such big infrastructure projects, given the mixed track record of 
HLL/HSCC in other projects. 
  (Para 9.10 of the Report) 

69 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.55.2 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The new AIIMS 
works are now being assigned to empanelled PSUs having experience of building large 
hospitals and other building infrastructure. The PSUs are appointed as Executing Agencies 
(EAs) with full empowerment to take decisions on all contractual matters including power to 
award construction tenders. With this arrangement, the contractual matters need not have to 
come to Ministry for decision thus simplifying the process and also avoiding delays. The 
system of appointing Project Consultants (PC) has been discontinued in view of the 
unsatisfactory experience with Project Consultants in the first six AIIMS Projects. The system 
of assigning work to Executing Agencies (EAs) has been put in place since 2015 and  all new 
AIIMS and GMC upgradation work for PMSSY Phase III onwards have been assigned to 
Executing Agencies under this system. Further, since 2016 the New AIIMS works are being 
executed by the Executive Agencies in ―Engineering, Procurement and Constructi on (EPC)‖ 
mode. In the EPC system, the construction agency itself is responsible for detailed designing 
and engineering and thus the problems of coordination between the Design Consultant and the 
Construction agency and consequent risk of delays also gets systemically addressed. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.55.3 The Committee observes that in all the new AIIMS like institutions, undue delay in 
construction activities resulted in cost and time overrun. It is surprising to note that the 
timeline for completion of the construction project was not met in any of the new AIIMS and 
was further extended by 5 to 7 years. CAG in its Report No 10 had also observed that the 
scheduled dates of completion of six new AIIMS of Phase -I were between August 2011 and 
July 2013. Construction works were not completed by scheduled dates in any of the new 
AIIMS and there were delays of about four to five years. 
(Para 9.11 of the Report) 
 
1.55.4 The Committee also observes that there were major architectural design faults in the  
buildings which in turn led to more delays and escalated the cost. A lot of time had to be 
invested in correcting the structural flaws caused due to the inconsiderate design planning. 
Moreover, various arbitration cases led to stalling of the project as t he companies waited for 
dispute resolutions and settlements. The Committee also notes that till date, only AIIMS 
Bhubaneswar has completed the construction activities under all the four packages.  
 
(Para 9.12 of the Report) 
 
1.55.5 The Committee is aggriev ed at the failure of the Ministry to monitor the timely 
completion of the project, mainly the construction activities in all the new AIIMS like 
institutions. The Ministry should also ensure proper planning and timely execution for 
completion of project. Th e Institute should always conduct detailed site investigations with 
careful monitoring, collective working and effective coordination among all the stakeholders. 
The poor performance of the project consultants and the contractors has been cited as the 
most common reason behind the inordinate delay. The Committee is of the view that the 

70 
 
Ministry could have explored the idea of appointing a single agency for architectural 
design/project consultancy and construction. The Committee also understands that employi ng 
a single agency may raise concern about the flaws in any phase of the project being ignored. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should make a detailed assessment 
of the consultants/contractors and employ a trusted company with a prove n track record of 
executing such infrastructural projects. The Committee also believes that designing and 
planning is fundamental for the optimum utilisation of the space available. The Ministry 
should learn from the architectural /design failures in AIIMS  Rishikesh and ensure that such 
mistakes are avoided in the construction of other AIIMS. 
  (Para 9.13 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.55.6 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for  future 
guidance. In the light of the experience g ained with the first six AIIMS projects, the new 
AIIMS works are now being assigned to empanelled PSUs having experience of building 
large hospitals and other building infrastructure. The PSUs are appointed as Executing 
Agencies (EAs) with full empowerment to take decisions on all contractual matters including 
power to award construction tenders. The Executing Agencies are also entrusted with the 
responsibility of appointment of design consultants, finalization of detailed designs and 
handling all coordination issues between the design consultants and the construction agencies. 
Thus, the work assigned to the Executing Agency is in the nature of turnkey assignment, with 
full empowerment and accountability. With this arrangement, the contractual matters need not 
have to come to Ministry for decision thus simplifying the process and also avoiding delays. 
The above system of assigning of project execution as a turnkey work to the EA has been 
introduced in 2015 onwards other than first six AIIMS are being executed  as per the new 
system. 
 
1.55.7 The new AIIMS works system has been introduced from 2016 at AIIMS Gorakhpur, 
Bhatinda and Guwahati and also taken up by the Executing Agencies in ―Engineering, 
Procurement and Construction (EPC)‖ mode.  AIIMS Deogarh and Bil aspurhave also been 
taken up in EPC mode by the Executing Agencies. In the EPC system, the construction 
agency itself is responsible for detailed designing and engineering and thus the problems of 
coordination between the Design consultant and the Construc tion agency and consequent risk 
of delays would get systemically addressed.  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare do 
not have any departmental Civil, Electrical etc. wing with necessary expertise to assess the 
performance of Consultants / Contractors. However, Third Party Evaluation has been 
involved since Phase III of PMSSY which takes care of the systemic and structural issues 
encountered during evaluation of the project. The introduction of Panel of PSU‘s having good 
experience of construction of exe cution of large Hospital Projects shall mitigate any 
bottlenecks and drawbacks. 
 
 
 
 

71 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.55.8 The Committee is concerned with the manner in which arbitration cases have been 
dealt resulting in grant of compensations to contracto rs. The Committee recommends for an 
arbitration mechanism/cell to be institutionalized in the Ministry that would deal with all the 
arbitration cases and ensure speedy resolution. The Committee is concerned with arbitration 
issues arising in case of reputed companies like L&T and would like to be apprised of all such 
cases. The Committee recommends that a report on the status of all arbitration cases with 
respect to projects under PMSSY be provided to it so that a fair assessment of the impact of 
arbitration cases can be done. 
  (Para 9.15 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.55.9 The details of Arbitration cases arising out of implementation of six AIIMS of 
PMSSY are given in Annexure - Arbitration. As per Revised Cost Estimates, 2010 for setting 
up of six AIIMS,  the sanctioned amount by CCEA for capital construction was around Rs. 
3566.83 cr. Consultancy fee was pegged at Rs. 25 cr per Institute. Around 15 cases of dispute 
requiring Arbitration came out during implementation of the Scheme. In some of the cases 
where arbitration was completed, the Ministry / AIIMS paid around Rs. 14.7 cr to the 
contractors / Project Consultants. Rest of the awards have been challenged in court. Hence, a 
definitive figure on awarded cost can‘t be arrived at this point of time.  In six AIIMS already 
there is a team of engineers with one Superintending Engineer and it has been considered to 
deal with arbitration methods of the institutes. 
 
1.56 PROCUREMENT OF MEDICAL DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.56.1 The Committee notes that the Procurement Support Agency (PSA) failed miserably in 
its task to ensure timely delivery and installation of the medical equipment. Reasons cited for 
non-installation of the medical equipment clearly highlight the fact that the PSA faile d to 
coordinate with the Institute that led to unnecessary delays. The Committee is of the opinion 
that the PSA in collaboration with the Institute should have resolved the user requirement, site 
details and other specific requirements with respect to the Medical Equipment well in 
advance. The Committee is highly disappointed by the performance of PSA and recommends 
for a strong monitoring of the function of PSA along with quarterly submission of a status 
Report on the procurement of medical devices/equipment to the Committee under the PMSSY 
scheme. 
  (Para 9.21 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.56.2 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
guidance. The deficiency as highlighted by the Hon‘ble Committee had been noted during 
implementation of the project. Hence in subsequent phase i.e. Phase  III of PMSSY, the Roles 
and Responsibilities of the Procurement Support Agency has been clearly demarcated in the 

72 
 
Procurement Policy of the PMSSY Division. Not only the role of the Procurem ent Agency 
but also the Roles and Responsibilities of the Executing Agency and respective Govt. Medical 
College under upgradation have also been spelt out. The quarterly status report on the 
procurement of medical devices/equipment to the Committee under t he PMSSY scheme will 
be submitted by PSA regularly. First Report from PSA (HITES) submitted. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.56.3 The Committee notes that several medical devices and other equipment have been 
procured on single bid basis in all the AIIMS . In cases where multiple bids were allowed, 
many companies were rejected on technical grounds. The Institutes have insisted on US FDA 
certification even for basic equipment for which BIS/CE certified equipment of equivalent 
quality were available in the m arket. Superfluous expenditure was done to purchase beds, 
cushions, LED TV etc with US FDA certification. 
(Para 9.22 of the Report) 
 
1.56.4 The Committee strongly underlines the need to follow a competitive tendering 
mechanism for procurement of any equipm ent rather than a single bid tender procurement. 
Downright rejection on technical grounds should be avoided and any such rejection, if made, 
should always be substantiated by a detailed evaluation. The requirement of US FDA 
certification for even some of t he basic equipment is not only a burden on the exchequer but 
is also an outright contempt of the Make in India campaign. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends that procurement of equipment/medical devices by the Institutes and the 
procurement agencies should be determined by quality, price and fair trade practice. 
(Para 9.23 of the Report) 
 
1.56.5 The Committee again emphasizes that non -transparent methods in tendering and 
award of contracts raises high chances of corruption, irregularities, non -value addition and 
encourage restrictive trade practices. Fair and equal opportunity to all the tenders promotes 
healthy competition and also offers the best price to the procurement agency. 
  (Para 9.24 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.56.6 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
compliance. Drugs Regulation Se ction of the Ministry issued guidelines regarding 
requirement / non -requirement of USFDA / CE certification, etc. in procurement of medical 
devices / equipments dated 20 .02.2018 which has been circulated by the PMSSY Division to 
HLL / HITES (Procurement Support Agency) / HSCC and all functioning AIIMS. PSA has 
intimated that they are allowing the standard of BIS or European CE or US FDA for PMSSY 
Procurement. In addition to above, in the MoA with the Procurement Support Agency (PSA), 
it has been stipulated that PSA will facilitate multi -vendor participation and procurement of 
Made in India medical equipments. Respective AIIMS have also been advised to follow the 
same. The Procurement Policy adopted by the PMSSY Division since March 2017 also 
clearly spells out the same.  
 

73 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.56.7 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the multiple rejections of bids on 
technical grounds and unnecessa ry delays caused during finalizing the technical specification 
of the equipment by individual AIIMS. In this regard, the Committee appreciates the 
suggestion of AIIMS Bhubaneswar and strongly recommends finalizing uniform technical 
specifications for equip ment especially high end/sophisticated equipment for all the AIIMS. 
The technical specifications of all the equipment should be finalized by a team of technical 
experts only after a detailed and scientific assessment. The Committee strongly recommends 
that the Ministry/Institute should give serious consideration to the suggestions of AIIMS 
Bhubaneswar for streamlining the procurement process. 
(Para 9.25 of the Report) 
 
1.56.8 The Committee further recommends that the other AIIMS like Institutions should 
emulate AIIMS Bhubaneswar that has procured 130 medical equipments with ISO/BIS 
certification. This would not only minimize the cost but also promote the domestic 
manufacturers thus boosting Government's flagship Make in India campaign. 
(Para 9.26 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.56.9 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future  
guidance. The procurement process is being further streamlined in view of various 
suggestions and recommendations of the Committee. A Team of technical expe rts is involved 
in framing the technical specification. In cases of insufficient competition, the technical 
specifications are revisited by the technical experts and tender re -invited as required. The 
issue of streamlining of procurement of medical equipme nt was discussed in the 3 rd Central 
Institute Body (CIB) meeting. It has been decided that various high value equipment would be 
procured centrally by AIIMS, New Delhi . In these procurements, the technical specification s 
are being finalized by a team of te chnical experts taken from INIs including AIIMS and other 
premier Central Institutes. Necessary instructions in this regard have been issued by the 
Ministry vide letter No- Z.28016/26/2018-PMSSY-I dated 29thJuly, 2019. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.56.10 The Committee also appreciates the guidelines regarding requirement/non -
requirement of US FDA /CE certification etc. in the procurement of medical devices. The 
Para 2(i) of the guideline clearly states that wherever the Indian Standards are available th e 
Hospitals/Health Institutes/Organizations shall not insist on USFDA or CE certification. The 
Committee is concerned regarding the misuse of Para 2(ii) of these guidelines that gives an 
opportunity to the indenting organization to purchase medical equipme nt with USFDA 
certification in the name of quality. 
(Para 9.27 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.56.11 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future  
compliance. Every possible step is being taken to minimize procurement of US FDA / 

74 
 
European CE marked equipments by the Ministry / AIIMS and promote Make in India 
medical equipments. For procurement of medical equipments under PMSSY, the 
specifications are finalized by a group of specialist doctors (technical experts). The matter 
being of technical nature, the Ministry has to go by the advice of technical experts. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.56.12 The Committee notes that even simple devices are being procured with 
USFDA mandatory certification in the backdrop of the discretionary  element in the 
guidelines. The Committee terms such provision as just another attempt to camouflage the 
USFDA requirement in the name of quality which is a setback to competitive pricing. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry sho uld fix certification 
requirement as USFDA or CE or Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) or any other 
internationally accepted certification in the interim till BIS standards are established 
universally so as to leave no option for discretion and its misuse. B IS through its Medical 
Devices Management System Certification Scheme IS/ISO 13485 gives certification to the 
medical equipment which are Made in India. The Committee is of the view that procurement 
of indigenously produced medical equipment will promote a nd encourage companies to 
manufacture their products under the "Make in India" scheme creating thereby additional 
employment opportunities and empowering secondary and tertiary sector of the country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that spirit of the guideline under reference must be 
executed on the ground level to encourage flagship ―Make in India‖ programme. The matter 
may also be taken up on priority basis; with the BIS so that every single equipment procured 
in India has a BIS standard which would be equivalent to international quality certification. 
 
(Para 9.28 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.56.13 The Ministry has already initiated action in this regard. Secretary, Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare vide letter dated 7 thMay, 2018 to Director Gen eral, Bureau of 
Indian Standards requesting formulation of specifications for all the commonly procured 
medical equipments to promote ‗Make in India‘ policy of the Government of India. Bureau of 
Indian Standards has already started creation of BIS standard s for Medical Equipments and 
Devices. As per information available with the Ministry around standardization list for around 
1000 medical devices have almost been completed. Apart from the above items, HITES has 
submitted list of commonly procured medical e quipment numbering 454 items to BIS for 
standardization. BIS then formed a Core committee for formulating Indian Standard in 2018. 
The committee comprises of members from BIS, NHSRC, AMTZ, and Industry bodies like 
FICCI, Assocham, CII, AiMED, USIBC, MTaI a nd Domestic & Foreign manufacturers. 
Among these 454 items, BIS standards of around 276 items were finalized and published in 
2019. Remaining items are under process.  
 
 
 
 

75 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.56.14 The Committee has also come across several di screpancies in the procurement 
exercise. Despite similar CMC/training/warranty conditions, a substantial price differential 
has been observed in the procurement of the same medical equipment by the private corporate 
hospitals and the new AIIMS. The Committ ee is concerned to note that AIIMS like 
Institutions have purchased the same medical equipment at a higher cost than their 
counterparts in the health industry. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
carry out a detailed assessment in all such ca ses where price differential is more than 10% in 
the procurement of equipment by private/corporate hospitals and AIIMS like Institutions. 
(Para 9.29 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.56.15 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
compliance. It is submitted that HLL/ HITES (PSA) invites open tender through global tender 
mechanism. Since HLL is into the field of medical equipment procurement since last 8 -9 
years we are having our own data base. PSA also compare prices with or ders placed by other 
reputed institute like AIIMS New Delhi, PGI Chandigarh, JIMPER, NIMHANS etc. PSA also 
compare rates with big corporate Hospitals like Apollo, Max, Fortis, Sri  Gangaram Hospital 
wherever the rates of such equipment are available. Howeve r HLL/ HITES stated that with 
conditions like equipment are brand new, unused, latest launch, all necessary updates are free 
during warranty and CMC period our prices are much cheaper than the other corporate and 
Govt. Orders.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.56.16 The Committee would also like to flag the observations of CAG in its Report 
No. 10 of 2018 which inter alia highlights the following: 
 
i. In six new AIIMS (Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur and Rishikesh) 1,318 
equipment valued at Rs. 454 crore remained undelivered as on 31 March 2017 for period over 
two years from the due date of delivery.       Para 4.5.2  
 
ii. Discrepancies in records relating to receipt and supply of medical equipment costing Rs. 
3.26 crore. Audit noted that 75 equ ipment stated to have been supplied and installed by M/s 
HLL at a cost of Rs. 3.26 crore in three GMCIs viz. BMCRI -Bangalore, RIMS-Ranchi and 
JMC-Jammu were either not received by the Institutes or were not traceable in the records 
/premises of the institutes.        Case Study 5.1   
 
iii. Procurement of equipment for GMCIs was to be made by the agencies appointed by the 
Ministry or the State Government/GMCI Against the procurement orders for 818 equipment 
costing Rs. 482.21 crore for eleven GMCIs, 151 equi pment costing Rs. 51.72 crore were yet 
to become available.          Para 5.5  
 

76 
 
iv. In ten GMCIs8, 408 equipment costing Rs. 71.25 crore were either not installed or 
installed with delay ranging from three months to over seven years as on 31 March 2017. Th e 
reasons for non -installation or delayed installation were again improper procurement 
planning, pending civil and electrical works, non availability of skilled manpower, etc.  
Para5.6  
 
v. In nine GMCIs 9,977 equipment costing Rs.34.99 crore were idle/non  functional as on 31 
March 2017 due to lack of manpower, software problems lack of supporting 
equipment/infrastructure, defect.        Para 5.7  
 
vi. As per the procurement guidelines and provisions of the MoU signed between GMCIs and 
the Ministry, GMCIs h ad to ensure that no alterations and additions were made to the list of 
equipment and specifications firmed up by the medical experts. In RIMS -Ranchi, JNMC -
Aligarh, BMCRI -Bangalore, IMS -Varanasi, GMC -Mumbai and GMC -Nagpur 293 medical 
equipment costing Rs. 19.86 crore were procured for installation in the upgraded facilities. 
Audit noted that these equipment did not fall in the approved list of medical equipment of the 
Ministry.           Para 5.8 
 
(Para 9.30 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.56.17 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
compliance. However, it is also brought out that since 2014 efforts have been made to remove 
the hindrances in installation of Medical Equipment and also towards  synchronization of 
procurement activities with construction.  The PSA was strictly advised to ensure placement 
of orders and delivery in synch with the construction. As per data provided by Procurement 
Support Agency (PSA) following is the present status of medical equipment at six AIIMS: 
 
No. of Medical Equipment Items 
AIIMS Order Placed Delivered  Installed 
Bhopal 194 181 125 
Bhubaneswa
r 
194 183 167 
Jodhpur 180 166 151 
Patna 192 186 156 
Raipur 194 182 151 
Rishikesh 184 169 153 
 1138 1067 903 
From above, it can be summarized th at out of 1138 items, 1067 (93.5%) has been delivered 
and out of delivered items (80.5%) has been installed.  
 
1.56.18 The position on these observations has been adequately explained in Ministry‘s 
detailed reply to CAG. It is further stated that it is not  a correct appreciation on the part of the 
CAG that irregularities of similar nature have occurred.  
 

77 
 
AIIMS 
Total 
Line 
items 
Ordered 
by HITES 
Order 
Cancel
led 
No. of Items 
Delivered at 
site 
No. of Installed Items 
No.  % No.  % 
Bhopal 194 7 186 99% 174 94% 
Bhubanes
war 194 6 187 99% 176 94% 
Jodhpur 180 9 171 100% 158 93% 
Patna 192 6 186 100% 166 89% 
Raipur 194 7 187 100% 173 93% 
Rishikesh 184 9 174 99% 165 95% 
 
From the above table, it can be summarized that almost 99% equipment have been delivered 
and out of delivered items more than 90% have been installed.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.56.19 The Committee takes a serious view of the observations of CAG with respect 
to the performance of the PSA and would like to be apprised of the time bound corrective 
actions taken on the CAG observations so that the procurement process can be streamlined. 
 
(Para 9.31 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.56.20 In this connection, the follo wing points/facts are submitted. [An agreement has 
been entered into betwee n MoH&FW and HITES on 6 th March, 2019 for procurement of 
medical equipment for AIIMS under Phase -IV & V of PMSSY. As per ―Clause III of 
Appendix C‖ of the Contract Agreement dated 06.03.2019, signed between this Ministry and 
M/s HITES for procurement of me dical equipment for new AIIMS under Phase -IV &V of 
PMSSY, 100% procurement cost should be released to the PSA before placement of 
Notification of Award to Suppliers.  An Addendum was signed on 25.09.2024 which provides 
that 100% of procurement cost shall be released before placement of Notification of Award in 
r/o items which require opening of Line of Credit (LC) in financial institution(s) by the 'PSA; 
and for other items which does not require opening of Line of Credit (LC) in financial 
institution(s) by the 'PSA', the client reserves the right to release funds in suitable tranches. It 
was further clarified that:- 
 
(a) 25% of the equipment cost will be provided as an advance before the issuance of the 
Notification of Award (NoA). 
 
(b) After delivery of the equipme nt, HITES can further claim 50% of the cost after 
furnishing the Consignee Receipt Certificate (CRC). 
 
(c) The remaining 25% can be claimed upon receipt of the Final Acceptance Certificate 
(FAC). 
 
 

78 
 
1.57 QUALITY OF MEDICAL EDUCATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.57.1 The Committee observes that providing quality education and producing better trained 
doctors is a major challenge for the new AIIMS like Institutions. The Committee also notes 
that some of the new AIIMS have started Post Graduate courses in diffe rent disciplines. 
Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the fact that the Post Graduates from these 
Institutes lack the required clinical exposure and practical training which should have been 
integral for all Graduates/Post Graduates in the AIIMS. 
(Para 9.37 of the Report) 
 
1.57.2 The Committee is of the considered view that starting PG courses is irrelevant until 
and unless the Institute is able to provide quality training under the supervision of full time 
expert faculties. The Committee strongly emphasizes the importance of proper clinical 
training of the postgraduate students. The Committee further recommends that the AIIMS like 
Institutions should emphasize on the applied aspects of various disciplines through practical 
training. AIIMS like Inst itutions should be the frontrunner in filling the critical gaps in the 
health sector by producing well trained specialists in different disciplines. 
(Para 9.38 of the Report) 
 
1.57.3 The Committee is also concerned to note that most of the AIIMS do not hav e any 
faculty at the HOD/Professor level from AIIMS Delhi or PGI or JIPMER or any premier 
National Institute. The experience and expertise of faculty/HOD has an impact on the quality 
of Medical Graduates. In most of the AIIMS, the faculty lacks any teachin g experience from 
any of the premier Institutes. This raises serious concern about the dilution of the AIIMS 
Delhi benchmark. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the number of clinical 
cases, discipline wise that have been dealt by the PG students from various Departments. 
(Para 9.39 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.57.4 The concerns of the esteemed Committee are noted for future guidance. The Institutes 
have also been sensitized in this matter.  The matter  of starting new PG courses are first 
deliberated in the Academic Committee meeting and courses are added after ensuring that HR 
and facilities are available to provide sufficient clinical exposure and practical training to the 
PG students.  Most of the faculty in all AIIMS has been trained in I NIs and other reputed 
Institutes at the level of PG/SR/Faculty. Many of the existing HODs have worked in AIIMS, 
New Delhi/PGIMER/JIPMER/SGPGI prior to joining at new AIIMS. All faculties have the 
prescribed teaching/research experience and most of them hav e trained from INIs.  The 
faculty members are being selected by the Standing Selection Committee purely on the basis 
of merit maintaining the standards and all faculties have had experience of teaching, research 
and patient care. They train the PGs in accordance with established curricula. 
 

79 
 
1.57.5 AIIMS undertakes their responsibility of training of Post Graduate Students very 
seriously and provide therewith a structural training program in all Departments. Students 
have adequate clinical exposure in all cl inical departments with a wide variety of cases and 
diseases being treated. PG training program is carried out by each department through various 
modalities like Seminars, Journal Clubs, Interactive sessions, Case/Practicals/Community 
discussions. Post graduate students are assessed regularly through formative assessments. Post 
graduate students are involved in all activities of their departments including both teaching, 
research and patient care. The post graduate students are associated with all the clini cal cases 
both in OPD, IPDs, Operation Theatres, both in Surgical and Medical departments. As the 
patient footfall is high, a large number and variety of cases come to these AIIMS ensuring 
adequate clinical exposure of all PGs.  Efforts are made to creating  AIIMS like ―Culture of 
Excellence‖ in new AIIMS and a Visiting Committee under chair of Dr VK Paul constituted 
to identify gaps and help institutionalize systems for training, handholding and Faculty 
exchange programmes. 
 
 
1.58 LOW BED OCCUPANCY RATE 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.58.1 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the low bed occupancy in the AIIMS 
like Institutions. In case of AIIMS Bhopal, the bed occupancy rate is just 10% in the 
Ophthalmology Department against 16 beds. The Committee  is surprised to note that even in 
an important Department like Obstetrics and Gynecology, the bed occupancy is just 37% 
against 40 beds. 
(Para 9.40 of the Report) 
 
1.58.2 The Committee is of the opinion that the AIIMS like Institutions that were anticipat ed 
to serve as an excellent centre of medical care have failed miserably to accomplish the desired 
objective. The low bed occupancy rate speaks volumes about the prevalent distrust in the 
healthcare facilities of the new AIIMS. The Committee is astonished to note that even in 
Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, only 37% bed occupancy exist. 
(Para 9.41 of the Report) 
 
1.58.3 The Committee is coerced to draw comparison with a hitherto neglected institute i.e. 
Regional Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS) Im phal where the Committee witnessed for 
itself during the course of its study visit that the bed occupancy rate is 100 % in RIMS 
Imphal. The Committee also noted that there were 210 beds in Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology with 100% occupancy through out the year and RIMS carried out 11,000 
deliveries per year. The Committee would appreciate if the new AIIMS like Institutions match 
at least 25% of the performance delivery of RIMS Imphal which the Committee witnessed for 
itself during the study visit of the Committee. 
(Para 9.42 of the Report) 
 
 
 

80 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.58.4 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
guidance. Current rate of Bed Occupancy (%) is as under: 
Name of Institute Bed Occupancy (%) (in year 2025) 
Bhubaneswar 88.22 
Jodhpur 87.00 
Patna 77.31 
Bhopal 92.00 
Rishikesh 88.19 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.58.5 The Committee recommends for quarterly assessment of the bed occupancy rate in all 
AIIMS. Further, all the AIIMS should submit a status note cit ing reasons for its failure 
towards optimum utilisation of the tertiary care facilities and Low Bed Occupancy Rate. 
 
(Para 9.43 of the Report) 
Action Taken  
 
1.58.6 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
guidance. 
 
1.59 GOVERNING BODY (GB) 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.59.1 The Committee strongly believes regular review and progress meetings instills a sense 
of accountability in the Institute and this system of check and balance is very important for 
smooth running of the Institute. The Committee also recommends that all major decisions by 
the Director and the President of the Regional AIIMS, should be approved by the IB/GB and 
any new project should be taken up after due approval of the IB/GB. The Committee also 
recommends that no ex -post-facto approval should be given under any circumstances. The 
Ministry should explore the possibility to assign overall supervisory role to CIB, while 
keeping the functional autonomy of each AIIMS intact. The Committee also recommends th at 
the vacancy in respect of Members of Parliament in the Governing Body of all new AIIMS 
must be filled up without further delay. This will not only ensure representation of the people 
in the Governing body but will also result in its better functioning in a democratic manner. 
 
(Para 9.46 of the Report) 
Action Taken  
 
1.59.2 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for  future 
compliance. The issues highlighted by the Committee have already been discussed in the first 
three meetings of CIB and approved. Vacancy in respect of MP‘s in the IB of all new AIIMS 

81 
 
have been filled up. The respective I B, have been advised to constitute the GB including the 
elected representative. A Central Institute Body has been created to take major policy decision 
common to all AIIMS and to review of the financial, physical and recruitment progress and 
over all progress of the new AIIMS.  Vacancies in respect of MPs in the IBs of new AIIMS 
have been filled up.  The respective IBs have been advised to constitu te the GBs including the 
elected representative. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.59.3 The Committee also welcomes the recent process of decentralization in all the six 
AIIMS with the appointment of their respective Presidents which would entail greater 
accountability and better monitoring. The constitution of a Central Institute Body (CIB) is 
also a step in the right direction, as this would facilitate the evolution of common standards 
across all AIIMS on all important benchmarks like human resources, pro curement, expansion 
and project execution. The Committee would also like to appreciate the increasing receptivity 
and meticulous approach of the Ministry in taking corrective measures in rectifying the flaws 
in the execution of PMSSY scheme and hopes that objective of the PMSSY scheme i.e. to 
provide tertiary health care facilities in the remotest regions of the country is realized. 
 
(Para 9.47 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken  
1.59.4 Matter of Record. 
 
1.60 MONITORING MECHANISM 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.60.1 The Committee strongly recommends that the State Project Monitoring Committee 
(PMC) should meet regularly and monitor the progress of the work being carried out in each 
AIIMS and GMCs. Each Institute should submit a quarterly report to the Ministry u pdating it 
about the status of infrastructure, faculty and construction activities. 
(Para 9.49 of the Report) 
Action Taken  
 
1.60.2 It is mentioned here that the State level project monitoring mechanism has been got 
activated through intense engagements wi th the State Governments for the new AIIMS and 
upgradation works under Phase -III and later Phases work.  Presently with respect to Phase III 
and later Phases work, Project Monitoring Group (PMG) meetings under the chairmanship of 
Chief Secretary of respecti ve State are being held to review progress and resolve State 
specific local issues.  The progress of the projects is now being monitored through an online 
Dashboard created in the Ministry which is updated on monthly basis for all PMSSY work 
(Civil and Medi cal Equipments) which also includes Hospital parameters like OPD / IPD 
attendance, availability of beds, surgeries done alongwith fund disbursed and utilization. 
 
 

82 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.60.3 The Committee also strongly recommends that AIIMS like  Institutions should be 
included in the MeraAspataal/My hospital initiative of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare that captures patient feedback for the services received at the hospital through user -
friendly multiple channels such as Short Message Service (SMS), Outbound Dialing (OBD) 
mobile application and web portal. The Committee is of the opinion that patient‘s feedback is 
critical for ensuring accountability of the health care system in the country. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends for inclu sion of all AIIMS like Institutions in the MeraAspataal 
initiative in order to enhance its operational proficiency. 
(Para 9.50 of the Report) 
Action Taken  
 
1.60.4 It is submitted that all new AIIMS are already on boarded on MeraAspataal/ My 
hospital application.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.60.5 The Committee also recommends that the Secretary /Divisional Head Level Officers 
from the PMSSY should make frequent field visits to all the AIIMS like Institutions to assess 
the ground realities of the Insti tutes. The Committee strongly urges the officers from the 
PMSSY division to carry out regular inspections of the sites rather than just relying on the 
progress report submitted by the respective Institutes. Ministry should also ensure that the 
work on paper corresponds to the actual performance of the Institute. 
(Para 9.51 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.60.6 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
compliance. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.60.7 The Committee notes that there are several resource constraints in all the States in the 
Health Sector. The Committee is of the view that despite the existing constraints, all AIIMS 
like Institutions have got preferential treatment from the Ministry and the State but these 
Institutes have failed to use this preferential treatment to their advantage. The Committee is 
disappointed to note that all the AIIMS like Institutions struggle in optimally utilizing the 
available resources. The Committee strongly recommends the Institutes to take suo moto 
cognizance of the delay in construction activities and play a more proactive role in 
establishing themselves as centre of apex medical care and facilities 
(Para 9.52 of the Report) 
Action Taken  
 
1.60.8 Observations / Recommendations of the C ommittee have been noted for future  
guidance. 

83 
 
1.61 DIALYSIS FACILITIES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.61.1 The Committee notes that in AIIMS Bhopal, only three out of sanctioned eight 
dialysis machines are functional; in AIIMS Bhubaneswar; setting up of a dialysis unit with 14 
dialysis machines is still under process; in AIIMS Jodhpur, 11 dialysis machines are 
functional; in AIIMS Rishikesh 3 dialysis machines are functional; in AIIMS Patna and 
AIIMS Raipur, the Department of Nephrology is not yet functional. 
(Para 9.53 of the report) 
 
1.61.2 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that all new AIIMS should establish 
a fully equipped Nephrology Department immediately. In view of the rising demand of 
dialysis services, a fully functional Nephrology De partment is critical in providing tertiary 
health care facilities. The Committee also recommends that all AIIMS like Institutions should 
ensure availability of adequate number of functional dialysis machines and skilled manpower 
in the Institute. 
(Para 9.54 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.61.3 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
guidance. The status of Nephrology Department in these six AIIMS is as below : 
 
 Nephrology 
Dept. 
No. of dialysis 
machines Remarks 
Bhopal Functional 03 Functional with adequate staff 
Bhubaneswar Functional 15 Functional with adequate staff 
Jodhpur Functional 13 Functional with adequate staff 
Patna Non- Functional 05 Dialysis facility functional on outsourced 
basis 
Raipur Functional 21 Functional with adequate staff 
Rishikesh Functional 23 Functional with adequate staff 
 
1.62 HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING AGENCY (HEFA) 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.62.1 The Committee is aware that raising funds from the market through HEFA is a 
herculean tas k and there would be a requirement of pledging of Government resources as 
collateral to HEFA to obtain loans. It has also been further mentioned that these loans would 
be serviced through internal accruals. The Committee is concerned to note that non -judicious 
usage of loans from HEFA by the regional AIIMS will create a vicious cycle wherein these 
AIIMS would be subject to a debt trap and would again seek budgetary support to service the 
loans obtained from HEFA. The Committee is of the considered opinion t hat any loan 

84 
 
proposal sent to HEFA should be duly vetted by the CIB after obtaining a comparative 
assessment from all the six AIIMS regarding the sourcing of funds and the ability of AIIMS 
to service the funds. The Committee foresees a situation where reck less expenditure from the 
loans obtained from HEFA may result in a situation where the incumbent Directors of the 
regional AIIMS may retire but the new incumbent would be faced with a fresh challenge of 
servicing the loans obtained from HEFA. 
(Para 9.57 of the Report) 
Action Taken  
 
1.62.2 The Ministry is providing funds to the respective AIIMS through Grants -in-Aid 
(General) which is provided by the Ministry of Finance through Budgetary grants for 
servicing of the loan from HEFA. Respective AIIMS do not ha ve any obligation to service 
loans from HEFA through internal revenue generation. There will be no liability for the 
respective AIIMS as far as HEFA loan is concerned. Taking note of the concern raised by the 
Hon‘ble DRPSC, the CIB has duly considered the proposal/demands of the functional AIIMS 
for non- DPR works and allow availing of HEFA loans by these AIIMS keeping in view the 
long terms loan servicing obligations of the HEFA loans. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.62.3 The Committee would like to be u pdated on a quarterly basis regarding all 
loan/advances obtained from HEFA alongwith the measures/proposals under consideration 
towards timely repayment of these loans. The Committee also recommends that 
accountability of these loans be clearly fixed so th at there are no legal issues in this regard in 
future. The Committee also recommends tapping donations and CSR funds as has been done 
by AIIMS Bhubaneswar and AIIMS Patna for projects like Dharmshala, etc. by the regional 
AIIMS. 
(Para 9.58 of the Report) 
Action Taken  
 
1.62.4 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future  
guidance.  
1.63 SPECIALITY/SUPER SPECIALITY DEPARTMENTS AND ADVANCE 
CENTRES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.63.1 The Committee appreciates the good intention b ehind construction of such 
Departments but after a broad study of all the AIIMS like Institutes, the Committee realizes 
that there is an urgent need to scrutinize the proper functioning of such Departments. In many 
AIIMS, the required infrastructure is pre sent but due to acute shortage of the medical 
faculty/specialist, the super -speciality departments are non -functional. This is a typical 
example of constructing buildings without foundation. With no staff, the infrastructure and 
the resources are lying untapped and unutilized. 
(Para 9.60 of the Report) 

85 
 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.63.2 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for taking  
correcting measures. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.63.3 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to th e different proposals of AIIMS 
like Institutions for establishing Advance Ophthalmic Centre, Advance Cardiac Centre, 
Advance Neurosciences Centre, Advance Transplant Centre & Advance Oncology Centre. 
(Para 9.61 of the Report) 
 
1.63.4 The Committee is espec ially worried about the viability of such Advance Centres in 
these six AIIMS like Institutions that have a very low average daily OPD footfall, with the 
highest being 2,949 at AIIMS Bhubaneswar and the lowest being 1300 at AIIMS Raipur. The 
Committee canno t comprehend the need for establishing advance centre for Institutes with 
such low OPD footfall, especially when these Institutes have failed to make optimum 
utilization of the available resource and infrastructure. The Committee also emphasizes that 
many faculty posts are still lying vacant in various Departments and even Speciality and 
Super Speciality Departments are non -functional. In such scenario, these Institutes vying for 
Advance Centres only reflect a poor understanding of the existing grim reality. 
(Para 9.62 of the Report) 
 
1.63.5 The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry/Institute should carry out a 
cost benefit analysis before any proposal for building an advance centre in the new AIIMS is 
passed. The Committee would like the Ministry/ Institute to furnish a status note and a cost 
benefit analysis on the proposed and sanctioned advance centers in all the AIIMS like 
Institutions. The Committee is of the view that the decisions regarding establishment of 
Advance Centers in all the new AIIM S should be taken by Central Institute Body. The 
Committee also strongly recommends that in the new AIIMS, an advance centre should only 
be established if the Institutions are able to achieve an OPD level which is 50% of the average 
daily OPD footfall of A IIMS Delhi. The utility of such advance centres has to be closely 
scrutinized so that the available resources are optimally put to use. 
 
(Para 9.63 of the Report) 
Action Taken  
 
1.63.6 Observations / Recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted  for 
future guidance. Each proposal for Advanced Centre is examined in the SFC and GB meeting 
of the respective Institutes. The Institutes have been sensitized about the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee. Further, all investment proposals above  
Rs.100 crores are also brought before the Central Institute Body  (CIB). However, as advised 
by the Committee, the various proposals regarding establishment of Advanced Centres will be 
brought before the CIB for consideration, approval.  

86 
 
 
1.63.7 It is, how ever mentioned there that AIIMS, Delhi has attained its current Status of 
Excellency in more than six decades after its establishment. The size of AIIMS, Delhi  in 
respect of bad capacity and number of faculty is more than three times of the size of six ne w 
AIIMS. In view of this, the new Institutes may not able to achieve the specified 50% of 
average of daily OPD footfall of AIIMS, Delhi even on attaining almost 100% capacity 
utilization. The need for augmenting facilities and setting up of Advanced Centre s to provide 
advance tertiary health care, medical education and research facilities in these new AIIMS 
which are established in different regions of the country, would be expected to arise sooner as 
the Institute attained full 960 bed capacity and availability of 70-80% of faculty. However, the 
observations and concern made by the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted and due care will 
be taken to set up Advanced Centres only after the Institutes have attained certain level of 
maturity in terms of capacity utilization and availability of human resource.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.63.8 The Committee also flags the fellowship programmes in different Departments that 
are being carried out by these Institutes. The Committee strongly recommends that such 
fellowship programmes should be carried out only when the Institutes are capable of 
providing the required infrastructure and quality training and are operating at its full capacity. 
(Para 9.64 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.63.9 Observations / Recommendati ons of the Committee have been noted for future  
guidance.  
1.64 OPD FOOTFALL 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.64.1 The Committee also hopes that the possibility of duplicating OPD footfall data should 
be avoided. The Committee strongly recommends that all  the patients should be given a 
unique ID that should form the basis of measuring patient load in an Institute. The possibility 
to exaggerate OPD footfall/number of procedures (major and minor surgeries) when the same 
patient visits multiple Departments in  a day should be avoided. The Committee strongly 
recommends all the Institutes to measure accurate OPD footfall/procedures and avert from 
extrapolating the OPD/surgery numbers. The Committee strongly advocates strengthening the 
system of online registratio n for all the AIIMS like Institutions and work towards effective 
implementation of Hospital Management Information System. 
(Para 9.65 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.64.2 The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
guidance. Each Institute has been advised to implement a hospital information system with 

87 
 
having provision for unique ID. The online registration system developed by NIC and 
implemented in AIIMS, Delhi, has also been adopted and implemented in all the six AIIMS.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.64.3 The Committee would also like to be apprised whether the establishment of AIIMS in 
the six States has had any impact on the patient load in AIIMS Delhi from these States. The 
idea behind regional AIIMS was to provide  tertiary health care facilities in all the States so 
that the patients from these States do not have to rush to AIIMS Delhi for even basic medical 
care. Therefore, the Committee desires AIIMS Delhi to submit a report on the impact these 
new AIIMS like Institutions had on patient load. AIIMS Delhi should also submit a report on 
the number of Patients that were transferred from the regional AIIMS to AIIMS Delhi. 
 
(Para 9.66 of the Report) 
Action Taken  
 
1.64.4 The present status of OPD and IPD in the six Institutes is as under: 
 
S. 
No. AIIMS IPD         (1.04.2024-31.12.2024) OPD      (1.04.2024-31.12.2024) 
1. Bhopal 62,696 11,28,098 
2. Bhubaneswar 31,102 9,48,881 
3. Jodhpur 99,740 9,54,124 
4. Patna 43,836 8,22,836 
5. Raipur 37,640 7,30,809 
6. Rishikesh 87,509 9,86,996 
 Total 3,62,523 55,71,744 
 
1.65 OPERATION THEATRES AND SURGERY ISSUES  
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.65.1 The Committee strongly recommends all the AIIMS like Institute to expedite the 
construction of the Operation Theatres and provid e the required infrastructure. The 
Committee also recommends all the AIIMS like Institutes to carry out a detailed analysis of 
the operation theatre utilization at their respective Institutes and submit the same to the 
Committee. The Committee also believe s that there is an urgent need to follow strict 
Operation Theatre guidelines so that OTs start on time and the time between two surgeries in 
a single day is optimally utilized and not wasted. Better planning of operation schedule and 
timings can definitely increase the efficiency of OTs. The Committee also takes a strong note 
of the existing large discrepancies in the data provided by each Institute. The Committee 
strongly recommends following a uniform criteria for classification of surgeries as minor and 
major so that accurate data related to the number of surgeries conducted can be obtained. 
 
(Para 9.68 of the Report) 
 

88 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.65.2 The observations / suggestions of the Committee are noted for future guidance. The 
observation of the committee to e nsure optimal utilization of the operation theatres  at AIIMS 
Hospital including recommendation to ensure timely starting of operation theatres and to 
decrease the time wastage between two operations and to improve operation theatres 
schedules and timings has been noted. All AIIMS have been advised for optimal utilization of 
the scarce resource like operation theatre time.  The Institutes have also been advised to 
expedite the construction of OTs. Substantial progress has been achieved in the matter as 
brought out in following table : 
AIIMS Beds Modular OTs Other OTs Sanctioned Installed 
Bhopal 938 24 24 14 
Bhubaneswar 960 25 25  
Jodhpur 960 30 30 10 
Patna 960 28 28 3 
Raipur 960 28 28 13 
Rishikesh 960 25 25 29 
 5738 160 160 69 
 
1.65.3 Basket of services in six AIIMS has been witnessing fast growth hand presently, on an 
average, more than 12000 patients visit OPD every day and about 2600 major surgeries are 
getting performed every month in these six AIIMS. The present status of functional beds is as 
under: 
AIIMS Functional Beds 
Bhopal 1457 
Bhubaneswar 1370 
Jodhpur 1046 
Patna 1213 
Raipur 1003 
Rishikesh 960 
 7049 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.65.4 CAG in its Report No 10 of 2018 has highlighted the findings of previous audit in the 
following paragraph:-  
'The Audit Report of the CAG (Report No.19 of 2013 - Union Government -Civil) 
contained observations relating to irregularities in selection of project consultants, irregular 
expenditure on escalation charges amounting to Rs. 1.56 crore, in correct release of 
mobilization advance amounting to Rs. 8.32 crore to contractors, excess payment of Rs.25.20 
lakh to in -house consultant and release of payment to PSU consultants based on estimated 

89 
 
fund requirements instead of on actual progress of work.  In reply to the audit comments, the 
Ministry had stated that the audit findings were noted for avoidance of such occurrence in 
future. However, irregularities of similar nature have been noticed during the current audit 
as mentioned in Paras 2.5, 3.11, 4.4.2 (b) and 4.4.3 (iii) of this Report.' 
(Para 9.69 of the Report) 
 
1.65.5 The CAG Report on PMSSY has highlighted various inadequacies and problem areas 
in setting up of new AIIMS and upgradation programme of Government Medical Colleges. 
The CAG Report No . 10 contains observations relating to cost and time overrun, excess 
payment of mobilization advance, delay in delivery and installation of medical equipment, 
shortage of faculty and non -faculty posts, non -functional speciality and super speciality 
Departments etc. The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures that have been 
taken by the Ministry and the Institutes to overcome all the inadequacies and address the 
CAG observations in its audit Report. 
(Para 9.70 of the Report) 
Action Taken  
 
1.65.6 The position on these observations has been adequately explained in Ministry‘s 
detailed reply. It is further stated that it is not a correct appreciation on the part of the CAG 
that irregularities of similar nature have occurred. The position on these obs ervations of CAG 
has been explained fully in Ministry‘s response to CAG . Institutes are taking necessary action 
to ensure that new construction projects are completed within the stipulated period of the 
contract. Similarly, procurement of medical equipment  are also processed where site for 
installation and faculty to operate the equipment are available.  It is stated that the several 
steps/policy interventions have been taken by the Government to improve the faculty position 
so as to ensure full functionality of all Departments under the six new AIIMS. In addition, the 
Ministry has also taken following policy initiatives for bringing about improved availability 
of trained HR at National Level at large. 
 
1.65.7 A Central Institute Body has been created and emp owered to take common policy 
decisions concerning all AIIMS to bring uniformity in policies across all AIIMS and to 
facilitate effective Governance of the AIIMS.  All AIIMS have been advised to conduct 
recruitments for Non -faculty (Technical) cadres on cent ralized basis. It has also mentioned 
here that presently the construction is being taken up in the EPC mode wherein extensive 
problem of large deviation / escalation would get systematically obviated. Further, the system 
of assigning the construction work to executing agencies on turnkey basis with empowerment 
to handle all contractual matters at their end has been introduced.  The executing agencies 
have been mandated to deploy and use Project Management Software to bring about 
improved project management at their end. The Ministry has also developed an online 
dashboard to facilitate a closer and more effective monitoring. The functional AIIMS have 
been empowered with greater delegation of powers in construction, procurement upto  Rs. 5 
crore in cases and al so in administrative matters. The procedure for procurement of medical 
equipment has been simplified and made more efficient with greater delegation and 
empowerment of the Procurement Support Agency (PSA) which is entrusted with the work of 

90 
 
procurement of medical equipments. All new AIIMS are now being designed keeping in view 
the ―GRIHA‖ norms for green buildings. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
1.65.8 The Committee besides recommending for decentralization of healthcare facilities in 
the most remote areas  of the country is inclined to emphasize that central Government and 
State Government must make policy and chalk out strategy and formulate/appropriate course 
of action for delivering Health Care Services at the Doorstep with the purpose of making 
Ayushman Bharat a successful scheme. 
(Para 9.71 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken  
 
1.65.9 Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri - Jan ArogyaYojana (AB PM -JAY) is a flagship 
scheme of the Government which provides Rs 5 lakh health cover per beneficiary family 
annually for sec ondary and tertiary care to approx. 55 crore beneficiaries (12.37 crore 
economically vulnerable families). Recently, it expanded to cover approx. 6 crore senior 
citizens (70+) from 4.5 crore families, regardless of socio -economic status. Under Ayushman 
Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan ArogyaYojana (AB PM -JAY) initially, 10.74 Crore beneficiary 
families under AB PM -JAY were targeted on the basis of the Socio -economic Caste Census 
(SECC) of 2011 using select deprivation and occupational criteria across rural and urb an 
areas respectively to identify the families. Further, in January 2022, on the basis of decadal 
growth rate of 11.7%, the Government of India, revised the beneficiary base to 12 Crore 
families. 
 
1.65.10 Further, in April 2022, as per the approval of Govt  of India, NHA had 
provided the flexibility to States/UTs to use non -SECC Aadhaar verified databases of similar 
socio-economic profile for verification of beneficiaries against such SECC beneficiaries who 
couldn't be identified and verified. Accordingly, m any States have used databases of poor and 
vulnerable families against unidentified SECC families. (including National Food Security 
Act, State specific datasets, etc).  In March 2024, 37 lakh families of ASHA, Anganwadi 
Worker and Anganwadi Helpers were al so included in the scheme.  Further, on 29th October 
2024, the Government expanded AB PM -JAY to provide free treatment benefits of up to ₹5 
lakh per year to all senior citizens aged 70 years and above, irrespective of their socio -
economic status. This aim to benefit approx. 6 crore s enior citizens from 4.5 crore families 
across the country.  In addition, many States/UTs implementing AB PM -JAY have expanded 
the beneficiary base under the scheme, at their own cost. 
 
1.65.11 Overall Scheme Progress 
 Scheme has been implemented in all the States/UTs except West Bengal 
 Ayushman Cards Created: As on 01st April 2025, more than 40 Crore Ayushman 
cards have been created. 
 Hospitals Empanelled: A total of 31,005 hospitals are empanelled under the scheme 
out of which 13,879 empanelled hospitals are private and the rest are public. 

91 
 
 Hospital Admissions: More than 9.19 Crore Hospital Admissions worth over Rs. 1.29 
Crore have been undertaken in the scheme since its inception. 
 Fund Released to States:  In FY 2024 -25, approx. 6637 Cr have been released to 
States/UTs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

92 
 
CHAPTER–II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
A. AIIMS BHOPAL 
 
2.1 Budgetary Allocation 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.1.1 The Committee notes with concern the observations of CAG that only 50% 
(approximately) of the funds allocated for AIIMS, Bhopal had been utilized between 2011 
and 2017. The Committee is of the firm view that the budgetary allocation should have been 
properly utilized under a strategic plan of action to prevent underutilization. The Committee 
observes the increasing trend of expenditure since 2017 -18 when the expansion work got 
momentum. The Committee also observes that allocation of funds to the tune of Rs.  99.90 
crore in the financial year 2017-18 was less than the actual expenditure of Rs. 237.24 crore in 
the said year and the remaining expenditure was met with unspent balances of the prior 
period. 
(Para 2.6 of the Report) 
Action Taken          
 
2.1.2 The substantial progress towards utilization of funds was made in the year 2017 -18. 
The unutilized balance was brought down to Rs.97.15 Crore as on March, 2018.  There was 
further improvement in the expenditure percentage and reduction in un -utilised fund duri ng 
2018-19 as brought out below: - 
 
Budget  
Head 
Opening Balance 
as on 01.04.18 
GIA Released by 
MoHFW 
Expenditure in FY 
2018-19 
Balance available 
with AIIMS as on 
01.03.19 
GIA (Gen) -1.78 65.23 89.43 -25.99 
GIA (Cap) 72.13 12.50 63.24 21.39 
GIA (Sal) 26.80 69.02 80.40 15.43 
Total 97.15 146.75 233.07 10.83 
 
2.1.3 The Ministry has further fine -tuned releases using PFMS so as to maintain a fund 
balance at a level even lesser than requirement of the Institute for the next 03 months.  It is 
also submitted th at Budgetary projections are based on anticipated expenditure against DPR 
construction work and procurement of medical equipment and on account of joining of 
faculty and functionalisation of services. However, despite several attempts to fill up the 
vacancies, the requisite qualified candidates as per AIIMS standard could not be made 
available due to which functionalisation of certain services could not be initiated resulting in 
under-utilisation of funds.  

93 
 
2.1.4 Since there was recruitment of faculty and n ursing staff during the years 2019 -20 and 
2020-21 there was substantial improvement in fund utilisation and most of the buildings had 
been completed and brought into use and all the courses, including specialty and super -
speciality, have b een started at AI IMS, Bhopal during this period. During year 2019 -20, the 
Ministry ensured release of the Grants-in-Aid (GiA) to the AIIMS Bhopal only after obtaining 
provisional utilization certificate so as to ensure that balance GiA position at AIIMS is 
approximately of 3 months‘ requirements as per GFR guidelines, as would be evident from 
the table below: 
 
2.1.5 It may be noted from the above table that attempts to fine tune the release and 
optimum funds utilization by AIIMS, Bhopal since 2018 -19 have resulted in desired financial 
prudence. Further there is no unspent grant by the end of FY 2023 -24 as entire amount was 
utilized. 
 
Budget  Head GIA Released by 
MoHFW 
Expenditure in FY 2023-24 Balance available with 
AIIMS as on 31.03.2024 
GIA (Gen) 211.00 211.00 0.00 
GIA (Cap) 116.09 116.09 0.00 
GIA (Sal) 369.00 369.00 0.00 
Total 696.09 696.09 0.00 
              
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.1.6 The Committee, during its visit to AIIMS, Bhopal observed that construction activities 
were still going on. Even the residential accommodation facilities for doctors and students 
were yet to be completed by CPWD. The Committee feels that the slow pace of progress 
would have adversely affected the quality of healthcare services and education being imparted 
at the Institute. The Committee calls upon the Institute to undertake prudent assessment of 
fund requirement and accordingly project its budgetary demand with due justification. 
 (Para 2.7 of the Report) 
 
2.1.7 The Committee is not convinced with the submission of the Institute that the 
underutilization of funds was due to undue lags in the construction activities, recruitment 
process and hospital services. The Committee, therefore, recommends that AIIMS, Bhop al 
must formulate a correct estimate for projects, prepare DPR and ensure administrative 
GIA Opening 
balance on 
01.04.2019 
GIA 
received 
during 
2019-20 
Total Expenditure Average 
Monthly 
expenditure  
Closing 
Balance as 
on 
31.03.2020 
General -25.99 94.04 68.05 87.07 7.26 -19.02 
Capital 21.39 76.78 98.17 70.25 5.85 27.92 
Salary 15.43 153.86 169.29 147.92 12.33 21.37 
Total 10.83 324.68 335.51 305.24 25.44 30.27 

94 
 
approvals in order to complete the remaining projects within set timelines and at the estimated 
cost. 
(Para 2.8 of the Report)  
 
Action Taken 
2.1.8 The observation / r ecommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for 
future guidance. It may be brought out here that the institute has been able to fine tune 
projection and fund requirement for 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 with greater accuracy and the 
utilization position h as improved drastically in these years as would be evident from the 
position furnished in the paras above. 
2.1.9 Close monitoring over the progress of work for construction of the residential 
accommodation facilities for doctors and students (Extension of Boy‘s & Girls Hostel) have 
been ensured and work has been completed by CPWD and the assets are under beneficial use.  
The observation of the Committee has already been complied with. 
 
2.2 PROCUREMENT OF MEDICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.2.1 The Committee understands that United States Food and Drug Administration 
(USFDA) is a regulatory mechanism/certification for protecting and promoting public health 
by way of control and supervision of food and drugs including medical devices with specif ic 
reference to the United States but there is hardly any country in the world besides the United 
States which makes a provision for allowing USFDA as a mandatory condition. The 
Committee fails to comprehend the reasons for procuring 50 equipment s with USF DA 
certification, some of which are easily available with CE marking and Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) (CE/BIS) certification. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the 
Institute to procure equipment with CE/BIS certification so as to encourage Medica l Device 
Industry in India and participate in the Government's "Make in India" initiative. 
(Para 2.17 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.2.2 Drugs Regulation Section of the Ministry vide letter dated 20.02.2018 issued 
guidelines regarding requirement/ non -requirement of USFDA/ CE certification, etc. in 
procurement of medical devices/ equipment which was also circulated by the PMSSY 
Division to HLL/ HITES (Procurement Support Agency) / HSCC and all functioning AIIMS. 
PSA has intimated that besides USFDA they ar e also allowing option of BIS or European CE 
standard to the vendors as available, for PMSSY procurement . Procurement of Equipment in 
AIIMS, Bhopal is being done through their Procurement Support Agency (PSA) i.e. M/s 
HLL-HITES (PSA)/e-Tender/GeM in which following options are generally mentioned in the 
tenders for the purpose of wide range for economic selection of the equipment proposed to be 

95 
 
procured i.e. DCGI/CE (Europe)/USFDA/WHO/GMP/BIS/IS/CDSCO (whichever is 
applicable for medical devices /Equipment/ consumables). Besides above, adopting clause 
regarding purchase preference policy is also mentioned wherever possible to give thereby 
importance to ―Make in India‖ products. At present, the procurement of medical equipment at 
AIIMS Bhopal is carried out in  accordance with government guidelines through mandatory 
online platforms such as the GEM portal, CPP portal and procurement support agencies like 
HLL/HITES as per MOU.  The tender documents are designed to facilitate a broad  and cost-
effective selection of the equipment to be procured. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.2.3 The Committee believes that the lackadaisical approach of the Institute has resulted in 
non-installation of the equipment which has delayed operationalization of the critical 
healthcare f acilities, thus, depriving the patients of key diagnostic and in -patient facilities. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Institute to have a system in place for ensuring 
timely procurement as well as installation of the equipment so that the equipment are properly 
and optimally utilized for the purpose for which they were procured. The Committee also 
recommends for immediate installation of 21 types of equipment costing Rs. 27.9 crore that 
have been procured but not installed yet. The Committee furt her calls upon the Ministry to 
look into matter of procurement of 25 equipment costing Rs. 84.7 crore which are yet to be 
received and installed in AIIMS, Bhopal. In view of the delays in procurement and 
installation of equipment in the Institute, the Comm ittee impresses upon the Ministry to 
ensure effective monitoring through ABC analysis (Always a better control) by the Technical 
Specification Committees at the Ministry and institutional level to ensure much needed 
synchronization and coordination of acti vities with regard to procurement and installation of 
equipment. 
(Para 2.23 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.2.4 Presently, the construction of all infrastructure works has been completed. In the 
present system, there exist a check and balance to ensure time ly supply of equipment by 
forecasting the site readiness from the user end and other resources linked with installation of 
the equipment. Further, a suitable provision has been incorporated in tender document for 
work on turkey basis for smooth installatio n and commissioning of the equipment wherever 
applicable.  At present, AIIMS Bhopal does not have any equipment which is procurement 
and uninstalled. 
2.3 BLOOD BANK FACILITY 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.3.1 The Committee is disturbed to note the non -availability of blood bank facility at the 
Institute even after five years of functional IPD services. The Committee is of the view that 
blood bank services are an integral part of any hospital system. The Committee, therefore, 

96 
 
strongly recommends to the In stitute to expedite the setting up of fully functional blood bank 
facility without further delay. 
(Para 2.51 of the report) 
Action Taken 
2.3.2 The fully functional blood bank facility is available at AIIMS, Bhopal. 
2.4 ISSUE OF CONTRACTUAL APPOINTMENTS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.4.1 The Committee was informed that the doctors of AYUSH Hospital have been working 
on contractual basis for the past several years. The Committee during its study visit found that 
the OPD footfall in the AYUSH centre was muc h higher despite limited infrastructure. The 
Committee appreciates the work ethics of the three AYUSH doctors in treating a large 
number of patients having faith in the Indian system of Medicine. The Committee feels that 
given the positive response towards  AYUSH services, the Ministry should contemplate of 
having a permanent staff instead of engaging contractual workforce. This would ensure job 
stability and security to the employees and in turn the organization would be benefitted from 
huge experience of t hese doctors gained during their service at AYUSH Hospital. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Department to revisit the rules regarding 
contractual appointments so as to regularize the existing AYUSH doctors to permanent 
appointments in view of their dedicated service and outstanding performance. 
(Para 2.54 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.4.2 Ministry has decided to integrate the AYUSH in the tertiary care system in new 
AIIMS by augmenting the strength of AYUSH professionals and by also crea ting scientific 
posts in order to undertake academic Ph.D programme and finding solutions to India‘s public 
health challenge. M/o AYUSH had advised that each of the new and upcoming AIIMS should 
have augmented faculty / doctor strength and higher focus in one particular traditional system 
of medicine which may be having popularity in the particular region. For example, 
AYURVEDA system of Indian medicine is recommended for AIIMS, Rishikesh, while 
SIDDHA is identified for upcoming AIIMS in Tamil Nadu, where S IDDHA is popular. Each 
such augmented medicine system will have additional 16 posts, consisting of posts of 
Professor, Additional Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, SR/JR posts. This 
will be over and above the already sanctioned five Medi cal Officer posts, one each in 
Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy. The above structure of 
AYUSH Department has been included in the Standard Staffing Pattern approved by Central 
Institute Body (CIB). The proposal for creation of p osts is being taken up with Department of 
Expenditure accordingly. 
2.4.3 Institute has completed the recruitment of Medical Officers of AYUSH Department at 
AIIMS Bhopal against the Advertisement dated 20.07.2017.  In the light of the direction, of 

97 
 
the esteemed Committee, the Ministry has, ab -initio, considered the matter Regularisat ion of 
Contractual employees.  In this regard, a reference has been made to DoPT vide the 
Ministry‘s letter dated 28/9/2018 seeking their guidance as to what preferential treatmen t and 
any other benefits that can be extended in favour of the contractual staff in the matter of 
considering them for  regular appointment in AIIMS. Clarifications form DoPT has been 
received in the above matter. It has been advised that regularization of contractual employees 
is not permissible in the light of the Judgement pronounced by the Hon‘ble Supreme Court in 
OA No. 43/2018 in the case of Uma Devi. As regards the standard staffing pattern of AYUSH 
structure, the matter has already been taken up with  Department of Expenditure on 27 th May, 
2019 and the same is under process.  The following four Medical Officers have joined the 
AYUSH Department on regular basis as per details given below –  
  
1. Dr. BarkatiMohdTarique, MO (Unani)  w.e.f. 15.10.2018 
2. Dr.Ashish Kumar Dixit, MO (Homeopathy) w.e.f. 15.10.2018 
3. Dr.RanjanaPandey, MO (Ayurveda)  w.e.f. 02.11.2018 
4. Dr. Mudda Sofia, MO (Yoga) w.e.f. 01.04.2019 (after resignation of   
Dr.Mooventhan A., MO(Yoga). His date of joining was 03.11.2018.     
 
2.4.4 With regard to three Medical Officers namely Dr. Ajay Singh Baghel (Homeo), 
Dr.Amit Kumar Verma (Homeo) and Dr. Shakti Singh Parihar (Ayur) who were working on 
contractual basis in AYUSH, they  have been relieved of their services w.e.f. 03.08.2019 
following the dismissal of Misc. Petition No. 4640/2018 (Dr.Amit Kumar Verma& others 
VsAIIMS Bhopal) on 30.07.2019. However, aggrieved with their termination order dated 
27.05.2019 passed by the Institute, they have filed Individual cases 2019 and the Hon‘ble 
CAT Jabalpur was pleased to pass Interim Order dated 29.05.2019 with the direction to stay 
the impugned order dated 27.05.2019 till further orders and the respondents were directed to 
continue the services of the applicant. The Hon‘ble High Court has already dismissed the 
Misc. Petition No. 4640/2018 and all the above named three Medical Officers (Contractual) 
of AYUSH Department were relieved of their services w.e.f. 03.08.2019. AYUSH is 
functional at AIIMS, Bhopal.  The following Six Medical Officers (Regular ) are working in 
the AYUSH Department as per details given below –    
1. Dr. Danish Javed, Senior Medical Officer – AYUSH 
2. Dr. Barkati Mohd Tarique, MO (Unani)  (DOJ: 15.10.2018) 
3. Dr. Ashish Kumar Dixit, MO (Homeopathy) (DOJ: 15.10.2018) 
4. Dr. Ranjana Pandey, MO (Ayurveda)  (DOJ: 02.11.2018) 
5. Dr. Mudda Sofia, MO (Yoga) w.e.f. 01.04.2019 (after resignation of  
Dr.Mooventhan A., MO (Yoga) (DOJ: 03.11.2018).   
6. Dr.  A Aishwarya, MO (Siddha) (DOJ: 22.08.2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

98 
 
B. AIIMS RISHIKESH 
 
2.5 STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION WORK 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.5.1 The Committee chides the Rishikesh management in the strongest term for not 
detecting the designing deficiencies in the detailed project report at the initial stage. The 
Committee is distressed to note that the project consu ltants failed miserably in designing the 
blueprint for the Institute and neglected the site specific limitations and concerns related to 
architectural and engineering techniques for a hospital set -up. The Committee is shocked to 
observe that there is no pr ovision for medical gas pipelines system, sewer lines passing 
through operation theatres, basement planning thereby overlooking the water table concerns. 
This was a basic civil engineering concept that was completely overlooked. 
(Para 3.17 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.5.2 It is submitted that work of Medical College gas pipeline system has been completed 
and MGPS running smoothly and supplying medical gas to the hospital. 
C. AIIMS JODHPUR 
 
2.6 Status of Operation Theatres 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.6.1 The Committee would also like to be apprised of the reasons for time overrun of the 
project from the originally planned two years to almost eight years and whether this has led to 
the reported Rs.150 crore arbitration claims by L&T. The Committee desires that a report on 
the arbitration status along with the position taken by the contractor and the Ministry may also 
be provided so that the matter can be expeditiously resolved without any loss to the 
exchequer. 
 (Para 4.53 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.6.2 It is submitted that till date no case of arbitration has been filed by M/S. L&T. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.6.3 The Committee has not been able to assess the number of surgical procedures carried 
out in AIIMS Jodhpur due to the variation in the data  furnished by the Institute and the 
Ministry. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that precise data with respect to 
major and minor surgeries done (patient wise and Department wise) till date since inception 
of the Institute may be submitted to t he Committee, within three months of presentation of 
this Report. 
 (Para 4.55 of the Report) 

99 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.6.4 The observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
2.6.5 The Institutes have also been advised to carry out detailed analysis in the matter of 
uniform classification of surgeries, position furnished in Para 9.67 above. Reference regarding 
nomenclature has also been made to AIIMS Delhi However, as already mentioned in Chapter 
– 1, Para no. 1.19, it is submitt ed to Hon‘ble committee that there is no variation in the data 
provided by the Ministry and the Institute. The details of data with respect to major and minor 
surgeries done by AIIMS, Jodhpur (Patient -wise and Department -wise) is being submitted, 
separately. 
For Year 2021 
Sl. 
No. Name of department 
Q1 (Jan - 21 - 
Mar-21) 
Q2 (Apr - 21 - 
Jun-21) 
Q3 (Jul - 21 - Sep-
21) 
Q4 (Oct - 21 - Dec-
21) 
Major Minor Major Minor Major Minor Major Minor 
1 ANAESTHESIOLOGY  10 0 1 6 4 7 0 13 
2 CARDIOLOGY 9 0 3 0 2 0 0 0 
3 CTVS (CARDIAC 
SURGERY) 49 0 16 0 64 5 73 2 
4 DENTAL SURGERY 65 0 63 1 74 3 78 5 
5 DERMATOLOGY 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
6 ENT (Otolaryngologist) 157 0 257 5 225 6 251 8 
7 GASTRO SURGERY 102 0 55 0 118 0 117 0 
8 GENERAL SURGERY  490 0 290 10 584 18 652 25 
9 MEDICINE 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 
10 NEPHROLOGY 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
11 NEUROLOGY 0 0 16 0 0 0 0 0 
12 NEURO SURGERY  220 0 86 2 264 2 255 6 
13 OBST & 
GYANACOLOGY 394 7 274 57 482 127 534 72 
14 ONCO MEDICINE 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
15 ONCO SURGERY 112 0 83 0 70 6 152 3 
16 ONCHOLOGY (Radio 
Oncology) 0 0 0 0 109 0 78 2 
17 OPTHALMOLOGY 15 0 24 1 16 93 46 125 
18 ORTHO SURGERY 310 0 159 6 457 24 445 20 
19 PAEDIATRIC 
SURGERY 201 0 89 1 278 0 319 1 
20 PLASTIC SURGERY  84 0 48 1 161 1 192 10 
21 PSYCHIATRIC 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
22 PMR DEPARTMENT 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
23 PULMONARY 
MEDICINE 1 1 0 3 0 0 4 0 
24 RADIOLOGY  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
25 UROLOGY 238 0 131 11 230 104 339 167 
Total 2458 8 1595 113 3138 396 3535 459 
For Year 2022 
S.No. Name of department 
Q1 (Jan - 22 - Mar-
22) 
Q2 (Apr - 22 - Jun-
22) 
Q3 (Jul - 22 - 
Sep-22) Q4 (Oct - 22 - Dec-22) 
Major Minor Major Minor Major Minor Major Minor 
1 ANAESTHESIOLO 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 

100 
 
GY  
2 CARDIOLOGY 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 
3 CTVS (CARDIAC 
SURGERY) 68 2 85 20 108 23 106 6 
4 DENTAL 
SURGERY (OFMS) 64 1 89 2 82 0 82 0 
5 DERMATOLOGY 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 
6 ENT 
(Otolaryngologist) 215 23 251 23 242 20 249 28 
7 GASTRO 
SURGERY 125 2 158 0 113 1 141 0 
8 GENERAL 
SURGERY  626 33 9 0 47 0 3 0 
9 MEDICINE 0 0 642 62 771 42 678 32 
10 NEPHROLOGY 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
11 NEUROLOGY 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
12 NEUROLOGY 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 
13 NEURO SURGERY  211 5 273 13 331 8 300 10 
14 OBST & 
GYANACOLOGY 449 133 522 354 695 352 665 279 
15 ONCO MEDICINE 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
16 ONCO SURGERY 22 0 123 3 21 0 204 5 
17 ONCHOLOGY 
(Radio Oncology) 146 4 94 2 207 8 10 0 
18 OPTHALMOLOGY 24 162 35 234 46 191 37 274 
19 ORTHO SURGERY 384 43 513 29 555 44 568 15 
20 PAEDIATRIC 
SURGERY 316 0 378 0 376 5 331 2 
21 PLASTIC 
SURGERY  166 3 216 12 219 14 209 13 
22 PAINCLINIC 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 
23 PSYCHIATRIC 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 
24 PMR 
DEPARTMENT 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 
25 PULMONARY 
MEDICINE 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
26 RADIOLOGY  0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 
27 UROLOGY 227 216 271 302 316 218 325 106 
Total 3046 629 3663 1057 4133 928 3908 770 
          For Year 2023 
S.No. Name of department 
Q1 (Jan - 23 - Mar-
23) 
Q2 (Apr - 23 - Jun-
23) 
Q3 (Jul - 23 - 
Sep-23) Q4 (Oct - 23 - Dec-23) 
Major Minor Major Minor Major Minor Major Minor 
1 ANAESTHESIOLO
GY  0 3 0 37 0 39 1 32 
2 CARDIOLOGY 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 
3 CTVS (CARDIAC 
SURGERY) 120 7 114 6 118 10 124 5 
4 DENTAL 
SURGERY (OFMS) 80 4 78 2 77 1 63 2 
5 DERMATOLOGY 0 40 1 64 1 68 6 73 
6 ENT 
(Otolaryngologist) 233 38 260 43 241 43 268 54 
7 GASTRO 
SURGERY 129 474 125 10 165 21 164 23 
8 GENERAL 
SURGERY  0 526 5 1528 0 1541 0 1538 

101 
 
9 MEDICINE 640 109 741 203 745 172 715 130 
10 NEPHROLOGY 0 1 0 2 0 1 0 2 
11 NEUROLOGY 0 0 2 0 1 3 0 0 
12 NEUROLOGY 0 1 0 1 0 7 0 7 
13 NEURO SURGERY  327 4 338 5 299 14 266 14 
14 OBST & 
GYANACOLOGY 601 316 615 362 674 345 682 245 
15 ONCO MEDICINE 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 4 
16 ONCO SURGERY 197 4 217 15 235 46 222 36 
17 ONCHOLOGY 
(Radio Oncology) 24 2 4 3 40 0 83 14 
18 OPTHALMOLOGY 58 333 62 238 46 246 56 321 
19 PAEDIATIC 
MEDICINE 0 0 0 0 0 0 191 13 
20 ORTHO SURGERY 545 26 584 28 578 50 364 37 
21 PAEDIATRIC 
SURGERY 330 3 394 1 404 1 363 0 
22 PLASTIC 
SURGERY  227 23 216 38 225 17 235 25 
23 PAINCLINIC 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 8 
24 PSYCHIATRIC 0 75 0 57 0 95 0 94 
25 PMR 
DEPARTMENT 0 126 0 262 0 176 0 187 
26 PULMONARY 
MEDICINE 0 136 0 180 0 172 0 208 
27 RADIOLOGY  0 0 0 0 0 1 27 0 
28 UROLOGY 314 990 275 1550 310 1448 300 1392 
Total 3825 3247 4031 4638 4159 4517 4130 4464 
          For Year 2024 
S.No. Name of department 
Q1 (Jan - 24 - Mar-
24) 
Q2 (Apr - 24 - Jun-
24) 
Q3 (Jul - 24 - 
Sep-24) Q4 (Oct - 24 - Dec-24) 
Major Minor Major Minor Major Minor Major Minor 
1 ANAESTHESIOLO
GY  0 56 0 51 0 36 0 59 
2 CARDIOLOGY 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 
3 CTVS (CARDIAC 
SURGERY) 127 12 153 104 171 156 180 230 
4 DENTAL 
SURGERY (OFMS) 83 5 81 110 72 199 69 224 
5 DERMATOLOGY 0 900 0 3453 0 4772 1 3782 
6 ENDOCRINOLOGY 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 1 
7 ENT 
(Otolaryngologist) 258 55 242 938 226 1926 251 1817 
8 GASTRO 
SURGERY 162 28 172 157 178 231 168 291 
9 GASTRO 
MEDICINE 0 1855 0 2020 5 2300 3 2398 
10 GENERAL 
SURGERY  791 204 793 1055 853 2880 881 2674 
11 MEDICINE 0 0 0 6 3 5 0 6 
12 NEPHROLOGY 0 2 0 7 0 6 0 15 
13 NEUROLOGY 0 5 0 9 0 24 0 19 
14 NEURO SURGERY  320 19 378 317 393 666 390 626 
15 OBST & 
GYANACOLOGY 664 339 696 981 802 1982 734 1623 
16 ONCO MEDICINE 0 5 0 18 0 19 0 14 
17 ONCO SURGERY 245 46 260 475 223 1087 262 1003 

102 
 
18 ONCHOLOGY 
(Radio Oncology) 116 2 80 9 98 16 48 12 
19 OPTHALMOLOGY 44 505 50 899 43 1532 46 1345 
20 ORTHO SURGERY 666 38 678 2339 748 3725 726 3496 
21 PAEDIATRIC 
SURGERY 360 4 429 129 402 245 440 247 
22 PLASTIC 
SURGERY  204 20 223 1102 218 2016 232 2157 
23 PAINCLINIC 0 0 0 130 0 107 0 170 
24 PSYCHIATRIC 0 181 0 178 0 177 0 201 
25 PMR 
DEPARTMENT 0 160 0 229 0 241 0 258 
26 PULMONARY 
MEDICINE 0 224 0 77 0 0 0 0 
27 RADIOLOGY  0 0 0 1231 0 1752 0 2123 
28 UROLOGY 300 1701 371 2916 330 3633 354 3010 
Total 4340 6366 4606 18943 4765 29733 4785 27801 
 
D. AIIMS PATNA 
 
2.7 STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION WORK 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.7.1 It is a proven fact that delay in any construction activity leads to unnecessary 
additional costs and time extensions. Inflation, abrupt ending of contracts, arbitration cases, 
disputes etc further increases the cost of any delayed project. Systemic analysis at the 
inception of any project and regular monitoring can easily control all these factors  and 
minimize the chances of delay. Sadly, the Ministry and the Institute remained ignorant of both 
time and cost deadlines for the completion of the project as envisaged for AIIMS Patna. 
 (Para 5.10 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.2 In continuation of t he position explained in para 5.9, it is clarified that there has been 
no cost escalation as the project is within the original Cost estimates of approved DPR. The 
total Tender cost under four packages in this project was Rs.554.28 Cr., against which 
Rs.554.47 cr. has been incurred  and the project is almost completed which is well within the 
deviation limit. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.7.3 The Committee observes with anguish that AIIMS Patna has failed to realize the 
implications of this sluggish rate of construction activities and is of the view that the reasons 
cited by AIIMS Patna for the construction delays are inexcusable and could have been easily 
avoided had the Institute been alert and committed for the Project. Moreover, the argument of 
AIIMS P atna that professional expertise in constructing hospital building is missing in the 
country is not tenable and bereft of fact and logic. 
(Para 5.12 of the Report) 

103 
 
 
2.7.4 The Committee is dismayed to note that no project management tool/strategy has been 
employed for construction of an AIIMS like institution that is intended to be the beacon of 
light for the tertiary healthcare sector in the State. A PERT or Program Evaluation Review 
Technique Chart is one such project management tool that helps in better a nalysis of the 
resources and the timeline of any project. In the absence of any evaluation technique, the 
Committee is really sceptical about the completion of the construction work under the 
remaining packages. The Committee recommends that a special project monitoring system for 
AIIMS Patna must be devised to track the progress of construction activities undertaken by 
the Institute so as to ensure better project management. The Committee strongly recommends 
that the work under Package II, III and IV must be completed on time with no further delays. 
 (Para 5.13 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.5 The observations/ recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
compliance.  All Project Packages are completed. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.7.6 The Committee is at pains to take into account the improper estimation of quantities of 
items pointed out by CAG in its report. Surprisingly, the deviation is upto 173% in case of 
AIIMS Patna which clearly indicates that the requirement of different items  had been under-
assessed and unrealistic assessment of the site conditions were made. The green building 
norms and the Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC) should have been implemented 
before the beginning of the construction activities. The Committee is highly distressed at the 
inadequate technical estimation made before the construction of AIIMS Patna. 
(Para 5.16 of the Report) 
 
2.7.7 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make a detailed 
technical and realistic assessment befor e setting up of other new AIIMS under PMSSY by 
carrying out proper field and site surveys and the errors while constructing AIIMS Patna 
should not be repeated. 
 (Para 5.17 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.7.8 It is submitted that there is no overall deviatio n in the project. The up to date payment 
made in PKG -1 is Rs.159.46 crore in final bill against tender cost of Rs. 160.69 crore. The 
final bill has not been paid so far. In PKG-II, the up to date payment made is Rs.306.03 crore , 
including escalation cost o f Rs.25 crore (approximately) against the tender cost of Rs.284.70 
crore. There is no overall deviation in package -1 & a minor deviation in package -due to 
escalation of Rs.25.00 crore. PKG-III-total cost incurred Rs.42.23 crore as against tender cost 
of Rs.42.60 cr. which well within the permissible limit and there is no deviation.  PKG-IV-
Total cost incurred Rs.46.74 crore as against tender cost of Rs.66.29 crore. The work is 
almost completed and there is no deviation. 

104 
 
 
2.7.9 The deviation of 158 -173% repor ted by CAG in its report is regarding certain 
individual items of work and not overall deviation. The deviation in individual items is due to 
less quantity taken in the estimate against the G.F.C. drawing issued by DOPR for 
construction of the buildings.  However, there are also savings in work quantity in number of 
items which is either not required or less quantity is required as per GFC drawing. It is also 
mentioned here that the contract agreement itself has provision of deviation limit of 30% or 
100% depending upon the item in superstructure/ substructure. 
 
2.7.10 It is also mentioned here that presently the construction is being taken up in the EPC 
mode wherein extensive problem of large deviation/escalation would get systematically 
obviated. Further, t he system of assigning the construction work to executing agencies on 
turnkey basis with empowerment to handle all contractual matters at their end has been 
introduced. The executing agencies have been mandated to deploy and use Project 
Management Software  to bring about improved project management at their end. The 
Ministry has also developed an online dashboard to facilitate a closer and more effective 
monitoring. The functional AIIMS have been empowered with greater delegation of powers 
in construction, procurement upto Rs.5 crore and also in administrative matters. The 
procedure for procurement of medical equipment has been simplified and made more efficient 
with greater delegation and empowerment of the Procurement Support Agency (PSA) which 
is entruste d with the work of procurement of medical equipment.  All new AllMS  are now 
being designed keeping in view the "GRIHA" norms for green buildings.  The status of 
different packages is provided as under:- 
 
Pkg-II 100% Completed 
Pkg-III 100% Completed 
Pkg-IV 100% Completed 
 
E. AIIMS RAIPUR 
 
2.8 PROCUREMENT OF EQUIPMENT 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.8.1 The Committee is of the further view that quality of medical equipment needs to be 
looked into because defective equipment result in frequent break down of health care services. 
Given the importance of medical equipment in diagnosis as well as treatment and the high 
price involved in purchase of several hi -tech equipment, it is imperative that the equipment 
are put to their best use for optimum utilization of re sources. Non-installation of equipment is 
indicative of lackadaisical approach of the Institute in letting them remain idle which is mere 
wastage of resources at the cost of taxpayers‘ money. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends the Institute to take str ict action against the manufacturers for delayed delivery 
or delivery of defective equipment. The Committee, further, recommends that Institute should 
either exchange the defective equipment with new equipment or scrap the contract with the 
manufacturers by seeking adequate legal redressal. The Committee recommends for an action 

105 
 
taken status report on the specific observations of the CAG in context of procurement of  
medical equipment and recommends the Ministry to take strict action against the errant 
officials. 
 (Para 6.29 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.8.2 Due care is taken to ensure that there is no defective equipment delivered/ supplied by 
vendor.  In case of breakdown of any equipment, the warranty or the CMC clause takes care 
of the interest of patien t care. The Institute ensures strict action if any defective equipment is 
supplied or scrap the contract with the manufacturer by seeking adequate legal redressal.  
Some of the equipment as mentioned in the CAG report could not be installed as necessary 
civil infrastructure was not available at that time. The progress regarding installation of these 
equipment is monitored very closely at Institute level as well as in MoHFW. The delay due to 
non-availability of site and the reasons thereof have already been brought out against the reply 
of Point No 6.12.  Some defective equipment supplied through PSA, has been notified to M/s 
HLL so as to take necessary action against respective vendors as per the tender terms and 
conditions. However, the equipment as mentioned  in the CAG have since been installed and 
put in use. 
2.8.3 It is informed that AIIMS Raipur is an institute established under the PMSSY scheme 
of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), where patients receive treatment. 
The institute purchases medical equipment, ensuring adequate precautions are taken during 
the procurement process. Additionally, repair and maintenance of the equipment are 
performed in accordance with the tender conditions and contract. If any vendor fails to meet 
these conditions, the institute takes strict action. 
2.9 MEDICAL EDUCATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.9.1 The Committee feels that clinical training is a vital part in a medical education for 
becoming a successful doctor. The Committee is, however, apprehensive ab out the quality of 
the clinical training imparted at the Institute to the undergraduate and postgraduate students 
due to shortage of faculty at the Institute as many key Departments are being handled by a 
single faculty. The Committee wonders how an Instit ute is accomplishing the objective of 
imparting clinical training to the medical students with limited number of faculty. The 
Committee also notes that seats under many PG courses are lying vacant which raises a 
question mark about the quality of clinical training facilities available at the Institute. Poor 
clinical training hampers the professional pursuit of doctors which amounts to risking the 
lives of the patients. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Institute to ensure 
adequate faculty at the I nstitute for imparting quality medical education and clinical training 
to the students aspiring to be well-trained doctors. 
 (Para 6.36 of the Report) 
 
 

106 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.9.2 So far as teaching of MBBS and BSc Nursing is concerned, it is to inform that AIIMS  
Raipur is having sufficient Faculty members and other required infrastructure from the 
beginning of these courses as Faculty members of Pre -clinical and Para -clinical and Broad 
Specialty departments were already available. The teaching and training of the se students are 
carried out without any compromise on quality and adequacy. Eight batches of MBBS and 
B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing have successfully completed their course. A good performance of 
passed out students of AIIMS Raipur by way of securing seats in AIIM S PG and NEET 
examinations reflects and supports this fact.  AIIMS Raipur has also started Postgraduate 
courses (MD/MS/MDS) in 28 specialities and M.Sc. Nursing in 4 subjects. Super speciality 
courses (DM/MCh) have also started in 23 specialities. 
2.10 STATUS OF OPERATION THEATRE (OTS) AND INTENSIVE CARE UNIT 
(ICUS) 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.10.1 The Committee notes with concern that only 26 beds out of total sanctioned strength 
of 100 beds are functional at the Institute. ICUs are used to provide sp ecialized rehabilitative 
care to patients as they start to recover from their critical illness or injury. The Committee 
believes that bed scarcity in ICU may result in refusal of admission to initial patients, thereby, 
depriving them the benefit of ICU services. The Committee observes that there are as many as 
35 ventilators for 26 ICU beds, indicating that 9 ventilators are lying unused in the ICUs. The 
Committee feels that the value of the equipment starts depreciating immediately after they are 
procured and non-functioning of the equipment results in loss of their value. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends to the Institute to increase the number of beds so that critically ill 
patients are not refused the service of ICUs due to scarcity of beds and focus on optimum 
utilization of resources available. 
 (Para 6.41 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.10.2 50 ICU beds are functional. AIIMS Raipur efficiently uses its available resources and 
equipment to provide care to the patients. However, patients are referred o nly for step down 
hospital care after diagnosis and essential treatment and stabilisation is done, so that more 
critical cases requiring immediate care may be accommodated. 
F. AIIMS BHUBANESWAR 
 
2.11 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.11.1 The Committee takes cognizance of the observation of CAG Report that delay in 
execution of construction projects that is reproduced below: - 
 

107 
 
"The main reasons for the delays were preparation of erroneous Bills of Quantities, 
delays in issue of drawings by  design consultants, delays in providing work sites, delays in 
clearance of deviations, extra items and substituted items, cash flow problems of agencies due 
to withheld payments due to delays in granting clearances, slow progress of work by 
contractors, v acancies in engineering positions in the Project Cell of the new AIIMS and 
abandonment of works by Project Consultants and delay in making alternate arrangements. 
These reasons were indicative of deficient project and contract management, administrative 
laxity and weak monitoring. It was incumbent upon the departments to take effective steps 
where necessary to mitigate the delays, remove bottlenecks and expedite the progress." 
 (Para 7.13 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.11.2 Matter of Record and noted for future compliance. 
2.12 STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION WORK 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.12.1 The Committee is of the view that underutilization of the funds during years 2011 -
2017 is the main reason behind the delay in completion of the project and cost overruns. The 
Committee expresses its concern over delay and cost overruns in different projects of various 
packages. Time and cost over runs are undesirable in projects under construction. The delays 
in construction project have delayed delivery of health servi ces. The Committee observes that 
delay in completion of the project was on account of poor planning, unrealistic scheduling of 
the dates, lack of communication between the contracting agency and the authorities 
concerned at the Institute and poor monitoring. 
 (Para 7.14 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.12.2 It is submitted that the payment to various agencies by Ministry / AIIMS 
Bhubaneswar was made as per actual completion of work at site. However, the delay in 
completion of project has not delayed the deliv ery of health services which was also 
interrelated to the joining of faculty, recruitment of other staff, installation of equipment‘s etc. 
In February 2014, the hospital was inaugurated and since then, the Hospital services have 
been started in the handed over areas in a phase-wise manner. 
2.13 STATUS OF OPERATION THEATRES AND WARDS/BEDS 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.13.1 The Committee is surprised to note the wide difference in the cost per bed in these two 
Institutes that have the same functional capac ity and the same number of beds. The 
Committee takes a serious note of this high cost incurred by AIIMS, Bhubaneswar especially 
when the other AIIMS like Institutions, providing the same tertiary health care facilities, have 
submitted relatively less cost. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Institute to limit its 

108 
 
redundant expenses. The Committee demands that the Institute should submit a status note on 
how the cost per bed was calculated and the reasons behind this high cost so that cost per bed 
may be calculated for other AIIMS also on the same parameters. 
 (Para 7.49 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.13.2 The Institute calculated the cost per bed at the time of furnishing information taking 
into consideration all recurring/non -recurring expenditure di vided by number of functional 
beds which was 560 at that point of time. The variation has occurred due to dividing 560 
functional beds with the total expenditure whereas AIIMS, Raipur might have calculated by 
dividing the total number of sanctioned beds i. e. 960. The numbers of functional beds have 
been taken as a lot of more expenditure will be incurred to make functional the remaining 
beds. Further, the recurring expenditure of AIIMS, Bhubaneswar may be higher in 
comparison to AIIMS, Raipur as the Hospita l services has started here earlier and the patient 
load is higher in comparison with AIIMS, Raipur.  The basis on which the Committee has 
determined that the cost per bed is significantly high remains unclear. It is important to note 
that AIIMS Bhubaneswar  is currently operating with 1,019 functional beds and 351 
temporary beds, bringing the total functional capacity to 1,370 beds.  If the cost per bed is 
recalculated based on this total capacity, the overall cost per bed may come significantly 
lower. 
G. UPGRADATION OF GOVERNMENT MEDICAL COLLEGES/ INSTITUTIONS 
2.14 STUDY VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.14.1 The Committee notes that the shortage of specialists is a major problem in all the 
AIIMS like Institutions and Government Medical Co lleges. The Committee again emphasizes 
the need to develop special packages and incentives for attracting the specialists to serve in 
this part of the region. 
  (Para 8.66 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.14.2 The matter regarding special packages and incent ives for attracting the Specialists in 
the Government Medical Colleges falls in the domain of the State Governments.  This issue 
was taken up with the States in the Quarterly Review Meeting (QRM) with the States held on 
19-20th September 2019. Innovative in centives and special packages developed by some of 
the States like H.P. and Rajasthan were shared with the States so that the States may consider 
and adopt suitable packages.   
 
 
 
 

109 
 
2.15 SELECTION OF PROJECT CONSULTANTS/CONTRACTORS 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
2.15.1 The Committee is of the view that the careless selection of the Project Consultants did 
more harm than good and caused unwarranted delays in the construction activity. The 
Ministry failed to make a comprehensive assessment of selection of proj ect-
consultants/contractors before the execution of the scheme. The CAG has also raised concerns 
regarding the award of consultancy work to PSUs on nomination basis in its Report. The 
Committee also notes that M/s HSCC and M/s HLL were appointed as consult ants on 
nomination basis under the garb of Rule 176 of General Financial Rules (GFR) 2005. This 
rule is always read with the section 1.5.3 that states the selection by direct negotiations/ 
nomination is permissible in terms of Rule 176 of General Financial  Rules, 2005 only under 
exceptional circumstances and such selection may normally be restricted to a financial ceiling 
of Rs ten lakhs. The Committee notes that the cases did not fall under any of the special 
circumstances stipulated in the section 1.5.3. 
(Para 9.9 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
2.15.2 In addition to the above para the following pertinent points are mentioned below:  
 
The Project Consultants selected for six AIIMS are as under: 
 
Sl. AIIMS Project Consultant 
1. Bhopal M/s Enarch 
2. Bhubaneswar M/s Hospitech 
3. Jodhpur M/s Hospitech 
4. Patna M/s Enarch 
5. Raipur M/s Mukesh Associates 
6. Rishikesh  M/s SMEC 
 
2.15.3 HLL and HSCC were selected as Project Consultants after following due procedure as 
per extant rules, regulations and guideline s. It may be observed that all these companies are 
reputed ones in their respective fields. However, their abandonment of project at crucial time 
did create problems in continuation of works. From perusal of the para, it is noted that the 
Hon‘ble Committee is referring to reading of Rule 176 of GFR 2005 in consonance with Rule 
1.5.3. of Manual of Policies and Procedure of Employment of Consultants prepared by 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in August, 2006. The attention of Hon‘ble 
Committee is being sought with the last para of the preface issued by the then Secretary, 
Department of Expenditure along with the Manual wherein it has been clearly stated that the 
manual is to be taken as generic guideline and to be interpreted broadly.  Moreover,  Section 
1.5.3 (b) explicitly permits appointment on nomination basis is done in situations where 
timely completion is of utmost importance. In view of the above the appointment of PSU, on 
nomination basis does not violate the Rule 176 along with Section 1 .5.3 of the Manual of 
Policies and Procedure of Employment of Consultants is followed. 

110 
 
CHAPTER–III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
A. AIIMS BHOPAL 
 
3.1 STATUS OF FACULTY/NON FACULTY STRENGTH 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.1.1 The Committee is dissatisfied with the vacancy positions in different Departments in 
AIIMS, Bhopal, where out of 305 sanctioned faculty posts, 164 posts are lying vacant. The 
Committee is apprehensive that for an AIIMS like Institution, such a gap in workforce would 
adversely affect the functional capacity of the Institute. The Committee calls upon the 
Institute to accelerate its administrative procedure for filling up the vacant posts within a time 
bound manner. The Ministry also needs to closely monitor the efforts made by the Institute in 
this regard. The Committee, also, recommends that the vacant posts should be filled on 
regular basis within a specified period of time. Measures must be taken for fi lling up the 
vacant posts on permanent basis to ensure continuity and smooth functioning of the Institute. 
(Para 2.27 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.2 Several policy interventions have been introduced by the Ministry to improve 
availability of candidates  for various faculty positions.   In addition, the Ministry has also 
taken some policy initiatives for bringing about improved availability of trained HR at 
National Level at large.   
 
3.1.3 Measures to improve faculty strength in the new AIIMS were also d iscussed in the 
meeting of the Central Institute Body (CIB) held on 13.08.2018, 10.12.2018, and 24.01.2019.  
CIB advised that the regular recruitment will be done at Institute level while combined 
contractual recruitment will be done by AIIMS, New Delhi thr ough walk in -interview twice 
in a year for selecting students passing from premium medical institutes/INIs, in addition to 
the recruitment done by individual AIIMS.  It was also decided in the CIB to allow 
temporarily, the new AIIMS to fill up the senior le vel posts by selection of candidates at one 
level below in case the post could not be filled up due to no -availability of suitable 
candidates. Measures to improve faculty strength in the new AIIMS were further deliberated 
in the 4 thmeeting of the Central I nstitute Body (CIB) on 27.07.2019 and various steps 
suggested to strengthen the faculty position have been mentioned. 
 
3.1.4 Further, the updated input is as follows: Out of 12 Nursing Faculty sanctioned for 
AIIMS, Bhopal, 10 faculty positions have already  been filled. The post of Professor -cum-
Principal, Nursing College, AIIMS, Bhopal has already been advertised. Subsequent to the 
pending court cases, the result has not been declared. Further, it is also submitted that out of 
305 sanctioned posts of facult y, as on date 232 posts have already been filled up and the 
process for further filling up of the vacant posts has already been initiated.  

111 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.1.5 The Committee notes the progress made by filling up of 232 posts out of 305 
sanctioned faculty posts in AIIMS Bhopal, but the Committee expresses concern  that 73 
vacancies still persist and that some appointments (e.g. N ursing Principal) are delayed 
due to  procedural hurdles. In order to secure full, sustained staffing, the Committee 
recommends that AIIMS Bhopal, in coordination with the Ministry  should further 
undertake followings actions for strengthening faculty and non - faculty of AIMS 
Bhopal: (a) set a deadline for completing all remaining regular recruitments and 
declaring results of p ending cases; (b) convert existing contractual and one -level-below 
appointments into permanent posts as soon as eligibility is met; (c) institute a j oint 
quarterly review mechanism to monitor progress against recruitments targets; and (d) 
actively partner with premier medical institutes to broaden the candidate pool, thereby 
ensuring uninterrupted teaching, research and patient-care functions. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.1.6 The Committee expresses its concern that out of total sanctioned strength of 3 776 non 
faculty posts in AIIMS, Bhopal, only 792 posts have been filled up, including 424 posts that 
have been actually outsourced. In Committee's opinion non -faculty staff is the backbone of 
any medical institution in terms of its successful and smooth fu nctioning. With such a wide 
gap in the in -position strength against the sanctioned non faculty posts, it would have been 
extremely difficult to manage the day to day functional equilibrium of various Departments of 
the Institute in an integrated manner. Th e Committee, therefore, recommends for expediting 
the appointment process of non -faculty staff on a regular basis so that all the Departments 
have adequate man power to cater to all aspects of patient care. The Committee is of the 
considered opinion that a  centralized recruitment process for filling up of non -faculty posts 
would address the entire non faculty shortage issue and also ensure a transparent recruitment 
process. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to initiate this process on an 
immediate basis. 
(Para 2.28 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.1.7 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted for 
future guidance.  In pursuance of the observation of the Hon‘ble Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, the Central Institute Body (CIB) in its 3rd meeting held on 24.01.2019 advised all 
AIIMS to conduct recruitments for Non -faculty (Technical) cadres on centralized basis by 
applying the following measures:  
 AIIMS Delhi will conduct centralised recruitment for all AIIMS in case of  Nursing 
Cadres. 
 For rest of technical cadres (19), the six new AIIMS will do the centralized 
recruitment by suitably dividing the cadres amongst themselves. 
 
3.1.8 Following is the current status of the recruitment: Out of total 510 sanctioned posts 
of Se nior Nursing Officer (Group B), As on date, 72 Sr. Nursing Officers are in position 

112 
 
against the DR Quota of 127 Posts and the recruitment process for remaining 55 posts vacant 
will be initiate . Total 383 Nursing Officers have been promoted to the post of S r. Nursing 
Officers against 75% quota.  Out of Total sanctioned 1326 posts of Nursing Officers, as on 
date, 1190 Nursing Officer is in position. Further 85 posts out of the remaining vacant posts 
of Nursing Officer have been proposed to be surrendered so that new posts may be created as 
per the Standard Staffing Pattern. 
 
Direct Recruitment for Group 'B' (285 Posts) :- As on date, 194 employees are in 
position in Group -B posts.  Recruitment process against the posts earmarked for 
Direct Recruitment has been i nitiated. Various Group ‗A‘ & ‗B‘ posts on deputation 
basis are being advertised and recruitment is under process.  
 
Recruitment of Faculty positions on Direct Recruitment basis (305 posts):  As on date 
total 232 faculty posts are filled and the recruitment  of remaining 73 posts is under 
process.  
 
Recruitment of Tutor/Clinical Instructor (33 posts): The proposal for surrender of 
these posts is lying with Ministry under SSP. 
  
3.1.9 Out of 12 Nursing Faculty sanctioned for AIIMS, Bhopal, 10 faculty positions  have 
already been filled.  The post of Professor -cum-Principal, Nursing College, AIIMS, Bhopal 
has already been advertised. Subsequent to the pending court cases, the result has not been 
declared. Recruitment for the post 10 Nos. Of Assistant Professor on  contractual basis in 
various Departments at  AIIMS Bhopal is under process. The advertisement has been 
published. Out of total 630 posts, as on date, 360 are filled and the recruitment of remaining 
vacant posts is under process. Total 192 posts have been advertised through CRE. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.1.10 The Committee observe lackadaisical approach towards filling up of non-faculty 
posts at AIIMS Bhopal, particularly in the nursing cadre . Accordingly, the Committee 
remains deeply concerned towards the persistent large number of vacancies and the 
over-reliance of the institute on outsourcing. Since the 3776 sanctioned non-faculty posts 
are not filled up through regular recruitment, core institutional functions are being 
compromised. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation for the Ministry 
to operationalize a robust, time-bound recruitment mechanism for all technical and non-
technical non -faculty posts, ensuring uniformity and transparency across AIIMS. The 
Committee further recommends that posts proposed to be surrendered be reviewed with 
caution to avoid under -staffing in critical areas, and that all direct recruitment and 
deputation-based appointments currently under process be concluded, at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 

113 
 
3.2 SPECIALITY/SUPER SPECIALITY DEPARTMENTS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.2.1 The Committee is deeply anguished to take into account with the present status of the 
faculty at the Specialty and Super Departments at the Institute. Only 17 posts have been filled 
up against 100 sancti oned posts in the Super Specialist Departments and 83 posts are lying 
vacant. Not only that, many Departments such as Cardiology, Cardiothoracic and Vascular 
Surgery, Psychiatry, Nephrology, Surgical Oncology, Endocrinology & Metabolic Diseases, 
Pediatric Surgery and Nuclear Medicine are being run by a single faculty. The Committee is 
surprised to observe the sorry state of functioning of AIIMS, Bhopal and concludes that with 
such huge vacancy, the Institute cannot achieve its objectives of providing tertiary level health 
care services to the people. The Committee believes that there is an urgent need to address the 
deficiency in the manpower at the Specialist and Super Specialist level. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends to the Institute to fill up the vacant posts at the earliest. The 
Committee also recommends that AIIMS Bhopal should explore innovative means like 
special packages/incentives to attract Specialist/Super Specialists from premier institutes in its 
different Departments to ensure better functioning of AIIMS Bhopal. 
(Para 2.33 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.2.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for 
future guidance.  From the side of the Ministry several policy interventions have been 
introduced to improve availability of candidates for various faculty positions.   In addition, the 
Ministry has also taken some policy initiatives for bringing about improved availability of 
trained HR at National Level at large. Measures to improve faculty strength in the new AIIMS 
were also discussed in the meeting of the Central Institute Body (CIB) held on 13.08.2018, 
10.12.2018, and 24.01.2019. CIB advised that the regular recruitment will be done at Institute 
level while combined contractual recruitment will be don e by AIIMS, New Delhi through 
walk in -interview twice in a year for selecting students passing from premium medical 
institutes/INIs, in addition to the recruitment done by individual AIIMS.  It was also decided 
in the CIB to allow temporarily, the new AIIM S to fill up the senior level posts by selection 
of candidates at one level below in case the post could not be filled up due to no -availability 
of suitable candidates. 
 
 
3.2.3 The details of department wise posts are enclosed. Out of total 510 sanctioned posts of 
Senior Nursing Officer (Group B), As on date, 72 Sr. Nursing Officers are in position against 
the DR Quota of 127 Posts and the recruitment process for remaining 55 posts vacant will be 
initiated. Total 383 Nursing Officers have been promoted to t he post of Sr. Nursing Officers 
against 75% quota. Out of Total sanctioned 1326 posts of Nursing Officers, as on date, 1190 
Nursing Officer is in position. Further 85 posts out of the remaining vacant posts of Nursing 
Officer have been proposed to be surrendered so that new posts may be created as per the 
Standard Staffing Pattern. 
 

114 
 
Direct Recruitment for Group 'B' (285 Posts) :- As on date, 194 employees are in 
position in Group -B posts.   Recruitment process against the posts earmarked for 
Direct Recruitment has been initiated.  Various Group ‗A‘ & ‗B‘ posts on deputation 
basis are being advertised and recruitment is under process.  
  
Recruitment of Faculty positions on Direct Recruitment basis (305 posts):  As on date 
total 232 faculty posts are filled and th e recruitment of  remaining 73 posts is under 
process.  
  
Recruitment of Tutor/Clinical Instructor (33 posts):  The proposal for surrender of 
these posts is lying with Ministry under SSP.  
  
3.2.4 Out of 12 Nursing Faculty sanctioned for AIIMS, Bhopal, 10 fa culty positions have 
already been filled.   The post of Professor -cum-Principal, Nursing College, AIIMS, Bhopal 
has already been advertised. Subsequent to the pending court cases, the result has not been 
declared. Recruitment for the post 10 Nos. Of Assista nt Professor on contractual basis in 
various Departments at AIIMS Bhopal is under process. The advertisement has been 
published.  Out of total 630 posts, as on date, 360 are filled and the recruitment of remaining 
vacant posts is under process. Total 192 p osts have been advertised through CRE.  Senior 
Resident – 134 vac ant out of 377 sanctioned posts. Junior Resident – NIL out of 421 
sanctioned posts. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.2.5 The Committee acknowledges the Ministry‟s ongoing recruitment efforts and 
policy interventions aimed at addressing faculty shortages across AIIMS institutions, 
including AIIMS Bhopal. However, the Committee remains concerned that despite these 
measures, critical gaps persist in the Specialty and Super Specialty Departments, many 
of which continue to function with only one faculty member. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that AIIMS Bhopal, in close coordination with the Ministry, implement a 
targeted recruitment plan specifically for Super Specialty Departments, with defined 
timelines and deliverables. The Committee also urges that the previously suggested 
measures such as offering special incentives, permitting lateral entry of experienced 
specialists from leading institutes be operationalized without delay.  
 
3.3 MEDICAL EDUCATION 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.3.1 The Committee has observed that the admissions in MBBS and B.Sc Nursing Courses 
are being done with an intake of 100 and 60 students respectively at AIIMS, Bhopal. The 
number of admissions in MD/MS courses in different disciplines has also increased. Out of 33 
sanctioned seats for January, 2018 session, 24 admissions have already been done. The 
Committee was given to understand by the Ministry that two seats in Departments of 
Microbiology and one seat in Immunohemato logy and Blood Transfusion were sanctioned in 
January, 2018. However, utmost to the surprise of the Committee, none of the seats in these 

115 
 
two Departments have been filled up yet. Further, in Anatomy and Paediatrics Departments, 
three seats have been sancti oned for each Department and only one seat in each Department 
has been filled up. The Committee, while expressing its serious co ncern, strongly, 
recommends the Ministry to evaluate the reasons for non -filling up of the seats and undertake 
corrective measur es to fill up the vacant seats strictly in a time bound manner so that the 
intended benefit to the beneficiaries be made available and the scarce resources, that have 
immense opportunity costs, are used in a judicious manner. The Committee, further, 
recommends to the Institute to expedite the process of starting new courses within a stipulated 
time so that students do not suffer due to non -availability of any medical Department in the 
Institute. 
(Para 2.35 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.3.2 As per advise of the committee, required efforts have been made and the current status 
is as below: 
 There are 106 students pursuing MD/MS Courses in various departments. 
 PDCC program started in July 2018 with 3 seats in the department of Pathology & 
Anaesthesiology (2 sea ts in Anaesthesiology & 1 seat in Pathology). 3 PDCC 
candidates have joined the Institute. 
 Super specialty DM course in Neurology and Pulmonary Medicine started in the 
Institute in January 2019 with 2 seats in Neurology and 2 seats in Pulmonary Medicine 
were advertised. 3 candidates have joined so far. 
 Super specialty courses in M.Ch. in Burns & Plastic Surgery and in Neurosurgery 
started in January 2019 with 2 seats in Burns & Plastic and 2 seats in Neurosurgery. 
All 4 students have joined. PhD program was  started in AIIMS Bhopal in January 
2019 and 17 candidates have joined.   
 
3.3.3 The admission to MD/MS &DM/M.Ch program are through all India entrance test as 
subsequent counselling conducted by AIIMS, Delhi. The reasons for some of the seats 
remaining vacant have to be explored through a coordinated exercise conducted at all India 
level. This is not a phenomena specific for AIIMS Bhopal. 
 
3.3.4 Current status is as below: 
 From2020: 125 seats per year for MBBS  
 From 2024:  90 seats per year intake for B.Sc. Nursing (Hons)  
 There are 315 students pursuing MD/MS/MDS courses in Various departments  
 There are 84 students pursuing DM/M. Ch Courses in various departments 
 In last 4 years, approval granted for 25 new courses of DM/M.Ch at AIIMS Bhopal  
 27 MD/MS/MDS  course are running at AIIMS Bhopal and in last 4 years,6 new 
MD/MS/MDS courses started  
 
Dept. Sanctioned Total filled Total vacant 
Cardiology 4 1 3 
CTVS 8 6 2 
Psychiatry 7 7 0 

116 
 
Nephrology 4 1 3 
Surgical Oncology 7 2 5 
Endocrinology & Metabolism Disease 4 4 0 
Pediatric Surgery 8 4 4 
Nuclear Medicine 5 2 3 
  
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3.5 The Committee notes  significant progress in increasing student intake across 
various courses at AIIMS Bhopal, including MBBS, B.Sc Nursing, MD/MS, and the 
successful initiation of numerous new PDCC, DM, M.Ch, and PhD programs. This 
demonstrates a proactive approach to expanding educational and healthcare capacities. 
However, the continued vacancy in certain super-specialty departments like Cardiology, 
Nephrology, and  Surgical Oncology remains a concern for the Committee. While the 
Ministry attributes this to an all -India phenomenon, it is crucial to further analyses and 
make detailed assessment by the concerned authority and take appropriate step for 
fulfilling up vac ant post in various department s. Moreover, if any specific factors at 
AIIMS Bhopal contribute to these vacancies, in order to develop targeted strategies in 
coordination with AIIMS Delhi, AIIMS Bhopal must address these gaps, ensuring 
timely recruitment of sanctioned seats and optimal utilization of resources, particularly 
in high-demand and specialized departments. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.3.6 The Committee is of the strong view that for a medical or nursing college, it is 
imperative to have more exposure of medical cases for students to attain clinical skills in their 
respective fields. The Committee is highly apprehensive as to how the Institute will 
accomplish the objective to impart training to the PG students, MD/MS, PhD students with 
inadequate faculty and limited OPD. The Committee is also skeptical of the clinical training 
of the first batch of MBBS& Nursing students who have completed their internship this year. 
Since the Institute had huge number of vacancies in various departments, it is obvious that 
students would not have been given adequate clinical training as part of their curriculum. This 
is not a good indicator for AIIMS, Bhopal for meeting the expectation of high medical 
education from an institute of national importance. The Commi ttee has reasons to apprehend 
that inadequate training of medical and nursing students will only produce partially skilled 
and half trained doctors in the country that would, in fact, become a liability rather than assets 
of the country. Therefore, in orde r to ensure the prospective future of aspiring doctors and 
nurses, the Institute must strive towards providing all the requisite resources for the students 
to help them to hone their skills adequately during their academic years so that they acquire 
desired level of knowledge during their stay in AIIMS. 
(Para 2.40 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.3.7 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted for 
future guidance. The faculty who joined in the year 2012 (MBBS 1 st Prof. Subjects) when the 

117 
 
clinical posting does not start in 1 st year of MBBS, took efforts to provide quality education. 
Departments and beds in hospital gradually increased and faculty in the year 2013 and 
subsequently, joined to ensure that education of MBBS students is not compromised. 
 PDCC, DM, M.Ch, Ph. D courses have started at AIIMS Bhopal. 
 MD/MS seats have been increasing since January 2017 at AIIMS Bhopal. 
 
3.3.8 It is submitted that number of beds and clinical material have increased substantially 
along with increase in faculty strength, which increased the clinical exposure and learning to 
the students of AIIMS, Bhopal at par with other Institute of National Importance. 
 
i. In the year of 2017 total number of faculties was 53 and as on date (12/02/25) 249 
faculties are working at AIIMS Bhopal  
ii. In the year of 2017 number of MD/MS courses were running in 03 departments and as 
on date (12/02/25) MD/MS courses running in 25 departments 
iii. MDS Course is running in two departments 
 
 
3.3.9 The institute adopts a cutting -edge c urriculum that integrates theoretical knowledge 
with extensive clinical exposure, ensuring that students receive a well -rounded medical 
education. The faculty comprises experienced and qualified professionals dedicated to 
mentoring and guiding students. In  the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) 
2024, AIIMS Bhopal was ranked 31 st among medical colleges in India. This recognition 
reflects the institute's dedication to maintaining high standards in medical education and 
research. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3.10 The Committee appreciates  positive steps taken to address the  Committee‟s 
concerns regarding inadequate clinical exposure and faculty shortages, notably through 
a substantial increase in faculty numbers (from 53 in 2017 to 249 as of 12/02/25 ), 
expansion of MD/MS courses to 25 departments, and the commencement of PDCC, DM, 
M.Ch, and PhD programs. The improved National Institutional Ranking Framework 
(NIRF) ranking to 31st in 2024 further supports the claim of enhanced educational 
quality. Whil e these are commendable achievements demonstrating a commitment to 
providing a "well-rounded medical education," the Committee further recommends that 
the Ministry should provide specific metrics, such as patient -to-student ratios, bed 
occupancy rates, and  a breakdown of surgical cases or specialized procedures students 
are exposed to across various departments. Such data would offer concrete evidence of 
adequate clinical material and validate the claim of "extensive clinical exposure," 
ensuring that the qu alitative improvements translate into demonstrably high levels of 
practical skills for all medical and nursing graduates. 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.3.11 The Committee, however, appreciates the efforts made by the Institute in expanding 
their medical  education services. The Committee feels that paramedical education and 
training should also be included in the medical education services at AIIMS, Bhopal as the 

118 
 
available requisite infrastructure can help produce a competent technical workforce in 
different clinical fields. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to 
contemplate about introducing the paramedical education and training courses at AIIMS, 
Bhopal on an urgent basis to address the problem of shortage of technical manpower in 
clinical fields and optimize the utilization of infrastructure of the hospital set up. 
(Para 2.41 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.3.12 In this regard, Central Institute Body (CIB) has been constituted by Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare to look into the matter s of common concerned of all AIIMS. This body is 
in process of formulating recommendations in this regard. However, the Institute is also 
actively pursuing commencement of Para Medical Training/ Courses to address the problems 
of shortage of technical manp ower in clinical fields and to optimise the utilisation of 
infrastructure of the Hospital setup. 
 
3.3.13 Paramedical (Allied Health Sciences) Courses have been initiated at AIIMS Bhopal 
from 2024 academic session onwards. Details are as follows: 
 
COURSE AND PROGRAMME OFFERED (Flag-1) 
Allied Health Course (Phase-I) has started at AIIMS Bhopal from session 2024 with numbers 
of seat. [Duration 3+1 years] 
 
Sl. No Subject  Total Seats 
B. Sc Allied Health Courses 
1. B.Sc. (Radiotherapy Technology) 08 
2. Bachelor in Medical Lab Technician 06 
3. Bachelor in Respiratory Therapist 02 
M. SC Allied Health Courses 
4. Master in Medical Laboratory Technician 
(Microbiology) 
10 
Total 26 
 
COURSE AND PROGRAMME OFFERED—NURSING- Flag-3 
1) PhD Nursing Course 
2) M.Sc. Nursing Course  
 
Sl.  No. Course No. of intake per year Duration 
1 M.Sc Nursing 10 Seats from 2020 2 years 
30 Seats from 2021 
 
Sl. No Subject 
Seat 
1 M.Sc. in Medical Surgical Nursing (Critical Care Nursing) 2 
2 M.Sc. in Medical Surgical Nursing (Neurosciences Nursing) 2 

119 
 
3 M.Sc. in Medical Surgical Nursing (Cardiological/Cardiothoracic Vascular 
Nursing) 
6 
4 M.Sc. in Medical Surgical Nursing (Oncology Nursing) 2 
5 M.Sc. in Child Health (Peadiatric) Nursing 4 
6 M.Sc. in Obstetric & Gynecological Nursing 8 
7 M.Sc. in Mental Health (Psychiatric) Nursing 2 
8 M.Sc. in Community Health Nursing 4 
Total 30 
 
3) B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing Course (for Female candidate only) 
 
Sl.  No. Course No. of intake per year Duration 
1 B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 90 from the year 2024 
75 from the year 2020-2023 
60 from the year 2013-2019 
4 Years 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3.14 The Committee commends AIIMS Bhopal for initiating paramedical (Allied 
Health Sciences) courses and expanding nursing education programmes, including t he 
launch of B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. level courses. This marks a significant step toward 
addressing the shortage of trained technical manpower and optimizing the use of 
available infrastructure. However, the Committee recommends that the Ministry and 
the I nstitute should further strengthen these efforts by expanding the range of Allied 
Health Science  disciplines offered, increasing seat capacity based on projected 
healthcare needs, and ensuring timely faculty recruitment for these programmes. The 
Committee also recommends the establishment of a dedicated Allied Health Sciences 
faculty or school within AIIMS Bhopal for better academic oversight, curriculum 
development, and integration with clinical services. A long -term roadmap for Allied 
Health Science educa tion expansion should be taken up on fast track mode to produce 
timely and  adequately competent technical work force in various clinical fields. Such 
steps would make the hospital infrastructure capable of providing world class 
healthcare besides opening o pportunity for employment -generation through expansion 
of Medical field. 
3.4 OPERATION THEATRES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.4.1 The Committee is concerned to note that the waiting time in surgical procedures varies 
from one week to six months due to l imited availability of operation theatres at present. The 
Committee is of the view that AIIMS, Bhopal was established to provide immediate medical 
care to the nearby population who rush to AIIMS, Delhi or other adjoining facilities for 
specialized care. Th erefore, long waiting time at AIIMS, Bhopal for the patients requiring 
surgeries would defeat the very purpose of having an AIIMS like Institution in the State. It 
would further increase the out of pocket expenditure of those who cannot afford high medical  

120 
 
expenses. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Institute to expedite the construction 
of OTs and make them fully functional. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
number of surgeries being conducted (both major and minor) per day per OT to ensure 
optimum utilization of the existing functional OTs. 
(Para 2.43 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.4.2 The details of Surgeries conducted (both major and minor) by AIIMS, Bhopal is as 
under: 
 
Month/Year Major Surgery Minor Surgery Total Surgery 
2019 4624 9471 14095 
2020 2674 3003 5677 
2021 Nov 4823 3941 8764 
Total 12121 16415 28536 
 
All the 27 Major OTs including 24 Modular OTs and 8 Minor OTs are fully functional at 
AIIMS Bhopal. Please be apprised that the waiting time is not because of non -
operationalization of Operation Theatres but due to the significantly higher number of patients 
coming to AIIMS Bhopal. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.4.3 The Committee acknowledges the Ministry‟s clarification that all 27 Major OTs 
(including 24 Modular OTs) a nd 8 Minor OTs at AIIMS Bhopal are now fully 
functional, and appreciates the substantial volume of surgeries being conducted 
annually. However, the Committee is worried that despite the operational readiness of 
OTs, long waiting periods for surgical proced ures persist due to high patient load. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that AIIMS Bhopal undertake a comprehensive 
audit of OT utilization, manpower adequacy, and scheduling efficiency to identify 
systemic bottlenecks to overcome the issue of long wai ting time for surgeries at AIIMS 
Bhopal. In this regard, the Institute should consider extending OT hours, recruiting 
additional surgical staff, and streamlining pre -operative processes to im prove output . 
The Committee also urges the Ministry to explore th e feasibility of establishing satellite 
surgical centres or partnerships with nearby government hospitals to offload elective 
surgeries and reduce waiting times. 
3.5 STATUS OF INTENSIVE CARE UNITS AND TRAUMA/EMERGENCY 
FACILITIES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.5.1 The Committee expresses its deep concern to view that for an institution like AIIMS, 
Bhopal the facilities for intensive care units are inadequate. Though the existing units are 

121 
 
functional with optimal equipment, there is scope for expansion in t erms of separate ICU for 
different Departments like Cardiology, Medicine, etc. The Institute has partially started 24x7 
Trauma and Emergency services. However, there are just two faculty for Trauma and 
Emergency center which is inadequate to provide dedica ted trauma/emergency facilities and 
to deal with mass casualties. A lot more needs to be done by AIIMS, Bhopal as a tertiary level 
medical care hospital to cater to the victims of increasing road accidents and other trauma 
cases. The Committee would like to emphasize that the Institute should have a well developed 
infrastructure and a better equipped set up with state of art medical facilities to deal with 
trauma cases. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Institute should work towards 
enhancing it s spheres/perception of healthcare services to stand out as the most efficient 
healthcare provider in Madhya Pradesh. The Institute needs to increase ICUs and trauma 
facilities on a priority basis so that it becomes the best referral centre in the entire S tate for 
Trauma/Emergency Care. 
(Para 2.45 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.5.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for 
future guidance.Trauma and Emergency services are fully functional at AIIMS, Bhopal and 
working 24x7. Total 137 bedded COVID & Non Covid ICU is functional at AIIMS, Bhopal.  
As on today, there are 12 Faculty Members in the Trauma and Emergency and there are 78 
beds including 20 ventilator supported beds and Trauma and Emergency is functional 
24x7x365 days with 3 OTs dedicated to Trauma and Emergency. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.5.3 The Committee notes the  significant progress in enhancing trauma and 
emergency services at AIIMS Bhopal, particularly with the increase to 12 faculty 
members and 78 functional be ds, includi ng 20 ventilator -supported beds.  The overall 
Intensive Care Unit ( ICU) bed count has increased to 137. A breakdown of the se beds 
into specialized units like Trauma, Cardiology, ENT, Neurology, Urology, etc.,  address 
the targeted functionality a nd the specific need for specialized critical care. This 
specialization optimizes patient care by providing tailored environments and expertise 
for complex medical conditions. The Committee further recommends that the separate 
ICUs should be expanded to ot her remaining specialisations also and their numbers in 
Urology and Trauma should be adequately increased for taking specialised critical 
healthcare.  
 
3.6 DIALYSIS FACILITIES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.6.1 The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction  that there are only two dialysis machines 
at the hospital. The Committee also notes huge shortfall in manpower resources especially in 
the Nephrology Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Institute should 

122 
 
strive to increase the number of dialysis machines as well as the requisite manpower to 
upgrade their Nephrology Department for effective health care service delivery. 
(Para 2.49 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.6.2 AIIMS Bhopal is making all sincere efforts to improve the overall situat ion in the 
Nephrology department. As desired by the Committee, Faculty posts have been advertised in 
the Department of Nephrology vide Advertisement No. Admin/AIIMS/ Bhopal/2019/2917 
dated 21-01-2019 to meet  the requirement. As on today, there are 11 dialy sis machines fully 
functional in departments of Nephrology, Paediatrics and ICU. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.6.3 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by AIIMS Bhopal to strengthen its 
Nephrology services, including the increase in the number of functi onal dialysis 
machines from two to eleven across Nephrology, Paediatrics, and ICU. However, the 
Committee emphasizes that enhancing equipment capacity must be matched with 
adequate and specialized human resources to ensure quality service delivery. In its 
reply, the Ministry stated that the faculty posts have been advertised in Department of 
Nephrology in 2019, however, the status of recruitment through that advertisement and 
the present status of vacant posts should have been informed to the Committee. The  
Committee further recommends that the Institute should expedite all p ending 
recruitment of qualified nephrologists, dialysis technicians, and nursing staff dedicated 
to renal care. It also urges the Ministry to support the development of a dedicated Renal  
Care Unit with integrated diagnostic, therapeutic, and training facilities.  
3.7 MERGER OF BHOPAL MEMORIAL HOSPITAL & RESEARCH CENTRE 
(BMHRC) AND AIIMS, BHOPAL 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.7.1 The Committee welcomes the positive response of the Minis try w.r.t. the merger of 
BMHRC with AIIMS Bhopal. The Committee also appreciates the concurrence of Director, 
BMHRC and the Department of Health Research to this merger proposed in public interest. 
The Committee is of the considered view that at present th ere is duplication of resources and 
services being offered in various medical fields leading to non -optimal utilization of high cost 
equipment and medical services. The BMHRC caters to a substantial population of gas 
tragedy victims and their dependents, i t may continue to do the same subsequent to the 
merger. BMHRC is well equipped to train paramedical workforce which can be produced by 
the hospital easily if the requisite faculty is made available. The Committee feels that merger 
of both hospitals would h elp in attracting and retaining medical faculty. The Committee feels 
that merger of BMHRC with AIIMS, Bhopal would increase scope of teaching and training 
avenues for doctors and students. The Committee, therefore, lends its full support to the 
merger of b oth Institutes for the benefit of the society. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Department of Health & Family Welfare should work towards chalking out 

123 
 
necessary course of action for bringing BMHRC under its purview by merging it with AIIMS 
Bhopal. While doing so, the Department of Health & Family Welfare can look into utilizing 
the huge set up of BMHRC, Bhopal for putting in place a dedicated resource centre for both 
medical faculty and paramedical staff in order to have paramedical/clinical techni cians 
workforce in various fields. The synergy arising out of the merger of BMHRC with AIIMS, 
Bhopal would result in optimal utilization of the existing infrastructure and resources. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that administrative hurdles towards the merger of 
both the institutes should be removed as early as possible. 
(Para 2.60 of the report) 
 
3.7.2 The Committee, further, recommends that in order to protect the interest of doctors of 
BMHRC, the recruitment rules which are different from  AIIMS (which happens to be an 
autonomous Institution governed by a separate Act) be retained in the transitory phase till 
complete merger is done so that the promotional avenues of the BMHRC doctors are 
protected. No fresh recruitment should be done under  BMHRC rules and the cadre of serving 
doctors be treated as a dying cadre for smooth transition of the merger process. The 
Committee recommends for time bound action in this matter and would like to be apprised of 
the progress made within three months of presentation of this Report. 
(Para 2.61 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.7.3 It was decided to constitute a Core Group under the Chairmanship of Director, AIIMS, 
Raipur and Director, AIIMS Bhopal in connection with the proposal of merger of Bhopal 
Memorial Hospital and Research Centre (BMHRC), Bhopal with AIIMS, Bhopal. The Core 
Group has submitted its report on the 1 st October, 2018. PMSSY has sent the report to 
Department of Health Research with the request to consult all the stakeholders including 
employees/doctors association and confirm acceptability of the recommendations made in the 
Report. Further, action will be taken in the matter on acceptance of the recommendation by all 
stakeholders. The recommendation of the DRPSC in the para was shared with DHR f or 
necessary action.  However, DHR has decided not to merge BHMRC with AIIMS Bhopal. 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.7.4 The Committee recapitulates the positive response of the Ministry w.r.t. the 
merger of BMHRC with AIIMS Bhopal before the Committee during it s discussion on 
the subject. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its strong conviction that the merger of 
BMHRC with AIIMS Bhopal is in larger public interest and would ensure optimum 
utilization of resources, better faculty retention, and expanded traini ng and teaching 
opportunities, particularly while continuing to cater to the needs of gas tragedy victims. 
While noting that the Department of Health Research has decided against the merger, 
the Committee urges the Department of Health and Family Welfare  to revisit this 
decision in consultation with all stakeholders, keeping in view the long -term benefits for 
patients, medical faculty, and students. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 

124 
 
Department of Health and Family Welfare  to devise  a concrete roadmap  and time -
bound plan for resolving administrative hurdles and ensuring that the merger, along 
with protection of service conditions of existing BMHRC doctors during the transition, 
in the interest of public health and medical education. 
 
B. AIIMS RISHIKESH 
3.8 STATUS OF FACULTY/NON FACULTY STRENGTH 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.8.1 The Committee observes that faculty position in AIIMS, Rishikesh has improved, 
however the Committee strongly feels that the present strength of faculty is insufficient for a 
premier tertiary care institute. This has adversely impacted the quality of medical services and 
standards of education being imparted by the Institute. The Committee, thus, recommends to 
the Institute to expedite the process of recruitment and take immediate  steps to avoid 
unnecessary administrative delays in faculty recruitment. 
(Para 3.34 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.8.2 The observation/recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted for 
future guidance. Measures to improve faculty strength in th e new AIIMS were also discussed 
in the meeting of the Central Institute Body (CIB) held on 13.08.2018, 10.12.2028, 
24.01.2019. CIB advised that the regular recruitment will be done at Institute level while 
combined contractual recruitment will be done by A IIMS, New Delhi through walk -in 
interview twice a year for selecting students passing from premium medical institutes/INIs, in 
addition to the recruitment done by individual AIIMS.  It was also decided in the CIBs to 
allow temporarily, the new AIIMS to fill  up the senior level posts by selection of candidates 
at one level below in case the post could not be filled up due to non -availability of suitable 
candidates. To ensure more number of candidates appearing for the interview, CIB also 
advised in the meetin g held on 10/12/2018 that the institute may convene the Standing 
Selection Committee meeting at the mentor Institute or any city near Institute. 
 
3.8.3 From the side of the Ministry several policy interventions have been introduced to 
improve availability of candidates for various faculty positions. In addition, the Ministry has 
also taken some policy initiatives for bringing about improved availability of trained HR at 
national level at large. Institute is continuously advertising vacant posts of faculty i n various 
departments. However, recently two advertisement were advertised by the Institute and was 
cancelled due to revision and implementation of new reservation roster is approved by the 
Competent Authority new advertisement of vacant posts will be publ ished. As on date total 
sanctioned posts of faculties are 305 against which 214 are working. Advertisement for 
recruitment of balance post is being done time and again. 
 
 

125 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.8.4 The Committee acknowledges the efforts made by AIIMS Ri shikesh and the 
Ministry to enhance faculty recruitment, including the steps initiated through the 
Central Institute Body (CIB) and the ongoing policy interventions. However, the 
Committee expresses the  concern that despite repeated advertisements, approxi mately 
one-third of the sanctioned faculty posts remain vacant, and recent recruitments were 
delayed due to the revision of the reservation roster. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that AIIMS Rishikesh must urgently finalize and operationalize the revised 
reservation roster and ensure that the pending faculty recruitment advertisement is 
issued without further delay. To avoid recurring procedural setbacks, the Committee 
further advises instituting a streamlined and time -bound recruitment protocol. Regul ar 
biannual recruitment cycles, as envisaged by CIB, must be strictly adhered to, and the 
progress should be reviewed quarterly by the Ministry. Further, the Committee would 
like to have a status report on efforts taken by  AIIMS Rishikesh and the Ministry 
regarding the operationalization of revised reservation roster and latest recruitment 
advertisement issued towards filling up of sanctioned posts of faculties. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.8.5 The Committee underlines the need to augment the Specialty  and Super Specialty 
workforce at the Institute. The Committee observes that in 16 Departments the posts for 
Professor are lying vacant. Further, four Departments i.e. Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, 
Transfusion Medicine, Gastroenterology and Biochemis try are being handled by a single 
faculty. The Committee would like the Institute to seriously introspect the issues of faculty 
and staff shortage and take necessary actions on a priority basis. The Committee feels that 
having an experienced workforce is a bsolutely necessary not only for providing best medical 
services to the patients but also for enhancing the practical expertise of the resident doctors. 
The Committee is of the considered view that adequate incentives should be offered at Super 
Specialty l evel to attract faculty at senior level from premier institutes like AIIMS, 
Delhi/JIPMER/PGI etc. for strengthening the healthcare services in the Institute. 
(Para 3.37 of the report) 
 
3.8.6 The Committee also notes that while on the one hand the Institute  has announced its 
plans for expansion, it has not been able to recruit even the sanctioned strength. The 
Committee strongly recommends that additional posts beyond the initially projected posts 
should be contemplated only when the existing sanctioned facu lty is recruited to the extent of 
almost 100% and there is optimum utilization of the existing infrastructure Any addition in 
faculty/Non faculty posts should be done only after ensuring that there is substantial 
enhancement in patient load. 
(Para 3.38 of the report) 
 
 
 

126 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.8.7 The observation/ recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for 
future guidance. However, all 18 speciality Departments and all 17 Super Speciality 
Departments are functional at AIIMS Rishikesh.  Transfusion M edicine and Biochemistry 
have more than one faculty now. All efforts are being made to fill up all vacant posts. 
 
Departments  Sanctioned  Filled up  Vacant 
PMR 4 2 2 
Transfusion Medicine 5 3 2 
Gastroenterology 4 4 NIL 
Biochemistry 8 5 3 
 
Noted and co ntinuous efforts are being made to fill up the vacant post by advertising 
periodically. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.8.8 The Committee takes note of the Ministry‟s and AIIMS Rishikesh‟s ongoing 
efforts to strengthen the Specialty and Super Specialty Departme nts, including progress 
in departments such as Gastroenterology, Transfusion Medicine, and Biochemistry. 
However, the Committee is concerned that critical vacancies still persist in key 
departments such as Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation (PMR) and Bioch emistry, and 
that faculty recruitment overall continues to lag despite repeated advertisements. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that AIIMS Rishikesh urgently 
prioritize the filling up of all senior faculty positions , especially Prof essors, through 
time-bound recruitment drives, while exploring targeted strategies such as inter -
institutional deputation, lateral entry of experienced specialists, and incentivized 
appointments from leading institutes like AIIMS Delhi, JIPMER, and PGIMER.  
Further, the Com mittee emphasizes that any plan  for institutional expansion must be 
accompanied by demonstrable improvements in faculty strength, infrastructure 
utilization, and patient load.  
3.9 MEDICAL EDUCATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.9.1 The Committee observes that there are new courses being offered at the Institute viz. 
PhD, MSc Nursing, DM/M.Ch and there has been a increase in the number of seats in existing 
courses as also the number of courses being offered at the Institute. The Committe e 
recommends that enhancement of the PG seats at the Institute should be done only after 
ensuring that AIIMS, Rishikesh meets at least the minimum benchmarks as per MCI norms 
applicable to other medical college throughout the country. The Committee does no t accept 
the argument of the Institute that it is governed by the AIIMS Act and hence the minimum 
bench mark as per MCI norms are not applicable to it. This argument puts a question mark 
over the quality of learning and clinical experience given to graduat es passing out of regional 

127 
 
AIIMS. The Committee is of considered opinion that graduates and post graduate passing out 
of AIIMS, Rishikesh should be equal to other medical graduates passing out of premier 
Institutes of the country. The Committee is of the c onsidered opinion that autonomy as per 
AIIMS Act was given only with respect to AIIMS, Delhi which has always exceeded the MCI 
benchmarks in every single aspect. However, the Committee is extremely concerned that the 
reference to the AIIMS Act and conseque nt autonomy available to regional AIIMS by virtue 
of this Act is being audaciously misused to dilute the medical education standards in a very 
blatant manner with the justification that the Institute meets US/UK standards. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to ensure that autonomy must not be used to 
dilute educational standards under any circumstances. The Committee is distressed at the 
medical education standards of the new AIIMS and is of the opinion that vacant PG seats in 
these Institutes are a reflection of lower standards of medical education. 
(Para 3.46 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.9.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for 
future guidance. The Institute have been sensitized in this regard.  The o bservation 
/recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted for future guidance & we are 
trying to implement all suggestions. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.9.3 The Ministry's response, stating that the Committee's observations have been 
"noted for fut ure guidance" and that the Institute has been "sensitized" and is "trying 
to implement all suggestions," lacks specific details or a concrete action plan to address 
the Committee's serious concerns regarding the potential dilution of medical education 
standards at AIIMS Rishikesh. The Committee's core apprehension centres on the 
perceived misinterpretation and misuse of AIIMS  Act autonomy to justify not adhering 
to MCI /NMC benchmarks, thereby raising questions about the quality of learning and 
clinical exp erience. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry 
provide a detailed, time -bound action plan outlining how AIIMS Rishikesh will be 
brought into full compliance with MCI /NMC norms for faculty -student ratios, 
infrastructure, and clinica l exposure, particularly for postgraduate seats, without 
compromising the autonomy under the AIIMS Act , but rather enhancing, t he quality of 
medical education. 
3.10 OPERATION THEATERS (OTS) AND TRAUMA & EMERGENCY CENTER 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.10.1 The Committee is dismayed at the sorry state of affairs with regard to patients getting 
surgical procedures done after long waiting time. The Committee observes that at present only 
13 operation theatres are functional at AIIMS, Rishikesh due to which th ere is a long waiting 
period for the surgical procedures to be done at the Institute. The Committee observes that in 
Urology, Neurosurgery, and Burns & Plastic Departments, there is two months waiting time 

128 
 
and in general surgery, there is 45 days waiting t ime for the procedures to be done besides six 
months for ENT. The Committee feels that such instances of long waiting time due to non -
availability of operation theatres defies the very purpose of setting up of AIIMS like 
institution as patients have to fac e hardships. The Committee finds the reasons for long 
waiting time at AIIMS, Rishikesh are inadequate infrastructure and constraints even after six 
years of its operationalization. The Committee recommends for optimum utilization of the 
existing OT infrastructure. The Committee also recommends for a comparative analysis with 
AIIMS Delhi regarding the number of major/minor surgeries per OT per day. Despite these 
lacunae the Institute is aiming for setting up of advanced centres at exorbitant costs without 
getting the basics right. The Committee recommends that optimum functional status of the 
originally conceived infrastructure be achieved and resources be utilized for achieving this 
objective instead of just focusing on rapid expansion. 
(Para 3.56 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.10.2 The observation/recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for future 
guidance. There was some delay in construction work related to setting up of Modular OTs. 
However, as on date 54 OTs including 25 Major OTs, 29 Mino r OT/procedure rooms are 
fully functional. A comparative study with AIIMS Delhi to evaluate utilization of OTs will be 
carried out. OTs were non -functional temporarily during COVID -19 pandemic, but now all 
OTs are fully functional, which will help in reducing waiting time for patient‘s surgery. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.10.3 The Committee appreciates the progress made by AIIMS Rishikesh in 
operationalizing a total of 54 Operation Theatres, including 25 Major and 29 Minor 
OTs, which marks a significant impr ovement in surgical infrastructure. However, the 
Committee emphasizes that full functionality must translate into tangible reductions in 
patient waiting times across all surgical departments. The Committee,  therefore, 
reiterates that AIIMS Rishikesh conduc t and submit, without delay, a detailed 
comparative analysis with AIIMS Delhi on OT utilization efficiency, including the 
number of surgeries (major and minor) performed per OT per day.  The Committee  
further recommends that a performance audit be undertake n to assess scheduling 
practices, manpower deployment, and procedural turnaround times to ensure optimum 
utilization of available OT infrastructure. The Committee reiterates that a ny future 
expansion plans must be substantiated by due justification evident with supporting data 
showing improved usage of existing facilities and reduced surgical backlogs.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.10.4 The Committee notes that AIIMS, Rishikesh is not prepared to manage huge number 
of casualties in case of any disaster  due to non -establishment of trauma center. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that AIIMS, Rishikesh management must expedite the 

129 
 
construction work for establishment of Trauma center for treatment of casualties in case of 
disaster, as Uttarakhand is prone to disasters. 
(Para 3.57 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.10.5 The obse rvation / recommendation of the  Committee has been noted for future 
guidance. It is submitted that the Trauma Building is fully functional with the capacity of 50 
beds. Helipad is also made functional in AIIMS Rishikesh, which is helping in managing and 
receiving patients for any disaster, in cooperation with the State Government. Heli Emergency 
Medical Services (HEMS) has been started for transporting critical patients to AIIMS 
Rishikesh.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.10.6 The Ministry's response details significant progress in addressing the 
Committee's concerns regarding disaster preparedness at AIIMS Rishikesh, with the 
Trauma Building now fully functional with 50 beds, the helipad oper ational, and the 
commencement of Heli Emergency Medical Services (HEMS). This proactive approach 
to establishing critical infrastructure and services for trauma and disaster management 
is commendable, especially given Uttarakhand's susceptibility to natura l disasters. The 
Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in 
tandem with Ministry of Home Affairs, must now focus on conducting regular, large -
scale multi -agency disaster drills and simulations involving local and stat e emergency 
services, as well as other relevant stakeholders. The Committee also desires that the 
Ministry should make introspection to specifically test the hospital's capacity in 
managing "huge numbers of casualties" in recent disaster in the states and accordingly 
refine coordination protocols to further  enhance preparedness and response capabilities 
for future contingencies. 
 
C. AIIMS JODHPUR 
3.11 Procurement of Medical Equipment 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.11.1 The Committee expresses its concern tha t 32 types of equipment were procured on a 
single bid basis at AIIMS Jodhpur. Such situation leads to minimizing the options for 
procurement of equipment for the Institute. In case of single bid, the cost of equipment is 
likely to be higher than multiple b ids. The Committee is of the view that multiple bids is the 
only way for procurement of economical and best equipment for the Institute. The Committee 
cautions that the Institute has not followed the General Financial rules for the procurement of 
equipment. As per General Financial Rules, procurement from a single source may be 
resorted to only when there is a single manufacturer, in case of emergency and for 
standardization of machinery or spare parts to be compatible to the existing sets of equipment. 

130 
 
In the event where more than one bid is received, it means that there is more than one supplier 
of the required equipment. The Committee, thus, recommends to the Ministry to comply with 
the GFRs issued by the Government of India and go for procurement of equi pment on 
multiple bid bases so as to achieve competitive advantage. The Committee recommends for a 
probe and analysis for all cases of single bid/ proprietary certificate procurements and a status 
report be submitted to the Committee within three months of the presentation of the Report. 
(Para 4.26 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.11.2 The observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for 
future guidance. It is stated by AIIMS, Jodhpur that the process of E -tendering and publishing 
all tenders on CPPP portal & website is being followed w.e.f. November, 2016. Prior to this 
also multiple tendering process has been followed for purchase of medical equipment. This 
approach has been adopted to encourage wider participation for all vendors a nd getting more 
competitive bids and to ensure public trust and transparency in procurement system. 
However, procurement on single bid basis has been made in few cases where multiple bids 
were not received in spite of tendering for multiple times. It is to  mention here that single bid 
has been resorted to only when there is a single manufacturer, in case of emergency and for 
standardization of machinery or spare parts to be compatible to the existing sets of equipment 
under Rule 166 of GFR. Moreover, techni cal committee has also certified in accordance with 
Rule GFR 173(xx) that the specifications prepared are not specific to any brand/ make and 
encourage larger/ multivendor participation in order to get competitive prices and rate 
reasonability has been asc ertain by the committee based on the copies of Purchase Order of 
other Government institution in most of the cases. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.11.3 The Committee takes note of the steps undertaken by AIIMS Jodhpur to ensure 
transparency in procurement, inc luding the use of e -tendering and publication of 
tenders on the CPPP portal, as well as adherence to relevant provisions of the General 
Financial Rules (GFRs) in cases where single bid procurement was undertaken. 
However, the Committee is of the view that instances of procurement through single 
bids should have been avoided and the institute must adhere to mu ltiple tendering 
attempts. The C ommittee feels the need for more proactive vendor outreach and 
competitive specification design to reduce cost of procu rement of components. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that AIIMS Jodhpur should also develop a 
structured vendor engagement strategy, including pre -bid meetings, to increase 
participation. Moreover, the Committee desires that all single bid and propri etary 
procurements should be independently reviewed on a half -yearly basis by an internal 
audit committee, and the summary of such reviews, including justification and cost 
comparisons with peer institutions, should be submitted to the Ministry. A 
comprehensive status report on the findings of the earlier probe into single bid 

131 
 
procurements, as previously recommended, should also be submitted for consideration 
of Committee. 
3.12 Status of Faculty and Non Faculty Strength 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.12.1 The Committee is constrained to observe that out of 305 sanctioned faculty posts, 160 
posts are lying vacant. Again, 2059 posts are vacant in non -faculty staff that amounts to 
approximately 55 percent of the total sanctioned non faculty posts. The Committ ee finds the 
vacancy level at Professor/Additional professor level quite alarming. The Committee is of the 
view that deficient number of teaching faculty at the Institute adds woes to basic health 
infrastructure at the Institute besides diluting the standa rd of medical education. Such a huge 
number of vacancies of the faculty/staff would definitely have an adverse impact on the 
functioning of the Institute. Vacancy of one category of health personnel is restricted not only 
to a particular Department but als o affects the overall functioning of a healthcare Institute. 
The Committee, thus, recommends to the Ministry to make all out efforts to expedite the 
process of filling up of the posts in a time bound manner in order to impart the medical 
education at the desired level and to ensure that tertiary level health care services are provided 
to the patients. The Committee also recommends to the Ministry to offer better pay structure 
and incentives to attract Specialist/Super Specialist doctors from premier Institu tes like 
AIIMS/JIPMER/PGI, etc. to join the Institute. The Committee is constrained to observe 
almost negligible presence of faculty from these similar premier Government Institutes and 
would also like to be apprised of the number of applicants who had app lied from these 
Medical Institutes but were not found suitable, along with the reasons for rejection. 
(Para 4.35 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.12.2 The process of strengthening the faculty in the new AIIMS is being deliberated upon 
by the Ministry and Ins titutes on regular basis and the overall situation will improve in near 
future. Measures to improve faculty strength in the new AIIMS was also discussed in the 
meeting of the Central Institute Body (CIB) held on 13.08.2018, 10.12.2018 and 24.01.2019. 
CIB a dvised that the regular recruitment will be done at Institute level while combined 
contractual recruitment will be done by AIIMS, New Delhi through walk in -interview twice 
in a year for selecting students passing from premium medical institutes/INIs, in ad dition to 
the recruitment done by individual AIIMS. It was also decided in the CIB to allow 
temporarily, the new AIIMS to fill up the senior level posts by selection of candidates at one 
level below in case the post could not be filled up due to no -availability of suitable 
candidates. 
 
As regards vacant non -faculty posts at the institute, it is informed that Institute is making all 
its efforts to fill up the vacancy and regular recruitment are being done to fill up the vacant 
posts. As regards, number of ap plicants who had applied from premier institute like 
AIIMS/JIPMER/PGI, but were not found suitable, it is informed that institute has not 

132 
 
maintained data in such format. However, the information is being extracted and will be 
provided separately. The updated position of faculty and non-faculty posts is as below – 
 
Faculty AIIMS, Jodhpur 
S. 
N
o. 
Post  Category Total Sanctioned Total On Roll Total Vacant 
 
1 Professor 
EWS 
54 
1 
34 
UR 18 
OBC 0 
SC 1 
ST 0 
2 Additional 
Professor 
EWS 
45 
2 
17 
UR 18 
OBC 6 
SC 2 
ST 0 
  
Associate 
Professor 
EWS 
81 
5 
25 
UR 33 
3 OBC 13 
  SC 4 
  ST 1 
4 Assistant 
Professor  
EWS 
125 
7 
112 
UR 66 
OBC 24 
SC 9 
ST 6 
Total 305 216 89 
 
Non Faculty posts as on 31.01.2025 
Total 
Sanctioned 
post 
Number of posts filled Vacant Post  
Regular Deputation Contract Total Filled Post 
3884 2300 10 767* 3077 807 
*Including JR and SR. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.12.3 The Committee acknowledges the measures taken by the Ministry and AIIMS 
Jodhpur to address faculty and non -faculty vacancies, including regular recruitment 
drives and the introduction of combined contractual recruitment through AIIMS New 
Delhi for candidates from premier medical institutions. While these initiatives are steps 
in the right direction, the Committee, however, is worried that 89 faculty posts and 807 
non-faculty posts still remain vacant, particularly at the senior levels whose leader ship 
and guidance is critical to institutional performance and academic quality. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates that immediate, time -bound recruitment targets must 
be set with quarterly progress monitoring. Further, the policy of appointing candidate s 

133 
 
under contract & one level below the sanctioned post should be only a temporary 
stopgap measure/management, and not a substitute for attracting high -calibre talent. 
The Committee, in this regard, recommends the creation of a centralized digital 
recruitment dashboard across all AIIMS to track applications, selections, rejections 
(with reasons), and origin of candidates (including those from AIIMS 
Delhi/JIPMER/PGI). This would not only enhance transparency but also help refine 
strategies to attract top tale nt. The Committee expects the pending data on applicants 
from premier institutes viz. AIIMS/ JIPMER/PGI but were not found suitable along 
with reasons for their rejection to be submitted in Action Taken Notes of present Report 
to the Committee for consideration. 
3.13 Super Speciality Services 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.13.1 The Committee desires the Ministry to submit a status note on the cost -benefit 
analysis for establishment of Advanced Cardiac Center, Neuroscience Centre, Advanced Eye 
Centre, Cent re for Oncology, Reserved block and Organ Transplant Service Centre. The 
Committee, in this connection, recommends that Advanced Centers be established only after 
AIIMS, Jodhpur achieves the desired level of faculty and manpower needed to run these 
Super-Specialties Departments and attains the daily OPD of at least 50% of AIIMS, Delhi. 
The Committee also recommends that all the decisions regarding setting up of advance 
centers should be referred to the CIB. 
(Para 4.39 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.13.2 The observation / recommendation of the committee have been noted for future 
guidelines. As also advised the matter for establishment of the various advance centres will be 
placed before the CIB for consideration / decision. As a policy, the attempt / focus w ill be on 
operationalization of remaining super -speciality Departments.  Reference in this regard has 
also been made to AIIMS Delhi vide Ministry letter dated 23.03.2019.  The Governing Body 
(GB) in its 8 th Meeting has given in principle approval regarding t he establishment of various 
centres at AIIMS Jodhpur viz. – 
 Centre for skill development of rural health  
 Allied healthcare professional training centre 
 Establishment of De-addiction centre 
 Comprehensive cancer care centre 
 Centre for rare diseases 
 OMICS centre 
 Centre for infectious disease 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.13.3 The Committee acknowledges that the Ministry and AIIMS Jodhpur have taken 
action in compliance of  Committee‟s recommendations for establishment of advanced 

134 
 
centres which was later on  referred to the Central Institute Body (CIB) for arriving at 
concrete decision . While the in -principle approval by the Governing Body for new 
centres such as the Comprehensive Cancer Care Centre, Centre for Rare Diseases, and 
others is appreciated, the Committee  re-emphasizes that such expansions should not 
dilute the core objective of achieving full operationalization of existing super -specialty 
departments and optimal faculty strength. The Committee, however, recommends that a 
detailed cost-benefit analysis and  feasibility report for each proposed centre, including 
staffing, infrastructure, and projected patient load, be submitted to the CIB prior to 
establishment of advance centre at AIIMS Jodhpur. The Committee reiterates that the  
establishment of these centre s must be contingent on AIIMS Jodhpur filling up critical 
vacancies.  
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.13.4 The Committee observes that out of 285 sanctioned posts in 37 functional Super 
Specialties Departments at the AIIMS Jodhpur, only 142 Seats have bee n filled up which 
constitutes only 50% of the sanctioned seats. The Committee is appalled to note that the 
Departments of Cardiology, Cardiothoracic Surgery, Endocrinology &Metabolism, General 
Medicine, Nephrology, Neurology, Surgical Oncology and Radio Th erapy are functioning 
with single person manning these Departments. Further, in the Neonatology Department, 
there are only two faculty and one of them is working on contractual basis. These 
Departments cater to cases of heart, kidney, and neurological dise ase. The Committee is of 
the view that Super Specialty Departments offer specialized diagnosis and treatment protocol 
dealing with a particular disease as it is not possible for a general physician to deal with 
patients suffering from all kinds of diseases. The gap in the actual position and the sanctioned 
strength of Super Specialists will adversely affect the working efficiency of the Institute as 
patients would be denied the services of the institute due to lack of Specialty/Super Specialty 
Departments. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Institute must fill up the vacant 
faculty posts at the Professor /HOD level so as to provide best services to the patients visiting 
the Institute. 
(Para 4.41 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.13.5 The observation / recommendation of the co mmittee are noted for guidance. From the 
side of the Ministry several policy interventions have been introduced to improve availability 
of candidates for various faculty positions.   In addition, the Ministry has also taken some 
policy initiatives for bringing about improved availability of trained HR at National Level at 
large. Recruitment advertisements for faculty members are being advertised on regular basis. 
Currently the rolling advertisements no. Admn/Faculty/01 -2024- AIIMS.JDH and 
Admn/Faculty/03-2024- AIIMS.JDH for 82 post of faculty members and 04 post of faculty 
members respectively in various departments of AIIMS Jodhpur are under process for which 
the interviews is likely to be conducted shortly. Faculty Position at AIIMS, Jodhpur as on 31 st 
January 2025 (Without APS) 
 

135 
 
S. 
No
. 
Name of the 
Department Post 
Sanctioned Filled Vacant Post 
Total Post 
Wise  Total Post Wise Post Wise Total 
1 
Anaesthesiolog
y and Critical 
Care 
Professor 
15 
2 
13 
1 1 
2 
Additional 
Professor 2 2 0 
Associate 
Professor 5 4 1 
Assistant 
Professor 6 6 0 
2 Anatomy 
Professor 
10 
1 
9 
1 0 
1 
Additional 
Professor 1 0 1 
Associate 
Professor 2 2 0 
Assistant 
Professor 6 6 0 
3 Biochemistry 
Professor 
8 
1 
7 
0 1 
1 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 
Assistant 
Professor 5 5 0 
4 Burns and 
Plastic Surgery 
Professor 
8 
1 
4 
0 1 
4 
Additional 
Professor 1 0 1 
Associate 
Professor 4 2 2 
Assistant 
Professor 2 2 0 
5 Cardiology 
Professor 
4 
1 
2 
0 1 
2 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 0 1 
Assistant 
Professor 1 1 0 
6 
Cardiothoracic 
and Vascular 
Surgery 
Professor 
8 
1 
5 
0 1 
3 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 4 3 1 
Assistant 
Professor 2 1 1 
7 
Community 
and Family 
Medicine 
Professor 
10 
1 
10 
1 0 
0 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 
Assistant 
Professor 7 7 0 
8 Dentistry 
Professor 
4 
1 
4 
1 0 
0 
Additional 
Professor 0 0 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 

136 
 
Assistant 
Professor 2 2 0 
9 
Dermatology, 
Venereology 
and Leprology 
Professor 
6 
1 
5 
0 1 
1 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 
Assistant 
Professor 3 3 0 
10 
Diagnostic and 
Interventional 
Radiology 
Professor 
12 
2 
7 
0 2 
5 
Additional 
Professor 2 1 1 
Associate 
Professor 3 2 1 
Assistant 
Professor 5 4 1 
11 
Endocrinology 
and 
Metabolism 
Professor 
4 
1 
1 
0 1 
3 
Additional 
Professor 1 0 1 
Associate 
Professor 1 0 1 
Assistant 
Professor 1 1 0 
12 
Forensic 
Medicine and 
Toxicology 
Professor 
5 
1 
4 
1 0 
1 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 0 1 
Assistant 
Professor 2 2 0 
13 Gastroenterolo
gy 
Professor 
4 
1 
2 
0 1 
2 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 0 1 
Assistant 
Professor 1 1 0 
14 General 
Medicine 
Professor 
11 
3 
7 
0 3 
4 
Additional 
Professor 0 0 0 
Associate 
Professor 2 1 1 
Assistant 
Professor 6 6 0 
15 General 
Surgery 
Professor 
11 
3 
8 
2 1 
3 
Additional 
Professor 1 0 1 
Associate 
Professor 3 2 1 
Assistant 
Professor 4 4 0 

137 
 
16 Hospital 
Administration 
Professor 
3 
1 
1 
0 1 
2 
Additional 
Professor 1 0 1 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 
Assistant 
Professor 0 0 0 
17 
Medical 
Oncology/ 
Haemotology 
Professor 
8 
2 
1 
0 2 
7 
Additional 
Professor 2 0 2 
Associate 
Professor 2 0 2 
Assistant 
Professor 2 1 1 
18 Microbiology 
Professor 
9 
2 
6 
0 2 
3 
Additional 
Professor 2 1 1 
Associate 
Professor 2 2 0 
Assistant 
Professor 3 3 0 
19 Neonatology 
Professor 
6 
1 
2 
0 1 
4 
Additional 
Professor 1 0 1 
Associate 
Professor 2 1 1 
Assistant 
Professor 2 1 1 
20 Nephrology 
Professor 
4 
1 
2 
0 1 
2 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 
Assistant 
Professor 1 0 1 
21 Neurology 
Professor 
4 
1 
1 
0 1 
3 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 0 1 
Assistant 
Professor 1 0 1 
22 Neurosurgery 
Professor 
8 
1 
7 
1 0 
1 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 4 3 1 
Assistant 
Professor 2 2 0 
23 Nuclear 
Medicine 
Professor 
5 
1 
3 
1 0 
2 
Additional 
Professor 1 0 1 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 
Assistant 
Professor 2 1 1 

138 
 
24 Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology 
Professor 
9 
2 
8 
2 0 
1 
Additional 
Professor 1 0 1 
Associate 
Professor 2 2 0 
Assistant 
Professor 4 4 0 
25 Ophthalmolog
y 
Professor 
7 
1 
7 
1 0 
0 
Additional 
Professor 2 2 0 
Associate 
Professor 2 2 0 
Assistant 
Professor 2 2 0 
26 Orthopaedics 
Professor 
8 
2 
7 
1 1 
1 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 2 2 0 
Assistant 
Professor 3 3 0 
27 Otorhinolaryng
ology (ENT) 
Professor 
6 
1 
5 
0 1 
1 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 
Assistant 
Professor 3 3 0 
28 Paediatric 
Surgery 
Professor 
8 
1 
6 
1 0 
2 
Additional 
Professor 1 0 1 
Associate 
Professor 4 3 1 
Assistant 
Professor 2 2 0 
29 Paediatrics 
Professor 
9 
2 
8 
2 0 
1 
Additional 
Professor 2 2 0 
Associate 
Professor 2 1 1 
Assistant 
Professor 3 3 0 
30 Pathology and 
Lab Medicine 
Professor 
12 
2 
9 
1 1 
3 
Additional 
Professor 3 2 1 
Associate 
Professor 1 0 1 
Assistant 
Professor 6 6 0 
31 Pharmacology Professor 7 1 7 1 0 0 

139 
 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 
Assistant 
Professor 4 4 0 
32 
Physical 
Medicine 
and 
Rehabilitation 
Professor 
3 
1 
2 
0 1 
1 
Additional 
Professor 0 0 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 
Assistant 
Professor 1 1 0 
33 Physiology 
Professor 
11 
2 
7 
1 1 
4 
Additional 
Professor 1 0 1 
Associate 
Professor 4 2 2 
Assistant 
Professor 4 4 0 
34 Psychiatry 
Professor 
7 
1 
5 
0 1 
2 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 
Assistant 
Professor 4 3 1 
35 Pulmonary 
Medicine 
Professor 
5 
1 
4 
0 1 
1 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 
Assistant 
Professor 2 2 0 
36 
Radiation 
Oncology/ 
Radiotherapy 
Professor 
4 
1 
3 
0 1 
1 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 
Assistant 
Professor 1 1 0 
37 
Surgical 
Gastroenterolo
gy 
Professor 
8 
1 
5 
0 1 
3 
Additional 
Professor 1 0 1 
Associate 
Professor 4 3 1 
Assistant 
Professor 2 2 0 

140 
 
38 Surgical 
Oncology 
Professor 
8 
1 
3 
0 1 
5 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 4 1 3 
Assistant 
Professor 2 1 1 
39 
Transfusion 
Medicine 
and Blood 
Bank 
Professor 
5 
1 
4 
0 1 
1 
Additional 
Professor 1 1 0 
Associate 
Professor 1 1 0 
Assistant 
Professor 2 2 0 
40 Trauma and 
Emergency 
Professor 
13 
1 
10 
0 1 
3 
Additional 
Professor 0 0 0 
Associate 
Professor 0 0 0 
Assistant 
Professor 12 10 2 
41 Urology 
Professor 
8 
1 
5 
1 0 
3 
Additional 
Professor 1 0 1 
Associate 
Professor 4 4 0 
Assistant 
Professor 2 0 2 
 
TOTAL 305   216     89 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.13.6 The Commi ttee acknowledges the efforts made by the Ministry and AIIMS 
Jodhpur to address faculty shortages through rolling advertisements and policy 
initiatives aimed at enhancing the availability of qualified candidates. However, despite 
these measures, a signific ant number of posts, i.e., nearly 30% of the total sanctioned 
faculty positions remain vacant, with several critical super -specialty departments still 
being manned by inadequate number of faculty member. The Committee understands 
that such situation severely hampers the delivery of quality healthcare and compromises 
academic and clinical training standards. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its 
recommendation that urgent and targeted steps be taken to fill up the vacant faculty 
positions, particularly at  the Professor and Head of Department levels in the super -
specialties.  

141 
 
3.14 STATUS OF OPERATION THEATRES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.14.1 The Committee is surprised at the long waiting period for basic diagnostic tests and 
demands the institute to su bmit the waiting period for all the diagnostic tests in AIIMS 
Jodhpur specifically MRI. The Committee is saddened to note that despite limited functional 
OPD to AIIMS standards there is a waiting time for surgeries and even ENT procedure. If 
AIIMS, Jodhpur  has to enhance its perception, there has to be minimal waiting time for 
surgeries and other procedures. 
(Para 4.51 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.14.2 Regarding the waiting period for MRI, we wish to state that the MRI machines is 
being utilized at its ma ximal /optimal rate Emergency cases for MRI are being done on a 
priority basis depending upon the clinical necessity. The patient care services are 
exponentially increasing at AIIMS Jodhpur. The waiting time for MRI is an effect of heavy 
patient load. Rega rding waiting time for surgical cases, we expect that the waiting time will 
be curtailed as soon as the 33 planned modular operation theatres are commissioned.  Details 
of waiting period for all diagnostic tests in AIIMS, Jodhpur is given below. 
 
Sr. 
No 
Modality Waiting Period Action Taken 
  OPD IPD Emergency / 
ICU 
 
1.  USG  15 days No 
waiting 
Period 
No waiting 
Period 
1. Routine waiting in 10-15 days.  
2. There has been a 33% increase in the 
number of USG scans done between 2023 
to 2024.  
3. Two more USG s canners are under 
procurement process, which will further 
reduce the waiting time.  
2.  CT scan  15 days No 
waiting 
Period 
No waiting 
Period 
1. The CT scanners are being optimally 
utilised with 24 X 7 availability. The 
average scans per day is 130-140.  
2. There is increase in IPD and 
Emergency scans. Uninterrupted service 
is being provided.  
3. There was 35% increase in the number 
of scans between 2023 to 2024.  
4.Shortage of Radiographer technician, 
request already sent.  
4. Upcoming CT scanner in the tr auma 
block will reduce the wait list further. 

142 
 
3. MRI  6 
months 
No 
waiting 
Period 
No waiting 
Period 
1. One MRI machine is running 24 x 7 to 
accommodate all urgent scans.  
2. There was 82% increase in the number 
of scans done between 2023 to 2024, this 
suggest a significant increase in demand 
for MRI scans. (this corresponds to 
increase in OPD and Emergency patient 
footfall).  
3. Shortage of Radiographer technician, 
request already sent. 
4. At least 4 MRI scanners running 24 X 7 
are needed to meet the increa sing demand 
for OPD and In-patient  
4. X-Ray & 
DSA  
No Waiting Period  
- 
 
 
 
 
Department of Biochemistry 
 
S.
No
. 
Observation/ 
Recommendati
on of the 
Committee 
Last Action taken note 
Furnished to this 
Ministry 
Current 
update 
Remarks 
1 The C ommittee 
is surp rised at 
the long waiting 
period for basic 
diagnostic tests 
& demands the 
institute to 
submit the 
waiting period  
All routine investigations - 
No waiting time 
No waiting 
time 
Biochemistry IPD lab is 
NABL Accredited. It is 
constantly monitoring the 
TAT which  is ICU -2-4 
Hrs., IPD - 6-8 Hrs, OPD -
12 Hrs. 
Special investigation like 
PSH, LHH-01 Week 
No waiting 
time 
Department of Microbiology  
 
1. - All Routine Investigation No waiting time - 
Department of Pathology 
 
1. - All Routine Investigation No waiting time - 
  Department of Pulmonary Medicine 
 
1. Pulmonary 
Function Test 
No Waiting No Waiting - 
 Bronchoscopy 
Suite 
No. Waiting No Waiting - 

143 
 
 Polysomnogra
phy Test 
No Waiting 15 days Waiting - 
DEPARTMENT OF CARDIOLOGY 
 
S. No. Department Investigation Waiting Period 
1. Cardiology TMT in OPD patients Same day 
2. ABPM  in OPD & IPD 
patients 
2-3 days 
3. Holter Monitoring in OPD & 
IPD patients 
7 days 
4. Echocardiography  
OPD patients 1 month 
IPD patients 7 days 
 
30 Nos. Modular OT‘s  waiting time period are as follows:- 
 
Name of Surgical Department  Time Period 
Department of Urology 2-6 Weeks 
Department of Gen. Surgery 2 Weeks  
Department of Neurosurgery 1.5 Months 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 10 Days 
Department of Ophthalmology 1-2 Weeks to 2-3 Months depending on surgery  
Department of Orthopaedics 3-4 Weeks 
Department of Otorhinolaryngology 3 Month 
Department of Paediatric Surgery 2-3 Months 
Department of Burns and Plastic surgery 2-3 Months 
Department of Gastroenterology Surgery 2 Weeks  
Department of CTVS 3-4 Weeks 
Department of Surgical Oncology  1.5 Months 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.14.3 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by AIIMS Jodhpur in enhancing 
diagnostic and surgical capacities, including 24x7 ope ration of the MRI unit, 
procurement of additional USG scanners, and the commissioning of 30 modular OTs. 
However, the Committee remains seriously concerned about the persistently long 
waiting period, up to six months , for MRI in OPD patients and up to thre e months for 
elective surgeries in several departments such as ENT, Paediatric Surgery, and Plastic 
Surgery. Such delays in treatment of patients compromise timely patient care. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry take immediate  steps to 
address infrastructural and human resource bottlenecks, particularly by expediting  the 
procurement and commissioning of additional MRI machines,  USG and CT Scanner  
increasing recruitment of radiographer technicians, and ensuring optimal utilizati on of 
the new modular OTs.  
 

144 
 
3.15 BURNS AND PLASTIC SURGERY DEPARTMENT 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.15.1 The Committee is of the view that given the high incidences of burn injuries in the 
State of Rajasthan and adjoining areas, a separate Burn Unit at  the Institute is the need of the 
hour. This will ensure that timely and adequate treatment to burn patients in terms of reducing 
their mortality, complications and rehabilitation. The Committee, thus, strongly recommends 
that the Institute must start a se parate Burns Unit in IPD with sufficient manpower and 
necessary equipment to improve the care and facilities for such patients at the earliest. The 
Committee, in this connection, recommends that ambulance services equipped with advanced 
features for transportation of patient from accident site to the burns unit of the Institute should 
be made available. 
(Para 4.63 of the report) 
Action Taken 
3.15.2 The observation/ recommendation of the committee have been noted for future 
guidance. Regarding the observatio n about starting of Burn unit, AIIMS Jodhpur is in the 
process of setting up a Burn and Plastic Service in the Institute. State of the art advanced 
ambulances is available in the Institute round the clock and are being utilized for patient care. 
The institute is in the process of augmenting the services.  One floor in the under construction 
trauma building is designated for state of art burn unit.  Currently construction work is under 
full swing. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.15.3 The Committee notes the availa bility of state -of-the-art ambulance service and 
that a floor, in the new trauma building under construction , has been designated 
towards establishing a dedicat ed Burns Unit at AIIMS Jodhpur. The response of the 
Ministry, however, lacks specific timelines for the completion and operationalization of 
the Burns Unit, including the recruitment of specialized manpower and procurement of 
all necessary equip ment. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should provide a detailed project completion timeline for the "state of the art burn unit" 
within the trauma building, clearly outlining key milestones such as construction 
completion, equipment procurement, and the specific plan for recruiting and training 
sufficient specialized manpower (plastic surg eons, burn nurses, physiotherapists, etc.) 
dedicated to the unit.  
3.16 AYUSH FACILITIES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.16.1 The Committee observes that only Ayurveda and Homoeopathic OPD services are 
functional at the AIIMS, Jodhpur. The Committee consi ders that there is a need to integrate 
the Ayurveda, Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, and Homeopathy (AYUSH) system of 
indigenous medicine to meet the shortage of health care professionals and strengthen the 

145 
 
delivery system of the health care service through an alternate system of Indian medicine. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to start other AYUSH services at the 
Institute. The Committee also recommends to the Ministry to ensure the accessibility and 
availability and choice of AYUSH services to all patients depending in these specific needs. 
The Committee recommends to the institute to chalk out strategy for strengthening AYUSH 
services and to support this system with adequate infrastructure and manpower in a time 
bound manner. 
(Para 4.66 of the report) 
 
3.16.2 The Committee is constrained to observe that out of seven sanctioned posts for 
AYUSH faculty, only two faculties are presently working at AIIMS, Jodhpur and that too on 
contract basis. The Committee observes that posts of Senior  Medical Officer AYUSH and 
Yoga instructor are lying vacant. The Committee, thus, recommends the Ministry to fill up the 
posts for AYUSH doctors on regular basis at the earliest. 
(Para 4.67 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.16.3 The observations / recommendat ion of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for 
future guidance. The Ministry has decided to integrate the AYUSH in the tertiary care system 
in new AIIMS by augmenting the strength of AYUSH professionals and by also creating 
scientific posts in order to un dertake academic Ph.D. programme and finding solutions to 
India‘s public health challenge. M/o AYUSH had advised that each of the new and upcoming 
AIIMS should have augmented faculty / doctor strength and higher focus in one particular 
traditional system of medicine which may be having popularity in the particular region. Each 
such augmented medicine system will have additional 16 posts, consisting of posts of 
Professor, Additional Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, SR/JR posts. This 
will be over and above the already sanctioned five Medical Officer posts, one each in 
Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeo pathy. The above structure of 
Ayush Department has been included in the Standard Staffing Pattern approved by CIB. The 
proposal for creation of posts is being taken up with Department of Expenditure accordingly.  
The Institute has taken action to fill up these posts. 
 
3.16.4 AYUSH OPD services have been started in the institute and a separate AYUSH Block 
is functional. Curre ntly out of seven sanctioned post, six are working at AIIMS Jodhpur on 
regular basis. 1 post of Ayurveda Medical Officer has been advertised.  Recruitment Process 
for One Senior Medical Officer AYUSH and Five Posts of Medical Officer AYUSH 
(Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha  & Homeopathy) has been completed. Joined in August 
2022. 1 Medical officer (Ayurveda) resigned on 30.11.2023, same post has been 
advertisement on 19.10.2024 and requirement is under processing. 1 Yoga  Instructor has also 
joined on regular basis w.e.f. 17.08.2021. 
 
 
 
 

146 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.16.5 The Committee acknowledges the positive steps taken by AIIMS Jodhpur and 
the Ministry towards strengthening AYUSH services, including the establishment of a 
dedicated AYUSH block, initiation of OPD s ervices, recruitment of AYUSH medical 
officers, and alignment with the Standard Staffing Pattern ap proved by the CIB. T he 
Committee, nevertheless, emphasizes  that the resignation of a key medical officer and 
the continued gaps in faculty recruitment unders core the need for robust retention and 
timely hiring mechanisms. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
expedite the creation and operationalization of the additional 16 AYUSH posts as 
proposed and  ensure timely recruitment against all sanc tioned vacancies, and allocate 
adequate budgetary support for infrastructure, training, and research under AYUSH 
disciplines.  
 
D. AIIMS PATNA 
3.17 PROCUREMENT OF MEDICAL EQUIPMENT 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.17.1 The Committee is dismayed to note that 16 items of equipment (8.33%) costing Rs. 56 
crore remain undelivered while 34 items of equipment (19.54 %) costing Rs. 34 crore have 
been delivered but not installed. Consignee Receipt Certificate (CRC) has not been issued for 
20 items of equipment (11.49%) costing Rs. 3 crore. The Committee is shocked over the state 
of affairs in this institute of National importance where such grave underutilization of 
resources has become a common phenomenon. The Committee cannot fathom that how can 
the Institute turn a blind eye to the number of medical equipment that are lying uninstalled in 
the hospitals for such long periods. 
(Para 5.27 of the report) 
 
3.17.2 The Committee is not at all convinced by the reasons given by AIIMS Patna for the 
delayed supplies and non -installation of the medical equipment. Delays due to the non -
availability of space or complete power etc. could have been easily addressed by the Institute. 
The Committee believes that the institute had plenty of time at its disposal to obtain site 
approvals and the site should have been prepared well in advance. This undue delay in 
installation also highlights the failure of the Procurement Support Agency in ensuring timely 
supply and installation of the medical equipment in the Institute. The Committee is al so 
highly concerned regarding the role of the Procurement Support Agency that should have 
analysed the area and power requirement for the medical equipment and communicated the 
same to the Institute. The Committee holds the Institute and the Procurement Su pport Agency 
responsible for the delay in operationalization of these equipment and also warns that this lax 
attitude of the institute has proved to be the biggest roadblock in its path to establish itself as a 
centre of excellence in medical education. 
(Para 5.28 of the report) 

147 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.17.3 The observation/recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted for future 
guidance. In pursuance of the observations of the Committee, the delivery status of the 16 
Items of equipment has been checked up and the position is as under: 
 
(i) Out of 16 items, only four items were not delivered due to some issues between HITES 
(PSA) and the Vendor. PSA is being directed to sort out the issues and get the equipment 
delivered and installed. 
 
(ii) All the deliver ed equipment was installed except two equipment s delivered but not 
installed by the vendor l.e. High Speed Steam Glass Sterilizer & Lyophilizer. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.17.4 The Committee takes note of the updated status indicating progress in the 
delivery and installation of most of the previously undelivered and uninstalled medical 
equipment at AIIMS Patna. The Committee, however, expresses serious concerns over 
the fact that some critical equipment remains undelivered or uninstalled due to 
unresolved issues between the Procurement Support Agency (HITES) and vendors 
reflects persistent systemic inefficiencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should monitor and co -ordinate in a time -bound manner for resolution of 
issues pertaining to procurement and installation delays, indicating defined 
accountability for both the Institute and the PSA. A periodic review system should be 
institutionalized, involving all stakeholders, to ensure proactive site readiness, 
infrastructure support, and timely vendor coordination. The Ministry should consider 
developing a centralized dashboard for real -time tracking of equipment procurement 
and installation across all AIIMS. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.17.5 The Committee, therefore strongly recommen ds that the institute should be proactive 
in taking suomoto cognizance of the delay in delivery of the equipment and ensure that 
medical equipment are delivered on time. The Institute should also make sure that 
unnecessary delay in installation of equipmen t does not take place due to shortage of skilled 
manpower or lack in infrastructure. The Committee also recommends that all the medical 
equipment should be accepted only after a technical inspection by a technical Inspector and 
should receive routine maint enance and calibration. The Institute should also have a 
contingency plan in case of breakdown of equipment so that the diagnostic services are not 
adversely effected. 
(Para 5.29 of the report) 
 
 

148 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.17.6 The observation/recommendation of the H on'ble Committee has been noted for future 
guidance. Efforts are made by the Institute and the Ministry to impress upon the Procurement 
Support Agency i.e. HITES for early delivery and installation of equipment. However, 
whenever there is delay in supply o f equipment, penalty is imposed as per tender clause by 
the PSA. Moreover, skilled manpower is provided for installation of equipment. Also for 
equipment purchased and installed, there is a warranty clause for 5 years warranty and in 
addition all equipment  are covered with Comprehensive Maintenance Agreement for further 
period of five years. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.17.7 The Committee note s the efforts being made to impress upon HITES for early 
delivery and installation, along with the imp osition of penal ties for delays at AIIMS 
Patna. Furthermore, the provision of skilled manpower for installation and the coverage 
of equipment under 5 -year warranty and subsequent 5 -year Comprehensive 
Maintenance Agreements are positive steps towards ensuring operation fun ctionality 
and proficiency. However, the reply does not explicitly address the Committee‟s 
recommendation for a technical inspection by a technical inspector before acceptance of 
equipment, nor does it details a comprehensive contingency plan in case of eq uipment 
breakdown to prevent adverse effects on diagnostic services. Therefore, the Committee 
reiterates that the Ministry, in addition to existing measures, establish a mandatory 
protocol for independent technical inspection and certification of all medic al equipment 
prior to acceptance to ensure quality and functionality at the time of delivery. The 
Committee reiterates that a detailed contingency plan for critical equipment 
breakdowns should be developed at AIIMS Patna outlining alternative arrangements to 
minimize disruption to patient diagnostic and treatment services. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.17.8 AIIMS Patna also submitted that US FDA and CE certification was put in the 
specification due to unavailability of a similar Indian Model. The Commit tee is shocked by 
the false claims of AIIMS Patna that Indian model for basic instruments such as hand drill, 
mouth gags, rib, hooks, chisels etc. are not available in the market. The Committee is of the 
opinion that items such as Navigation system, Surgic al Helmet and Accessories, Surgical 
consumable items and other instruments are easily available with the Indian manufacturers 
but AIIMS Patna, by insisting on US FDA and CE certification even for such basic 
instruments has clearly shown contempt for the Indian manufacturing sector. 
(Para 5.35 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.17.9 With reference to the Committee's observation, it is mentioned here that the Ministry 
has issued guidelines for adopting the BIS standards also as an option to bidders, wherever 

149 
 
available, vide Ministry OM dated 20.02.2018 and since then procurement is being made 
accordingly. All the AIIMS have been advised to comply with the instructions. AIIMS, Patna 
is also following "Make in India" policy and insists on Bureau of Indian Standard ( BIS) 
certification. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.17.10 In the light of the Ministry‟s response and the adoption of BIS standards 
in procurement practices following the OM dated 20.02.2018, the Committee 
acknowledges the corrective steps taken to promote indi genous manufacturing. The 
Committee, nevertheless,  recommends that the Ministry ensure strict compliance with 
the BIS-inclusive procurement policy across all AIIM S and mandate that procurement 
committees give due preference to quality -certified Indian manufacturers, especially for 
basic instruments. A formal mechanism should be instituted for periodic audit of tender 
specifications and vendor selection processes to prevent unwarranted bias toward 
foreign certifications.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.17.11 On one side where the Government is taking measures to reduce the country‘s 
dependency on imported medical devices, it is unfortunate to find an institute of national 
importance openly following a mandatory US FDA certification policy for purchasing 
medical equipment. The Committee is distressed to note that medical devices like 
defibrillator, ultrasound machine, neonatal ventilator, surgical instruments etc  are being 
purchased with US FDA certification even though there are many other manufacturers wit h 
CE certification. The Committee strongly recommends to AIIMS Patna to follow a buy 
"Make in India" policy and insist on Bureau of Indian Standard (BIS) certification. 
(Para 5.36 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.17.12 With reference to the observation/recom mendation of the Hon'ble Committee, 
it is submitted that the Ministry has already initiated action in this regard. The Secretary, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide letter dated 7 th May, 2018 to Director General, 
Bureau of Indian Standards requesti ng for formulation of specifications for medical 
equipment being procured to promote 'Make in India' policy of the Government of India.  
Bureau of Indian Standards has already started creation of BIS standards for Medical 
Equipment and Devices. As per infor mation available with the Ministry, a standardization list 
for around 1000 medical devices has almost been completed. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.17.13 In view of the action taken by the Ministry and the ongoing efforts by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BI S) to formulate specifications for approximately 1000 
medical devices, the Committee appreciates the alignment with the "Make in India" 
initiative. However, to ensure that these efforts translate into real -time procurement 

150 
 
reform, the Committee recommends that AIIMS Patna and all other similar institutions 
strictly discontinue the practice of mandating US FDA certification where BIS or CE 
standards are available. Additionally, the Committee recommends monitoring of 
procurement patterns across AIIMS institutions to ensure preference for indigenous and 
BIS-certified products. 
3.18 STATUS OF FACULTY/NON-FACULTY STRENGTH 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.18.1 The Committee notes that 122 posts have been filled up against the sanctioned 
strength of 305 for Profess ors/Additional Professor/Associate Professor/ Assistant Professor 
whereas 183 Posts are lying vacant in different Departments of AIIMS Patna. None of the 
posts have been filled up in Trauma and Emergency, Nuclear Medicine, Nephrology, Hospital 
Administration and Endocrinology and Metabolism Departments. The Committee observes 
with concern that important Departments such as Cardiology, Medical Oncology and 
Haematology, Neonatology, Neurology, Radiotherapy, Surgical Oncology, Urology are 
functioning with only  one doctor in AIIMS Patna. The Committee also notes with serious 
concern that AIIMS Patna has the lowest faculty strength among all the new AIIMS 
established under Phase 1 of PMSSY. This casts aspersion on the functioning of AIIMS, 
Patna with regard to Human Resource Management as well. 
(Para 5.39 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.18.2 Matter of Record. At present, 224 seats of various faculty posts against total 305 seats 
are filled up. Only one department, Endocrinology & Metabolism is not functional at AII MS 
Patna due to non-availability of suitable candidates for the post. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.18.3 The Committee acknowledges the progress made in improving faculty 
recruitment at AIIMS Patna with 224 out of 305 faculty posts now filled up. However, 
the Committee expresses deep concern that critical departments such as Endocrinology 
& Metabolism continue to remain non -functional due to the lack of suitable candidates, 
and many other departments don‟t have adequate number of faculty. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry take urgent and targeted measures to address 
faculty shortages through proactive recruitment drives, relaxation of procedural delays, 
and provision of additional incentives, especially for super -specialty and 
underrepresented departments. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.18.4 The Committee is disturbed by the acute shortage of Professors/Additional 
Professor/Associate Professor/ Assistant Professor in AIIMS Patna and other AIIMS like 
Institutes. The Committee during its study visit to AIIMS Patna also discussed the shortage of 

151 
 
facility with the Director and representatives of the Ministry. The Committee recommends 
that AIIMS Patna should make immediate efforts to implement all the initiatives for 
recruitment of faculty. The  Committee notes that provision has been made to engage faculty 
from other institutes and Government medical colleges on deputation but the Committee 
would also like to emphasize that engaging faculty from the GMCs should not result in 
vacancies in the nearby GMCs. 
(Para 5.41 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.18.5 The process of strengthening the faculty in the new AIIMS is being deliberated upon 
by the Institutes & the Ministry on regular basis and the overall situation will improve in near 
future. In additi on, the Ministry has also taken some policy Initiatives for bringing about 
improved availability of trained HR at National Level at large. Measures to improve faculty 
strength in the new AllMS  were also discussed in the meeting of the Central Institute Bod y 
(CIB) held on 13.08.2018 and 10.12.2018 and 24.01.2019. CIB advised that the regular 
recruitment will be done at Institute level while combined contractual recruitment will be 
done by AIIMS, New Delhi through walk in -interview twice in a year for selecti ng students 
passing from premium medical institutes/INIs, in addition to the recruitment done by 
Individual AIIMS. It was also decided in the CIB to allow temporarily, the new AIIMS to fill 
up the senior level posts by selection of candidates at one level below in case the post could 
not be filled up due to non-availability of suitable candidates. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.18.6 The Committee notes the efforts to streamline and decentralize faculty 
recruitment processes and the policy decision to allow comb ined contractual 
recruitment through AIIMS, New Delhi. However, given the continuing faculty 
shortage, especially in critical specialties, the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
and AIIMS Patna urgently operationalize bi -annual walk-in interviews as pl anned and 
closely monitor the success rate of such recruitments. The Committee understands that 
while temporary appointments at one level below may provide only interim relief, 
therefore, the Committee emphasizes the need to maintain academic and clinical 
standards on permanent basis.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.18.7 The Committee understands that special packages/incentives or higher salary may not 
always be a driving factor to serve in this part of the country, therefore, the Institute has to 
explore alternative means such as paid research collaboration, high end technology, better 
working hours, security, enough leisure time etc. to attract qualified doctors to the Institute. 
 (Para 5.42 of the Report) 
 
 

152 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.18.8 The observations/recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted for future 
guidance. 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.18.9 Given the persistent challenges in attracting and retaining qualified doctors in 
these regions, the Committee urges the Ministry to prepare a structured fr amework of 
non-monetary incentives also such as opportunities for research collaboration, provision 
of advanced medical technology, assured work -life balance, and safety measures. The 
Committee further recommends that pilot initiatives in this regard be un dertaken at 
select Institutes with regular monitoring and feedback, so that effective models can be 
scaled up across all Institutes to ensure sustainable retention of skilled medical 
professionals. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.18.10 The Committee unde rstands that the shortage of doctors and specialist is a 
macro level problem considering the poor doctor: patient ratio in the country but the 
Committee fails to understand the reasons for huge number of vacancy in the non -faculty 
positions at AIIMS Patna.  The Committee strongly recommends that the Institute should 
expedite the recruitment process for the non-faculty posts. 
(Para 5.44 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.18.11 On the basis of the Parliamentary Standing Committee observations, the 
Central Institut e Body (CIB) in its 3 rd meeting held on 24.01.2019 advised all AIIMS to 
conduct recruitment for Non -faculty posts on centralized basis by applying following 
measures: 
 The recruitment of Nursing Officers in all AIIMS is being conducted by AIIMS New 
Delhi th rough NORCET (Nursing Officer Recruitment Common Eligibility Test) 
twice in a year as of now and allocating the provisionally selected candidates to the 
concerned participating institute. 
 For the rest of Technical and Non -Technical posts of Non -faculty Gro up- B & C, 
recruitment is being by AIIMS New Delhi through Common Recruitment 
Examination (CRE) in an year an allocating the provisionally selected candidates to 
concerned participating institutes. 
3.18.12 The Non-Faculty position as on 31.01.2025 is as under: 
Sanctioned Filled Up Vacant 
3884 2539 1345 
 
 246 vacancies of Nursing Officers has been advertised by AIIMS New Delhi through 
NORCET- 07 and 222 provisionally selected candidates were allocated to AIIMS 
Patna, which is under process. 

153 
 
 
3.18.13 307 vac ancies of various Non -Faculty posts of Group - B & C has been 
advertised by AIIMS New Delhi through Common Recruitment Examination (CRE)  - 2024 
on behalf of AIIMS Patna and the process is ongoing. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.18.14 The Committee acknowledges a administrative shift towards centralized 
recruitment for non -faculty posts at all AIIMS, including AIIMS Patna, through 
NORCET for Nursing Officers and the Common Recruitment Examination (CRE) for 
other Group B & C posts. Such streamlined approach aims t o expedite the recruitment 
process, as evidenced by the recent advertising of 246 Nursing Officer vacancies and 307 
other non -faculty posts for AIIMS Patna. However, despite these efforts, a significant 
number of vacancies of non-faculty posts (1345 out of  3884 sanctioned posts as of 
31.01.2025) still persist. Therefore, the Committee further recommends the Ministry to 
take necessary steps for expediting recruitment process by the centralized recruitment 
process, particularly focusing on the conversion rate  of advertised vacancies to fill up 
positions and shortening the average time taken for a complete recruitment cycle. The 
Ministry should identify bottlenecks or systemic challenges within the centralized 
process that might still contribute to the high vac ancy rates and develop targeted 
interventions, such as increasing the frequency of examinations for posts with persistent 
shortages or implementing fast -track recruitment for critical positions to ensure high -
quality patient care and education. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.18.15 The Committee also feels that AIIMS Patna should not ignore the importance 
of nurses in the health care system and recommends expediting the recruitment of 500 staff 
nurses for which AIIMS Patna has already issued advertisement . The institute should also 
speed up its efforts to start different medical and para -medical courses to fill the existing gaps 
in their medical services. 
(Para 5.45 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.18.16 The matter was discussed in the 3 rd Meeting of CIB hel d on 24.01.2019 with 
the purpose to streamline the recruitment process of non-faculty (Technical) by new AIIMS to 
attain speedier and better outcome.  It was inter-alia decided that, AIIMS New Delhi shall 
conduct recruitment for Nursing Officers for all AII MS through NORCET and CRE and 
vacant positions have advertised and recruitment is under process.  Present Strength of 
Nursing Officers is 786 against Sanctioned strength of 1326 seats.  Present Strength of Senior 
Nursing Officer is 413 against Sanctioned str ength of 510 seats.  Presently 246 seats of 
Nursing Officer advertised vide NORCET - 07 by AIIMS New Delhi.  Presently 39 seats of 
Senior Nursing Officer advertised vide CRE- 2024 by AIIMS New Delhi. 
 
 

154 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.18.17 The Committee observes th e steps taken towards addressing the issue of 
nursing staff shortage at AIIMS Patna by centralizing recruitment through NORCET 
and CRE via AIIMS New Delhi. The current strengths of 786 Nursing Officers against 
1326 sanctioned and 413 Senior Nursing Officer s against 510 sanctioned indicate 
ongoing efforts, further supported by the recent advertisements for 246 Nursing Officer 
and 39 Senior Nursing Officer positions. However, a substantial vacancy of 540 Nursing 
Officers and 97 Senior Nursing Officers still e xists. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry, in collaboration with AIIMS New Delhi, should explore 
the feasibility of increasing the frequency of NORCET and CRE examinations, or 
streamlining the selection and allocation process, to more r apidly fill up the persistent 
vacancies in nursing cadres. The Committee also reiterates that the Ministry should 
chalk out a streamlined strategy and timeline for the initiation of "different medical and 
para-medical courses " to address underlying gaps in  medical services and ensure a 
sustainable supply of skilled healthcare professionals. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.18.18 The Committee feels that this huge shortage against faculty and non -faculty 
posts in AIIMS Patna has an adverse effect on the fun ctioning of many important 
Departments in the Institute impacting the overall quality of medical service provided to the 
patients. Therefore, the Committee recommends a common centralised recruitment policy for 
filling up the vacancies in all the AIIMS. Th is will not only lower the cost of recruitment 
process but also offer uniform and fair selection criteria for all the AIIMS. 
 (Para 5.46 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.18.19 The observations/recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted  
for future guidance. 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.18.20 The Committee expresses deep concern on the response of the Ministry in 
regard to the Committee‟s recommendation on huge shortage against faculty and non -
faculty posts in AIIMS Patna. The Committee, therefore, rec ommends AIIMS Patna 
that concrete roadmap is imperative at place to address the acute shortage of faculty 
and non -faculty in AIIMS Patna and other new AIIMS. The Committee further 
recommends the Ministry to expedite formulation and implementation of a cent ralized 
recruitment policy for all AIIMS, ensuring uniformity, transparency, and cost -
effectiveness in the selection process. A clear timeline be laid down for operationalizing 
this policy. 
 

155 
 
3.19 SPECIALITY AND SUPER-SPECIALITY DEPARTMENTS 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.19.1 The Committee believes that Speciality and Super Speciality Departments are 
fundamental for an Institute like AIIMS Patna that is envisaged as a flag bearer in providing 
tertiary health care and medical education. The Committee howeve r is anguished to note that 
important Departments like Endocrinology, Nephrology, Urology, and Nuclear Medicine are 
not functional till date in the Institute. Considering the fact that around 2.2 Lakh new patients 
suffering from End Stage Renal Disease (ES RD) are reported every year which results in an 
additional demand of 3.4 crore dialysis every year  the status of crucial Department like 
Nephrology being non-functional in AIIMS Patna is a matter of grave concern. 
(Para 5.50 of the report) 
3.19.2 The Insti tute needs to be considerate towards the expenses borne by poor patients 
when they are referred to other hospitals because of non -availability of the medical facility in 
AIIMS Patna. The Committee, thus, recommends to the Institute to start the Specialty a nd 
Super Speciality Departments as early as possible in the best interest of the people of the 
State. 
(Para 5.51 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.19.3 All specialty and Super -specialty departments are functional at AIIMS Patna except 
the Department of Endoc rinology and Metabolism. Vide Rolling Advertisement 2023/1 
(Phase-II) Dated: 11.03.2024 the sanctioned seats have been advertised which envisages 
filling the vacant seats of the department of Endocrinology & Metabolism. However, it is 
pertinent to mention that, only 2 applications for the said department have been received so 
far. Some posts of Additional Professor and Associate Professor have been downgraded as per 
recommendation of the CIB & GB. Rolling Advertisements for the vacant posts is regularly 
advertised and efforts are being made to shortlist suitable candidates. Present Faculty Strength 
at AIIMS Patna is as below: 
 
Post Sanctioned Filled up 
Professor 54 21 
Additional Professor 45 17 
Associate Professor 81 46 
Assistant Professor 125 140 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
 
3.19.4 The Committee acknowledges the progress made in operationalizing almost all 
Speciality and Super -Speciality Departments at AIIMS Patna, except for the 
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism. However, the pers istent non -
functionality of vital department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,  despite rolling 
advertisements and downgrading of posts to attract candidates, remains a matter of 

156 
 
concern to the Committee . The Committee , therefore, recommends that AIIMS Patna, 
in coordinati on with the Ministry, undertake a focused recruitment drive for this 
department, possibly exploring options such as academic collaborations with other 
institutions, and targeted incentives for qualified specialists , etc. All faculty vacancies 
need to be filled up without further delay by undertaking suitable recruitment process. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.19.5 The Committee recognises the fact that there is a dire need to address the shortage of 
specialist and start the recruitment process for each D epartment. AIIMS Patna's contention 
that the decision for offering incentives to Specialists/Super Specialist will be taken by the 
Ministry amounts to shirking off its responsibilities and therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommends that the proposal of o ffering special incentives and packages to Specialist and 
Super Specialists in AIIMS Patna be submitted to the Ministry for consideration without 
much delay. 
(Para 5.52 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.19.6 The observation/recommendation of the Hon'ble Comm ittee has been noted for future 
guidance. As far as proposal of offering special incentives and packages to faculty member is 
concerned, the matter was also deliberated in the CIB meeting.  It is submitted that a Dr.  
Balram Committee has been set up by Ministry to recommend suitable measures. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.19.7 The Committee appreciates that the critical issue of attracting specialists and 
super-specialists to AIIMS Patna, including the proposal for special incentives, has been 
noted and deliber ated within the CIB, leading to the formation of the Dr. Balram 
Committee to recommend suitable measures. While the establishment of a dedicated 
Committee is a positive step towards addressing this long -standing challenge, the 
response lacks a clear timeli ne for the Committee's report submission and, more 
importantly, concrete actions or interim measures to mitigate the immediate shortage of 
specialists. Therefore, the Committee further recommends that the Ministry expedite 
the work of the Dr. Balram Commit tee, setting a strict deadline for the submission of its 
recommendations regarding special incentives and recruitment strategies for specialists 
and super-specialists at AIIMS Patna. Simultaneously, the Ministry should outline any 
immediate, short -term mea sures being explored or implemented, such as temporary 
deputations, contractual appointme nts with enhanced remuneration to address the 
critical gaps in specialist availability at AIIMS Patna. 
 
 
 

157 
 
3.20 MEDICAL EDUCATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.20.1 The Committee is unhappy to note the slow progress in starting Post Graduate courses 
in different Departments of the Institute. The Institute should take cognizance of the acute 
shortage of specialists in the country in general and in Bihar in particular a nd therefore need 
to focus on producing better qualified specialists. The Committee, at the same time, is 
aggrieved at the insufficient number of faculty staff in AIIMS Patna and worries that in the 
absence of the required number of Professors/Additional P rofessor/ Associate 
Professor/Assistant Professor in the institute, the quality of medical education may suffer. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that AIIMS Patna, before starting any Post graduate 
course in the Institute, should ensure that the necessa ry infrastructure and human resource is 
available with the Institute. 
(Para 5.55 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.20.2 Post graduate courses in AIIMS Patna commenced from January 2019. Number of 
seats approved was done after site inspection of the Discipline/Department at AIIMS Patna by 
a senior faculty member of AIIMS New Delhi deputed by the Director, AIIM S New Delhi to 
ensure availability of requisite human resource and infrastructure. Inspection of additional 12 
disciplines were done and recommended for  Post Graduate Courses. It is also mentioned that 
post graduate courses stated only in those departments where required faculty were available. 
This ensures that quality of medical education imparted does not suffer.  Present PG & 
DM/M.Ch Depts.  Presently, no. of dept. Having  MD Course -15; MS Course – 5; MDS 
Course – 1; DM Course – 2; M.ch Course – 7 
 
Total Students in MD/MS = 246 
 
DM/M.Ch – 20 
 
Some seats in DM/M.ch go vacant, as admission is done by AIIMS Delhi for all AIIMS, and 
no candidates are allocated by AIIMS Delhi. 
 
SPECIALITY  (MD/MS/MDS/M.Ch 6 yrs.) courses Total seats per year 
 
ANAESTHESIOLOGY (MD) 20 
ANATOMY (MD) 5 
BIOCHEMISTRY (MD) 9 
CFM (COMMUNITY & FAMILY MEDICINE)  (MD) 8 
DERMATOLOGY (MD) 2 
ENT (MS) 5 
EMERGENCY MEDICINE (MD) 10  
FMT (FORENSIC MEDICINE & TOXICOLOGY) (MD) 4 
GENERAL MEDICINE (MD) 10 
GENERAL SURGERY (MS) 10 
MICROBIOLOGY (MD) 3 

158 
 
ORAL & MAXILLOFACIAL SURGERY (OMFS) (MDS) 2 
OBG (OBSTETRICS & GYNAECOLOGY) (MS) 16 
OPHTHALMOLOGY (MS) 5 
ORTHOPAEDICS (MS) 7 
PAEDIATRICS (MD) 10 
PATHOLOGY (MD) 10 
PHARMACOLOGY (MD) 3 
PHYSIOLOGY (MD) 7 
PMR (MD) 4 
PSYCHIATRY (MD) 5 
RADIODIAGNOSIS (MD) 7 
RADIATION ONCOLOGY (MD) 2 
TRANSFUSION MEDICINE (MD) 2 
CARDIOTHORACIC AND VASCULAR SURGERY (CTVS 
M.Ch 6 YEARS COURSE) 4 
SURGICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY (M.Ch 6 YEARS 
COURSE) 2 
PAEDIATRIC SURGERY (M.Ch 6 YEARS COURSE) 3 
TRAUMA SURGERY & CRITICAL CARE (M.Ch 6 
YEARS COURSE) 6 
  
Super Specialty-DM/M.Ch (3 years seat at AIIMS Patna) 
 
PLASTIC & RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERY (M.Ch) 6 
CARDIOLOGY (DM) 3 
CLINICAL & INTERVENTIONAL PHYSIOLOGY (DM) 4 
CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE (DM) 2 
CARDIOTHORACIC AND VASCULAR SURGERY 
[CTVS] (M.Ch) 4 
GASTROENTEROLOGY (DM) 2 
INTERVENTIONAL RADIOLOGY (DM) 2 
NEUROLOGY (DM) 2 
NEUROSURGERY (M.Ch) 2 
PAEDIATRIC SURGERY (M.Ch) 2 
PULMONARY, CRITICAL CARE & SLEEP MEDICINE 
(DM) 6 
NEONATOLOGY (DM) 2 
NEPHROLOGY (DM) 3 
SURGICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY (M.Ch) 2 
SURGICAL ONCOLOGY (M.Ch) 2 
UROLOGY (M.Ch) 4 
TRAUMA SURGERY & CRITICAL CARE (M.Ch) 2 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.20.3 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the AIIMS Patna in ensuring that Post 
Graduate and Super Specialty courses are introduced only where adequate 

159 
 
infrastructure and faculty are available. However, the Committee is concerned over the 
recurring issue of vacant DM /M.Ch seats due to centralised counselling and allocation 
by AIIMS Delhi, which results in underutilisation of available training capacity and 
specialist output. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry, in 
coordination with AIIMS Delhi, expl ore options for decentralised or supplementary 
counselling rounds specifically for AIIMS Patna to ensure optimal seat utilisation. The 
Committee further recommends that AIIMS Patna should submit a roadmap for 
gradually introducing PG courses in other departments that are currently not teaching 
PG course, subject to the availability of faculty and infrastructure, to further address 
the shortage of specialists in the region. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.20.4 The Committee reprimands that AIIMS Patna does  not have a human resource 
development cell for undertaking regular induction and in service training programs for 
capacity building of the staff. The Committee believes that training of personnel is critical for 
development of high standards of medical ed ucation in AIIMS Patna. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends creation of a Human Resource Development Cell in AIIMS 
Patna that would conduct regular training for the doctors, nurses and the staff. The Institute 
must also conduct special training for ensuring palliative care to the patients. 
(Para 5.56 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.20.5 The observation/recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for future 
guidance. AIIMS Patna besides promoting doctors to attend conferences and skill t raining 
programmes, also organises CME and workshops.  Similarly, in -house training programmes 
are organised to impart knowledge and skill to the nurses. They are also encouraged to present 
research papers and attend different conferences. Department of Medical Education have been 
formed and is regularly undertaking induction & Training programmes. Further, foundation 
courses are being conducted for UG & PG students. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.20.6 While the Committee notes the positive steps taken by AIIMS Patna in 
organizing CMEs, workshops, and training programs through the Department of 
Medical Education, however, a dedicated and structured Human Resource Development 
(HRD) Cell is yet to be formally established , as recommended by the Committee . The 
Committee, therefore,  reiterates its earlier recommendation and urges the Institute to 
institutionalize a full -fledged HRD Cell with defined roles, budgetary provisions, and 
training schedules to ensure systematic capacity building for all categories of staff 
including doctors, nurses, and paramedics.  
 
 
 
 

160 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.20.7 The Committee is sceptical about the standard of clinical training provided as the 
Institute has shortage of faculty in almost every Department. The Committee is anguished to 
find that there are insufficient number of Operation Theatres and laboratories as the 
construction work is yet to be completed. The Committee strongly emphasizes that the 
assessment of the budding doctors should be based on real clinical cases rather th an on rote 
learning. Ideally, each hospital should have senior consultants to advise the resident doctors 
on treatment or supervise the key procedure and surgeries but the shortage of trained 
specialists in AIIMS Patna may produce graduates and post gradua tes with no practical 
medical skills. Therefore, the Committee lays more impetus on imparting practical, technical 
and skill based knowledge to the doctors. The Committee is of the view that AIIMS Patna 
should, therefore, focus on producing better trained doctors who later become competent 
enough to work in a clinical setting and possess sharp clinical and medical acumen. 
(Para 5.58 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.20.8 At Present there are 28 OTs, functional at AIIMS Patna and 17 Minor OTs. All three 
labs Microbiology, Pathology & Biochemistry are functional and all tests are done in -house. 
A new MBBS Course has been implemented and also approved by SAC which is competency 
based Medical Education & training Programme with a foundation course, early Clinical 
exposure, elective posting for diverse learning experience with research & community project. 
This will enhance practical, technical & Skill of the students. 
 
3.20.9 The observation/ recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for future 
guidance. The faculty strength of the Institute has been increased in the last few years. 
Further, all departments at AIIMS Patna are functional except the Department of 
Endocrinology & Metabolism. The vacant seats are regularly being advertised through 
Rolling Advertisement. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.20.10 The Committee acknowledges the progress made by AIIMS Patna in 
terms of increasing the number of functional Operation Theatres, laboratories, and the 
implementation of the competency-based MBBS curriculum designed to enhance clinical 
and technical skills. However, the Committee remains to be apprised of the actual 
faculty strength against the sanct ioned strength, department -wise.  T he Committee , 
therefore, underscores the critical importance of adequate faculty  in-position to 
effectively deliver hands-on training and mentorship, particularly in specialized clinical 
procedures. Furthermore, t he Committee would like to know the reason for not yet 
operationalization of the Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism  and desire that 
all requisite initiative must be taken to commence that Department without further 
delay. The Committee further recommends that AIIMS Patna should strengthen clinical 
mentorship by ensuring the presence of senior consultants in all departm ents and 

161 
 
integrate simulation-based learning alongside real patient exposure. The Institute must 
also prioritize the completion of other requisite infrastructure to facilitate uninterrupted 
clinical training, thereby , ensuring that graduates are not only a cademically proficient 
but also clinically adept and job-ready. 
3.21 TRAUMA AND EMERGENCY SERVICES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.21.1 The Committee takes it to exception that all the faculty positions in the Trauma and 
Emergency Care Centre are vacant. Considering this fact, AIIMS Patna's claim that it has a 
functional trauma/emergency centre is absolutely farce. The Committee reprimands the 
Institute for making such false claims and misleading the Committee. It is unfortunate that 
despite the required infrastructure for Trauma and Emergency centre, it is not fully functional 
due to the shortage of skilled manpower. The Committee strongly recommends that 
recruitment to various posts is carried out and trauma and Emergency Centre is made 
functional in the real sense of the term with adequate manpower so that critical patients are 
given urgent and prompt treatment and care. The Committee takes serious note of the manner 
in which AIIMS Patna has tried to evade Parliamentary scrutiny. 
(Para 5.63 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.21.2 Trauma department is fully functional in AIIMS Patna.  Currently 6 Faculty (4 
Surgeons and 2 Anaesthetists) are working for the Department of Trauma Surgery & Critical 
Care. The remaining seats of Trauma & Emergency department shifte d to newly created 
Department the Emergency Medicine.  Currently 5 Faculty are working in Emergency 
Medicine. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.21.3 The Committee notes the recent efforts made by AIIMS Patna to operationalize 
the Trauma and Emergency Care Centre b y deploying faculty in both the Trauma 
Surgery & Critical Care and the newly created Emergency Medicine departments. 
While this marks a positive shift from the earlier situation, the Committee desires that 
faculty must be  supported by  dedicated emergency p rotocols and round -the-clock 
availability of skilled personnel and adequate support staff. Therefore, the Committee 
further recommends that AIIMS Patna must ensure seamless coordination between the 
Trauma and Emergency Medicine department s for  strengthening emergency response 
systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

162 
 
3.22 AYUSH 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.22.1 The Committee believes that in a country like India with acute shortage of medical 
professionals, AYUSH through its traditional methods of treatment can go a long way in 
providing basic health care facilities to the citizens. National AYUSH Mission was launched 
in 2014 with the same vision, to provide cost effective and equitable AYUSH health care 
throughout the country by improving access to AYUSH services. AIIMS Patna bei ng the 
foremost institute of medical care should understand the importance of medical pluralism and 
make every effort to strengthen the AYUSH system. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that other branches of AYUSH should be operationalized at AI IMS Patna 
without delay and recruitment to the sanctioned posts must be carried out immediately. 
(Para 5.72 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.22.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for 
future guidance. Advertisement for the vacant posts was issued and the Vacant positions have 
been filled up in the year of 2020 and 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.22.3 The Committee notes  that vacant positions we re filled in 2020 and 2021. The  
action so taken addresses the immediate conce rn of Committee about staffing, h owever, 
the response does not provide specific details on current functional status or patient 
uptake in these departments. To fully realize the potential of medical pluralism and 
strengthen AYUSH as envisioned by the Commi ttee, a mere statement of recruitment is 
insufficient. Therefore, the Committee further recommends that the Ministry provide a 
detailed update on the current operational status of all five major AYUSH branches 
(Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, and Homoeopathy) at AIIMS Patna, 
including the daily patient footfall and the range of services offered in each  department. 
Furthermore, the Ministry should outline a strategic plan for promoting and integrating 
these AYUSH services with conventional medic ine at AIIMS Patna, aiming to establish 
it as a model institution for medical pluralism and comprehensive healthcare delivery. 
 
E. AIIMS RAIPUR 
3.23 STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.23.1 The Committee is anguished at the slow pace of th e construction activities at the 
AIIMS, Raipur as none of the four Packages have been completed even after delays ranging 
from 70 to 90 months. Surprisingly, the main reasons for delay under all the Packages were 
abandonment of work by the construction age ncies and lack of co -ordination among various 

163 
 
agencies. The delay in the completion of the construction has resulted in cost escalation of Rs. 
58.18 crore which is expected to increase further if the remaining work is not completed 
within the revised date of completion. The Committee is of the view that though various 
reasons have been identified by the Institute, corrective measures should have been taken 
much earlier in order to rectify the mistakes to avoid time and cost overruns. Such inordinate 
delays have resulted in indefinite postponement of delivery of health care services to the 
people. The Committee, therefore, advocates strict monitoring by the Ministry so that the 
project work is completed within the revised deadlines without any further delay. The 
Committee recommends for submission of a detailed enquiry report  along with action 
taken against the errant project consultants and contractors. 
 
 (Para 6.12 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.23.2 Except for Package I the Final certificate for all the balance packages has been issued. 
1. Package II  :    06-01-2023. 
2. Package III :    07-05-2021. 
         3.   Package IV :     20-02-2023. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.23.3 The Committee notes the Ministry‟s submission that certificates have now been 
issued for completion of construction activities at AIIMS Raipur under Packages II, III, 
and IV, while construction activities under Package I remains pending. The Committee, 
however, emphasizes that accountability for delays spanning more than 70 mo nths in 
some cases and the resultant cost escalation must not be overlooked. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendation for a detailed enquiry report identifying lapses 
on the part of project consultants, contractors, and monitoring agencies, along with 
specific action taken against those found responsible. Further, the Committee 
recommends that lessons from these delays be institutionalized in the Ministry‟s 
monitoring framework to ensure that future projects under PMSSY or otherwise are 
completed strictly within timelines and without avoidable cost overruns. 
3.24 STATUS OF FACULTY AND NON FACULTY STRENGTH 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.24.1 The Committee has been reiterating that shortage of qualified medical professional is 
one of the key challenges that new A IIMS are presently facing. The Committee notes that 
huge number of posts in both faculty and non-faculty posts are lying vacant at AIIMS, Raipur. 
Out of total sanctioned posts of 4089, 2636 posts are lying vacant that constitutes more than 
64 percent of the total sanctioned posts. The Committee, further, observes that majority of the 
vacancies are at the Professor/Additional Professor level which indicates that the Institute is 
suffering from dearth of experienced personnel. The Committee believes that heal th care is 

164 
 
one of the most labour -intensive sectors where human resources are crucial. Merely 
developing infrastructure and increasing capital expenditure would not help, instead it is 
adequate manpower at the health care Institutes that ensures efficient and prompt delivery of 
health care services to the patients. The Committee, therefore, would like the Institute to make 
concerted efforts and accord equal priority to fill up the vacant posts. 
(Para 6.19 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.24.2 AIIMS Raipur has been continuously pursuing to fill up the vacant posts of Professor, 
Additional Professor, Associate Professor and Assistant Professor on permanent basis, 
deputation basis as well as on contractual basis at regular intervals. Despite many attempts, 
some p osts are still remaining vacant due to no application/less application/no suitable 
candidate found/non -joined after selection to the posts. There is no such problem in Pre -
clinical and Para-clinical departments. Many non-faculty posts have been filled on p ermanent 
basis. 
 
1. Continuous sincere efforts are being made to fill up vacant faculty posts in speciality  and 
super-speciality departments. Process for filling up 169 faculty posts was  completed in 2022. 
Joining of the selected candidates was completed in April 2023. 
2. Advertisement for recruitment to 116 post was published on 12.05.2023. The  same was 
cancelled due to some administrative reasons. 
3. Recently, AIIMS Raipur has successfully completed the rolling advertisement for 
recruitment to fill  up 129  vacant faculty posts with selection of 34 faculties for various 
departments.  
4. Second phase of existing rolling advertisement is ready for receiving online application for 
the remaining 91 vacant posts of the advertisement. 
5. Rolling advertisement give s eligible candidates opportunity to apply for the post  
throughout the year subject to availability of vacancies. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.24.3 The Committee acknowledges the  efforts made by AIIMS Raipur to fill up the 
vacant faculty and non -faculty posi tions through various recruitment methods, 
including permanent, deputation, and contractual basis, as well as the implementation of 
a rolling advertisement system. However, the submission of ministry  for remaining 
vacancies at various levels due to "no app lication/less application/no suitable candidate 
found/non-joined after selection" points out deeper systemic issues beyond mere 
recruitment efforts. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the Ministry, while 
continuing with the current recruitment drive s, commission a comprehensive study to 
identify the root causes for the persistent lack of suitable candidates and joining issues, 
particularly at the Professor/Additional Professor levels in specialty and super -specialty 
departments at AIIMS Raipur. This study should explore factors such as competitive 
compensation packages, infrastructure and research facilities, work -life balance, 
academic environment, and geographical location. Based on these findings, the Ministry 
should develop and implement targeted strategies, which could include enhanced 

165 
 
incentives, improved institutional support for research and academic pursuits, or 
specialized outreach programs, to attract and retain experienced medical professionals 
to AIIMS Raipur. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.24.4 The Committee is perturbed to observe that majority of the non -faculty posts are 
engaged either on contract or have been outsourced. The Committee believes that such adhoc 
arrangements for deployment of medical professionals on contractual basis results in 
disturbing issues of inconsistency in carrying on daily task that ultimately affects the overall 
functioning of the Institute. It also affects the motivational level of the staff due to prevailing 
uncertainties about job security and stability a nd thereby, lack of sense of belongingness 
towards the organization. Hence, the Committee calls upon the Institute to strive for 
employing staff on permanent basis for ensuring continued and better delivery of services. 
(Para 6.21 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.24.5 AIIMS Raipur is continuously filling the Non-Faculty posts by advertising recruitment 
notices and many candidates have joined in various department/sections.3224 DR posts are of 
non-faculty positions (Out of which 798  Resident doctors,1481 Nurs ing staff and 945 
technical and nontechnical posts are sanctioned for DR . The recruitment for medical 
professionals is always done on regular basis first through direct recruitment as per prevailing 
recruitment rules. The unfilled posts are attempted to fi ll up on contractual basis to run the 
services and strengthen department. Amid the unfilled posts are advertised.  SRs and JRs are 
recruited as per the Residency Scheme throughout the year. In Nursing Cadre 1627 employees 
are working on permanent basis (DR and Promotional posts). Technical and Non -Technical 
Group ‗B‘ employees are working on permanent as well as on contractual basis.  Employees 
of Group ‗C‘ employees are working on outsourced basis as well as permanent basis. 
 
Group A 
12 candidates in 'Group A' joined through Direct Recruitment in the year 2024. 
 
Group B 
(i) 47 posts of Group B sent to AIIMS Delhi to fill up by CRE-2024.  
(ii) 130 posts of Nursing Officer will be filled by NORCET 
(iii) 209 candidates joined through Direct Recruitment in the Year 2024 
 
Group C 
(i) 169 candidates joined through Direct Recruitment in the year 2024. 
(ii) 103 posts of 'Group C' sent to AIIMS Delhi to fill up by CRE-2024. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.24.6 The Committee notes that the M inistry acknowledges the Committee 's concern 
regarding the high reliance on contractual and outsourced non -faculty staff at AIIMS 
Raipur. A significant number of candidates have joined through direct recruitment in 

166 
 
2024 across Group A, B, and C, and that 1627 nursing staff are already on p ermanent 
roles. The Ministry explicitly states that attempt s are made to fill up  unfilled posts on 
contractual basis to run the services and strengthen department," indicating that 
contractual arrangements remain a necessity due to persistent vacancies. Wh ile 
acknowledging the operational imperative, nevertheless the Committee is of the view 
that the Ministry should develop a comprehensive, time-bound strategy to systematically 
reduce the reliance on contractual and outsourced non -faculty staff at AIIMS Rai pur 
and ultimately to do away with such methods of ad -hoc recruitment. Rather the strategy 
should be more focussed on frequent direct recruitment drives for all non-faculty cadres 
and addressing the underlying reasons for permanent positions remaining vaca nt, such 
as potentially uncompetitive salaries or benefits for specific roles, to ensure long -term 
job security and foster a sense of belongingness among the workforce, thereby 
enhancing the overall stability , quality and professional proficiency  of health care 
services. 
3.25 SPECIALTY AND SUPER SPECIALTY SERVICES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.25.1 The Committee finds that the status of vacancies in 18 Specialty and 12 Super 
Specialty Departments is equally appalling. Under Specialty Departments, out of a  total of 
146 sanctioned posts, 68 posts are lying vacant. While in Super -Specialty Departments, out of 
81 sanctioned posts, 60 posts are vacant. The Committee expresses its concern that 16 
Departments are suffering with vacancies of more than 50% of sanct ioned posts. The 
Departments i.e. Radiotherapy, Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Physical Medicine & 
Rehabilitation, CTVS, Endocrinology & Metabolic Diseases and Neonatology are being 
handled by a single faculty. Such huge vacancy will hamper the specia lized services provided 
by the Institute. The main purpose of having Super Specialty services at the medical Institute 
is to save the patients of the State from the compulsion of going out for treatment to other 
metro cities but that very purpose is defeat ed due to the shortage of faculty. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends to the Institute to fill up the vacant posts at the earliest so as 
to provide best medical services to the patients who are visiting hospital with the hope best of 
tertiary level health care services at lower cost. The Committee desires the Ministry to take 
necessary action to get the vacant posts filled up without delay. 
(Para 6.23 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.25.2 Observation / Recommendation of the Committee has been note d for compliance.  
AIIMS Raipur is continuously endeavouring to fill up Faculty posts. From the side of the 
Ministry several policy interventions have been introduced to improve availability of 
candidates for various faculty positions:  In addition, the Min istry has also taken some policy 
initiatives for bringing about improved availability of trained HR at National Level at large.   
 
 
 

167 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.25.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry, in its response to the critical faculty 
vacancies, particularly, in specialty and super -specialty departments at AIIMS Raipur, 
largely reiterates the ongoing efforts viz. including continuous recruitment drives, 
contractual appointments, and the implementation of a rolling advertisement system. 
While the com pletion of recruitment for 169 faculty posts and the ongoing process for 
129 more (with 34 selections) are positive indicators of effort, nevertheless, the persistent 
high vacancy rates, especially in departments being run by a single faculty, pin-point 
that current strategies  deployed by AIIMS management  are not fully addressing the 
underlying challenges of attracting and retaining specialized medical professionals. The 
Committee, therefore, further recommends that besides normal recruitment efforts, the 
Ministry, in conjunction with AIIMS Raipur  management must undertake a targeted, 
department-specific analysis for 16 departments with over 50% vacancies, particularly 
those operated by a single faculty.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.25.4 The Committee is distressed to observe that crucial Super Specialty Departments like 
Surgical Gastroenterology, Nephrology, Medical Oncology/Hematology, Surgical Oncology 
and Gastroenterology are not functional at AIIMS, Raipur. The Committee believes that there 
are man y diseases which require specialty diagnosis and treatment necessitating the 
availability of Specialty and Super Specialty Departments. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends to the Institute to make these Departments functional without any delay so that 
tertiary healthcare services are made available for the patients from Chhattisgarh and 
neighbouring States. 
(Para 6.24 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.25.5 AIIMS Raipur has floated advertisement for recruitment of 183 posts for Faculty 
members. Preference was given to the Super -Specialty departments for conducting the 
interview in the 1 stand2ndphases. The 1 stphase of faculty interviews against above said 
notification was conducted, wherein a faculty member as Assistant Professor in the 
Department of Nephrology (Super-specialty) was selected and subsequently joined the 
Institute. The interviews for the Departments of Surgical Gastroenterology and Surgical 
Oncology (Super -Specialty) have been conducted in the 2nd phase. Result of2nd phase of 
faculty interview has been declared. AIIMS Raipur has also included Ministry‘s initiatives for 
faculty to enhance its services through Visiting Faculty Scheme, retired faculty on contractual 
and deputation basis. AIIMS Raipur is actively pursuing filling -up of all the vacant po sts of 
faculty members in the Super -Specialty as well as Specialty departments for providing the 
best services to patients from Chhattisgarh and neighbouring States.  The department of 
Nephrology, Surgical Gastroenterology, Nephrology, Medical Oncology & Haematology   are 
functional at the Institute now. Currently Surgical Oncology is not functional, however, the 
cases of Onco surgeries are being done by the surgical departments.  AIIMS Raipur is 

168 
 
repeatedly publishing the recruitment of faculty posts for   Su rgical Oncology but No 
candidate applied/selected candidates did not show interest to join/found suitable  in the 
interview. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.25.6 The Committee acknowledges the  efforts made by AIIMS Raipur to 
operationalize crucial Super Specialt y Departments, with the result that Department of 
Nephrology, Surgical Gastroenterology, Medical Oncology & Haematology are now 
functional. The ongoing recruitment drives, including the preference given to Super -
Specialty departments in interviews and init iatives like the Visiting Faculty Scheme, 
demonstrate a commitment to adequate staffing. However, the reply highlights the 
persistent challenge of making Surgical Oncology fully functional due to a lack of 
suitable applicants or can didates joining. The Com mittee further recommends that the 
Ministry must direct  AIIMS Raipur  management to  conduct a targeted analysis to 
understand the specific deterrents for super -specialists in Surgical Oncology. The 
Ministry should develop a tailored, aggressive recruitment strategy for Surgical 
Oncology, which could include offering enhanced incentives, dedicated research grants, 
specialized training opportunities, to ensure that this vital department becomes fully 
functional with adequate specialized faculty without further  delay, thereby ensuring 
comprehensive cancer care. 
3.26 PROCUREMENT OF EQUIPMENT 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.26.1 The Committee deprecates the Institute for poor management of crucial equipment 
worth crores. Procurement process involves commissioning , installation, training, warranty, 
after sales services like post -warranty maintenance and assured availability of spares. The 
Committee is of the view that delay in the installation of procured equipment may jeopardize 
after sales services for warranty p eriod may lapse as per the contract. The Committee would 
like the Institute to install the equipment as soon as these equipment are delivered. Further, 
the equipment must be purchased only when the suitable infrastructure and manpower for 
their installation and operation is available. 
(Para 6.27 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.26.2 So far as purchases done by the Institute are concerned, there are no such cases as 
mentioned in this point, where in equipment were purchased and infrastructure and manpower 
was not available. The Institute purchases equipment only when suitable infrastructure and 
manpower for their operation and installation are available and take immediate action to 
install the equipment as soon as it is received.  As per the tender clauses of AI IMS Raipur, the 
warranty will commence only after the installation and commissioning of the particular 
equipment. In addition to this, there is always a clause of Liquidated Damages as prescribed 
under GFR to supplier in case the equipment is supplied afte r expiry of prescribed delivery 
period as mentioned in purchase order to protect the interest of AIIMS Raipur.  So far as cases 

169 
 
relating to equipment purchased through M/s. HLL are concerned, few of the equipment 
could not be installed where the designated area of the concerned departments was not handed 
over timely by the project contractors. The reasons of construction delay have already been 
brought out in the point no. 6.12. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.26.3 The Committee has been informed that AIIMS Raipu r generally adheres to best 
practices by purchasing equipment only when infrastructure and manpower are 
available, and by ensuring warranty periods commence post -installation, with 
provisions for liquidated damages. This is a positive step towards prudent equipment 
management.  However, the submission that "few of the equipment could not be 
installed where the designated area of the departments concerned was not handed over 
timely by the project contractors" underscores a critical gap in coordination betwee n 
procurement and infrastructure development. The Committee , therefore,  further 
recommends that the Ministry implement a more robust, inter -departmental 
coordination mechanism between the procurement wing and the project/construction 
department at AIIMS Ra ipur. Such mechanism should include mandatory, pre -
procurement verification of infrastructure readiness and a staggered procurement 
schedule explicitly linked to the confirmed handover dates of designated departmental 
areas, thereby preventing future insta nces where costly equipment remains uninstalled 
due to construction delays. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.26.4 The Committee feels that delay in the delivery or installation of the equipment at the 
Institute is certainly not a healthy trend. It deprive s patients of diagnostic/therapeutic benefits 
through the usage of such equipment. The delay in the supply of the equipment is the fault on 
the part of the PSA/supplier/manufacturer and the Institute must take suitable action against 
the errant supplier. The Committee is of the view that procurement of equipment is a key area 
and therefore the Institute must resolve these issues by making the PSA accountable for any 
delay and lapse. 
(Para 6.28 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.26.5 So far as the procurement c ases pertaining to PSA, i.e. M/s HLL, adequate Liquidated 
damage have been imposed on delayed supply of the equipment whenever there is 
delay/defect on the part of PSA/ Supplier/ Manufacturer. The Final Acceptance Certificates 
against such equipment issued  by the Institute clearly mentions the date of installation and 
commissioning. The PSA, in turn, imposes suitable penalty against errant suppliers as the 
conditions of the tender.  However, the concern raised by Hon‘ble Committee is well taken 
and the Institute will take up suitable action/measures against the PSA. 
 
 

170 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.26.6 The Committee has been apprised that the Committee‟s concern over delays in 
equipment delivery and installation has been addressed by imposing liquidated damages 
on errant suppliers and that AIIMS Raipur generally ensures infrastructure and 
manpower are available before procurement. The Committee , however, recommends 
that the Ministry, be side imposing penalties must  establish a more integrated and 
proactive system t o ensure seamless coordination between procurement, infrastructure 
development, and departmental readiness at AIIMS Raipur. This system should 
mandate a pre -procurement checklist and real -time monitoring of project completion 
milestones, enabling a "just-in-time" equipment delivery and installation strategy.  
 
3.27 MEDICAL EDUCATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.27.1 The Committee was given to understand that out of the 30 total PG seats, only 22 seats 
were filled in July, 2018. The seats in six Departme nts i.e. Anatomy, Biochemistry, Forensic 
Medicine & Toxicology, Microbiology, Pharmacology and Physiology remained vacant. The 
Committee expects the Institute to assess the reasons for the vacant seats and take remedial 
action so that all seats get filled up from the next session onwards. 
(Para 6.34 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
3.27.2 As the first two rounds of counselling are conducted online, non -filling of seats is 
probably due to the candidates not exercising their choice for these departments, which ar e all 
Pre-clinical/Para-clinical departments. Reasons for candidates not opting for these seats can 
be multiple ranging from availability of seats in Clinical Departments (through NEET or State 
quotas), which provide more job opportunities including in Non -Academic Institutions and 
also to do clinical practice in society. While for non -clinical and para clinical courses, the job 
opportunities are mainly in Academic Institutions.  The choice of seats by students is beyond 
the purview/control of the Institute.  However, it may please be noted that vacant seats of the 
previous sessions(s) are included in the subsequent sessions to the extent permitted as per 
availability of teachers in the department. 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.27.3 The Committee acknowledges the Ministry‟s explanation that the persistent 
vacancies in pre -clinical and para -clinical departments are largely due to candidates‟ 
preference for clinical specialties offering wider job opportunities. The Committee , 
while noting the submission of the Minist ry, emphasizes that sustained underutilization 
of sanctioned PG seats defeats the very objective of expanding medical education 
capacity. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry, in consultation with 
the National Medical Commission (NMC), ex plore remedial measures such as offering 
structured career pathways, research incentives, fellowships, or enhanced academic and 
institutional opportunities in pre -clinical and para -clinical disciplines to make them 
more attractive to aspirants. The Committ ee, therefore, recommends the Ministry for 

171 
 
periodic assessment of demand trends across disciplines and corrective action so that 
sanctioned seats are optimally utilized and do not remain vacant year after year. 
3.28 AYUSH 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.28.1 The Committee observes that out of 5 AYUSH services, only Ayurveda services are 
functional at the Institute at the present. The Committee underlines the need for starting other 
branches of AYUSH system at the Institute so that the patients avail the fa cilities and services 
of an alternate system of medicine. Patients would be benefitted immensely as AYUSH 
medicines are not only cost effective but also widely used as a standalone option or as adjunct 
with bio medicine in the diseases entailing long durat ion of treatment. The Committee feels 
that the relevance of AYUSH has become more prominent due to this paradigm shift in the 
health sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Institute to start other Ayush 
services as well as IPD services at the Institute without any further delay. 
(Para 6.46 of the report) 
 
3.28.2 The Committee notes that out of 7 sanctioned posts, only one post has been filled up 
yet. One Senior Medical Officer (Ayurveda) is working on contractual basis since 1st 
September 2014. The Committee believes that the Institute needs to strengthen its in AYUSH 
wing and provide cost effective & equitable AYUSH health care services throughout the 
country by improving access to the services as envisaged under National Ayush Mission. To 
ensure the optimal development and propagation of AYUSH systems of health care, there is 
the need to have adequate faculty in the AYUSH Department of the Institute. The Committee, 
thus, recommends to the Institute to fill up the vacant posts in the AYUSH Depar tment on 
regular basis without further delay. 
(Para 6.47 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.28.3 The Institute is aware of the immense benefits that the patients can get by AYUSH 
Health Care Services and also supports the same whole heartedly. The department of AYUSH 
(Ayurveda, Yoga, Siddha and Homeopathy) is functioning with the permanent Medical 
Officers.OPD and IPD services are available.  Post for Medical Officer Unani Medicine is 
presently vacant due to resignation of the Medical Officer Unani Medicine, and  has been 
advertised. The recruitment process for the post of Senior Medical Officer -1 (Ayurveda) has 
been completed, and the position has been filled on a permanent basis following due 
procedure. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.28.4 The Committee appreciates t he progress made by AIIMS Patna in expanding 
AYUSH services, including the initiation of OPD and IPD services and the appointment 
of permanent Medical Officers in various AYUSH disciplines. However, the Committee 
notes with concern that Unani services rema in non -operational due to a vacancy, and 
the Department overall still lacks the full sanctioned strength needed for optimal 

172 
 
functioning. Given the increasing demand for holistic and cost -effective healthcare 
solutions, the Committee reiterates the importan ce of ensuring all five AYUSH systems 
are fully operational. Therefore, the Committee further recommends that AIIMS 
Raipur expedite the recruitment process for the vacant Unani Medical Officer post and 
ensure that all sanctioned posts under AYUSH are filled on a regular basis.  
 
F. AIIMS BHUBANESWAR 
3.29 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.29.1 The Committee expresses concern over the constant underutilization of funds in 
AIIMS, Bhubaneswar from the year 2011 to 2017. There has been an abysma l increase in the 
percentage utilization of funds from 2016-17 onwards, however, it remained below 75 percent 
of the total available funds. The Committee feels that improper planning and lack of 
monitoring mechanism in the initial years led to under -utilization of Grants in Aid under the 
head CCA that adversely affected the construction and other developmental activities at the 
Institute and resulted in cost overruns. This is indicative of financial mismanagement within 
the Institute. The underutilization o f available funds will only result in an inordinate delay in 
realization of both the short as well as long -term objectives of the Institute. The Committee, 
therefore, is of the view that the funds allocated to the Institute need to be reviewed from time 
to time. An effective strategy ensuring fiscal discipline by continuous and efficacious 
monitoring would help in strengthening the financial management in the Institute. 
 (Para 7.8 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.29.2 The % utilisation of funds under Capital grants from the period from 2018-19 to 2023-
24 are mentioned as below- 
                                                                        (₹ in Crore) 
Year              Fund received           Fund Utilised           % 
2018-19               69.68                          69.66               99.97 
2019-20             123.58                        114.45               92.61 
2020-21             114.13                        104.28               91.37 
2021-22             104.85                          74.73               71.27 
2022-23             155.12                        114.98               74.12 
2023-24             113.02                        113.02             100.00 
 
The utilisation of funds under GIA Capital is rapidly utilised during the perio d from 2018-19 
to 2020-21. The unutilised balance for the year 2021-22 is carried forward to the year 2022-23 
and subsequently refunded as per the direction of the Ministry after implementation of TSA.  
Hence, after implementation of TSA, no surplus fund laying with the Institute Accounts. 
 
 

173 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.29.3 The Committee takes note of the significant improvement in fund utilization at 
AIIMS Bhubaneswar in recent years, particularly the near full utilization of capital 
grants in 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21, and 2023-24. However, the Committee observes that 
in 2021 -22 and 2022 -23, utilization again dipped to below 75 percent, which points 
towards persisting gaps in financial planning and project execution. While the 
implementation of TSA has addres sed the issue of surplus funds lying idle, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry ensure a robust mechanism for real -time 
monitoring of fund flow, project progress, and  timely corrective action , and 
institutionalize periodic financial audits and  capacity-building of its financial 
management systems to prevent recurrence of underutilization and consistency in fiscal 
discipline. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.29.4 The Committee finds that funds allocated in the year 2017 -18 remained unaudited. 
The Committee underlines the need for an audit of the allocated funds regularly. Needless to 
say, audit ensures financial reliability and compliance with laws and statutory regulations. 
 (Para 7.9 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.29.5 The Director General of Audit (C & AG) has conducted Financial Audit regularly of 
the Accounts of AIIMS Bhubaneswar to ensures financial reliability and compliance with 
laws and statutory regulations. SAR for the Financial Year 2018 -19 to 2023 -24, have been 
received from the Audit Auth ority for incorporation in the Annual Report and submission to 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for laying before both the Houses of the Parliament. 
The Audit Report is available on the Institute website. 
Further Recommendation 
3.29.6 The Committee notes with satisfaction that regular financial audits of AIIMS 
Bhubaneswar are now being conducted by the CAG and that the audit reports from 
2018-19 to 2023 -24 have been received and incorporated in the Annual Reports. While 
this is a welcome step towards  ensuring financial accountability, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry ensure timely completion and disclosure of audits every 
financial year without delay. The Committee also stresses that audit observations, if any, 
must be acted upon promptly wi th a clear compliance mechanism and periodic 
reporting to avoid recurrence of lapses.  
3.30 STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION WORK 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.30.1 The Committee takes serious note of the delay in most of the cases due to non -
performance of const ruction agency. The work of Package I that includes construction of 

174 
 
medical complex building commenced on 27 th May, 2010 and the original date of completion 
was 26 th August, 2011. The work was actually completed on 31 st August, 2017 with time 
overrun of 72 months and cost overrun of Rs. 8.56 crore. Package II that includes construction 
of Hospital Complex buildings was started on 16 th September, 2010 and original date of 
completion was 15th September, 2012. The work under this package has seen time overrun of 
73 months and the cost of the project has increased to Rs. 297.07 crore from Rs. 261.65 crore 
as estimated originally. Similarly, the work under Package III that includes electrical services 
got started on 16 th September, 2010 and original target date o f completion was 11 th January, 
2013 but the work was completed on 31 st July, 2015 with a time overrun of 30 months and 
cost overrun of Rs. 1.51 crore. The work under Package IV had started on 4 th July, 2012 with 
scheduled date of completion by 3 rd July, 2013 but the work was actually completed on 28 th 
February, 2018 with a time overrun of 55 months. The total cost escalation under the four 
Packages is approximately Rs. 35.36 crore. 
 (Para 7.12 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.30.2 The updated data regarding the packages are as follows- 
Package II IBMS (Integrated Building Management System) is subjudice. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.30.3 The Committee takes into account the updated status of construction packages at 
AIIMS Bhubaneswar and acknowledges that most of the packages have been completed, 
though with significant delays and cost overruns. However, the pendency in Package II , 
particularly the sub -judice matter related to IBMS (Integrated Building Management 
System), remains a matter of concern as it continues to hold back full and optimal 
operationalization of the facilities. The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the 
Ministry must take expeditious steps to resolve the pending issues, including legal 
hurdles, and ensure that all components of Package II are completed at the earliest. 
Further, the Committee emphasizes the need for fixing accountability on non -
performing agencies to prevent recurrence of such delays and for instituting a robust 
Sl. Packasge 
Approved 
Contract Value  
(Rs.cr) 
Date of Completion as 
per Current Progress 
Present Status 
of Work as on 
28.02.2019 
Completion cost 
(Cr) 
1 Package- I 67.37 completed 100% 78.24 
(Actual) 
2 Package- II 261.65 Almost completed  99.70% 295.07 
(Likely) 
3 Package- III 52.08 completed 100% 53.59 
(Actual) 
4 Package- IV 47.64 completed 100% 36.77 
(Likely) 
 Total 428.74   463.36 

175 
 
monitoring and penalty mechanism in future projects to minimize both time and cost 
overruns. 
3.31 STATUS OF FACULTY AND NON-FACULTY STRENGTH 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.31.1 The Committee is perturbed to note that approximately 40 percent of faculty posts and 
78 percent non-faculty posts are lying vacant at the Institute. The Committee notes that out of 
54 sanctioned posts for Professor, only 17 posts have been filled up and under 2 4 
Departments, posts for Professor are lying vacant. Further, 13 Departments are being run 
either by an Associate or Assistant Professor. The Committee believes that shortage of health 
personnel to this extent is a critical stressor for hospitals. The Comm ittee underlines the need 
for requisite number of health personnel in place for smooth functioning of the Institute. 
(Para 7.33 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.31.2 It is submitted that the vacant faculty posts and non-faculty posts have been advertised 
by AIIMS Bhubaneswar on more than one occasion. The institute did not get suitable 
candidates to fill up these vacant posts. The institute again advertised all 37 vacant posts of 
Professors on 28.01.2019. 
 
Faculty  
The recruitment for filling 108 posts of Faculty Advt. was published on 13.11.2020 but due to 
a change in the reservation roster policy of Government of India, the advertisement was 
cancelled and a fresh advertisement of 112 faculty posts was issued on 30.08.2021.  The 
interview for the same has been completed on 08.12.2021 and the result of selected candidates 
will be issued on approval of HR- Sub Committee of GB.  
 
Non-Faculty  
The Recruitment Rule for non -faculty positions of AIIMS, Bhubaneswar is under revision. 
After obtaining the necessary appr oval for such revision all the vacant posts (Direct 
Recruitment) in Gr. B & Gr. C will be filled up through open competition.  Presently, the 
recruitment for the post of Nursing Officer is being carried out centrally by AIIMS, New 
Delhi through a common ope n competitive exam, NORCET and at AIIMS vacancies of such 
post are being filled regularly, as per the choices exercised by the qualified candidates of the 
said examination. In 2020, AIIMS, Bhubaneswar projected 600 vacancies for Nursing Officer 
to be fille d through NORCET -2020 and in turn, 403 Nursing Officers out of 439 who opted 
AIIMS BBSR as their first choice has joined in AIIMS, Bhubaneswar till the first phase of 
candidate allocation. Further, more candidates will join against the said 600 vacancies o n 
completion of the document verification of the 118 candidates allotted in the second phase of 
candidate allocation. 
 
3.31.3 Moreover, for NORCET -2021, AIIMS, Bhubaneswar has projected 296 vacant posts 
of Nursing Officer for which recruitment is under pro cess. Regarding non-faculty Group ‗A‘, 
the recruitment process has already been completed for the post of Antenatal Medical Officer, 

176 
 
Child Psychologist, Clinical Psychologist, Deputy Medical Superintendent has been 
completed and the result of the selected candidate will be issued shortly.  As most of the 
Group A posts are meant to be filled through promotions only, due to the non -availability of 
candidates in the feeder cadre such posts are lying vacant. 
 
Present Status of Faculty Posts at AIIMS Bhubaneswar 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Category Name of the Post Sanctioned 
Posts 
Working Vacancy 
1 Faculty (Medical College) Professor 54 27 27 
2 Faculty (Medical College) Additional Professor 45 32 13 
3 Faculty (Medical College) Associate Professor 83 59 24 
4 Faculty (Medical College) Assistant Professor 133 119 14 
  Total 315 237 78 
 
Present Status of Non-Faculty Posts at AIIMS Bhubaneswar 
 
Advertisements are rolled out on a regular basis to fill the vacant posts considering the 
importance of health personnel in this organization.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.31.4 The Committee acknowledges the proactive efforts undertaken by AIIMS 
Bhubaneswar to address faculty and non -faculty shortages through repeated 
advertisements and the use of  centralized recruitment mechanisms like NORCET. The 
Committee, however, expresses deep  concern over the continuing high vacancies at 
various levels, particularly, with 78 vacancies out of 315 faculty posts, 222 vacancies out 
of 748 sanctioned posts at non -faculty level (SRs & JRs)  and 865 vacancies out of total 
sanctioned strength of 3082 posts of non-faculty (excluding SRs & JRs) still remains to 
be filled up in AIIMS Bhubaneswar . The Committee emphasizes that persistent gaps in 
critical human resources, especially senior faculty and Group A positions, can severely 
undermine institutional performance, training quality, and patient care. Therefore, the 
Committee further recommends that AIIMS Bhubaneswar devise a time -bound 
recruitment strategy with specific  targets to fill up all key vacancies  existing at (78) 
faculty, (222) non -faculty (SRs & JRs) ,  and (865) non -faculty (excluding SRs & JRs) 
levels including alternative mechanisms such as lateral entry or contractual 
appointments as the interim  measure. Ad ditionally, the Institute should explore 
incentives to attract talent, strengthen feeder cadres for promotional posts.   
Sl. No. Name of Post Sanctioned In Position Vacant 
01. Senior Resident 389 for 3 year 219 170 
02. Junior Resident 359 for 3 year 307 52 
03. Total 748 526 222 
Sl. No. Name of Post Sanctioned In Position Vacant 
01. Non-Faculty (excluding SRs, JRs & Tutors) 3082  2217 
 865 
05. Total 3082 2217 865 

177 
 
3.32 SPECIALITY/SUPER SPECIALITY DEPARTMENTS 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.32.1 The Committee is dismayed to note that most of the S pecialty and Super -Specialty 
Departments are functional despite inadequate number of faculty in place. Barring Dentistry, 
all other Departments are plagued with shortage of faculty. The status of faculty in 
Departments of Radio -Diagnosis, Nephrology, Urolo gy, Surgical oncology, Clinical  
haematology, Burns and Plastic surgery, Nuclear medicine is very pathetic. The Departments 
of Endocrinology &Metabolic diseases and Nephrology are run by one faculty single -
handedly. The Committee believes that quality treat ment and adequate care would only be 
possible with adequate faculty. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Institute to 
employ adequate number of faculty in each Department. 
(Para 7.36 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
3.32.2 Presently, at AIIMS Bhubaneswar,  all 18 Speciality and 17 Super - Speciality 
departments are fully functional. 
 
Sl. 
No. Category Name of the Post 
Sanctioned 
Posts working Vacancy 
1 Faculty (Medical College) Professor 54 27 27 
2 Faculty (Medical College) Additional Professor 45 32 13 
3 Faculty (Medical College) Associate Professor 83 59 24 
4 Faculty (Medical College) Assistant Professor  133 119 14 
  Total   315 237 78 
      Sl. 
No. Name of Post Sanctioned In Position Vacant 
 1 Senior Resident 389 for 3 year 219 170 
 2 Junior Resident 359 for 3 year 307 52 
 3 Total 748 526 222 
  
Further Recommendation 
 
3.32.3 The Committee appreciates that all 18 Specialty and 17 Super -Specialty 
departments at AIIMS Bhubaneswar are currently functional, however, the Committee 
remains to be apprise d of faculty status , particularly in critical departments such as 
Nephrology, Endocrinology, Surgical Oncology, and Plastic Surgery. The Committee is 
of the considered view that functionality without adequate staffing attracts risks of 
compromising the qua lity of care, overburdening existing personnel, and affecting the 
academic environment. The Committee , therefore, further recommends that the 
Institute undertake an urgent, department-wise assessment to identify high-burden units 
operating with suboptimal staffing. Priority recruitment drives must be conducted for 
these departments, alongside strategic faculty deployment, visiting consultant 

178 
 
arrangements, and collaborations with other AIIMS or institutions to ensure 
uninterrupted services and academic training.  
3.33 STATUS OF OPERATION THEATRES AND WARDS/BEDS 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.33.1 The Committee takes note that out of 25 sanctioned OTs, only 7 are functional at 
present resulting into waiting time of one week to four months for surgical proced ures under 
various Departments. The Committee is of the view that the Institute was established with the 
aim of providing affordable and reliable tertiary healthcare services to the people and 
preventing them from shuttling to other metro cities in search of tertiary level health care 
services. Further, the Committee finds the non -availability of gas pipe -line in OTs 
unacceptable. The Committee recommends to the Institute to make the remaining 18 
sanctioned OTs functional without any delay. The Institute sh ould also ensure that OTs are 
equipped with latest equipment including Medical Gas Pipeline System (MGPS). 
(Para 7.45 of the report) 
Action Taken 
3.33.2 At AIIMS Bhubaneswar: - 
 
(a) All 25 sanctioned State of the Art Modular OT (MoT) and MGPS have been made 
fully functional. 
 
(b) Functioning status of ICU beds= 
 
Sanctioned ICU beds Functional ICU beds 
112 + 86 Trauma Centre beds + 
36 Burn Centre beds 
112 + 12 Trauma Centre beds + 06 
Burn Centre beds= 130 ICU beds 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.33.3 The Committee appr eciates the significant progress made by AIIMS 
Bhubaneswar in operationalizing all 25 sanctioned Modular Operation Theatres (MoTs) 
and ensuring the installation of the Medical Gas Pipeline System (MGPS), thereby 
addressing a critical infrastructure gap. Ho wever, the Committee notes that despite the 
sanction of 112 ICU beds in the main hospital, 86 beds in the Trauma Centre, and 36 
beds in the Burn Centre, only a total of 130 ICU beds (112 + 12 trauma centre beds + 06 
burn centre beds) are currently function al and 30 burn centre beds remains to be 
installed. This indicates a considerable underutilization of sanctioned critical care 
infrastructure. The Committee , therefore, further recommends that the Institute 
expedite the process of making all remaining ICU beds functional by addressing any 
outstanding manpower, equipment, or logistical constraints. The Committee also desires 
that the Institute may furnish details of occupancy rate of ICU beds in various 
wards/departments.  
 
 
 

179 
 
3.34 AYUSH FACILITIES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.34.1 The Committee observes that out of five services under AYUSH, only two services 
i.e. Yoga and Ayurveda OPD services are functional at the AIIMS, Bhubaneswar. The 
Committee is of the considered view that the AYUSH systems offer a n alternative system of 
medicine to the patients and is generally cheaper and affordable with lesser side effects. Gaps 
in India‘s healthcare sector are huge with a large proportion of the population virtually being 
denied access to healthcare facilities. To address these gaps, there is a need to support 
AYUSH systems of medicine and education, particularly in vulnerable and far flung areas. 
The Committee desires the Institute to make earnest efforts to start other AYUSH services as 
well as IPD services at the Institute. The Committee recommends that apprehensions about 
the efficacy and safety of AYUSH systems need to be allayed through undertaking suitable 
desired level of scientific research and development of good AYUSH practices. Further 
Standard Treatment protocols need to be developed also to build public trust in these systems. 
(Para 7.54 of the report) 
 
3.34.2 The Committee is distressed to note that out of six sanctioned posts at the AYUSH 
Department, only one post has been filled up so far and that too on contractual basis. The 
Committee believes that without adequate manpower, the Institute will not be able to achieve 
the objective of strengthening AYUSH services. The Committee, therefore, recommends to 
the Institute to fill up the vacant posts on regular basis without further delay. 
 (Para 7.55 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.34.3 The recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted for future guidance.  
The Ministry has decided to integrate the AYUSH in the tertiary care system in new AIIMS 
by augmenting the strength of AYUSH professionals and by also creating scientific posts in 
order to undertake academic Ph.D programme and finding solutions to India‘s public health 
challenge. M/o AYUSH had advised that each of the new and upcoming AIIMS shoul d have 
augmented faculty / doctor strength and higher focus in one particular traditional system of 
medicine which may be having popularity in the particular region. Each such augmented 
medicine system will have additional 16 posts, consisting of posts of Professor, Additional 
Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, SR/JR posts. This will be over and above 
the already sanctioned five Medical Officer posts, one each in Ayurveda, Yoga and 
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy. The above struc ture of AYUSH Department 
has been included in the Standard Staffing Pattern approved by CIB. The proposal for 
creation of posts is being taken up with Department of Expenditure accordingly.  Current 
status of posts is as follows: 
SI.NO. POST SANCTIONED AVAILABLE 
1 SENIOR MEDICAL OFFICER 1 1 
2 MEDICAL OFFICER 5 4 
3 YOGA INSTRUCTOR 1 1 

180 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.34.4 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Institute has taken steps to fill  up 
the sanctioned posts in the AYUSH Department, with five ou t of six posts now occupied, 
thereby reflecting progress in addressing the earlier manpower shortfall. However, the 
Committee also emphasizes that mere availability of posts is not sufficient unless backed 
by regular appointments, appropriate infrastructur e, and full operationalization of 
services. Therefore, the Committee desires that the remaining vacancy be filled up on a 
priority basis through regular recruitment. Additionally, the Institute should ensure 
that all appointed personnel are provided with necessary facilities and support to deliver 
quality AYUSH services. The Committee also urges the Institute to develop a roadmap 
for expanding AYUSH services beyond OPD to include IPD and academic functions, 
aligning with the Ministry‟s broader vision of int egrated and regionally adapted 
traditional healthcare delivery. 
 
G. Upgradation of Government Medical Colleges/ Institutions  
 
3.35 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION AND FUNDING PATTERN 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.35.1 The Committee takes into account the budgetary allocation and funding pattern of 
select 73 GMCs under five phases in PMSSY for which the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare has released a total amount of Rs.5239.71 crore. However, the State share is pending 
in about 50% case of GMCs for upgradation w orks under Phase III. The Committee observes 
that delay in release of State share has impacted the upgradation projects adversely. The 
Committee desires the Ministry to urgently take the matter with State Governments concerned 
to release their share at the earliest so that the work of GMCs does not suffer. The Committee, 
in this regard, would like to emphasize that the Ministry/State Governments concerned must 
comply with the fund sharing commitment to maintain the sanctity of project. The Ministry 
needs to put in place a mechanism for release of funds within a stipulated time period from 
both Centre and State Governments. The Committee, therefore, recommends concerted action 
on part of both the Centre and State Governments to make the upgradation project su ccessful. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that all out efforts need to be taken by the Ministry to 
get all the procedural formalities/ necessary approvals done well in time and the State 
Governments concerned need to be persuaded and advised regularly  in this regard. A 
quarterly status report on the pending position with respect to the State share may also be 
provided to enable the Committee to take up the matter with the concerned State Government 
as most of the delays are due to internal processes of the States. 
 (Para 8.10 of the report) 
 
 
 
 

181 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.35.2 Meetings have been held with State Governments for release of funds pending from 
State‘s share. Consequently, all State Governments, except for Government of Andhra 
Pradesh in respect of Upgradation of GMC at Anantapur and Vijayawada, have fully released 
their share of funds. Government of Andhra Pradesh is being requested to release its share in 
respect of above two projects. Matter will be vigorously pursued with the Government of 
Andhra Pradesh in this regard.    
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.35.3 The Committee acknowledges the progress made by the Ministry in ensuring that 
almost all State Governments, barring Andhra Pradesh, have released their share of 
funds under Phase III of the PMSSY upgr adation projects. However, the continued 
delay by the Government of Andhra Pradesh in releasing its share for the GMCs at 
Anantapur and Vijayawada remains a matter of concern. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry intensify its efforts by engaging at the highest 
administrative and political levels with the Government of Andhra Pradesh to expedite 
the release of the pending State share. Additionally, the Committee reiterates its earlier 
recommendation that a formal mechanism be institutional ized to monitor and report 
fund releases on a quarterly basis, including reasons for delays and follow -up actions 
taken, so as to ensure timely implementation of upgradation works and enable proactive 
intervention wherever needed. 
 
3.36 SITE SELECTION AND STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES IN 
GMCS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.36.1 The Committee during the course of its study visit observes that construction activities 
at various Institutes are delayed. The reasons for delays are manifold including (i) n on-
availability of encumbrance free land (ii) delays in getting clearances for excavation (iii) tree 
cutting and other site related conditions (iv) changes made in the scope and quantum of work 
(v) post contract changes in drawings and quantities (vi) dela ys in providing drawings (vii) 
delay in release of mobilization advance and payments to contractor (viii) delay in provision 
of services (ix) delay in work due to shortage of labour (x) delay in finalization/tendering of 
medical equipment (xi) changes in s ite after award of work delay in shifting of existing 
electrical lines (xii) internal disturbances in some States etc. The Committee urges the 
Ministry to flag these issues with the State Government concerned to undertake appropriate 
steps to remove the bo ttlenecks causing delay in the completion of construction activities at 
various GMCs. 
(Para 8.28 of the report) 
 

182 
 
3.36.2 The Committee, further, observes that the work of 12 GMCs out of 13 approved under 
Phase-I, scheduled to be completed in March, 2013, have been completed with delays ranging 
from eight months to seven years. In other six GMCs approved under phase -II, the 
upgradation of only three GMCs has been completed though with the delay of several years. 
In the remaining three colleges, the work has n ot been completed even after many years. The 
revised date of completion has been extended to 31st December, 2018 for GMCs which 
initially that were scheduled to be completed in July, 2011. 
(Para 8.29 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.36.4 All such matters are taken up, as when such issues are faced, with the respective States 
at highest level as well as in the Project Monitoring Committee Meetings. Issues have also 
been taken up in the State‘s level Review Meetings under Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary 
(Medical Education). Presently all hindrances have already been removed and the 
construction is progressing in all the Projects.  As stated above, out of 75 upgradation o f 
Government Medical Colleges/Institutions approved under various phases of the Scheme, 71 
projects have so far been completed. The status of the remaining 04 projects is as under:  
 
Sl.No. Project Status 
1. Patna Medical College and 
Hospital 
Physical progress as on 30.04.2025 is 94.5%. 
2. Government Medical 
College, Surat 
Physical progress as on 30.04.2025 is 76%. 
3. Upgradation of Guru Teg 
Bahadur Hospital, Delhi 
The commitment from the State Government towards its 
share of Rs. 80.0 crore is pending. M atter is regularly 
being taken up with the State Government. 
4. Upgradation of Government 
Medical College, Cuttack 
State Government has recently conveyed that the DPR for 
establishing the trauma centre will be submitted shortly. 
 
3.36.5 Matter of record.  It is submitted that the delay in completion of the upgradation 
projects was mainly due to delay in getting clear land and clearances from the Statutory 
Authorities concerned and therefore beyond the control of the Ministry. Making available 
unencumbered land ready for construction and all necessary clearances from the Authorities 
concerned was the responsibility of the State Government/GMCI concerned for completion of 
the Project on time. The summarised position of the year -wise completion plan for the up -
gradation projects as below: 
 
No. of GMCs upgradation projects Completion Timelines/Plan 
54 Already completed 
17 2021-22 
04 2022-23 
Total 75  
3.36.3 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  
 

183 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.36.6 The Committee appreciates the concerted efforts made by the Ministry in 
coordinating with State Governments and relevant stakeholders to address the multiple 
causes of delays in construction activities at various Government Medical Colleges 
(GMCs), resulting in the completion of 71 out of 75 projects. However, the Committee 
expresses concern over the continued delays in the remaining four projects  viz. PMCH, 
GMC (Surat) and GTBH (Delhi) , particularly due to pending State share commitments 
and GMC (Cuttack) due to delayed submission of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs). The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should establish a fixed 
timeline in coordination with the concerned State Governments for resolving the 
outstanding issues in these four projects. A robust escalation mechanism should also be 
instituted fo r projects facing chronic delays, including structured fortnightly reviews 
and submission of status updates to the Committee. Furthermore, resilient follow-up 
action is needed in the case of the Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital project in Delhi, where 
financial commitments are still pending, to prevent further delay in project completion. 
 
3.36.7 The Committee takes note of the reasons cited such as issues related to land 
availability and statutory clearances  as being largely under the purview of the State 
Governments and implementing agencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
for future projects, the Ministry must ensure timely pre-approval protocols, including 
mandatory submission of encumbrance -free land certificates and statutory clearances 
before initiating tendering or construction.  
3.37 PROCUREMENT OF EQUIPMENT 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.37.1 The Committee observes that there is an acute shortage of equipment at the various 
GMCs approved for upgradation under PMSSY. The primary reasons being de lays in 
placement of orders, change in the model of the equipment and lack of follow up by Institutes 
with the nominated PSA after placement of orders. The Committee apprehends that in the 
absence of the equipment, the scheme gets affected and patients are  deprived of upgraded 
services. The CAG has further highlighted a grave concern i.e 75 equipment have been 
supplied by HLL at a cost of Rs. 3.26 crore but are not anywhere in record either with HLL or 
the concerned GMCs. The Committee takes a serious note of this lapse and recommends for 
suitable remedial action to address this criminal wastage of public fund. The Committee 
would also like to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry for fixing accountability for 
this lapse. 
(Para 8.42 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.37.2 It is submitted that the current position with respect to Installation of Equipment at 39 
sites under Phase-III is as below: 
 

184 
 
Out of total 141 items under Phase III indicated as pendency under this Para, order for 48 
items has already been placed and the remaining are under procurement. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.37.3 The Ministry's Action Taken Notes, while acknowledging the equipment shortage 
at GMCs under PMSSY, primarily focuses on the current procurement status for Phase 
III, indicating that orders for 48 out of 141 pending items have been placed and the rest 
are under procurement. This response, however, completely omits addressing the 
Committee's serious concern over the wastage of public funds because of the fact that a 
total of 75 numbers of equipment worth Rs. 3.26 crore remained unaccounted for by 
both HLL and the GMCs  concerned, as highlighted by the CAG. It also fails to address 
the underlying issues of delays in order placement, changes in equipment models, and 
lack of follo w-up, or to outline any measures for fixing accountability for these lapses. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation for a comprehensive 
and urgent remedial action plan to recover or account for the 75 missing equipment s as 
identified by the CAG, along with a detailed report on the investigation conducted to fix 
accountability for such lapse in public fund management. Furthermore, the Ministry 
must chalk out a concrete strategy, with strict timelines and clear performance metrics, 
and streamline the entire procurement -to-installation process, establishing robust 
inventory management systems ensuring rigorous oversight a nd follow -up action with 
PSAs and GMCs to prevent future occurrences of such mismanagement. 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.37.4 The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that procurement of equipment on 
single bid basis reduces the competition in the market and minimizes the opportunity of 
competitive bidding. The Committee would like the Ministry to adhere to the procedure of the 
multiple bids in order to achieve competitive pricing. 
(Para 8.43 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.37.5 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for guidance. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.37.6 The Committee notes that its recommendation regarding avoidance of single bid 
procurement to encourage competitive pricing has been acknowledged by the Ministry. 
However, in view of the significant financial outlay involved in medical equipment 
procurement and the need for t ransparency and efficiency in public procurement 
processes, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should issue detailed guidelines 
to all implementing agencies and procurement units under its purview, explicitly 
discouraging single bid procurement except in exceptional and justifiable circumstances. 
These exceptions should be subject to prior approval by a higher authority and duly 

185 
 
documented. Additionally, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must establish 
a monitoring mechanism to regularly re view procurement cases, especially those 
finalized on a single bid basis. 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.37.7 The Committee observes that the revised policy and procedure formulated for 
procurement of medical equipment has not been followed in letter an d spirit. The Committee 
strongly recommends that there should be minimum pendency and in the procurement process 
and all pending procurement tenders be closed without any further delay. The Ministry should 
also formulate effective monitoring mechanism for timely receipt, installation and proper 
functioning of equipment at GMCs so that the equipment are utilized properly for the purpose 
for which they were procured. A quarterly update on gap analysis, delivery of equipment, 
delays if any, with respect to all GMCs should be submitted to the Committee by the PSA. 
(Para 8.44 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.37.8 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
guidance. The progress of procurement of equipment is reviewed periodically alo ng with the 
progress of construction so that better synchronization between procurement activity and 
construction activity can be achieved. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.37.9 The Committee acknowledges that the Ministry has taken note of its 
recommendations a nd is reviewing the progress of equipment procurement alongside 
construction activities  with respect to all GMCs . The Committee,  in this regard,  
recommends that a centralized digital dashboard be developed for real -time tracking of 
tender issuance, approva l, delivery, installation, and operationalization of equipment 
across all GMCs. The effective monitoring mechanism must ensure that there should be 
no delay in procurement of medical equipments in any GMC. 
 
3.38 ENHANCEMENT OF PG SEATS 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.38.1The Committee notes that as per the joint gap analysis and DPR, the number of PG 
seats would be 666 in 39 GMCs under Phase-III Projects and 355 PG seats in 14 GMCs under 
Phase IV & V Projects. The Committee, however, is of the view that th e enhancement of PG 
seats without having adequate faculty/staff would not be result - yielding. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends to the Ministry to focus on the employment of the faculty along with 
enhancement of the PG seats to the desired level of fac ulty-student ratio. Hence, the 
Ministry/State Governments must strive to fill up the vacant seats within a stipulated time 

186 
 
period and basic other infrastructure for teaching must be in place for facilitating the 
imparting of medical education to extended number of students. 
(Para 8.46 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.38.2 It is submitted that Agreement of the State Govt. has been obtained through MOUs 
entered with each state to the effect that the State Govt. will create and fill up required faculty 
and non -faculty post to operationalize the new super speciality facilities.   However, as 
advised by the Committee, the matter for employment of faculty will be pursued with the 
State Govt. with greater vigour.  In addition, Ministry has also in various forum take up the 
matter of recruitment with the State Government during the course of up -gradation of the 
GMCIs. The need for creating required posts of specialist doctors was again highlighted in 
Quarterly Review Meeting (QRM) held on 19-20th September 2019 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.38.3 The Committee appreciates the efforts in securing commitments from State 
Governments through MOUs for creating and filling up required faculty and non -
faculty posts, and its continued engagement with States through review meetings.  
However, the Committee expects that the Ministry should have furnished the 
development/progress made and outcome achieved of various steps taken, in this regard, 
during September 2019 to May 2025. G iven that enhancement of PG seats without 
proportionate f aculty undermines the quality of medical education, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry develop a structured timeline with performance 
indicators for faculty recruitment aligned with the increase in PG seats. Further, the 
Ministry should regularly m onitor compliance by States and the status of faculty -
student ratios across GMCs on a quarterly basis.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.38.4 The Committee, further, recommends to the Ministry that the PG seats in GMCs 
should be increased in view of the e xisting infrastructure and adequate faculty. When 
compared to new AIIMS like Institutions, GMCs are better equipped to provide medical 
education and clinical exposure to the PG students. GMCs are in a better position to address 
the regional imbalances in S tates and enhancing their PG seats could increase the outreach of 
tertiary health care in the remote areas of the country. The Committee strongly recommends 
for a substantial enhancement in the PG seats in all the GMCs so as to address this critical gap 
in medical education. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should prepare a 
comprehensive action plan for augmenting PG seats in GMCs which are being upgraded 
under PMSSY. 
(Para 8.47 of the report) 
 
 

187 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.38.5 It is submitted that the Minist ry has work out plan for increase in PG seats in 
consultation with the respective State Government and also taken their consultation through 
MoU with them.  The matter is being pursued with the State Government in this regard.  The 
need for creating additio nal P.G seats in these GMCs was again highlighted in Quarterly 
Review Meeting held on 19 -20th September, 2019 and State Govt. requested for taking 
necessary action in this direction. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.38.6 The Committee desires that the Ministry s hould have furnished the details of 
outcome of the efforts so made to collaborate with State Governments through MoUs 
and its continued engagement via review meetings to enhance PG seats in GMCs,  
especially during the period September 2019 to May 2025. The Committee, furthermore, 
recommends that a time -bound and target -driven roadmap be finalized and 
implemented for each GMC, detailing the proposed increase in PG seats aligned with 
available infrastructure and faculty strength. The Committee further urges t he Ministry 
to institute a central monitoring cell to track the progress of PG seat augmentation 
across all GMCs  along with status of professional proficiency generated due to 
enhancement of PG seats in all GMCs. The Committee understands that GMCs are the  
gateway for delivery of adequate, accessible and affordable healthcare services at grass 
root level imparting medical education and clinical exposure at doors, and effective 
means of removing regional imbalances and critical medical education gap at sourc e. 
The Ministry, in tandem with State Government, should chalk out „Action Plan‟ to 
achieve the said objectives.   
 
3.39 SUPER SPECIALTY BLOCKS 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.39.1 The Committee is, therefore, of the firm view that in the modern age wher e heart 
diseases have become so common, super specialty services without a CATH lab would be 
short of special facility for delivery of adequate service to the suffering heart patient. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that all the SSB envisaged should i nclude functional 
CATH lab under the project should be made functional without much procrastination. 
  (Para 8.52 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.39.2 The Committees Recommendations have been noted for compliance. The requirement 
of facilities including CA TH Lab has been finalised in the Gap Analysis  Meetings in 
consultation with the respective GMCs, Institutes/State Governments and accordingly 18 Cath 
Labs have been created under Phase III.  The GMCs/ State Govt. have prioritized their 
requirements and decided the facilities to be provided.  As is the limit budget (Phase III – 150 

188 
 
crore each, Phase IV – Rs.200 crore each) all needed facilities could not be covered in the 
projects.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.39.3 The Committee takes note of the creation of 18 Cath Labs under Phase III in 
consultation with GMCs, Institutes, and State Governments. However, the Committee 
expresses the concern that due to budgetary limits, not all required Cath Labs could be 
established, which may compromise the availability of critical cardiac care services in 
certain regions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry, in 
coordination with the State Governments, should devise a phased plan to ensure that all 
medical colleges and institutions with super -specialty ser vices are equipped with 
functional Cath Labs at the earliest. Additional financial support, either through 
enhanced central allocation, phased funding, Corporate Social Responsibility or 
convergence with other healthcare schemes, should be explored so that  budgetary 
constraints do not hinder the provision of life-saving cardiac care infrastructure. 
3.40 GENERATION OF EMPLOYMENT 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.40.1 The Committee observes with concern that no action has been taken by the Ministry 
and the Sta te Governments concerned to generate employment at the GMCs approved for 
upgradation under PMSSY. The Committee is of the considered view that health care sector 
has tremendous potential for employment generation. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the Central and State Government must to chalk out suitable strategy to 
explore various avenues for employment generation in different segments of healthcare 
sector. The Committee, in this regard, believes that higher investment in the health sect or 
would yield greater opportunities for employment generation. The Committee is, however, 
perturbed to observe that many Departments at the various GMCs are not functional due to 
the shortage of the manpower. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to the 
Ministry to analyse the manpower requirement of each GMC and advise the State 
Governments to create and fill up adequate number of posts, accordingly. The Committee also 
recommends that vacant posts must be filled up as early as possible so as to pa ve the way for 
smooth delivery of health services to the people. 
(Para 8.55 of the report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.40.2 The Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for guidance. The matter of 
creation of posts / filling up of Faculty and Non -faculty position is regularly taken up with 
State Governments in different review meetings and through D.O letters.  The need for 
creating required posts of specialist doctors and paramedics was again highlighted in 
Quarterly Review Meeting held on 19-20th September 2019. 
 

189 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.40.3 The Committee acknowledges the communication with State Governments 
regarding manpower requirements, however, the Committee expresses concern that the 
Ministry has not furnished updated response covering details of progr ess made during 
September 2019 to May 2025 in compliance of recommendation for exploring huge 
employment generation opportunities in all GMCs identified for up -gradation under 
PMSSY. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a structured manpower audit be 
conducted for each GMC upgraded under PMSSY to assess current staffing gaps across 
faculty, non -faculty, healthcare allied and professional services , and support services. 
The Ministry should also set up a robust follow -up mechanism to ensure time -bound 
action by State Governments on the creation and filling of posts , at various levels so as 
to open employment generation opportunities and ensuring that all departments of 
GMCs are made functional.  
3.41 STUDY VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.41.1 The Committee also notes that wide regional imbalance exists in the delivery of 
Health Care Services in the State. The remote regions of the State are still out of the reach of 
tertiary health care services as most of such facilities are estab lished in and around Patna. 
There is a severe lack of adequate medical care and facilities in Government Sector in North 
Bihar, especially in the districts of Saharsha, Madhepura, Purnea, Kathiar, Kishanganj and 
Farbishganj, i.e., Koshi region. The Committ ee desires that the Ministry may explore the 
possibility for setting up of AIIMS like institutions in this extremely poor and backward 
region to cater to the health facilities and services to the poor at the economical/lower cost. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly urges upon the Central and the State Governments to take 
into account the need and requirement of health care services in these economically deprived 
regions and work towards decentralization of the health care facilities. 
 
  (Para 8.65 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.41.2 It is submitted that three Districts in Bihar namely Purnia, Saran (Chhapra) and 
Samastipur have been approved under Phase I of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme namely, 
'Establishment of new medical colleges attached with existing District/Referral Hospitals' at a 
cost of Rs.189 crore each to be shared between Centre and State Government in the ratio of 
60:40. Complete amount of central share amounting to Rs.113.40 crore has been released to 
the State for colleges at Purnia, Samasti pur and Saran. The medical college at Purnia is 
functional from academic session 2023-24. Further, as informed by the State Government, the 
construction of medical colleges at Saran and Samastipur is almost complete.  
 
3.41.3 The State Government approved transfer of 200.02 acre land in Darbhanga Medical 
College & Hospital (DMCH) campus and in March, 2023, alternatively offered a new site 

190 
 
(Measuring 187.44 Acre) situated on EkmiShobhan Bypass, Anchal - Bahadurpur, Mouza -
Balia, Thana No.-120/2 for establishment of AIIMS Darbhanga.  A Central (Technical) Team 
was constituted to assess the feasibility and suitability of the proposed site and it 
recommended that the site is feasible for establishing AIIMS  and suggested that necessary 
geotechnical investigation, liquefaction hazard analysis, Hydrological Study/Investigation and 
Analysis for drainage planning and flood management should be undertaken for ensuring 
structural stability. 
 
3.41.4 On 13.09.2024, the work of conducting the necessary Geotechnical investigat ions, 
Hydrological Study etc. was entrusted by the Ministry to IIT Delhi. On 18.09.2024, M/s 
HSCC (India) Ltd. was appointed as the Executing Agency (EA) for Pre -Investment Works 
and Main Works. Subsequently, an  MoU was signed on 12.11.2024 between MoHFW a nd 
State Government of Bihar, wherein, the State Govt. has committed to provide permanent 
electricity connection of required load from two alternate power sources, 4 -lane road 
connectivity and potable water supply for the Institute and has also agreed to u ndertake land 
filling. The BhoomiPujan on the site was conducted on 13 thNovember, 2024 and the logo of 
the Institute was launched by Hon'ble PM the same day. 
 
3.41.5 In December 2024, Architectural & Design Consultant for the project was finalized by 
M/s HSCC. Topographical Studies including Soil Investigation, Soil testing, Site Survey & 
Contour map work has been completed and the report has been shared with IIT Delhi . 
Hydrological Study has also been completed. The land for the project has been demarcated  by 
the State Government. Masterplan and Drawings and estimation of the Main building is under 
preparation in consultation with IIT Delhi. The Executing Agency has awarded the  work for 
the construction of boundary wall of AIIMS Darbhanga on 16.04.2025. Mob ilization of men 
and material have started at the site. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.41.6 The Committee takes into account the progress made in strengthening healthcare 
infrastructure in Bihar through the establishment of new medical colleges at Purnia, 
Saran, and Samastipur as well as the initiation of AIIMS Darbhanga.  
3.41.7 The Committee, however, emphasizes that the Koshi/ Simanchal region and other 
underserved districts such as Saharsha, Madhepura, Katihar, Kishanganj,  Araria and 
Farbishganj continue to  remain deprived of adequate tertiary healthcare facilities. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry, in collaboration with the State 
Government, should prepare a comprehensive roadmap to ensure equitable distribution 
of tertiary healthcare services across all backward and flood -prone Koshi/Simanchal 
region of Bihar. The Committee understands that site selection for any AIIMS like 
Institution requires a detailed assessment of the geographical location and the 
demographic distribution. Easy ac cessibility and transportation availability is also the 
other criteria being taken into consideration for setting up of AIIMS like institution . 
Moreover, air connectivity to the place has been one of the major basis for site selection 
for AIIMS. The Committee takes into consideration the poor human development index 

191 
 
in the Simanchal region and poor ratio of doctor against the national average 
necessitates the setting up of AIIMS like institution in the Simanchal region.  The 
proposed expressway from Patna to  Purnia and commencement of air connectivity to 
and fro Purnia has brought the Koshi region on national platform that fulfils the criteria 
of easy accessibility and transportation for setting up of AIIMS like institution. Further, 
being a backward and unde rserved region, Koshi/Simanchal region is the suitable site 
for establishment of AIIMS like institution to bridge the regional  imbalance in 
healthcare access. The Committee, therefore, urges the Government for setting up of 
clear timelines for exploring th e feasibility of setting u p additional tertiary healthcare 
facilities through AIIMS like institution in the Koshi/Simanchal region.  
H. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ON COMMON ISSUES 
3.42 EXPANSION PROGRAMME OF AIIMS 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.42.1 The Committee is of the view that AIIMS like Institutes and hospitals should be 
excluded from the NBC guidelines or some amendments in the guidelines can be made so that 
AIIMS like Institutions are allowed to carry out vertical expansion. This will not only ensure 
the optimum utilization of land but also resolve the delays caused due to unavailability of 
land. Vertical expansion will also lead to an organized set up. The OPDs can be operated from 
the top floors and the other critical centres such as trauma an d emergency, ICUs, HDUs, OTs, 
etc. can be functional from the lower floors of the building. The Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare should take up this proposal with the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
and study the feasibility and implications of the recommendation so as to facilitate vertical 
expansion in all AIIMS. 
(Para 9.18 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.42.2 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for future 
guidance. As regards exclusion from the NBC guidelines or amen dment in the guidelines to 
enable to the AIIMS to carry out the vertical expansion, the matter has already been taken 
with Ministry of Urban Development and NBCC. Further, action shall be taken after 
receiving the recommendation /suggestion of MoUD/MoHUPA.  Incidentally, it may be 
mentioned that FAR for AIIMS Nagpur has been increased and the FAR of Bilaspur AIIMS 
building has also been increased.  A communication has been sent to Secretary, Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs highlighting the observations of the Committee in March, 2019. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.42.3 The Committee has been informed that the recommendation for excluding 
AIIMS-like institutions from or amending NBC guidelines to allow vertical expansion 
has been "noted for future guidance,"  and the matter has been taken up with the 
Ministry of Urban Development and NBCC. The mention of increased FAR for AIIMS 

192 
 
Nagpur and Bilaspur is a positive sign, suggesting some progress in facilitating vertical 
growth. However, the communication with the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
dates back to March 2019, and the response lacks concrete timelines or definitive 
outcomes from the action taken so far , particularly regarding a broader policy change 
that would benefit all AIIMS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare must actively pursue a time -bound resolution with the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs regarding the proposed amendments to the 
National Building Code (NBC) guidelines for vertical expans ion of hospital buildings  in 
AIIMS-like initiatives, wherever required. 
 
3.43 SHORTAGE OF FACULTY AND NON FACULTY STAFF 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.43.1 The Committee appreciates that the Ministry is also considering common recruitment 
process for the  non-faculty of all AIIMS by clubbing together all the vacancies. The 
Committee concurs with the view of the Ministry that one AIIMS can hold recruitment of a 
particular category for all the other AIIMS like Institutions. The Committee is of the view that 
the Ministry should take this proposal with the Central Institute Body (CIB) and take 
necessary steps to execute the same on ground level. The Committee expects that CIB would 
play a pro-active role in this matter. 
(Para 9.34 of the report) 
 
3.43.2 The Committee strongly recommends for a centralised recruitment process for all non-
faculty staff preferably monitored by AIIMS, Delhi or through a centralized reputed agency, 
so that the irregularities in the recruitment process are minimized and the issue of st aff 
shortage is addressed through a nationwide selection process. The issues related to shortage of 
faculty staff have been dealt in respective AIIMS Chapter.  
(Para 9.35 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.43.3 On the basis of the Parliamentary Standing Commit tee observations, the Central 
Institute Body (CIB) in its 3 rd meeting held on 24.01.2019 advised all AIIMS to conduct 
recruitments for Non -faculty (Technical) cadres on centralized basis by applying the 
following measures:  
 
 AIIMS Delhi will conduct centra lized recruitment for all AIIMS in case of Nursing 
Cadres. 
 For rest of technical cadres (19), the six new AIIMS will do the centralized 
recruitment by suitably dividing the cadres amongst themselves. 
 
The current filled up position of Non-faculty is as below:  
 

193 
 
Name of 
Institutes 
Sanction Strength 
of Non-Faculty 
position 
Filled up position* 
as on March, 2019 
Vacancy Number of 
vacancies 
advertised 
Bhopal 3776 1431 2345 330 
Bhubaneswar 3776 1161 2615 1362 
Jodhpur 3776 1185 2591 1085 
Patna 3776 324 3452 NIL 
Raipur 3776 1646 2130 513 
Rishikesh 3776 1821 1955 644 
 
The current filled up position of Non -faculty is as below (Including manpower deployed on 
outsourced basis)  
 
AIIMS Sanctioned 
Posts 
Posts filled  Posts 
vacant 
Remarks 
Bhopal 3776 1418 
 
2358 Recruitment for around 
1024 posts is underway. 
Bhubaneswar 3776 1649 2127 1212 Group D posts, 107 deputation 
posts, 121 posts of SR 14 posts of 
Group A  already advertised . 
Jodhpur 3776 1958 1818 Total 1085 posts 
advertised since 2017. 
Patna 3776 1382 2394 Recruitment for 500 posts is underway 
.165 more posts have been advertised. 
Raipur 3776 1839 1937 715  posts have been 
advertised and recruitment in process 
Rishikesh 3776 2665 1111 644 posts advertised and 
recruitment process is 
under way. 
 
The current filled up position of Non-faculty is as below:- 
 Sanctioned strength Filled up position Vacancy 
Bhopal 3884 2842 1042 
Bhubaneshwar 3904 2795 1109 
Jodhpur 3884 3150 734 
Patna 3884 2507 1377 
Raipur 3884 2748 1136 
Rishikesh 4095 2697 1398 
 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.43.4 The Committee appreciates the action taken by the Ministry and the CIB‟s 
endorsement of a centralized recruitment mechanism for non -faculty staff across all 
AIIMS. The Committee recommends that such centralized process be institution alized 
with clear timelines, standard operating procedures, and accountability mechanisms to 

194 
 
ensure timely filling up of vacancies. While the delegation of specific technical cadres to 
individual AIIMS is a step forward, the Committee urges the Ministry to  establish a 
unified digital recruitment platform under the supervision of AIIMS Delhi or a 
designated national agency to oversee coordination, monitoring, an d transparency in 
recruitments. The Committee would like to be apprised of current filled up posit ions of 
non-faculty in all six AIIMS. The Ministry should have furnished the details in its 
Action Taken Notes.  
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.43.5 The Committee would also like to be apprised of the number of faculty that have been 
employed from other  premier Medical Institutes like AIIMS, JIPMER, PGI, etc. and are 
working full time in the new AIIMS like Institutions. The Institutes should also submit a 
status note on the number of applications received from such candidates and the number of 
candidates employed and rejected/not found suitable. The Committee also desires the Institute 
to submit reasons for the rejection of such candidates.  
(Para 9.36 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.43.6 As far as AIIMS Bhubaneswar is concerned, the details of the faculty  members 
employed from other premier Medical Institutions like AIIMS, JIPMER, PGIMER etc. have 
already submitted as Annexure -K in response to Answer for Question no 63 of replies to 
Questionnaire about functioning of AIIMS like Institute of the DRPSC.  As f ar as AIIMS 
Jodhpur is concerned, currently 63 faculty out of 162 faculty working in AIIMS, Jodhpur are 
either completed their UG/PG from premier national institute such as AIIMS Delhi, PGIMER 
Chandigarh, JIPMER Puducherry, NIMHANS, TMH, or having working exposer as SR/JR in 
these premier institutes. 
3.43.7 As far as AIIMS Raipur is concerned, currently, 25 faculty members working in 
AIIMS Raipur have earlier worked at premier Medical Institutes like AIIMS, JIPMER, PGI, 
etc. Further, the applicants coming f rom these premier medical institutions are normally 
selected by the Standing Selection Committee of AIIMS Raipur, which is chaired by Prof 
(Dr) Vinod Paul, Former HoD Paediatrics, AIIMS New Delhi.  Regarding status note on 
candidates rejected/not found suit able, it is submitted that the Institute usually upload the list 
of eligible and ineligible candidates along with reasons in their website well in advance before 
conducting interviews for selection of any faculty posts.  The candidates are asked to 
represent against the reasons of ineligibility, then the same is examined by the Screening 
Committee and final list used to be uploaded.  The current filled up position of faculty is as 
below: 
 Sanctioned strength Filled up position Vacancy 
Bhopal 305 232 73 
Bhubaneshwar 315 237 78 
Jodhpur 305 220 85 
Patna 305 188 117 

195 
 
Raipur 305 224 81 
Rishikesh 355 214 141 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.43.8 The Committee has been informed about the recruitment of faculty from premier 
medical institutions and the current vacanc y status . In view thereof, the Committee 
recommends that a targeted and sustained strategy be formulated to attract and retain 
high-quality faculty from institutions like AIIMS Delhi, PGIMER, JIPMER, and others. 
The Committee further urges that each AIIMS -like institute regularly publish and 
update detailed recruitment data, including reasons for ineligibility and status of 
representations, on their websites in a transparent and standardized format. 
Additionally, the Ministry should exp lore incentive -based mechanisms such as 
accelerated career progression, housi ng support, or research funding to make positions 
in newer AIIMS institutions more attractive to faculty from premier institutes.  
 
3.44 DIALYSIS FACILITIES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
3.44.1 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the procurement of Dialysis 
machine at a much higher price in the new AIIMS. The Committee observes that same 
dialysis machines with the same specifications have been procured by State Government at a 
much lower  price. Moreover, the same dialysis machines have been procured under the 
MPLAD scheme at one third of the price paid by new AIIMS. The Committee takes this as a 
serious irregularity in the procurement policy and process. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends for instituting an enquiry into the matter and accordingly apprises the Committee 
about the reasons and compelling circumstances under which the dialysis machines were 
purchased at such higher prices in the new AIIMS. 
(Para 9.55 of the report) 
Action Taken 
 
3.44.2 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  
It is submitted that an Enquiry committee has also been set up for submitting the report by 
30.04.2019. The committee constituted to look into the issue ha d submitted its report. 
However, on examination it was observed that the committee had not considered all relevant 
aspects. The committee has been advised to exam ine the matter further, and re -submit their 
report. AIIMS are providing round the clock hemodialysis services to the patients. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.44.3 The Committee expresses concern over the incomplete assessment by the initial 
enquiry committee constituted to examine the issue of procurement of Dialysis machine 
at a much higher price in t he new AIIMS , and in view thereof, the Committee 

196 
 
recommends that the Ministry expedite the re -examination and ensure the resubmission 
of a comprehensive and conclusive report on the procurement of dialysis machines at 
inflated costs. The revised enquiry must include a comparative cost analysis with similar 
procurements by State Governments and under MPLAD schemes, evaluation of 
procurement procedures followed, and identification of any lapses or accountability 
issues. The Committee also stresses that measur es be instituted to strengthen 
transparency, cost-efficiency, and oversight in future procurements across all AIIMS to 
prevent recurrence of any irregularities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

197 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
 
AIIMS PATNA 
 
4.1 OPERATION THEATRES 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
4.1.1 From the data submitted by AIIMS Patna, the Committee observes with deep concern 
that AIIMS, Patna has conducted on an avera ge 10 surgeries per day in its 13 Operation 
Theatres. Moreover, only 506 emergency surgeries have been conducted. The Committee 
finds that these 13 OTs remain highly underutilized although AIIMS Patna cited limited 
availability of OTs as the reason behind the waiting time in surgical procedures. The 
Committee also recommends to AIIMS, Patna for planning higher number of surgeries to be 
carried out in a day so that one OT can be used for more than one surgery in a day, thus, 
resulting in optimum utilisation of the Operation Theatre. 
(Para 5.60 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
4.1.2 The observation / recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted  for 
future guidance. Many of the surgeries carried out in the OT‘s are major surgeries and take 
more time than normal routine surgeries. Moreover, many minor surgeries are performed in 
OPD‘s, the number of which is not taken into account while submitting the data. It is also to 
submit that with increase in no of OT‘s and ward, the number of surgeries will increase.  The 
use of O.T. will also be optimized.  As present there are 28 OTs functional at AIIMS Patna 
and 17 Minor OTs. No. of surgeries performed have also increased now which shall be clear 
from the following table:- 
Month Major Minor Total 
Sept 21 984 159 1143 
Oct 21 900 116 1016 
Nov 21 928 106 1034 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
4.1.3 As per the information submitted by the Ministry, AIIMS Patna has conducted 4224 
major and minor surgeries till September, 2018, the Committee is displeased with such huge 
variation in the data and would like AIIMS Patna to submit precise data with respect to 
surgical procedures (patient wise and Department wise) till date, since inception of the 
Institute, within three months of presentation of this Report. 
 (Para 5.61 of the Report) 

198 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.1.4 As directed by the Committee, a detailed report will be submitted soon. Regarding the 
number of procedures per OT, it is pertinent to point out that number of cases  being done in 
an operation theatre is dependent on the nature  and complexity of cases with more complex 
cases taking a much longer time. However, it is informed that total 6271 surgical procedures 
were performed at AIIMS Patna in 2018. 
 
4.2 MONITORING MECHANISM 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
4.2.1 AIIMS Patna, an In stitute of National Importance today trails behind in many areas 
that are fundamental for providing quality healthcare. The Committee expects AIIMS Patna to 
make extra efforts to build itself into a world class institute as envisioned while establishing 
the institute. 
(Para 5.78 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
4.2.2 Efforts are being made/would be made to streamline the lacunae pointed out by the 
Hon‘ble committee. It is expected that with the completion of construction work and filling 
up of the vacant posts, AIIMS Patna will emerge as an institute of Excellence. 
AIIMS RAIPUR 
4.3 STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
4.3.1 The Committee observes that the AIIMS, Raipur has failed in evaluating the 
requirement for the residential accommodation wh ile planning the Phase II expansion 
program. The planning process for expansion started in March, 2015 and continued till May, 
2018 with the submission of detailed drawings of the project. By then, it was realized that 
there is a need to revive the entire plan. The Committee is appalled at the laid back approach 
of the Institute in execution of the project. The changes in the design at such a later stage 
would have a negative impact on the expansion program, in terms of additional resources, 
cost and extended project duration. It seems to the Committee that obviously the Institute had 
not conducted any proper study before planning the expansion of phase II residential 
complex. The preparation of revised drawing, revised detailed estimates and tender 
documents would require additional time resulting in cost and time overruns. The Committee, 
therefore, underlines the need for proper planning and evaluation by engaging reputed 
agencies before undertaking any construction projects. 
 (Para 6.16 of the Report) 
 
 

199 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.3.2 The Standing Finance Committee of AIIMS Raipur approved the proposal of 
construction of Phase -II in Residential Complex at Kabir Nagar in its first meeting vide 
Agenda Note 15.3 and entrusted the work of DPR and Project Management Consul tant to M/s 
HSCC (SFC01/15.3). The DPR submitted by AllMS,  Raipur for construction of Phase -ll of 
Residential Complex at Kabir Nagar as prepared by M/s HSCC was considered and approved 
by (SFC 02/10). It was further decided that in view of the decision of MoHFW not to award 
any fresh work to HSCC, the Institute should explore the possibility for execution of the 
project through CPWD as a deposit work and submit a detaile d proposal to PMSSY Division. 
(SFC08/05). The SFC approved the proposal to award the construction of Phase-II Residential 
Complex at Kabir Nagar to M/s. HSCC on the basis of tender finalized by them, subject to the 
condition that, M/s. HSCC furnish the commitment letter to complete the project within the 
timeline and the tendered value of Rs.  63.O9 Crores and no time overrun/cost overrun will be 
permitted.(SFC 09/05) . The SFC considered and approved the Construction of Phase II 
Residential Complex at Kabir Nagar through CPWD as a deposit work. (SFC 10/13) . The 
SFC discussed and approved the pr oposal for the construction of  Phase II Residential 
complex with an estimated financial implication of  Rs. 89.39 Crore through CPWD.(SFC 
11/13). In compliance with the SFC decision the details were shared with the CPWD for 
preparation of DPR and BOQ.  The f ollowing units has been undertaken considering the 
estimated financial implications of Rs 89.39 Crore:- 
(a) Hostel for Boys and Girls: 02 (160 students) 
(b) Type III : 02 ( G+8/9: 64/80 DU) 
(c ) Type IV : 01 (24 DU) 
 
4.4 STATUS OF FACULTY AND NON FACULTY STRENGTH 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
4.4.1 The Institute needs to engage itself with continuous assessment of the gap in demand 
and supply of human resources and take suitable steps/measures to fill up the gap. The 
Committee is of the view that career as piration, socio -economic status, organizational 
policies, work environment, growth opportunities , infrastructural facilities are the main 
factors that influence the decision of any health personnel to join any health care Institute. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Institute to focus on strengthening these crucial 
parameters to attract adequate number of health care personnel. 
(Para 6.20 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
4.4.2 Observation / Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for future  guidance. 
The Institute is continuously striving to create a very conducive environment for Faculty 
members and other staff working in the Institute. A need has been expressed to introduce new 
policies by way of offering additional incentives/special packages , so that candidates can 

200 
 
become interested to work at new AIIMS such as Raipur etc. the issue was discussed in 
various CIB Meetings and is under consideration in the Ministry. 
 
UPGRADATION OF GOVERNMENT MEDICAL COLLEGES/ INSTITUTIONS 
 
4.5 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
4.5.1 The Committee noted that more than two years have passed since the inclusion of 
PMCH in the upgradation program under Phase IV of PMSSY but the foundation stone of the 
Super Speciality Department is yet to see the light of day. PMCH sub mitted that the delay in 
transfer of land measuring merely 500 meter has stalled the construction of the Super 
Speciality Block that cast aspersion on the administrative will and skill of PMCH 
management. The Committee, however, welcomes the Institute‘s pr oposal to increase the 
number of seats in MBBS and also advocated the increase in the number of seats in PG 
course. The Committee also endorsed PMCH's suggestion for inclusion of important 
Departments such as Cardiology, Onco-Haemetology in the Super Speciality Block. 
  (Para 8.62 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.5.2 The scope of work of the project approved by the Cabinet includes construction of 211 
bedded Super  Speciality Block (including 51 ICU beds) having 8 departments, viz., 
Neurology, Nephrology,  Neurosurgery, Gastroenterology, Endocrinology, Urology, 
Neonatology and Radiotherapy (equipment), with 6 OTs, and procurement of medical 
equipment. The project got delayed due to the following reasons:  
(i) Non availability of Land for Main Building and parki ng - Tender Invited on 
18.12.2017 (first call), cancelled on 03.04.2018 after four times extension of date due 
to non-handing over of land/hindrance free land. Work finally awarded in Feb 2019.  
(ii) Local body submission and approval got delayed due to unavailability of land records.                                                                                                                             
(iii) Delay in vacation of existing staff quarters at site due to Court Case & Relocation of 
site for construction of Service Block. 
(iv) Delay in receipt of EIA clearance.  
(v) Disruption of supply chain and labour due to outbreak of Covid -19 in 2020, 2021 & 
omicron in Jan - Feb-2022. 
(vi) Work hindered due to demolition of old structure and blockage of a pproach road in 
PMCH Campus by BMSICL for work of redevelopment of PMCH by State 
Government.  
(vii) Proposed location of sub -station was changed by PMCH and new location made 
available for construction in Aug-2022 after demolition of existing quarters at t he new 
proposed location. 
(viii) Earlier tender for ESS building was rescinded. Retendering of work was done and 
awarded to new agency after confirmation of requirement of Sub-station by PMCH. 

201 
 
(ix) There was a transformer at the site of ESS building which was to be shifted. State 
Electricity board had given estimate to PMCH for the shifting of same. PMCH has 
forwarded the estimate to CPWD on 07.11.2023. The same was removed by the 
agency under the supervision of State Electricity board by 04.01.2024. 
(x) Approach road to the building from Ashok Rajpathwas closed by BMSICL from 
10.04.204 to 03.07.2024 for laying external services under redevelopment project of 
PMCH.    
(xi) Location of UG sump and pump room changed by PMCH. Clear site of Revised 
location given on 25.08.2024.   
(xii) Site is congested. Carriage of building material hindered due to ongoing construction 
of bridge and metro rail project throughout the Ashok Rajpath which is single path for 
the transportation of the materials to the construction site.  
(xiii) CPWD is unable to take up the work of false ceiling in whole building, as HITES has 
to install the equipment‘s/ Medical Gas pipelines. 
 
The project is being regularly monitored alongwith State authorities.  
 
4.6 STUDY VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
 
4.6.1 The Committee is appalled at the lax attitude of the State in monitoring the progress 
made under PMSSY and recommends that the State should conduct regular review meetings 
with the GMCs to address the various hurdles in i ts smooth functioning. The Committee 
strongly recommends that the State should transfer its share of funds well in time for the 
upgradation of all the Government Medical Colleges. The Committee also strongly 
recommends the State to develop a Third Party Quality Assurance Audit for the all the GMCs. 
 
 (Para 8.64 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
 
4.6.2 The observations / recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The concerns 
raised and recommendations of the Committee have been conveyed to the State Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

202 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  - AT   A  GLANCE 
 
STATUS OF FACULTY/NON FACULTY STRENGTH 
1. The Committee notes the progress made by filling up of 232 posts out of 305 
sanctioned faculty posts in AIIMS Bhopal, but the Committee expresses conc ern that 73 
vacancies still persist and that some appointments (e.g. Nursing Principal) are delayed 
due to procedural hurdles. In order to secure full, sustained staffing, the Commit tee 
recommends that AIIMS Bhopal, in coordination with the Ministry should further 
undertake followings actions for strengthening faculty and non - faculty of AIMS 
Bhopal: (a) set a deadline for completing all remaining regular recruitments and 
declaring results of pending cases; (b) convert existing contractual and one -level-below 
appointments into permanent posts as soon as eligibility is met; (c) institute a joint 
quarterly review mechanism to monitor progress against recruitments targets; and (d) 
actively partner with premier medical institutes to broaden the candidate pool, thereby 
ensuring uninterrupted teaching, research and patient-care functions. 
(Para 3.1.5 of the ATR) 
2. The Committee observe lackadaisical approach towards filling up of non -faculty 
posts at AIIMS Bhopal, particularly in the nursing cadre. Accordingly, the Committee 
remains deeply concerned towards the persistent large number of vacancies and the 
over-reliance of the institute on outsourcing. Since the 3776 sanctioned non -faculty posts 
are not filled up through regular recruitment, core institutional functions are being 
compromised. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation for the Ministry 
to operationalize a robust, time-bound recruitment mechanism for all technical and non-
technical non -faculty posts, ensuring uniformity and transparency across AIIMS. The 
Committee further recommends that posts proposed to be surrendered be reviewed with 
caution to avoid under -staffing in critical areas, and that all direct recruitment  and 
deputation-based appointments currently under process be concluded, at the earliest. 
(Para 3.1.10 of the ATR) 
SPECIALITY/SUPER SPECIALITY DEPARTMENTS 
 
3. The Committee acknowledges the Ministry‟s ongoing recruitment efforts and 
policy interventions ai med at addressing faculty shortages across AIIMS institutions, 
including AIIMS Bhopal. However, the Committee remains concerned that despite these 
measures, critical gaps persist in the Specialty and Super Specialty Departments, many 
of which continue to f unction with only one faculty member. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that AIIMS Bhopal, in close coordination with the Ministry, implement a 
targeted recruitment plan specifically for Super Specialty Departments, with defined 
timelines and deliverabl es. The Committee also urges that the previously suggested 
measures such as offering special incentives, permitting lateral entry of experienced 
specialists from leading institutes be operationalized without delay. 
 (Para 3.2.5 of the ATR) 

203 
 
MEDICAL EDUCATION 
 
4. The Committee notes significant progress in increasing student intake across 
various courses at AIIMS Bhopal, including MBBS, B.Sc Nursing, MD/MS, and the 
successful initiation of numerous new PDCC, DM, M.Ch, and PhD programs. This 
demonstrates a proactive approach to expanding educational and healthcare capacities. 
However, the continued vacancy in certain super -specialty departments like Cardiology, 
Nephrology, and Surgical Oncology remains a concern for the Committee. While the 
Ministry attributes this to an all-India phenomenon, it is crucial to further analyses and 
make detailed assessment by the concerned authority and take appropriate step for 
fulfilling up vacant post in various departments. Moreover, if any specific factors at 
AIIMS Bhopal con tribute to these vacancies, in order to develop targeted strategies in 
coordination with AIIMS Delhi, AIIMS Bhopal must address these gaps, ensuring 
timely recruitment of sanctioned seats and optimal utilization of resources, particularly 
in high-demand and specialized departments. 
(Para 3.3.5 of the ATR) 
 
5. The Committee appreciates positive steps taken to address the Committee‟s 
concerns regarding inadequate clinical exposure and faculty shortages, notably through 
a substantial increase in faculty number s (from 53 in 2017 to 249 as of 12/02/25), 
expansion of MD/MS courses to 25 departments, and the commencement of PDCC, DM, 
M.Ch, and PhD programs. The improved National Institutional Ranking Framework 
(NIRF) ranking to 31st in 2024 further supports the cla im of enhanced educational 
quality. While these are commendable achievements demonstrating a commitment to 
providing a "well-rounded medical education," the Committee further recommends that 
the Ministry should provide specific metrics, such as patient -to-student ratios, bed 
occupancy rates, and a breakdown of surgical cases or specialized procedures students 
are exposed to across various departments. Such data would offer concrete evidence of 
adequate clinical material and validate the claim of "extensive clinical exposure," 
ensuring that the qualitative improvements translate into demonstrably high levels of 
practical skills for all medical and nursing graduates. 
(Para 3.3.10 of the ATR) 
6. The Committee commends AIIMS Bhopal for initiating paramedical (Al lied 
Health Sciences) courses and expanding nursing education programmes, including the 
launch of B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. level courses. This marks a significant step toward 
addressing the shortage of trained technical manpower and optimizing the use of 
available infrastructure. However, the Committee recommends that the Ministry and 
the Institute should further strengthen these efforts by expanding the range of Allied 
Health Science  disciplines offered, increasing seat capacity based on projected 
healthcare needs, and ensuring timely faculty recruitment for these programmes. The 
Committee also recommends the establishment of a dedicated Allied Health Sciences 
faculty or school within AIIMS Bhopal for better academic oversight, curriculum 
development, and in tegration with clinical services. A long -term roadmap for Allied 

204 
 
Health Science education expansion should be taken up on fast track mode to produce 
timely and adequately competent technical work force in various clinical fields. Such 
steps would make the hospital infrastructure capable of providing world class 
healthcare besides opening opportunity for employment -generation through expansion 
of Medical field. 
(Para 3.3.14 of the ATR) 
OPERATION THEATRES 
7. The Committee acknowledges the Ministry‟s clarifica tion that all 27 Major OTs 
(including 24 Modular OTs) and 8 Minor OTs at AIIMS Bhopal are now fully 
functional, and appreciates the substantial volume of surgeries being conducted 
annually. However, the Committee is worried that despite the operational rea diness of 
OTs, long waiting periods for surgical procedures persist due to high patient load. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that AIIMS Bhopal undertake a comprehensive 
audit of OT utilization, manpower adequacy, and scheduling efficiency to identify  
systemic bottlenecks to overcome the issue of long waiting time for surgeries at AIIMS 
Bhopal. In this regard, the Institute should consider extending OT hours, recruiting 
additional surgical staff, and streamlining pre -operative processes to improve outp ut. 
The Committee also urges the Ministry to explore the feasibility of establishing satellite 
surgical centres or partnerships with nearby government hospitals to offload elective 
surgeries and reduce waiting times. 
(Para 3.4.3 of the ATR) 
STATUS OF INTENSIVE CARE UNITS AND TRAUMA/EMERGENCY FACILITIES 
8. The Committee notes the significant progress in enhancing trauma and 
emergency services at AIIMS Bhopal, particularly with the increase to 12 faculty 
members and 78 functional beds, including 20 ventilator -supported beds. The overall 
Intensive Care Unit (ICU) bed count has increased to 137. A breakdown of these beds 
into specialized units like Trauma, Cardiology, ENT, Neurology, Urology, etc.,  address 
the targeted functionality and the specific need for sp ecialized critical care. This 
specialization optimizes patient care by providing tailored environments and expertise 
for complex medical conditions. The Committee further recommends that the separate 
ICUs should be expanded to other remaining specialisatio ns also and their numbers in 
Urology and Trauma should be adequately increased for taking specialised critical 
healthcare. 
(Para 3.5.3 of the ATR) 
DIALYSIS FACILITIES 
9. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by AIIMS Bhopal to strengthen its 
Nephrology services, including the increase in the number of functional dialysis 
machines from two to eleven across Nephrology, Paediatrics, and ICU. However, the 
Committee emphasizes that enhancing equipment capacity must be matched with 

205 
 
adequate and specialized h uman resources to ensure quality service delivery. In its 
reply, the Ministry stated that the faculty posts have been advertised in Department of 
Nephrology in 2019, however, the status of recruitment through that advertisement and 
the present status of va cant posts should have been informed to the Committee. The 
Committee further recommends that the Institute should expedite all pending 
recruitment of qualified nephrologists, dialysis technicians, and nursing staff dedicated 
to renal care. It also urges the Ministry to support the development of a dedicated Renal 
Care Unit with integrated diagnostic, therapeutic, and training facilities. 
(Para 3.6.3 of the ATR)  
 
MERGER OF BHOPAL MEMORIAL HOSPITAL & RESEARCH CENTRE 
(BMHRC) AND AIIMS, BHOPAL 
 
10. The Committ ee recapitulates the positive response of the Ministry w.r.t. the 
merger of BMHRC with AIIMS Bhopal before the Committee during its discussion on 
the subject. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its strong conviction that the merger of 
BMHRC with AIIMS Bh opal is in larger public interest and would ensure optimum 
utilization of resources, better faculty retention, and expanded training and teaching 
opportunities, particularly while continuing to cater to the needs of gas tragedy victims. 
While noting that t he Department of Health Research has decided against the merger, 
the Committee urges the Department of Health and Family Welfare to revisit this 
decision in consultation with all stakeholders, keeping in view the long -term benefits for 
patients, medical fa culty, and students. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare to devise a concrete roadmap and time -
bound plan for resolving administrative hurdles and ensuring that the merger, along 
with protection of service condi tions of existing BMHRC doctors during the transition, 
in the interest of public health and medical education. 
(Para 3.7.4 of the ATR) 
STATUS OF FACULTY/NON FACULTY STRENGTH 
11. The Committee acknowledges the efforts made by AIIMS Rishikesh and the 
Ministry to enhance faculty recruitment, including the steps initiated through the 
Central Institute Body (CIB) and the ongoing policy interventions. However, the 
Committee expresses the concern that despite repeated advertisements, approximately 
one-third of the  sanctioned faculty posts remain vacant, and recent recruitments were 
delayed due to the revision of the reservation roster. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that AIIMS Rishikesh must urgently finalize and operationalize the revised 
reservation roster and ensure that the pending faculty recruitment advertisement is 
issued without further delay. To avoid recurring procedural setbacks, the Committee 
further advises instituting a streamlined and time -bound recruitment protocol. Regular 
biannual recruitment cycles, as envisaged by CIB, must be strictly adhered to, and the 
progress should be reviewed quarterly by the Ministry. Further, the Committee would 
like to have a status report on efforts taken by  AIIMS Rishikesh and the Ministry 
regarding the operation alization of revised reservation roster and latest recruitment 
advertisement issued towards filling up of sanctioned posts of faculties. 
(Para 3.8.4 of the ATR) 

206 
 
 
12. The Committee takes note of the Ministry‟s and AIIMS Rishikesh‟s ongoing 
efforts to strengthen the Specialty and Super Specialty Departments, including progress 
in departments such as Gastroenterology, Transfusion Medicine, and Biochemistry. 
However, the Committee is concerned that critical vacancies still persist in key 
departments such as Phy sical Medicine & Rehabilitation (PMR) and Biochemistry, and 
that faculty recruitment overall continues to lag despite repeated advertisements. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that AIIMS Rishikesh urgently 
prioritize the filling up o f all senior faculty positions, especially Professors, through 
time-bound recruitment drives, while exploring targeted strategies such as inter -
institutional deputation, lateral entry of experienced specialists, and incentivized 
appointments from leading i nstitutes like AIIMS Delhi, JIPMER, and PGIMER. 
Further, the Committee emphasizes that any plan for institutional expansion must be 
accompanied by demonstrable improvements in faculty strength, infrastructure 
utilization, and patient load. 
(Para 3.8.8 of the ATR) 
MEDICAL EDUCATION 
13. The Ministry's response, stating that the Committee's observations have been 
"noted for future guidance" and that the Institute has been "sensitized" and is "trying 
to implement all suggestions," lacks specific details or a co ncrete action plan to address 
the Committee's serious concerns regarding the potential dilution of medical education 
standards at AIIMS Rishikesh. The Committee's core apprehension centres on the 
perceived misinterpretation and misuse of AIIMS Act autonomy  to justify not adhering 
to MCI /NMC benchmarks, thereby raising questions about the quality of learning and 
clinical experience. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry 
provide a detailed, time -bound action plan outlining how AIIMS Rishikesh will be 
brought into full compliance with MCI/NMC norms for faculty -student ratios, 
infrastructure, and clinical exposure, particularly for postgraduate seats, without 
compromising the autonomy under the AIIMS Act, but rather enhancing, the quali ty of 
medical education. 
(Para 3.9.3 of the ATR) 
OPERATION THEATERS (OTS) AND TRAUMA & EMERGENCY CENTER 
14. The Committee appreciates the progress made by AIIMS Rishikesh in 
operationalizing a total of 54 Operation Theatres, including 25 Major and 29 Minor  
OTs, which marks a significant improvement in surgical infrastructure. However, the 
Committee emphasizes that full functionality must translate into tangible reductions in 
patient waiting times across all surgical departments. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates that AIIMS Rishikesh conduct and submit, without delay, a detailed 
comparative analysis with AIIMS Delhi on OT utilization efficiency, including the 
number of surgeries (major and minor) performed per OT per day. The Committee 
further recommends t hat a performance audit be undertaken to assess scheduling 

207 
 
practices, manpower deployment, and procedural turnaround times to ensure optimum 
utilization of available OT infrastructure. The Committee reiterates that any future 
expansion plans must be substa ntiated by due justification evident with supporting data 
showing improved usage of existing facilities and reduced surgical backlogs. 
(Para 3.10.3 of the ATR) 
 
15. The Ministry's response details significant progress in addressing the 
Committee's concerns  regarding disaster preparedness at AIIMS Rishikesh, with the 
Trauma Building now fully functional with 50 beds, the helipad operational, and the 
commencement of Heli Emergency Medical Services (HEMS). This proactive approach 
to establishing critical infra structure and services for trauma and disaster management 
is commendable, especially given Uttarakhand's susceptibility to natural disasters. The 
Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in 
tandem with Ministry of Home  Affairs, must now focus on conducting regular, large -
scale multi -agency disaster drills and simulations involving local and state emergency 
services, as well as other relevant stakeholders. The Committee also desires that the 
Ministry should make introspe ction to specifically test the hospital's capacity in 
managing "huge numbers of casualties" in recent disaster in the states and accordingly 
refine coordination protocols to further enhance preparedness and response capabilities 
for future contingencies. 
(Para 3.10.6 of the ATR) 
16. The Committee takes note of the steps undertaken by AIIMS Jodhpur to ensure 
transparency in procurement, including the use of e -tendering and publication of 
tenders on the CPPP portal, as well as adherence to relevant provisions  of the General 
Financial Rules (GFRs) in cases where single bid procurement was undertaken. 
However, the Committee is of the view that instances of procurement through single 
bids should have been avoided and the institute must adhere to multiple tenderin g 
attempts. The Committee feels the need for more proactive vendor outreach and 
competitive specification design to reduce cost of procurement of components. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that AIIMS Jodhpur should also develop a 
structured vendor en gagement strategy, including pre -bid meetings, to increase 
participation. Moreover, the Committee desires that all single bid and proprietary 
procurements should be independently reviewed on a half -yearly basis by an internal 
audit committee, and the summa ry of such reviews, including justification and cost 
comparisons with peer institutions, should be submitted to the Ministry. A 
comprehensive status report on the findings of the earlier probe into single bid 
procurements, as previously recommended, should  also be submitted for consideration 
of Committee. 
(Para 3.11.3 of the ATR) 
Status of Faculty and Non Faculty Strength 
17. The Committee acknowledges the measures taken by the Ministry and AIIMS 
Jodhpur to address faculty and non -faculty vacancies, includi ng regular recruitment 

208 
 
drives and the introduction of combined contractual recruitment through AIIMS New 
Delhi for candidates from premier medical institutions. While these initiatives are steps 
in the right direction, the Committee, however, is worried th at 89 faculty posts and 807 
non-faculty posts still remain vacant, particularly at the senior levels whose leadership 
and guidance is critical to institutional performance and academic quality. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates that immediate, time -bound recruitment targets must 
be set with quarterly progress monitoring. Further, the policy of appointing candidates 
under contract & one level below the sanctioned post should be only a temporary 
stopgap measure/management, and not a substitute for attracti ng high -calibre talent. 
The Committee, in this regard, recommends the creation of a centralized digital 
recruitment dashboard across all AIIMS to track applications, selections, rejections 
(with reasons), and origin of candidates (including those from AIIM S 
Delhi/JIPMER/PGI). This would not only enhance transparency but also help refine 
strategies to attract top talent. The Committee expects the pending data on applicants 
from premier institutes viz. AIIMS/ JIPMER/PGI but were not found suitable along 
with reasons for their rejection to be submitted in Action Taken Notes of present Report 
to the Committee for consideration. 
(Para 3.12.3 of the ATR) 
Super Speciality Services 
18. The Committee acknowledges that the Ministry and AIIMS Jodhpur have taken 
action in compliance of Committee‟s recommendations for establishment of advanced 
centres which was later on referred to the Central Institute Body (CIB) for arriving at 
concrete decision. While the in -principle approval by the Governing Body for new 
centres such as the Comprehensive Cancer Care Centre, Centre for Rare Diseases, and 
others is appreciated, the Committee re -emphasizes that such expansions should not 
dilute the core objective of achieving full operationalization of existing super -specialty 
departments and optimal faculty strength. The Committee, however, recommends that a 
detailed cost-benefit analysis and feasibility report for each proposed centre, including 
staffing, infrastructure, and projected patient load, be submitted to the CIB prior to 
establishment of advance centre at AIIMS Jodhpur. The Committee reiterates that the 
establishment of these centres must be contingent on AIIMS Jodhpur filling up critical 
vacancies. 
(Para 3.13.3 of the ATR) 
19. The Committee acknowledges the efforts made by the  Ministry and AIIMS 
Jodhpur to address faculty shortages through rolling advertisements and policy 
initiatives aimed at enhancing the availability of qualified candidates. However, despite 
these measures, a significant number of posts, i.e., nearly 30% of the total sanctioned 
faculty positions remain vacant, with several critical super -specialty departments still 
being manned by inadequate number of faculty member. The Committee understands 
that such situation severely hampers the delivery of quality health care and compromises 
academic and clinical training standards. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its 

209 
 
recommendation that urgent and targeted steps be taken to fill up the vacant faculty 
positions, particularly at the Professor and Head of Department lev els in the super -
specialties. 
(Para 3.13.6 of the ATR) 
STATUS OF OPERATION THEATRES 
20. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by AIIMS Jodhpur in enhancing 
diagnostic and surgical capacities, including 24x7 operation of the MRI unit, 
procurement of ad ditional USG scanners, and the commissioning of 30 modular OTs. 
However, the Committee remains seriously concerned about the persistently long 
waiting period, up to six months, for MRI in OPD patients and up to three months for 
elective surgeries in severa l departments such as ENT, Paediatric Surgery, and Plastic 
Surgery. Such delays in treatment of patients compromise timely patient care. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry take immediate steps to 
address infrastructural and hum an resource bottlenecks, particularly by expediting the 
procurement and commissioning of additional MRI machines, USG and CT Scanner 
increasing recruitment of radiographer technicians, and ensuring optimal utilization of 
the new modular OTs.  
(Para 3.14.3 of the ATR) 
BURNS AND PLASTIC SURGERY DEPARTMENT 
21. The Committee notes the availability of state -of-the-art ambulance service and 
that a floor, in the new trauma building under construction, has been designated 
towards establishing a dedicated Burns Unit  at AIIMS Jodhpur. The response of the 
Ministry, however, lacks specific timelines for the completion and operationalization of 
the Burns Unit, including the recruitment of specialized manpower and procurement of 
all necessary equipment. Therefore, the Com mittee recommends that the Ministry 
should provide a detailed project completion timeline for the "state of the art burn unit" 
within the trauma building, clearly outlining key milestones such as construction 
completion, equipment procurement, and the spec ific plan for recruiting and training 
sufficient specialized manpower (plastic surgeons, burn nurses, physiotherapists, etc.) 
dedicated to the unit. 
(Para 3.15.3 of the ATR) 
AYUSH FACILITIES 
22. The Committee acknowledges the positive steps taken by AIIMS Jodhpur and 
the Ministry towards strengthening AYUSH services, including the establishment of a 
dedicated AYUSH block, initiation of OPD services, recruitment of AYUSH medical 
officers, and alignment with the Standard Staffing Pattern approved by the CIB. The 
Committee, nevertheless, emphasizes that the resignation of a key medical officer and 
the continued gaps in faculty recruitment underscore the need for robust retention and 
timely hiring mechanisms. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministr y 

210 
 
expedite the creation and operationalization of the additional 16 AYUSH posts as 
proposed and ensure timely recruitment against all sanctioned vacancies, and allocate 
adequate budgetary support for infrastructure, training, and research under AYUSH 
disciplines.  
(Para 3.16.5 of the ATR) 
PROCUREMENT OF MEDICAL EQUIPMENT 
23. The Committee takes note of the updated status indicating progress in the 
delivery and installation of most of the previously undelivered and uninstalled medical 
equipment at AIIMS Patn a. The Committee, however, expresses serious concerns over 
the fact that some critical equipment remains undelivered or uninstalled due to 
unresolved issues between the Procurement Support Agency (HITES) and vendors 
reflects persistent systemic inefficienc ies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should monitor and co -ordinate in a time -bound manner for resolution of 
issues pertaining to procurement and installation delays, indicating defined 
accountability for both the Institute and the P SA. A periodic review system should be 
institutionalized, involving all stakeholders, to ensure proactive site readiness, 
infrastructure support, and timely vendor coordination. The Ministry should consider 
developing a centralized dashboard for real -time tracking of equipment procurement 
and installation across all AIIMS. 
(Para 3.17.4 of the ATR) 
24. The Committee notes the efforts being made to impress upon HITES for early 
delivery and installation, along with the imposition of penalties for delays at AII MS 
Patna. Furthermore, the provision of skilled manpower for installation and the coverage 
of equipment under 5 -year warranty and subsequent 5 -year Comprehensive 
Maintenance Agreements are positive steps towards ensuring operation functionality 
and profici ency. However, the reply does not explicitly address the Committee‟s 
recommendation for a technical inspection by a technical inspector before acceptance of 
equipment, nor does it details a comprehensive contingency plan in case of equipment 
breakdown to p revent adverse effects on diagnostic services. Therefore, the Committee 
reiterates that the Ministry, in addition to existing measures, establish a mandatory 
protocol for independent technical inspection and certification of all medical equipment 
prior to acceptance to ensure quality and functionality at the time of delivery. The 
Committee reiterates that a detailed contingency plan for critical equipment 
breakdowns should be developed at AIIMS Patna outlining alternative arrangements to 
minimize disruption to patient diagnostic and treatment services. 
(Para 3.17.7 of the ATR) 
25. In the light of the Ministry‟s response and the adoption of BIS standards in 
procurement practices following the OM dated 20.02.2018, the Committee acknowledges 
the corrective step s taken to promote indigenous manufacturing. The Committee, 
nevertheless, recommends that the Ministry ensure strict compliance with the BIS -

211 
 
inclusive procurement policy across all AIIMS and mandate that procurement 
committees give due preference to qualit y-certified Indian manufacturers, especially for 
basic instruments. A formal mechanism should be instituted for periodic audit of tender 
specifications and vendor selection processes to prevent unwarranted bias toward 
foreign certifications. 
(Para 3.17.10 of the ATR) 
 
26. In view of the action taken by the Ministry and the ongoing efforts by the Bureau 
of Indian Standards (BIS) to formulate specifications for approximately 1000 medical 
devices, the Committee appreciates the alignment with the "Make in India " initiative. 
However, to ensure that these efforts translate into real -time procurement reform, the 
Committee recommends that AIIMS Patna and all other similar institutions strictly 
discontinue the practice of mandating US FDA certification where BIS or C E standards 
are available. Additionally, the Committee recommends monitoring of procurement 
patterns across AIIMS institutions to ensure preference for indigenous and BIS-certified 
products. 
(Para 3.17.13 of the ATR) 
STATUS OF FACULTY/NON-FACULTY STRENGTH 
27. The Committee acknowledges the progress made in improving faculty 
recruitment at AIIMS Patna with 224 out of 305 faculty posts now filled up. However, 
the Committee expresses deep concern that critical departments such as Endocrinology 
& Metabolism continue to remain non -functional due to the lack of suitable candidates, 
and many other departments don‟t have adequate number of faculty. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry take urgent and targeted measures to address 
faculty shortages through proactive recruitment drives, relaxation of procedural delays, 
and provision of additional incentives, especially for super -specialty and 
underrepresented departments. 
(Para 3.18.3 of the ATR) 
 
28. The Committee notes the efforts to streamline and d ecentralize faculty 
recruitment processes and the policy decision to allow combined contractual 
recruitment through AIIMS, New Delhi. However, given the continuing faculty 
shortage, especially in critical specialties, the Committee recommends that the Mini stry 
and AIIMS Patna urgently operationalize bi -annual walk-in interviews as planned and 
closely monitor the success rate of such recruitments. The Committee understands that 
while temporary appointments at one level below may provide only interim relief, 
therefore, the Committee emphasizes the need to maintain academic and clinical 
standards on permanent basis.  
(Para 3.18.6 of the ATR) 

212 
 
29. Given the persistent challenges in attracting and retaining qualified doctors in 
these regions, the Committee urges t he Ministry to prepare a structured framework of 
non-monetary incentives also such as opportunities for research collaboration, provision 
of advanced medical technology, assured work -life balance, and safety measures. The 
Committee further recommends that pilot initiatives in this regard be undertaken at 
select Institutes with regular monitoring and feedback, so that effective models can be 
scaled up across all Institutes to ensure sustainable retention of skilled medical 
professionals. 
(Para 3.18.9 of the ATR) 
 
30. The Committee acknowledges a administrative shift towards centralized 
recruitment for non -faculty posts at all AIIMS, including AIIMS Patna, through 
NORCET for Nursing Officers and the Common Recruitment Examination (CRE) for 
other Group B & C po sts. Such streamlined approach aims to expedite the recruitment 
process, as evidenced by the recent advertising of 246 Nursing Officer vacancies and 307 
other non -faculty posts for AIIMS Patna. However, despite these efforts, a significant 
number of vacanc ies of non -faculty posts (1345 out of 3884 sanctioned posts as of 
31.01.2025) still persist. Therefore, the Committee further recommends the Ministry to 
take necessary steps for expediting recruitment process by the centralized recruitment 
process, particularly focusing on the conversion rate of advertised vacancies to fill up 
positions and shortening the average time taken for a complete recruitment cycle. The 
Ministry should identify bottlenecks or systemic challenges within the centralized 
process that m ight still contribute to the high vacancy rates and develop targeted 
interventions, such as increasing the frequency of examinations for posts with persistent 
shortages or implementing fast -track recruitment for critical positions to ensure high -
quality patient care and education. 
(Para 3.18.14 of the ATR) 
 
31. The Committee observes the steps taken towards addressing the issue of nursing 
staff shortage at AIIMS Patna by centralizing recruitment through NORCET and CRE 
via AIIMS New Delhi. The current streng ths of 786 Nursing Officers against 1326 
sanctioned and 413 Senior Nursing Officers against 510 sanctioned indicate ongoing 
efforts, further supported by the recent advertisements for 246 Nursing Officer and 39 
Senior Nursing Officer positions. However, a substantial vacancy of 540 Nursing 
Officers and 97 Senior Nursing Officers still exists. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry, in collaboration with AIIMS New Delhi, should explore 
the feasibility of increasing the frequency of NORCET and  CRE examinations, or 
streamlining the selection and allocation process, to more rapidly fill up the persistent 
vacancies in nursing cadres. The Committee also reiterates that the Ministry should 
chalk out a streamlined strategy and timeline for the initia tion of "different medical and 
para-medical courses" to address underlying gaps in medical services and ensure a 
sustainable supply of skilled healthcare professionals. 
(Para 3.18.17 of the ATR) 

213 
 
32. The Committee expresses deep concern on the response of t he Ministry in regard 
to the Committee‟s recommendation on huge shortage against faculty and non -faculty 
posts in AIIMS Patna. The Committee, therefore, recommends AIIMS Patna that 
concrete roadmap is imperative at place to address the acute shortage of fa culty and 
non-faculty in AIIMS Patna and other new AIIMS. The Committee further recommends 
the Ministry to expedite formulation and implementation of a centralized recruitment 
policy for all AIIMS, ensuring uniformity, transparency, and cost -effectiveness in the 
selection process. A clear timeline be laid down for operationalizing this policy. 
(Para 3.18.20 of the ATR) 
SPECIALITY AND SUPER-SPECIALITY DEPARTMENTS 
33. The Committee acknowledges the progress made in operationalizing almost all 
Speciality and S uper-Speciality Departments at AIIMS Patna, except for the 
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism. However, the persistent non -
functionality of vital department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, despite rolling 
advertisements and downgrading of posts to  attract candidates, remains a matter of 
concern to the Committee. The Committee, therefore, recommends that AIIMS Patna, 
in coordination with the Ministry, undertake a focused recruitment drive for this 
department, possibly exploring options such as acade mic collaborations with other 
institutions, and targeted incentives for qualified specialists, etc. All faculty vacancies 
need to be filled up without further delay by undertaking suitable recruitment process. 
(Para 3.19.4 of the ATR) 
34. The Committee app reciates that the critical issue of attracting specialists and 
super-specialists to AIIMS Patna, including the proposal for special incentives, has been 
noted and deliberated within the CIB, leading to the formation of the Dr. Balram 
Committee to recommend  suitable measures. While the establishment of a dedicated 
Committee is a positive step towards addressing this long -standing challenge, the 
response lacks a clear timeline for the Committee's report submission and, more 
importantly, concrete actions or interim measures to mitigate the immediate shortage of 
specialists. Therefore, the Committee further recommends that the Ministry expedite 
the work of the Dr. Balram Committee, setting a strict deadline for the submission of its 
recommendations regarding spe cial incentives and recruitment strategies for specialists 
and super-specialists at AIIMS Patna. Simultaneously, the Ministry should outline any 
immediate, short -term measures being explored or implemented, such as temporary 
deputations, contractual appoin tments with enhanced remuneration to address the 
critical gaps in specialist availability at AIIMS Patna. 
(Para 3.19.7 of the ATR) 
MEDICAL EDUCATION 
35. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the AIIMS Patna in ensuring that Post 
Graduate and Super Speci alty courses are introduced only where adequate 
infrastructure and faculty are available. However, the Committee is concerned over the 

214 
 
recurring issue of vacant DM/M.Ch seats due to centralised counselling and allocation 
by AIIMS Delhi, which results in un derutilisation of available training capacity and 
specialist output. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry, in 
coordination with AIIMS Delhi, explore options for decentralised or supplementary 
counselling rounds specifically for AIIMS Patn a to ensure optimal seat utilisation. The 
Committee further recommends that AIIMS Patna should submit a roadmap for 
gradually introducing PG courses in other departments that are currently not teaching 
PG course, subject to the availability of faculty and infrastructure, to further address 
the shortage of specialists in the region. 
(Para 3.20.3 of the ATR) 
 
36. While the Committee notes the positive steps taken by AIIMS Patna in 
organizing CMEs, workshops, and training programs through the Department of 
Medical Education, however, a dedicated and structured Human Resource Development 
(HRD) Cell is yet to be formally established, as recommended by the Committee. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation and urges the Institute to 
institutionalize a full -fledged HRD Cell with defined roles, budgetary provisions, and 
training schedules to ensure systematic capacity building for all categories of staff 
including doctors, nurses, and paramedics.  
(Para 3.20.6 of the ATR) 
 
37. The Committee ac knowledges the progress made by AIIMS Patna in terms of 
increasing the number of functional Operation Theatres, laboratories, and the 
implementation of the competency-based MBBS curriculum designed to enhance clinical 
and technical skills. However, the Com mittee remains to be apprised of the actual 
faculty strength against the sanctioned strength, department -wise.  The Committee, 
therefore, underscores the critical importance of adequate faculty in -position to 
effectively deliver hands-on training and mento rship, particularly in specialized clinical 
procedures. Furthermore, the Committee would like to know the reason for not yet 
operationalization of the Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism and desire that 
all requisite initiative must be taken to comm ence that Department without further 
delay. The Committee further recommends that AIIMS Patna should strengthen clinical 
mentorship by ensuring the presence of senior consultants in all departments and 
integrate simulation-based learning alongside real pat ient exposure. The Institute must 
also prioritize the completion of other requisite infrastructure to facilitate uninterrupted 
clinical training, thereby, ensuring that graduates are not only academically proficient 
but also clinically adept and job-ready. 
(Para 3.20.10 of the ATR) 
TRAUMA AND EMERGENCY SERVICES 
 
38. The Committee notes the recent efforts made by AIIMS Patna to operationalize 
the Trauma and Emergency Care Centre by deploying faculty in both the Trauma 
Surgery & Critical Care and the newly cr eated Emergency Medicine departments. 
While this marks a positive shift from the earlier situation, the Committee desires that 
faculty must be supported by dedicated emergency protocols and round -the-clock 

215 
 
availability of skilled personnel and adequate sup port staff. Therefore, the Committee 
further recommends that AIIMS Patna must ensure seamless coordination between the 
Trauma and Emergency Medicine departments for strengthening emergency response 
systems. 
(Para 3.21.3 of the ATR) 
AYUSH 
 
39. The Committee  notes that vacant positions were filled in 2020 and 2021. The 
action so taken addresses the immediate concern of Committee about staffing, however, 
the response does not provide specific details on current functional status or patient 
uptake in these depa rtments. To fully realize the potential of medical pluralism and 
strengthen AYUSH as envisioned by the Committee, a mere statement of recruitment is 
insufficient. Therefore, the Committee further recommends that the Ministry provide a 
detailed update on th e current operational status of all five major AYUSH branches 
(Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, and Homoeopathy) at AIIMS Patna, 
including the daily patient footfall and the range of services offered in each department. 
Furthermore, the Ministry should outline a strategic plan for promoting and integrating 
these AYUSH services with conventional medicine at AIIMS Patna, aiming to establish 
it as a model institution for medical pluralism and comprehensive healthcare delivery. 
(Para 3.22.3 of the ATR) 
STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION 
40. The Committee notes the Ministry‟s submission that certificates have now been 
issued for completion of construction activities at AIIMS Raipur under Packages II, III, 
and IV, while construction activities under Package I rema ins pending. The Committee, 
however, emphasizes that accountability for delays spanning more than 70 months in 
some cases and the resultant cost escalation must not be overlooked. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendation for a detailed enqui ry report identifying lapses 
on the part of project consultants, contractors, and monitoring agencies, along with 
specific action taken against those found responsible. Further, the Committee 
recommends that lessons from these delays be institutionalized i n the Ministry‟s 
monitoring framework to ensure that future projects under PMSSY or otherwise are 
completed strictly within timelines and without avoidable cost overruns. 
(Para 3.23.3 of the ATR) 
STATUS OF FACULTY AND NON FACULTY STRENGTH 
41. The Committee acknowledges the efforts made by AIIMS Raipur to fill up the 
vacant faculty and non -faculty positions through various recruitment methods, 
including permanent, deputation, and contractual basis, as well as the implementation of 
a rolling advertisement sys tem. However, the submission of ministry for remaining 
vacancies at various levels due to "no application/less application/no suitable candidate 
found/non-joined after selection" points out deeper systemic issues beyond mere 
recruitment efforts. The Commit tee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry, while 
continuing with the current recruitment drives, commission a comprehensive study to 

216 
 
identify the root causes for the persistent lack of suitable candidates and joining issues, 
particularly at the Professo r/Additional Professor levels in specialty and super -specialty 
departments at AIIMS Raipur. This study should explore factors such as competitive 
compensation packages, infrastructure and research facilities, work -life balance, 
academic environment, and geographical location. Based on these findings, the Ministry 
should develop and implement targeted strategies, which could include enhanced 
incentives, improved institutional support for research and academic pursuits, or 
specialized outreach programs, to at tract and retain experienced medical professionals 
to AIIMS Raipur. 
(Para 3.24.3 of the ATR) 
42. The Committee notes that the Ministry acknowledges the Committee's concern 
regarding the high reliance on contractual and outsourced non -faculty staff at AIIMS  
Raipur. A significant number of candidates have joined through direct recruitment in 
2024 across Group A, B, and C, and that 1627 nursing staff are already on permanent 
roles. The Ministry explicitly states that attempts are made to fill up unfilled posts  on 
contractual basis to run the services and strengthen department," indicating that 
contractual arrangements remain a necessity due to persistent vacancies. While 
acknowledging the operational imperative, nevertheless the Committee is of the view 
that the Ministry should develop a comprehensive, time-bound strategy to systematically 
reduce the reliance on contractual and outsourced non -faculty staff at AIIMS Raipur 
and ultimately to do away with such methods of ad -hoc recruitment. Rather the strategy 
should be more focussed on frequent direct recruitment drives for all non -faculty cadres 
and addressing the underlying reasons for permanent positions remaining vacant, such 
as potentially uncompetitive salaries or benefits for specific roles, to ensure long -term 
job security and foster a sense of belongingness among the workforce, thereby 
enhancing the overall stability, quality and professional proficiency of healthcare 
services. 
(Para 3.24.6 of the ATR) 
SPECIALTY AND SUPER SPECIALTY SERVICES 
43. The Committe e notes that the Ministry, in its response to the critical faculty 
vacancies, particularly, in specialty and super -specialty departments at AIIMS Raipur, 
largely reiterates the ongoing efforts viz. including continuous recruitment drives, 
contractual appoi ntments, and the implementation of a rolling advertisement system. 
While the completion of recruitment for 169 faculty posts and the ongoing process for 
129 more (with 34 selections) are positive indicators of effort, nevertheless, the persistent 
high vaca ncy rates, especially in departments being run by a single faculty, pin -point 
that current strategies deployed by AIIMS management are not fully addressing the 
underlying challenges of attracting and retaining specialized medical professionals. The 
Committee, therefore, further recommends that besides normal recruitment efforts, the 
Ministry, in conjunction with AIIMS Raipur management must undertake a targeted, 

217 
 
department-specific analysis for 16 departments with over 50% vacancies, particularly 
those operated by a single faculty. 
(Para 3.25.3 of the ATR) 
 
 
44. The Committee acknowledges the efforts made by AIIMS Raipur to 
operationalize crucial Super Specialty Departments, with the result  that Department of 
Nephrology, Surgical Gastroenterology, Medical On cology & Haematology are now 
functional. The ongoing recruitment drives, including the preference given to Super -
Specialty departments in interviews and initiatives like the Visiting Faculty Scheme, 
demonstrate a commitment to adequate staffing. However, t he reply highlights the 
persistent challenge of making Surgical Oncology fully functional due to a lack of 
suitable applicants or candidates joining. The Committee further recommends that the 
Ministry must direct AIIMS Raipur management to conduct a target ed analysis to 
understand the specific deterrents for super -specialists in Surgical Oncology. The 
Ministry should develop a tailored, aggressive recruitment strategy for Surgical 
Oncology, which could include offering enhanced incentives, dedicated researc h grants, 
specialized training opportunities, to ensure that this vital department becomes fully 
functional with adequate specialized faculty without further delay, thereby ensuring 
comprehensive cancer care. 
(Para 3.25.6 of the ATR) 
PROCUREMENT OF EQUIPMENT 
45. The Committee has been informed that AIIMS Raipur generally adheres to best 
practices by purchasing equipment only when infrastructure and manpower are 
available, and by ensuring warranty periods commence post -installation, with 
provisions for liqui dated damages. This is a positive step towards prudent equipment 
management.  However, the submission that "few of the equipment could not be 
installed where the designated area of the departments concerned was not handed over 
timely by the project contrac tors" underscores a critical gap in coordination between 
procurement and infrastructure development. The Committee, therefore, further 
recommends that the Ministry implement a more robust, inter -departmental 
coordination mechanism between the procurement w ing and the project/construction 
department at AIIMS Raipur. Such mechanism should include mandatory, pre -
procurement verification of infrastructure readiness and a staggered procurement 
schedule explicitly linked to the confirmed handover dates of designa ted departmental 
areas, thereby preventing future instances where costly equipment remains uninstalled 
due to construction delays. 
(Para 3.26.3 of the ATR) 
 
46. The Committee has been apprised that the Committee‟s concern over delays in 
equipment delivery and installation has been addressed by imposing liquidated damages 
on errant suppliers and that AIIMS Raipur generally ensures infrastructure and 
manpower are available before procurement. The Committee, however, recommends 
that the Ministry, beside imposi ng penalties must establish a more integrated and 
proactive system to ensure seamless coordination between procurement, infrastructure 

218 
 
development, and departmental readiness at AIIMS Raipur. This system should 
mandate a pre -procurement checklist and real -time monitoring of project completion 
milestones, enabling a "just-in-time" equipment delivery and installation strategy.  
(Para 3.26.6 of the ATR) 
MEDICAL EDUCATION 
47. The Committee acknowledges the Ministry‟s explanation that the persistent 
vacancies in  pre-clinical and para -clinical departments are largely due to candidates‟ 
preference for clinical specialties offering wider job opportunities. The Committee, 
while noting the submission of the Ministry, emphasizes that sustained underutilization 
of sanct ioned PG seats defeats the very objective of expanding medical education 
capacity. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry, in consultation with 
the National Medical Commission (NMC), explore remedial measures such as offering 
structured career pathways, research incentives, fellowships, or enhanced academic and 
institutional opportunities in pre -clinical and para -clinical disciplines to make them 
more attractive to aspirants. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry for 
periodic ass essment of demand trends across disciplines and corrective action so that 
sanctioned seats are optimally utilized and do not remain vacant year after year. 
(Para 3.27.3 of the ATR) 
AYUSH 
48. The Committee appreciates the progress made by AIIMS Patna in exp anding 
AYUSH services, including the initiation of OPD and IPD services and the appointment 
of permanent Medical Officers in various AYUSH disciplines. However, the Committee 
notes with concern that Unani services remain non -operational due to a vacancy, a nd 
the Department overall still lacks the full sanctioned strength needed for optimal 
functioning. Given the increasing demand for holistic and cost -effective healthcare 
solutions, the Committee reiterates the importance of ensuring all five AYUSH systems 
are fully operational. Therefore, the Committee further recommends that AIIMS 
Raipur expedite the recruitment process for the vacant Unani Medical Officer post and 
ensure that all sanctioned posts under AYUSH are filled on a regular basis. 
(Para 3.28.4 of the ATR) 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
49. The Committee takes note of the significant improvement in fund utilization at 
AIIMS Bhubaneswar in recent years, particularly the near full utilization of capital 
grants in 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21, and 2023-24. However, the Committee observes that 
in 2021 -22 and 2022 -23, utilization again dipped to below 75 percent, which points 
towards persisting gaps in financial planning and project execution. While the 
implementation of TSA has addressed the issue of surplus funds ly ing idle, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry ensure a robust mechanism for real -time 
monitoring of fund flow, project progress, and timely corrective action, and 
institutionalize periodic financial audits and  capacity -building of its financial 

219 
 
management systems to prevent recurrence of underutilization and consistency in fiscal 
discipline. 
(Para 3.29.3 of the ATR) 
50. The Committee notes with satisfaction that regular financial audits of AIIMS 
Bhubaneswar are now being conducted by the CAG and tha t the audit reports from 
2018-19 to 2023 -24 have been received and incorporated in the Annual Reports. While 
this is a welcome step towards ensuring financial accountability, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry ensure timely completion and disclosur e of audits every 
financial year without delay. The Committee also stresses that audit observations, if any, 
must be acted upon promptly with a clear compliance mechanism and periodic 
reporting to avoid recurrence of lapses. 
(Para 3.29.6 of the ATR) 
STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION WORK 
51. The Committee takes into account the updated status of construction packages at 
AIIMS Bhubaneswar and acknowledges that most of the packages have been completed, 
though with significant delays and cost overruns. However, the pende ncy in Package II, 
particularly the sub -judice matter related to IBMS (Integrated Building Management 
System), remains a matter of concern as it continues to hold back full and optimal 
operationalization of the facilities. The Committee, therefore, reitera tes that the 
Ministry must take expeditious steps to resolve the pending issues, including legal 
hurdles, and ensure that all components of Package II are completed at the earliest. 
Further, the Committee emphasizes the need for fixing accountability on no n-
performing agencies to prevent recurrence of such delays and for instituting a robust 
monitoring and penalty mechanism in future projects to minimize both time and cost 
overruns. 
(Para 3.30.3 of the ATR) 
STATUS OF FACULTY AND NON-FACULTY STRENGTH 
52. The Committee acknowledges the proactive efforts undertaken by AIIMS 
Bhubaneswar to address faculty and non -faculty shortages through repeated 
advertisements and the use of centralized recruitment mechanisms like NORCET. The 
Committee, however, expresses deep  concern over the continuing high vacancies at 
various levels, particularly, with 78 vacancies out of 315 faculty posts, 222 vacancies out 
of 748 sanctioned posts at non -faculty level (SRs & JRs) and 865 vacancies out of total 
sanctioned strength of 3082 p osts of non -faculty (excluding SRs & JRs) still remains to 
be filled up in AIIMS Bhubaneswar. The Committee emphasizes that persistent gaps in 
critical human resources, especially senior faculty and Group A positions, can severely 
undermine institutional p erformance, training quality, and patient care. Therefore, the 
Committee further recommends that AIIMS Bhubaneswar devise a time -bound 
recruitment strategy with specific targets to fill up all key vacancies existing at (78) 
faculty, (222) non -faculty (SRs & JRs),  and (865) non -faculty (excluding SRs & JRs) 

220 
 
levels including alternative mechanisms such as lateral entry or contractual 
appointments as the interim measure. Additionally, the Institute should explore 
incentives to attract talent, strengthen feeder cadres for promotional posts. 
(Para 3.31.4 of the ATR)   
SPECIALITY/SUPER SPECIALITY DEPARTMENTS 
53. The Committee appreciates that all 18 Specialty and 17 Super -Specialty 
departments at AIIMS Bhubaneswar are currently functional, however, the Committee 
remains to be apprised of faculty status, particularly in critical departments such as 
Nephrology, Endocrinology, Surgical Oncology, and Plastic Surgery. The Committee is 
of the considered view that functionality without adequate staffing attracts risks of  
compromising the quality of care, overburdening existing personnel, and affecting the 
academic environment. The Committee, therefore, further recommends that the 
Institute undertake an urgent, department-wise assessment to identify high-burden units 
operating with suboptimal staffing. Priority recruitment drives must be conducted for 
these departments, alongside strategic faculty deployment, visiting consultant 
arrangements, and collaborations with other AIIMS or institutions to ensure 
uninterrupted services and academic training. 
(Para 3.32.3 of the ATR)  
STATUS OF OPERATION THEATRES AND WARDS/BEDS 
54. The Committee appreciates the significant progress made by AIIMS 
Bhubaneswar in operationalizing all 25 sanctioned Modular Operation Theatres (MoTs) 
and ens uring the installation of the Medical Gas Pipeline System (MGPS), thereby 
addressing a critical infrastructure gap. However, the Committee notes that despite the 
sanction of 112 ICU beds in the main hospital, 86 beds in the Trauma Centre, and 36 
beds in the Burn Centre, only a total of 130 ICU beds (112 + 12 trauma centre beds + 06 
burn centre beds) are currently functional and 30 burn centre beds remains to be 
installed. This indicates a considerable underutilization of sanctioned critical care 
infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, further recommends that the Institute 
expedite the process of making all remaining ICU beds functional by addressing any 
outstanding manpower, equipment, or logistical constraints. The Committee also desires 
that the Institut e may furnish details of occupancy rate of ICU beds in various 
wards/departments. 
(Para 3.33.3 of the ATR) 
AYUSH FACILITIES 
55. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Institute has taken steps to fill up 
the sanctioned posts in the AYUSH Department , with five out of six posts now occupied, 
thereby reflecting progress in addressing the earlier manpower shortfall. However, the 
Committee also emphasizes that mere availability of posts is not sufficient unless backed 
by regular appointments, appropriate  infrastructure, and full operationalization of 

221 
 
services. Therefore, the Committee desires that the remaining vacancy be filled up on a 
priority basis through regular recruitment. Additionally, the Institute should ensure 
that all appointed personnel are provided with necessary facilities and support to deliver 
quality AYUSH services. The Committee also urges the Institute to develop a roadmap 
for expanding AYUSH services beyond OPD to include IPD and academic functions, 
aligning with the Ministry‟s broader  vision of integrated and regionally adapted 
traditional healthcare delivery. 
(Para 3.34.4 of the ATR) 
 
 
UPGRADATION OF GOVERNMENT MEDICAL COLLEGES/ INSTITUTIONS  
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION AND FUNDING PATTERN 
 
56. The Committee acknowledges the progress made by the Ministry in ensuring that 
almost all State Governments, barring Andhra Pradesh, have released their share of 
funds under Phase III of the PMSSY upgradation projects. However, the continued 
delay by the Government of Andhra Pradesh in releasing its sh are for the GMCs at 
Anantapur and Vijayawada remains a matter of concern. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry intensify its efforts by engaging at the highest 
administrative and political levels with the Government of Andhra Pradesh to e xpedite 
the release of the pending State share. Additionally, the Committee reiterates its earlier 
recommendation that a formal mechanism be institutionalized to monitor and report 
fund releases on a quarterly basis, including reasons for delays and follow -up actions 
taken, so as to ensure timely implementation of upgradation works and enable proactive 
intervention wherever needed. 
(Para 3.35.3 of the ATR) 
 
SITE SELECTION AND STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES IN GMCS 
 
57. The Committee appreciates the conce rted efforts made by the Ministry in 
coordinating with State Governments and relevant stakeholders to address the multiple 
causes of delays in construction activities at various Government Medical Colleges 
(GMCs), resulting in the completion of 71 out of 7 5 projects. However, the Committee 
expresses concern over the continued delays in the remaining four projects viz. PMCH, 
GMC (Surat) and GTBH (Delhi), particularly due to pending State share commitments 
and GMC (Cuttack) due to delayed submission of Detail ed Project Reports (DPRs). The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should establish a fixed 
timeline in coordination with the concerned State Governments for resolving the 
outstanding issues in these four projects. A robust escalati on mechanism should also be 
instituted for projects facing chronic delays, including structured fortnightly reviews 
and submission of status updates to the Committee. Furthermore, resilient follow -up 
action is needed in the case of the Guru Teg Bahadur Hos pital project in Delhi, where 
financial commitments are still pending, to prevent further delay in project completion. 
(Para 3.36.6 of the ATR) 
 

222 
 
58. The Committee takes note of the reasons cited such as issues related to land 
availability and statutory cle arances as being largely under the purview of the State 
Governments and implementing agencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
for future projects, the Ministry must ensure timely pre -approval protocols, including 
mandatory submission of encumbra nce-free land certificates and statutory clearances 
before initiating tendering or construction. 
(Para 3.36.7 of the ATR) 
PROCUREMENT OF EQUIPMENT 
59. The Ministry's Action Taken Notes, while acknowledging the equipment shortage 
at GMCs under PMSSY, primarily focuses on the current procurement status for Phase 
III, indicating that orders for 48 out of 141 pending items have been placed and the rest 
are under procurement. This response, however, completely omits addressing the 
Committee's serious concern ove r the wastage of public funds because of the fact that a 
total of 75 numbers of equipment worth Rs. 3.26 crore remained unaccounted for by 
both HLL and the GMCs concerned, as highlighted by the CAG. It also fails to address 
the underlying issues of delays in order placement, changes in equipment models, and 
lack of follow -up, or to outline any measures for fixing accountability for these lapses. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation for a comprehensive 
and urgent remedial action pl an to recover or account for the 75 missing equipments as 
identified by the CAG, along with a detailed report on the investigation conducted to fix 
accountability for such lapse in public fund management. Furthermore, the Ministry 
must chalk out a concrete  strategy, with strict timelines and clear performance metrics, 
and streamline the entire procurement -to-installation process, establishing robust 
inventory management systems ensuring rigorous oversight and follow -up action with 
PSAs and GMCs to prevent future occurrences of such mismanagement. 
(Para 3.37.3 of the ATR) 
 
60. The Committee notes that its recommendation regarding avoidance of single bid 
procurement to encourage competitive pricing has been acknowledged by the Ministry. 
However, in view of the  significant financial outlay involved in medical equipment 
procurement and the need for transparency and efficiency in public procurement 
processes, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should issue detailed guidelines 
to all implementing agencies a nd procurement units under its purview, explicitly 
discouraging single bid procurement except in exceptional and justifiable circumstances. 
These exceptions should be subject to prior approval by a higher authority and duly 
documented. Additionally, the Co mmittee recommends that the Ministry must establish 
a monitoring mechanism to regularly review procurement cases, especially those 
finalized on a single bid basis. 
(Para 3.37.6 of the ATR) 
61. The Committee acknowledges that the Ministry has taken note of its 
recommendations and is reviewing the progress of equipment procurement alongside 

223 
 
construction activities with respect to all GMCs. The Committee, in this regard, 
recommends that a centralized digital dashboard be developed for real -time tracking of 
tender issuance, approval, delivery, installation, and operationalization of equipment 
across all GMCs. The effective monitoring mechanism must ensure that there should be 
no delay in procurement of medical equipments in any GMC. 
(Para 3.37.9 of the ATR) 
ENHANCEMENT OF PG SEATS 
62. The Committee appreciates the efforts in securing commitments from State 
Governments through MOUs for creating and filling up required faculty and non -
faculty posts, and its continued engagement with States through review meetings. 
However, the Committee expects that the Ministry should have furnished the 
development/progress made and outcome achieved of various steps taken, in this regard, 
during September 2019 to May 2025. Given that enhancement of PG seats without 
proportionate fa culty undermines the quality of medical education, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry develop a structured timeline with performance 
indicators for faculty recruitment aligned with the increase in PG seats. Further, the 
Ministry should regularly mo nitor compliance by States and the status of faculty -
student ratios across GMCs on a quarterly basis. 
(Para 3.38.3 of the ATR) 
63. The Committee desires that the Ministry should have furnished the details of 
outcome of the efforts so made to collaborate wi th State Governments through MoUs 
and its continued engagement via review meetings to enhance PG seats in GMCs, 
especially during the period September 2019 to May 2025. The Committee, furthermore, 
recommends that a time -bound and target -driven roadmap be f inalized and 
implemented for each GMC, detailing the proposed increase in PG seats aligned with 
available infrastructure and faculty strength. The Committee further urges the Ministry 
to institute a central monitoring cell to track the progress of PG seat augmentation 
across all GMCs along with status of professional proficiency generated due to 
enhancement of PG seats in all GMCs. The Committee understands that GMCs are the 
gateway for delivery of adequate, accessible and affordable healthcare services at grass 
root level imparting medical education and clinical exposure at doors, and effective 
means of removing regional imbalances and critical medical education gap at source. 
The Ministry, in tandem with State Government, should chalk out „Action Plan‟ to 
achieve the said objectives. 
(Para 3.38.6 of the ATR) 
SUPER SPECIALTY BLOCKS 
 
64. The Committee takes note of the creation of 18 Cath Labs under Phase III in 
consultation with GMCs, Institutes, and State Governments. However, the Committee 
expresses the concern that due to budgetary limits, not all required Cath Labs could be 

224 
 
established, which may compromise the availability of critical cardiac care services in 
certain regions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry, in 
coordination with the State Governments, should devise a phased plan to ensure that all 
medical colleges and institutions with super -specialty services are equipped with 
functional Cath Labs at the earliest. Additional financial support, either through 
enhanced central alloca tion, phased funding, Corporate Social Responsibility or 
convergence with other healthcare schemes, should be explored so that budgetary 
constraints do not hinder the provision of life-saving cardiac care infrastructure. 
(Para 3.39.3 of the ATR) 
GENERATION OF EMPLOYMENT 
65. The Committee acknowledges the communication with State Governments 
regarding manpower requirements, however, the Committee expresses concern that the 
Ministry has not furnished updated response covering details of progress made during 
September 2019 to May 2025 in compliance of recommendation for exploring huge 
employment generation opportunities in all GMCs identified for up -gradation under 
PMSSY. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a structured manpower audit be 
conducted for each GMC upgraded under PMSSY to assess current staffing gaps across 
faculty, non -faculty, healthcare allied and professional services, and support services. 
The Ministry should also set up a robust follow -up mechanism to ensure time -bound 
action by State Gov ernments on the creation and filling of posts, at various levels so as 
to open employment generation opportunities and ensuring that all departments of 
GMCs are made functional. 
(Para 3.40.3 of the ATR) 
STUDY VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
66. The Committee takes into account the progress made in strengthening healthcare 
infrastructure in Bihar through the establishment of new medical colleges at Purnia, 
Saran, and Samastipur as well as the initiation of AIIMS Darbhanga.  
(Para 3.41.6 of the ATR) 
67. The Committee, however, emphasizes that the Koshi/ Simanchal region and other 
underserved districts such as Saharsha, Madhepura, Katihar, Kishanganj, Araria and 
Farbishganj continue to remain deprived of adequate tertiary healthcare facilities. The 
Committee, therefore , recommends that the Ministry, in collaboration with the State 
Government, should prepare a comprehensive roadmap to ensure equitable distribution 
of tertiary healthcare services across all backward and flood -prone Koshi/Simanchal 
region of Bihar. The Com mittee understands that site selection for any AIIMS like 
Institution requires a detailed assessment of the geographical location and the 
demographic distribution. Easy accessibility and transportation availability is also the 
other criteria being taken in to consideration for setting up of AIIMS like institution.  
Moreover, air connectivity to the place has been one of the major basis for site selection 
for AIIMS. The Committee takes into consideration the poor human development index 

225 
 
in the Simanchal region  and poor ratio of doctor against the national average 
necessitates the setting up of AIIMS like institution in the Simanchal region.  The 
proposed expressway from Patna to Purnia and commencement of air connectivity to 
and fro Purnia has brought the Koshi region on national platform that fulfils the criteria 
of easy accessibility and transportation for setting up of AIIMS like institution. Further, 
being a backward and underserved region, Koshi/Simanchal region is the suitable site 
for establishment of AIIM S like institution to bridge the regional imbalance in 
healthcare access. The Committee, therefore, urges the Government for setting up of 
clear timelines for exploring the feasibility of setting up additional tertiary healthcare 
facilities through AIIMS like institution in the Koshi/Simanchal region. 
(Para 3.41.7 of the ATR) 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ON COMMON ISSUES 
EXPANSION PROGRAMME OF AIIMS 
68. The Committee has been informed that the recommendation for excluding 
AIIMS-like institutions from or ame nding NBC guidelines to allow vertical expansion 
has been "noted for future guidance," and the matter has been taken up with the 
Ministry of Urban Development and NBCC. The mention of increased FAR for AIIMS 
Nagpur and Bilaspur is a positive sign, suggesti ng some progress in facilitating vertical 
growth. However, the communication with the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
dates back to March 2019, and the response lacks concrete timelines or definitive 
outcomes from the action taken so far, particularl y regarding a broader policy change 
that would benefit all AIIMS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare must actively pursue a time -bound resolution with the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs regarding the proposed amendments to the 
National Building Code (NBC) guidelines for vertical expansion of hospital buildings in 
AIIMS-like initiatives, wherever required. 
(Para 3.42.3 of the ATR) 
SHORTAGE OF FACULTY AND NON FACULTY STAFF 
69. The Committee appreciates t he action taken by the Ministry and the CIB‟s 
endorsement of a centralized recruitment mechanism for non -faculty staff across all 
AIIMS. The Committee recommends that such centralized process be institutionalized 
with clear timelines, standard operating pr ocedures, and accountability mechanisms to 
ensure timely filling up of vacancies. While the delegation of specific technical cadres to 
individual AIIMS is a step forward, the Committee urges the Ministry to establish a 
unified digital recruitment platform under the supervision of AIIMS Delhi or a 
designated national agency to oversee coordination, monitoring, and transparency in 
recruitments. The Committee would like to be apprised of current filled up positions of 
non-faculty in all six AIIMS. The Ministry  should have furnished the details in its 
Action Taken Notes. 
(Para 3.43.4 of the ATR) 

226 
 
 
70. The Committee has been informed about the recruitment of faculty from premier 
medical institutions and the current vacancy status. In view thereof, the Committee 
recommends that a targeted and sustained strategy be formulated to attract and retain 
high-quality faculty from institutions like AIIMS Delhi, PGIMER, JIPMER, and others. 
The Committee further urges that each AIIMS -like institute regularly publish and 
update detailed recruitment data, including reasons for ineligibility and status of 
representations, on their websites in a transparent and standardized format. 
Additionally, the Ministry should explore incentive -based mechanisms such as 
accelerated career progr ession, housing support, or research funding to make positions 
in newer AIIMS institutions more attractive to faculty from premier institutes. 
(Para 3.43.8 of the ATR) 
DIALYSIS FACILITIES 
71. The Committee expresses concern over the incomplete assessment b y the initial 
enquiry committee constituted to examine the issue of procurement of Dialysis machine 
at a much higher price in the new AIIMS , and in view thereof, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry expedite the re-examination and ensure the resubmission 
of a comprehensive and conclusive report on the procurement of dialysis machines at 
inflated costs. The revised enquiry must include a comparative cost analysis with similar 
procurements by State Go vernments and under MPLAD schemes, evaluation of 
procurement procedures followed, and identification of any lapses or accountability 
issues. The Committee also stresses that measures be instituted to strengthen 
transparency, cost-efficiency, and oversight in future procurements across all AIIMS to 
prevent recurrence of any irregularities. 
(Para 3.44.3 of the ATR) 
 
  
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

227 
 
A pie-chart depicting the status of action taken by the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare on the 111th Report has been given hereunder: 
 
 
 
57%
9%
31%
3%
Status of Action taken by the Ministry in 
repect of 111th Report of the Committee
Recommendations/ 
Observations accepted by the 
Government
Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's 
replies
Committee has made further 
recommendations
Final replies of the Government 
have not been received