Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2013)
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Seventieth Report on 
Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50) of the 
Department of AIDS Control
REPORT NO. 
76
SEVENTY SIXTH REPORT
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SEVENTY SIXTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Seventieth Report on
Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50) of the
Department of AIDS Control
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  9 th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  9 th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—19
Chapter–I – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee .......................... 2—7
Chapter–II – Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................ 8—12
Chapter–III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 13—18
Chapter–IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................... 19
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 20—21
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 23—26
7. L IST OF R EPORTS PRESENTED EARLIER ................................................................................. 27—31

(i)
& Vacant vide disqualification as a member of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) w.e.f. 19 th September, 2013.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shrimati B. Jayashree
4. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
 
&7. Shri Rasheed Masood
8. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
9. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
10. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
14. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
15. Shrimati Priya Dutt
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
18. Dr. Monazir Hassan
19. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
20. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
hereby present this Seventy-sixth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee’s Seventieth Report on Demands for
Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50) of the Department of AIDS Control, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare for the year 2013-14.
2. The Seventieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
26
th April, 2013. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report,
received from the Department of AIDS Control were considered by the Committee at its meeting
held on the 29
th November, 2013.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
the 29 th November, 2013.
BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
29th November, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 8, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare

ACRONYMS
AIDS – Acquired Immuno-Deficiency Syndrome
ART – Antiretroviral Therapy Centre
AR V – Anti-retro-viral
BCSUs – Blood Component Separation Units
CABA – Children Affected by AIDS
CDSCO – Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
CHCs – Community Health Centres
CoEs – Centres of Excellence
CSCs – Care and Support Centres
DAC – Department of AIDS Control
DAPCUs – District AIDS Prevention and Control Units
DCGI – Drug Controller General of India
GFA TM – Global Fund for AIDS, TB and Malaria
HCV – Hepatitis C Virus
HIV – Human Immunodeficiency Virus
ICTC – Integrated Counseling and Testing Centre
IEC – Information Education and Communication
LWS – Link Worker Scheme
NACP – National AIDS Control Programme
NBTA – National Blood Transfusion Authority
NBTC – National Blood Transfusion Council
NGO – Non-Government Organisation
NRHM – National Rural Health Mission
PFC – Plasma Fractionation Centre
PHCs – Primary Health Centres
PLHIVs – People living with HIV/AIDS
PPTCT – Prevention of Parent to Child Transmission
SACS – S tate AIDS Control Society
SBTC – State Blood Transfusion Council
STYI – Sexually Transmitted Infections
TI – Targeted Intervention
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in Seventieth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No.50) of the
Department of AIDS Control for the year 2013-14.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Seventieth Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
been accepted by the Committee: 2.5, 2.9, 2.12, 4.3, 4.5, 6.3, 7.6, 10.3, 10.5, 10.7,
11.3, 11.5 Total–12  (Chapter-I)
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: 2.14, 7.4, 8.3, 8.6, 12.3, 14.1 Total–6 (Chapter- II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 2.3, 3.2, 4.7, 5.5, 5.7, 9.4, 13.3 Total–7
(Chapter-III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: Nil Total–Nil (Chapter-IV)
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 The Committee observes that in a resource constrained country like India, the efficient
deployment of the available resources is the key for success of any programe scheme. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should initiate concrete measures for
efficient use of the allocated funds and remove apparent inefficiencies at every level of programme
implementation.
(Para 2.5)
Action Taken
1.2 Annual Action Plan has been drawn, linking Activities to the timelines at State AIDS Control
Society (SACS). This is regularly monitored at periodic interval. Instructions are regularly being
issued to emphasize efficient utilization of funds.
Recommendation/Observation
1.3 The Committee expresses its serious concern that the actual expenditure of the Department
for the year 2010-11 was Rs. 1167.21 crore as against the BE of Rs. 1435.00 crore; for the year
2011-12, Rs. 1313.86 crore as against BE of Rs. 1700.00 crore, and for the year 2012-13,
Rs. 1345.16 crore as against BE of Rs. 1700.00 crore. The Committee expresses its disappointment
at this persistent trend of under-utilization of the budgeted funds and is of the view that this trend
is not only indicative of fiscal indiscipline but also points to slack monitoring of utilization of the
sanctioned provisions. The Committee feels that the reasons adduced by the Department cannot
justify shortfall in expenditure to the tune of Rs. 267.79 crore in 2010-11, Rs. 386.14 crore in
2011-12 and Rs. 354.84 crore in 2012-13. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should put in place a strict and effective monitoring mechanism to ensure that the
funds allocated to the Department are monitored quarterly, and exercise utmost fiscal prudence and
discipline so as to make realistic Budget Estimates in future. The Committee desires to be apprised
of the measures initiated in this regard.
(Para 2.9)
Action Taken
1.4 Regular monitoring is being done. Monthly Financial Management letter has been initiated to
keep a track on expenditure, advanced and utilization of funds in the programme.
Recommendation/Observation
1.5 The Committee appreciates that due to the efforts made by the Department, there has been
a considerable decline in unspent balances available with the SACS. The Committee would,
2

3
however, like to point out that availability of unspent balance with some SACS, like Andhra Pradesh
SACS (Rs.23.33 crore), Bihar SACS (Rs.18.23 crore), Gujarat SACS (Rs.14.58 crore), Karnataka
SACS (Rs.26.60 crore) is still quite high. The Committee emphasizes that the Department should
make concerted efforts to get resolved all the unspent balances with the societies so that funds
do not accumulate and remain unutilized. The Committee recommends that in order to ensure timely
and effective utilization of unspent balances, the Department should insist on quarterly feedback
from all the State AIDS Control Societies. Close monitoring of their activities and spending will
certainly deliver the desired results. (Para 2.12)
Action Taken
1.6 Close Monitoring has been initiated and further releases have been linked to cash balances
with SACS. Monthly, unspent balances are being initiated with SACS and instructed to liquidate the
same.
IV. Setting up of new Blood Component Separation Units (BCSUs)
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 The Committee is not aware as to what headway has been made towards concretizing the
above proposal. Considering the fact that blood transfusion is a life-saving treatment in many
situations but it can also be a quick route for the transmission of infectious agents such as HIV ,
HBC, HCV , etc; the Committee recommends that urgent measure be taken on war footing to
regulate Blood Banks. The Committee desires to be furnished with a Status Note, indicating the
initiatives taken by the Department towards ensuring quality management systems and monitoring
of Blood Banks and the outcome thereof.
(Para 4.3)
Action Taken
1.8 Blood banks are under the regulatory control of the State Drug control authorities under the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act. Blood banks cannot function without a licence, which is issued by the
state authorities following approval of the DCGI.
1.9 The efforts of department of AIDS control has taken up the initiative to set up a core
committee in the states with representatives from the state drug control authorities, blood bank
experts and representatives of state AIDS control societies/State blood transfusion councils to
periodically inspect the blood banks to monitor their conformance to existing policy guidelines and
regulations.
1.10  Comprehensive standards to ensure better quality control system on collection, storage,
testing and distribution of blood and its components have been formulated and disseminated.
V. Setting up of new District level Blood Banks
Recommendation/Observation
1.11 The Committee notes that during NACP-III, the Department had fulfilled the target of
setting up 80 Blood Component Separation Units (BCSUs) at tertiary level of public health care
delivery system and proposes to continue the support to these facilities and also take up
upgradation of existing licensed blood banks in the Government and charitable sector with annual
blood collection of over 5000 blood units at BCSUs, so as to saturate the same, by the end of

4
NACP IV. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made towards upgrading the
existing licensed blood banks in the Government and Charitable Sector. (Para 4.5)
Action Taken
1.12 Department had fulfilled the carry over targets of NACP III through setting up of 3 BCSU
in the first year of NACP IV , thereby completing the target of setting up of 80 BCSU during NACP
III and completing the set up of BCSU at tertiary level of public health care delivery system.
1.13 The Department also provides recurring grant to the existing licensed component separation
facilities in the government and charitable sector for manpower and consumables. A total of 268
component separation facilities (including 34 model blood banks) are presently being supported in
the Government and charitable sector under the programme as on 1st June 2013. The department
is also supporting capacity building for rational use of blood among clinicians to step up the
demand for blood components.
VI. Integrated Counseling and Testing Centres (ICTCs)
Recommendation/Observation
1.14 The Committee notes that the achievements vis-à-vis the targets fixed for 2010-11, 2011-12
and 2012-13 leaves a lot to be desired in the implementation of the targets. The Committee is of
the opinion that the Department needs to fine tune its ground level machinery. The Committee
therefore recommends that Department should focus on setting monitorable targets and their
realization to the maximum extent. The Committee desires to be apprised of the targets fixed for
2013-14 and the measures put in place to monitor progress in this regard.
(Para 6.3)
Action Taken
2010-11 201 1-12 2012-13
Target Ach. Target Ach. Target Ach.
86.49 66.38 90.00 85.63 90.00 77.71
lakhs lakhs lakhs lakhs lakhs lakhs
1.15 The target for the year 2013-14 is 112 lakhs with the coverage up to CHCs level by the
programme and below CHCs i.e. PHCs and Sub Centre with the help of NRHM and General Health
system.
To monitor the progress the following measures are undertaken:
1. National level:
● Monthly reporting mechanism is in place under SIMS.
● Quarterly review meetings of the SACS programme officers at the national level.
● Periodic feedback to SACS on performance.
● Field visits are conducted by the department to poor performing States.
● Strong monitoring of supply chain management for HIV Rapid test kits to ensure
uninterrupted supplies.

5
2. State level:
● Monthly reporting by all facilities.
● Monthly/quarterly review meetings at State/district level
● Supervisory visits by SACS programme officers to poor performing districts.
VII. Anti Retroviral Therapy (ART) Centre
Recommendation/Observation
1.16 The Committee gathers from the information furnished by the Department that there is a
steady decline in overall prevalence of HIV/AIDS. However, a lot still remains to be done. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that during NACP-IV, additional ART Centres be established and
high quality treatment be made available to the eligible people. The Committee also recommends that
pre-ART follow-up be strengthened and all people eligible for treatment identified.
(Para 7.6)
Action Taken
1.17 Under NACP IV, it is proposed to have 600 ART Centres in the country by March, 2017
to make available quality treatment to eligible PLHIV .
1.18 The pre-ART follow up at ART centres is being strengthened. Emphasis is being given to
pre-ART care in all training programmes and during review meetings
X. New Strategies
(i) Setting up of District AIDS Prevention and Control Units (DAPCUs)
Recommendation/Observation
1.19 The Committee is of the opinion that setting up of the District AIDS Prevention and Control
Units function as a supportive structure below the state level would fill up the necessary gaps to
coordinate the activities at the district level as DAPCUs are expected to play a pivotal role in
monitoring and coordination of delivery from the different facilities in the district. The Committee
would, therefore, recommend that the Department should explore the possibility of expanding the
same to more districts in the near future so as to implement the programme more effectively.
(Para 10.3)
Action Taken
1.20 Department of AIDS Control (DAC) is working on district re-categorisation in the country
based on HIV Sentinel Surveillance, High Risk Group population, Migration, programme data and
vulnerability to get HIV in the district.
1.21 In NACP-IV , this re-categorisation of districts will be considered for expanding the network
of DAPCUs in other parts of the country. This will be based on the financial resources available
with department of AIDS Control.
(ii) Scheme of link workers in rural areas of category A and B districts
Recommendation/Observation
1.22 The Committee notes that the Link Worker Scheme is an intensive rural-based intervention
reaching out to the marginalized groups which remain uncovered even after the expansion of urban

6
based prevention programmes. The Scheme is being implemented only in 155 districts as of now.
The Committee recommends to the Department to assess the need to cover the remaining districts
and closely monitor the scheme as the success of this scheme is crucial for achieving the goal
of halting and reversing the epidemic of AIDS. Effective implementation of this scheme can bring
perceptible change.
(Para 10.5)
Action Taken
1.23 The Link Worker Scheme is being supported by Global Fund for AIDS, TB and Malaria
Round (GFATM)-VII to work in identified in 163 high prevalent and highly vulnerable districts till
August, 2013. These 163 districts were selected after considering HIV prevalence and the
vulnerability of the districts. In each district, 150 vulnerable villages were identified for extensive
mapping and based on the findings of the mapping, 100 most vulnerable villages were finalized for
implementation of LWS in the district. The scheme is operational in all 163 districts. The Scheme
has been proposed to be continued in NACP-IV with domestic funds.
(iii) Pr eferred private provider scheme for management of Sexually Transmitted
Infections (STYI) among high risk groups.
Recommendation/Observation
1.24 This is very good scheme which has the potential to penetrate to the lowest level provided
it is implemented with dedication. The Committee recommends close and strict monitoring of the
Preferred Private Providers Scheme to ensure that it is not misused for financial benefits by the
preferred private providers and strict norms should be put in place for identifying the preferred
private providers for management of sexually transmitted infection.
(Para 10.7)
Action Taken
1.25 Comments of Parliamentary Standing Committee have been noted for compliance. The State
AIDS Control Society monitor the Preferred Private Providers through mentoring and supportive
supervision in the field. Payment and reimbursement to Preferred Private Providers is disbursed on
the basis of records of number of patients managed by them. Further, the records are also
periodically scrutinized and verified by the TI NGO through their outreach network.
XI. National Pediatric HIV/AIDS Initiative
Recommendation/Observation
1.26 The Committee is of the view that the Department needs to delve deeper on the reasons
for rising trends of HIV prevalence among pregnant women in the State like Bihar, Gujarat, Uttar
Pradesh and Rajasthan. The Committee recommends that the Department should prepare specific
State-wise interventions in these States after analyzing the reasons for increase in HIV prevalence
in these States and if need be specific pilot projects for interventions on PPP mode may be mooted
with specific targets being fixed under these projects.
(Para 11.3)
Action Taken
1.27 The HIV Sentinel Survey has shown rising trends of HIV prevalence among pregnant

7
women in the states like Bihar, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan. To mitigate the impact the
following measures are undertaken:
● Scaling up of facilities for counseling and testing in these States.
● District specific strategies for increasing coverage of HIV testing among pregnant
women by working closely with NRHM/General Health System.
● In identified districts/blocks/villages, special prevention interventions for “source
migrants” are implemented.
● Increasing awareness among general population through mass media, mid media and
inter personal communication activities using folk troupes, street plays, hoardings, wall
paintings, etc to give thematic messages including PPTCT messages.
● Strong monitoring of linkages between ICTC and ART centres to ensure all pregnant
women detected HIV positive are linked to care, support and treatment services.
● Provision of single dose Nevirapine to mother and child for prevention of HIV
transmission to child.
● In a phased manner, introducing the multi drug PPTCT ARV regimen for further
reduction of parent to child transmission.
1.28 The department is already working out strategies for PPP Mode activities by working with
private industries and PSUs on a employer led model for implementing HIV prevention activities at
the work place
Recommendation/Observation
1.29 The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Department in constituting a national
task force under which there is a joint proposal to pilot this intervention for children affected with
AIDS (CABA). The Committee recommends that the Department should expand similar initiatives
to other affected districts which would help in complementing and supplementing the Government’s
efforts in its fight against combating HIV/AIDS.
(Para 11.5)
Action Taken
1.30 Based on the experience of intervention for children affected with AIDS (CABA) the
initiative is being integrated into a cost – effective, Care and Support model which is inclusive of
needs of HIV infected Children.
1.31 Under NACP IV , it is proposed to set up Care and Support Centers (CSCs) for PLHIVs
(people living with HIV/AIDS) which will also address the various needs of Children affected by
HIV/AIDS. 350 care and support centers will be set up across the country The Care and support
centers shall act as the focal point from which the required services to Children affected by HIV/
AIDS will be ensured through advocacy and linkages.

8
8
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES
II . Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation/Observation
2.1  The Committee takes note of the submission that the increased grants to SACS is due,
transitioning of Targeted Intervention (TI) projects from Development Partners into the national
programme. The Committee observes that funding from Development Partners have played a vital
role in supporting the NACP programme interventions in the past. The Committee would, therefore,
like to be apprised of the reasons behind shifting the TI projects from Development Partners to
the national programme and its implication on funding of HIV programmes in the Country.
(Para 2.14)
Action Taken
2.2 The increased allocation to the SACS is mainly keeping in mind the increased activities that
are proposed in the 2013-14 which include setting up of new targeted intervention to reach out
high risk population (Female Sex Workers, Men have Sex with Men, Transgenders and Hijrasand
Injecting Drug Users). The Transgender and hijra are new intervention amongst the high risk
groups based on the high prevalence of HIV noted amongst them. Implementation of the revised
migrant strategy for HIV will focus on interventions at destination, source and transit with the main
objective reducing transmission amongst the high risk migrants and also prevent the HIV spreading
in hitherto low prevalences states. Setting up of new Opioid substitution Therapy centers for harm
reduction is being up scaled during the 2013-14.The development partners were supporting National
AIDS Control Programme to reach out and provide prevention services to high risk groups through
implementing Targeted interventions in high prevalent states. The support was for given time frame
and phasing out from direct implementation of targeted intervention was already planned. The
takeover of majority of TIs and high risk population covered by development partners was
completed in March 2012. The transition from the development partners have been done based on
the performance of each TI.
VII.  Anti Retroviral Therapy (ART) Centre
Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The Committee recommends that the Department should ensure the achievement of targets
set for upgradation of 24 ART centres to ART Plus Centres in 2013-14 and due diligence should
be ensured that no delay should occur on this account. The Committee be apprised of the progress
made in this regard.
(Para 7.4)
Action Taken
2.4 Currently Second Line ART is being provided through CoEs and ART plus centres. As on

9
31st March, 2013, 27 ART Plus Centres (in addition to 17 CoEs), as per the details given
below:
Sl. No. State ART Plus Centre
1. ART Plus Centre, GGH, Vijayawada
2.
Andhra Pradesh
ART Plus Centre, RIMS, Kadapa
3. ART Plus Centre, King George Hospital, Vizag
4. Assam ART Plus Centre, MCH, Guwahati
5. Bihar ART Plus Centre, RMRIMS, Patna
6. Gujarat ART Plus Centre, Civil Hospital, Surat
7. ART Plus Centre, Civil Hospital, Rajkot
8. Karnataka ART Plus Centre, KIMS, Hubli
9. ART Plus Centre, VIMS, Bellary
10. ART Plus Centre, DH, Gulbarga
11. ART Plus Centre, DH, Udupi
12. Kerala ART Plus Centre, GMCH, Thrissur
13. Madhya Pradesh ART Plus Centre, GMCH, Bhopal
14. Maharashtra ART Plus Centre, GMCH, Aurangabad
15. ART Plus Centre, GMCH, Nagpur
16. ART Plus Centre, BJMC, Pune
17. ART Plus Centre, PVPG Hospital, Sangli
18. Mizoram ART Plus Centre, Civil Hospital, Aizwal
19. Nagaland AR T Plus Centre, Naga Hospital, Kohima
20. Punjab ART Plus Centre, GMC, Amritsar
21. Rajasthan AR T Plus Centre, SMS Hospital, Jaipur
22. Tamil Nadu ART Plus Centre, GMCH, Salem
23. ART Plus Centre, GMCH, Madurai
24. ART Plus Centre, GMCH, Tirunelveli
25. Uttar Pradesh ART Plus Centre, KGMU, Lucknow
26. Uttarakhand ART Plus Centre, Doon Hospital, Dehradoon
27. Odisha AR T Plus Centre, MKCG , Cuttack

10
2.5 It is planned to upgrade 7 more ART centres into ART Plus Centres in 2013-14 which will
ensure that each state will have at least one ART centres to provide Second line ART. The process
for same has already been initiated.
VIII.  New Initiatives
(i) Setting up of National Blood Transfusion Authority (NBTA)
Recommendation/Observation
2.6 The Committee is not happy with the slow progress in establishing the National Blood
Transfusion Authority and the proposal is still on paper only. The Committee desires that the
Department should formulate its stand on the issue on a priority basis and take an early decision.
(Para 8.3)
Action Taken
2.7 Regarding NBTA, the comments of Department of Expenditure, which deterred the DAC
from taking steps to set up NBTA were as follows:
2.8 The functions of NBTA can be done through the existing set up of NBTC and SBTCs which
were set up for the purpose. If necessary, these existing entities could be further strengthened.
Taking over regulation and administration of blood banks (including financial administration) by
NBTA through SBTAs does not appear to be feasible without a clear legal mandate in this regard.
2.9 The Department would strengthen the existing system of National and State Blood
Transfusion Councils.
So far, the DCG (I) is the central license approving authority for blood banks and hold all
regulatory powers with respect to the same. The Department would develop a close coordination
with CDSCO to monitor the blood banks.
2.10 Department would initiate steps to a relook at the scheme based on Finance Ministry’s
detailed observations and try to remove the infirmities and submit the same again for
reconsideration and approval.
(ii) Setting up of Plasma Fractionation Centre (PFC)
Recommendation/Observation
2.11 The Committee notes that the project for setting up of Plasma Fractionation Centre was
approved in 2008. Almost 5 years have elapsed since then and there is no indication that it will
see the light of day in the near future. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department
to make all out efforts for expediting submission of the report of Sub-Committee of experts so that
further follow-up action could be initiated without further delay. An early decision is appreciated.
(Para 8.6)
Action Taken
2.12 The Department agrees to the comments of the Parliamentary Standing Committee regarding
slow progress with set up of Plasma Fractionation Centres. The reasons have been detailed in the
replies submitted earlier.

11
2.13 However, the Department would expedite the meetings of the expert sub-committee set up
to discuss and explore the possibility of recombinant Factor-VIII and Factor-IX or any other new
technology which might be more viable/appropriate than the existing proposal on preparation of
Factor–VIII and Factor-IX of plasma.
2.14 Department would convene meetings of the sub-committee and revisit its strategy and set
out necessary time-bound corrective measures to achieve the target at the earliest.
XII. Information Education and Communication (IEC)
Recommendation/Observation
2.15 The Committee feels that Information, Education and Communication is the backbone to
ensure success of various schemes carried out by the Department. The Committee would like the
Department to orient IEC activities towards laying greater focus on behavior change and
strengthening the enabling environment. The Department should also design more media campaigns
to address stigma and discrimination attached with HIV/AIDS. The Committee desires that more
aggressive IEC activities are required to bring perceptible change.
(Para 12.3)
Action Taken
2.16 Information, Education and Communication division of Department of AIDS Control
undertakes regular thematic media campaigns on different issues (promoting conselling and testing
among general population and pregnant women, condom promotion, STI services, Blood Donation,
and addressing Stigma & Discrimination issues) related to HIV/AIDS throughout the year. DAC in
the past has implemented campaigns addressing issues related to Stigma & Discrimination at
workplace and school settings. DAC is in process of developing new campaign addressing stigma
and discrimination at health care setting.
XIV. Miscellaneous
Recommendation/Observation
2.17 The Committee observes that there were invariably delays in procurement of HIV kits,
which resulted in patient care suffering on this account. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon
the Department to streamline the process of procurement of HIV kits and ensure strict monitoring
of the same so as to eliminate delays in procurement thereof.
(Para 14.1)
Action Taken
2.18 Due to the GFATM policy that “WHO pre qualification criteria will be applicable as per revised
Quality Assurance Policy of GFATM” for procurement of HIV Rapid Test kit”, the unit cost of the
kit increased by 300% as was quoted by the bidders. HIV Rapid Test kit is required for all three
test kits i.e. 1
st ,2 nd and 3 rd Test kits simultaneously as all these three kits are interlinked.
2.19 After the bidding process was over, it was found that though qualified bidders for 1 st test kit
were available, no bidder for 2 nd and 3 rd test kit was found responsive. Therefore the bid was quashed.
Similarly the procurement of whole Blood Finger Prick Test kit could also not be materialized due to
higher price in comparison to last purchase price which was found 300% increase.

12
2.20 In view of this, the process of tendering was quashed.
2.21 Presently, the contract for the extension of Procurement Agent is under consideration and
simultaneously, the process for the selection of new Procurement Agent is under way.
2.22 The supplies of last awarded contract are still continuing and this Department is taking
necessary steps so as to manage the supplies of the kits.

13
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 The Committee observe that the 1 st year of the Twelfth Plan Period has already elapsed and
the 2 nd Year is in progress. However, the Department is still in the process of reworking the project
cost of NACP–IV for the Twelfth Plan period. The committee observes that the delay of more than
a year in finalization of the project cost of such a critical programme like NACP-IV is a sad
commentary on the working of the Department and calls for urgent remedial measures. The
Committee feels that the delay will have an adverse impact on the intended outcomes of NACP-
IV unless timely action taken. In an era of e-governance and with IT resources currently available,
the Department should have finalized the project cost long back. The Committee, therefore,
deprecates the delay in this regard and desires to be apprised of the reasons for the same. The
Committee recommends that the Department should finalize the project cost at the earliest and in
such a manner so that the intended outcomes of this programme are not adversely affected. The
Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
(Para 2.3)
Action Taken
3.2 CCEA has approved the World Bank aided National AIDS Control Support Project in
May, 2013. The EFC has approved NACP-IV in July 2013 and is being submitted to CCEA
approval.
Further Recommendation
3.3 The Committee is not satisfied with the lackadaisical approach of the Department in
the matter. It has been more than one and a half years since 12
th Plan Period started,
however, the Department could submit NACP-IV project in July 2013 for CCEA approval.
The Committee observes that delay in this regard may undermine the desired outcome in
the NACP-IV project. The Committee would like the Department to take pro-active action
in this matter and take all possible measures to check any further delay.
III. Role of NGOs.
Recommendation/Observation
3.4 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the issue of non-recovery of unspent balances
from the NGOs by the Department, even after about two years. Out of 27 States, 11 States have
a balance of Rs.100.8 lakhs still to be recovered. The Committee recommends that the issues like
contract norms fixed for NGOs-State-wise, the reasons for delay in recovering the same along with
the details of action taken against the NGOs who have repeatedly defaulted in paying back the
13

14
unspent balances. In future, funds should be released only to such agencies which have the
capacity to utilize the allocated amount.
(Para 3.2)
Action Taken
3.5 It may be observed that out of Rs. 352.17 lakhs, Rs. 251.8 lakhs has been recovered by
SACS, which is amounted to 71% of the total outstanding dues against the NGOs implementing
Tis SACS has initiated steps to recover the balance amount of Rs. 100.8 lakhs from remaining
NGOs in 11 states. Steps like auditing, sending show cause notices, legal action to NGOs for not
responding to notices have been initiated at state level. Department suggested SACS to speed up
the legal action against such defaulted NGOs.
3.6 The DAC have intensified monitoring and control of programmatic and financial activities
regularly at DAC as well as SACS level. Computerised Financial Management System (CPFM) has
been put in place to monitor the expenditure and releases for each NGO. Department has given
instruction to all SACS to ensure utmost care while recruiting NGOs for implementing programme.
The fund utilization capacity of NGOs is assessed during the selection process and is one of the
criteria for selection of NGOs which is carried by the SACS.
Further Recommendation
3.7 The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by the Department for recovering
the balance amount from the remaining States. However, the Committee observes that no
tangible steps have been taken or contemplated to be taken to accomplish the task. The
Committee would like the Department to indicate a specific action plan to sort out the
glitches with NGOs for achieving the targets and also put in place some tangible guidelines
on basis of which the NGOs would be identified in future.
IV. Setting up of new Blood Component Separation Units (BCSUs)
Recommendation/Observation
3.8 From the information furnished by the Department, the Committee gathers that the scheme
pertaining to setting up of four Metro Blood Banks is yet to be approved by EFC, and time-overrun
has led to the cost escalation of the scheme. The Committee deprecates the Department for not
visualizing the problems of its implementation at the planning stage, which has resulted in time-
overrun and cost escalation. The Committee recommends that the Department should expedite
revision of proposal of the scheme and proactively pursue its approval with the EFC so that this
scheme could be translated into action and there is no further cost-overrun. The Committee desires
to be kept apprised of the updated status of approval of this scheme. The proposal brooks no delay
and an expeditious action needs to be taken for its early approval. The Committee also impresses
upon the Department to speed up the process for acquisition of land for the proposed Metro Blood
Bank in Delhi.
(Para 4.7)
Action Taken
3.9 The four metro blood banks were proposed to be set up as four regional center of
excellence in Transfusion Medicine in Chennai, Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata.
3.10 The original EFC and CCEA approval was obtained in March and August, 2008 for
Rs. 468 crore. The date of commencement of project was 1.1.2009.

15
3.11 HLL was identified as Project Management Consultant and consultants were engaged
for preparing the detailed project reports for these sites. DPR II prepared for 3 sites, except
Delhi.
Land has been made available from State/Central Government for all sites.
o Chennai :  September.2011
o Kolkata : 22.7.2011
o Mumbai : 15.9.2011
o Delhi : 12.10.2012
3.12 Obtaining land free of cost from the states was the major cause for time over run of the
project. Land for the Delhi site is still to be handed over.
3.13 A r evised cost estimate memo for Metro Blood Banks was sent to Finance Ministry for
consideration and approval amounting to Rs. 1024 Crore, along with report of standing committee
on cost and time overrun.
3.14 However, EFC in its meeting on 31.12.2012 did not concur to the proposal.
3.15 The Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has asked for a revised proposal to
be framed incorporating their observations for consideration of EFC.
3.16 The following action has been taken by the department.
1. Eight meetings have been conducted with blood bank experts, team from Project
Management Consultant (HLL) and DPR consultants to rationally review the proposal
and bring down the cost without compromising on the basic intent of the project in
from January to March, 2013.
2. An expert group meeting has been conducted to reduce the cost of construction
through reduction in area and or specifications.
3. The manpower, equipments and consumables in the proposal have been reviewed by
the group of experts to rationalize the cost.
4. The revised proposal would be submitted for review and approval by the steering
committee and standing committee for Metro Blood Banks.
5. As per the mandate of the project, the operations of these centres are to be taken over
by the states after five years. Therefore, a consultation with States is planned to be
held to get the States on board with respect to the continued operations of these
centres after five years and proceed for signing of MoU with the States.
6. Following submission of revised proposal to EFC and obtaining CCEA approvals, the
process of construction and set up of these centres would take 18 months, during
which time recruitments and procurements would also be done.
7. In view of Point 5 above, Centres are expected to be operational after 18 months of
obtaining approval.

16
Timelines:
Task Original Status R evised timelines
Timeline
DPR-1 approval Dec., 2009 Approved
DPR-2 Feb., 2010 Approved for Kolkata, Mumbai and
Chennai in December, 2011. DPR II
for Delhi is dependant on handing
over of land.
EFC approval August 2012 EFC meeting for consideration of RCE
of Metro Blood Banks was conducted
on 31st December, 2012. Proposal was
not concurred.
Operationalization January, 2014 After 18 months of
of centres obtaining EFC
approval
3.17 The Department was assured through a communication dated 12.10.12 that the land would
be given by various authorities, however land was not handed over in Safdarjung Hospital premises,
as assured. A meeting with the concerned authorities has been held on 1st May, 2013 to resolve
the matter.
Further Recommendation
3.18 The Committee finds it hard to come to the view that the matter of setting up the
four metro Blood Banks has come to a naught since it was first initiated in 2009. The
Committee feels that the Department has not been able to convince the EFC in plausible
terms the financial as well as the social viability of the setting up of the Blood Banks. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the observations made by the Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance in the revised proposal for the Blood Banks for
consideration by the EFC. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress
made in acquisition of land in respect of all the four blood banks.
V. Setting up of new District level Blood Banks
Recommendation/Observation
3.19 The Committee expresses its disappointment that the Department has not been able to meet
the target of setting up of 39 blood banks during NACP-III. In some states not even one blood
bank was setup which gives a dismal picture of the implementation. The Committee feels that the
above issues could have easily been sorted out, had there been a streamlined mechanism in place
and the Department had pursued the matter vigorously. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Department needs to play a pro-active role by taking up the matter with the concerned State
Governments as well as the agencies at an appropriate level to expedite the procedural formalities.
(Para 5.5)
Action Taken
3.20 As per the latest updating 29 DLBB become operational on 31.03.2013. For early functional

17
of the remaining 11 DLBB spread in different states, communications have been sent to State Health
Secretaries to remove the bottlenecks in the set up of these blood banks immediately.
Communication has also been sent to the CDSCO to expedite the issuance of pending licenses. The
Department of AIDS Control would pursue this matter closely.
Recommendation/Observation
3.21 The Committee recommends that for resolving the problem of unfunctional District level
Blood Banks (DLBBs), the Department should take up the matter with the Drug Controller General
of India regarding licencing and operationlisation of these blood banks on priority basis. The issues
of shortage of manpower and lack of infrastructure should also be taken up with the States. The
Committee also recommends that the Department should take special care of the underserved
districts of Uttrakhand, Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand.
(Para 5.7)
Action Taken
3.22 The matter is being perused with the states where the remaining 11 DLBB are to be
established for providing infrastructure facilities immediately for early operational of these Blood
Banks. The matter of issuance of license to these DLBB will be taken up with the DCG(I) after
the infrastructure facilities are made available by the State Government on priority basis.
Further Recommendation
3.23 The Committee is not satisfied with languid pace of the progress made for setting up
of 11 DLBB out of 39 DLBB which was a target of Phase-III of NACP. Most of the reasons
cited in this regard seem purely procedural. The Committee would like the Department to
sort out the hurdles in this regard so that appropriate result can come out. The Department
should also consider providing appropriate additional funds, if required, for infrastructure
and manpower related matters so that there is no delay due to financial constraints.
IX.  Adolescence Education Programme (AEP)
Recommendation/Observation
3.24 The Committee is concerned to note that Adolescence Education Programme (AEP) remains
suspended in five States namely, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar
Pradesh. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made in its 57
th Report on Demand
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department that it should vigorously take up with the States where
the Programme is still under suspension and resolve their apprehensions in view of the fact that
HIV/ AIDS usually attacks the vulnerable population due to lack of awareness of the devastating
effects the disease could have on them. The Department may take up the matter with all concerned
States and clarify their apprehensions. The States also should understand the necessity of the
programme.
(Para 9.4)
Action Taken
3.25 Department of AIDS Control has taken the matter for resuming Adolescence Education
Programme with the states where the programme is suspended. Secretary, DAC has written letter
to Chief Secretary of the states where the programme is suspended. In the current financial year,
AEP has been resumed Karnataka as a result of efforts made by DAC.

18
Further Recommendation
3.26 The Committee while appreciating the efforts made by the Department in resuming
AEP in Karnataka, would like to impress upon the Department to ensure that AEP is
resumed in the other States also in the current financial year.
XIII. HIV/AIDS Bill
Recommendation/Observation
3.27 The Committee observes that much delay has already taken place in introducing the AIDS
Bill in Parliament. The Committee recommends that the Department should proactively pursue the
matter for getting the Bill vetted from the Ministry of Law and Justice without any further any
delay so that the Bill may be introduced in the Parliament at the earliest. The Committee does not
understand the reasons why it should take more than ten years to finalise a Bill when a decision
was taken in 2002. The Bill is yet to be finalized. The delay is not justifiable when the problem
is enormous and India is third largest AIDS/HIV affected Country.
(Para 13.3)
Action Taken
3.28 The Department of AIDS Control is closely working with the Ministry of Law & Justice
to finalize the HIV/AIDS (Prevention & Control) Bill 2013. A Draft Note for Cabinet in this regard
has been prepared by the Department of AIDS Control and sent to the Ministry of Law & Justice
on 6.6.2013. On behalf of the Ministry of Law & Justice, the Dept. of Legal Affairs is to submit
its opinion and the Legislative Department is to vet the Draft Bill. This is currently under process
and once these steps have been completed the same will be sent for approval of the Cabinet.
Department of AIDS Control is ensuring that all due procedures are followed prior to tabling of
the Bill in Parliament.
Further Recommendation
3.29 The Committee feels that inspite of numerous recommendations made by it, the said
Bill seems to be stuck up for reasons best known to the Ministry. The Committee would
like the Ministry to take its recommendations with the seriousness it deserves and
recommends that the Secretary of the Department of AIDS Control should personally
monitor the progress of the Bill to ensure its introduction in the Parliament at the earliest.

19
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
– Nil –
19

20
20
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
II. Budgetary Allocation
The Committee is not satisfied with the lackadaisical approach of the Department in
the matter. It has been more than one and a half years since 12 th Plan Period started,
however, the Department could submit NACP-IV project in July, 2013 for CCEA approval.
The Committee observes that delay in this regard may undermine the desired outcome in
the NACP-IV project. The Committee would like the Department to take pro-active action
in this matter and take all possible measures to check any further delay. (Para 3.3)
III. Role of NGOs.
The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by the Department for recovering
the balance amount from the remaining States. However, the Committee observes that no
tangible steps have been taken or contemplated to be taken to accomplish the task. The
Committee would like the Department to indicate a specific action plan to sort out the
glitches with NGOs for achieving the targets and also put in place some tangible guidelines
on basis of which the NGOs would be identified in future. (Para 3.7)
IV. Setting up of new Blood Component Separation Units (BCSUs)
The Committee finds it hard to come to the view that the matter of setting up the
four metro Blood Banks has come to a naught since it was first initiated in 2009. The
Committee feels that the Department has not been able to convince the EFC in plausible
terms the financial as well as the social viability of the setting up of the Blood Banks. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the observations made by the Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance in the revised proposal for the Blood Banks for
consideration by the EFC. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress
made in acquisition of land in respect of all the four blood banks. (Para 3.18)
V. Setting up of new District level Blood Banks
The Committee is not satisfied with languid pace of the progress made for setting up
of 11 DLBB out of 39 DLBB which was a target of Phase-III of NACP. Most of the reasons
cited in this regard seem purely procedural. The Committee would like the Department to
sort out the hurdles in this regard so that appropriate result can come out. The Department
should also consider providing appropriate additional funds, if required, for infrastructure
and manpower related matters so that there is no delay due to financial constraints.
(Para 3.23)
IX. Adolescence Education Programme (AEP)
The Committee while appreciating the efforts made by the Department in resuming
AEP in Karnataka, would like to impress upon the Department to ensure that AEP is
resumed in the other States also in the current financial year. (Para 3.26)

21
XIII. HIV/AIDS Bill
The Committee feels that inspite of numerous recommendations made by it, the said
Bill seems to be stuck up for reasons best known to the Ministry. The Committee would
like the Ministry to take its recommendations with the seriousness it deserves and
recommends that the Secretary of the Department of AIDS Control should personally
monitor the progress of the Bill to ensure its introduction in the Parliament at the earliest.
(Para 3.29)

MINUTES

24

25
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
(2013-14)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 29 th November, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
4. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Dr. Tarun Mandal
8. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
9. Shri Harin Pathak
10. Shri Ramkishun
11. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
***
***
***
***
***
25
*** Relates to other matters.

26
*** Relates to other matters.
II. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and informed them
about the agenda of the meeting i.e. (A) To consider and adopt draft :-(i) * * * (ii) 76 th Report
of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations/Observations contained
in the 70
th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of AIDS
Control; and (iii) * * *and (B) * * *
III. Adoption of the Draft Reports.
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the three draft Reports mentioned above.
After some discussion, the Committee adopted all the three Reports. The Committee, thereafter,
decided that the said Reports along with the * * * and * * * may be presented to the Rajya Sabha
and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Monday, the 09
th December, 2013. The Committee
authorized its Chairman to finalise the names of the Members to present the reports in both Houses.
IV. ***
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of proceedings of the Committee was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 
P.M.

27
27
LIST OF REPORTS PRESENTED EARLIER
Report Subject
No.
12
1. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Health (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
2. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Family Welfare (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
3. Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
4. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2004-2005) of the Department of Health. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
5. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Second Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2004-2005) of the Department of Family Welfare. (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
6. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Third Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2004-2005) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
7. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
8. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Family Welfare (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
9. Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
10. Report on the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill-2005
11. Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill-2005
12. Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill-2005
13. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Family Welfare. (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
14. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2005-2006) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

28
12
15. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2005-2006) of the Department of Health. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
16. Report on Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and family Welfare)
17. Report on Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
18. Report on the Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy Pharmacy Bill-2005
19. Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill-2005
20. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
21. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
22. Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
23. Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
24. Report on Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research
Puducherry Bill-2007
25. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-second Report of the
Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare, (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
26. Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Twenty-third Report of the Committee on Demands-for-
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
27. Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
28. Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
29. Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health Research (Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare)
30. Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)Bill, 2007
31. Report on the Paramedical And Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill-2007

29
12
32. Report on the Clinical Establishments (Registration And Regulation) Bill, 2007
33. Report on the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
34. Report on the functioning of the three Vaccine producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai
35. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
36. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty-Eighth report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
37. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Twenty ninth report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
38. Report on Major Issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, Namely the
Central Research Institute(CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor,
and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai
39. Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
40. Report on Demand for Grants 2010-11 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare)
41. Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of Department of Health Research.
42. Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of Department of AIDS Control (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)
43. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Thirty-Eighth Report
on major issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of india (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
44. Report on the Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009
45. Report on Issues Relating to Availability of Generic, Generic-branded and Branded
Medicines, Their Formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy and Effectiveness
46. Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010
47. Report on the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research,
Puducherry (Amendment) Bill, 2010
48. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Forty-First Report on Demands for Grants 2010-2011 (Demand No.
48) of the Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

30
12
49. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Forty-Second Report on Demands for Grants 2010-2011 of the
Department of AIDS Control(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
50. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Fortieth Report on Demands For Grants 2010-2011 (Demand No. 47)
of the Department of AYUSH. (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
51. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
Contained in the Thirty-Ninth Report on Demands for Grants 2010-2011 (Demand
No. 46) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
52. Report on Action Taken by the Department of Health And Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its 43rd Report on
Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in it’s 38th Report on
major issues concerning the three Vaccine Producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
53. Report on the National Institute of Mental Health And Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore
Bill, 2010
54. Report on Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
55. Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No.47) of the Department of AYUSH
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
56. Report on Demands For Grants 2012-13 (Demand No.48) of the Department of Health
Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
57. Report on Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of AIDS
Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
58. Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Forty-Fifth Report on issues relating to availability of Generic,
Generic-Branded and Branded Mediciens, their formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy
and Effectiveness
59. Report on the Functioning of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
(CDSCO)
60. Report on the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011
61. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 47)
of the Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
62. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand
No. 49) of the Department of AIDS Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

31
12
63. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 48)
of the Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
64. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fourth report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46)
of the Department of Health and Family Welfare; (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
65. Report on the Proposal to Introduce the Bachelor of Science (Community Health)
Course
66. Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Ninth Report on the functioning of Central Drugs Standards
Control Organisation (CDSCO)
67. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No.47) of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
68. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of
AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
69. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No.49) of the Department of Health
Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
70. Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50) of the Department of AIDS
Control (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
71. Report on the Functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)
72. Report on Alleged irregularities in the Conduct of Studies Using Human Papilloma Virus
(HPV) Vaccine by Path in India
73. Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
74. Report on the Mental Health Care Bill, 2013
75. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Sixty-Eighth Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand
No. 48) of the Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.