  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
43 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
FORTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
ON 
 
  ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTME NT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY 
WELFARE ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE  CONTAINED IN IT S THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT ON 
MAJOR ISSUES CONCERNING TH E THREE VACCINE PRODUCING 
PSUs, NAMELY, THE CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE  (CRI), 
KASAULI, THE PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF INDIA (PII), COONOOR, AND 
THE BCG VACCINE LABORATORY (BCGVL), CHENNAI. 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4th AUGUST, 2010)               
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4th AUGUST, 2010) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2010/SRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 


  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
FORTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
ON 
  ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTME NT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY 
WELFARE ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE  CONTAINED IN IT S THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT ON 
MAJOR ISSUES CONCERNING TH E THREE VACCINE PRODUCING 
PSUs, NAMELY, THE CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE  (CRI), 
KASAULI, THE PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF INDIA (PII), COONOOR, AND 
THE BCG VACCINE LABORATORY (BCGVL), CHENNAI. 
  
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4th AUGUST, 2010)               
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4th AUGUST, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2010/SRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 


  
C O N T E N T S 
 
       PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE---------- -----------------           (i) 
 
2. PREFACE-------------- --------------------------------------------------              (ii) 
  
3. REPORT----------- -------------------------------------------------------            1- 30 
   *4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* to be appended at printing stage 
 
 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) 
        
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Amar Singh    -    Chairman 
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
       *3.       Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
4.       Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
5.       Shri Balbir Punj 
6.       Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
7.       Shrimati Brinda Karat 
8.       Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
    @9.          Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy 
    #10         Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid 
12. Shri Ashok Argal 
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
14. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
15. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan 
17. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
18. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai 
19. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
20. Shri N. Kristappa 
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
22. Shri Datta Meghe 
23. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
25. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
26. Shri M. K Raghavan 
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
28. Shrimati Meena Singh 
29. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
31. Shri Ratan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
              
 Shrimati Vandana Garg,            Additional Secretary 
Shri R.B.Gupta,                         Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta,     Joint Director 
               Shri Dinesh Singh,                    Assistant Director 
 Shri Satis Mesra               Committee Officer 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
* ceased to be a member w.e.f  01/7/2010 
@ ceased to be a member w.e.f  30/6/2010 
# ceased to be member w.e.f  29/6/2010 
 
 (i)

  
PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-relat ed Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare, having been auth orised by the Committee on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Forty-Third Report of  the Committee on the action taken by the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare on  the recommendations/ observations of the 
Committee  contained in its  Thirty-Eighth Report  on ‘Major  issues concerning the three 
vaccine-producing PSUs, namely, the Central  Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the 
Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), 
Chennai.’ 
 
2. The Committee had made an extensive st udy on the Function ing of the three 
vaccine-producing PSUs, namely, the Central  Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the 
Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), 
Chennai’, the reasons for their closure in the 34 th Report.  Thereafter, the Committee also 
considered the Action Taken Note on the Repo rt received from the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare and finding that a nu mber of important issues still remained 
unanswered, the Committee presented its 38 th Report highlighting those major issues on 
which the Committee wished to make furthe r emphasis and obtain the Government’s 
response. Keeping in view of the adverse im pact of the closure of the three vaccine-
producing units on the vaccine availability in the country, and consequently the 
Universal Immunization Programme,  the Co mmittee had recommended revival of the 
three vaccine producing PSUs at the earliest in both its aforesaid Reports. Like in the 
previous instance, the Minist ry furnished a much delayed Action Taken Note on the 38
th 
Report of the Committee.  
1. The Committee had also taken note of th e fact that a Committee had been set up 
under the Chairmanship of Shri Javed Chaudhary, former Secretary under the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, to determine the reasons for the suspension of the 
manufacturing license of the three vaccine pr oducing units and to draw a road-map for 
their revival. An Interim Report had been presented by this Committee to the Ministry  

  
(ii) 
on the 5 th February, 2010. The Committee had the oppo rtunity to go through this report 
and found that it inter-alia confirmed the apprehensions hi ghlighted and the conclusions 
arrived at by the Committee in its 34th and 38th Report. 
 4.        The Draft Report, prepared on the basis of the feedba ck received from the 
Department, was considered and adopted by the Committee on the 6th July 2010. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.    
 
NEW DELHI 
6th July , 2010 
15 Asadha, 1932 (Saka) 
AMAR SINGH 
           Chairman,  
 Department-related Parliamentary  
        Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)  
 

  
Report 
I INTRODUCTION 
1.1 During the course of scrutiny of  Demands for Grants, 2008-09 of the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare , the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Health and Family We lfare had taken note of suspension of 
manufacturing license of the three vacci ne producing PSUs, namely, the Central 
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteu r Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the 
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL) Chennai. In  view of the adverse impact of such a 
move on the vaccine availability in the country, and consequently the Universal 
Immunization Programme,  the Committee ha d recommended revival of the three 
vaccine producing PSUs at the earliest. Since then, the Committee has been vigorously 
pursuing with the Ministry th e issue of making these unit s functional at the earliest. 
An extensive analysis of the background lead ing to closure of these units, which have 
remained major contributors of life-savi ng vaccines for our new-born children for 
decades, inherent constraints being faced by  them, adverse fallout of their closure, 
specially on the Universal Immunization Pr ogramme and the very apparent lack of 
initiative on the part of the Central Gove rnment made by the Committee resulted in 
an exhaustive report, i.e. 34 th Report presented to Parliament on the 18 th February, 
2009. However, instead of a pro-active follow-up action on the part of the Ministry, it 
took seven months for it to come out with its Action Taken Note.  
 
1.2 The Action Taken Note confirmed Co mmittee’s apprehensions that there was 
sheer lack of will on the part of the Minist ry for reviving the three vaccine producing 
PSUs. Major part of the Action Taken Note  seemed to display a lack of commitment 
on the Ministry’s part. The Committee strongly  felt that presenting an Action Taken 
Report in the routine manner would serve no  purpose as quite a few pertinent issues 
had remained unanswered. The Committ ee, accordingly, interacted with the 
Secretary, Health and Family Welfare  at its meeting held on the 26 th October, 2009. A 
detailed questionnaire covering all concei vable aspects was also forwarded to the 
Ministry by the Committee. Based on the anal ysis of the Action Taken Note furnished 

  
by the Ministry, deposition of the Secretary and the response to its questionnaire, the 
Committee presented to the Parliament its 38 th Report on major issues concerning the 
three vaccine producing PSUs, namely the Cen tral Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, 
the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory 
(BCGVL) Chennai on the 18th December, 2009.  
 
1.3 The Action Taken Note on a Parlia mentary Committee Report is to be 
submitted by the administrative Ministry wi thin a period of three months of its 
presentation to the Parliament. However, as in the case of 34 th Report, the Ministry 
took more than five months to furnish its ATN on the 38th Report, which was received 
in the second week of June, 2010 and that too, after constant reminders by the 
Committee at different levels. The Committee had hoped that the Department would 
come out with follow-up action in the true sense along with clear cut plan of action 
for the future. Unfortunately, the Committ ee is surprised to observe that the 
feedback furnished by the Ministry belie s the very idea of Action Taken Note. The 
Committee's pointed recommendations/observations on quite a few pertinent and 
crucial issues have either simply remained unanswered or are circumlocutory in 
nature and lack conviction. Not only ha s this, in response to a number of 
recommendations/observations on entirely different aspects, the Ministry has 
simply repeated the same reply. 
 
1.4 The Committee would take the opportuni ty to recall the interaction which took 
place with the Secretary, Health  and Family Welfare on the 17
th February, 2010. The 
Committee was informed that based on its 38 th R e p o r t  o n  t h e  s u b j e c t ,  o r d e r s  f o r  
revocation of suspension of manufacturin g license of the three vaccine-producing 
units had been issued by the Minister so as to allow them to use the existing finished 
as well as the raw material for production of vaccines, subject to their being fit for 
consumption. The Committee was further info rmed that the case for revoking the 
suspension on a formal basis for three years  and to restore full-scale production was 
under consideration. The Secretary also assured the Committee that CRI, Kasauli 
would be operational by June, 2010. With regard to PII, Coonoor, no final decision had 

  
been taken at that point of time. Lastly, the BCG Vaccine Laboratory, Guindy was 
proposed to be shifted to the new Vacci ne Complex coming up in Chennai. The 
Committee’s attention was also drawn to the Interim Report given by the Javed 
Chowdhary Committee, recommending three ye ars’ time for the three units to start 
production. It was emphatically pointed out that vaccines could not be allowed to be 
produced in sub-standard institutes which were to be made GMP compliant. Also, the 
Vaccine Complex going to be constructed at Chennai at the cost of Rs. 700 crore would 
be meeting global standards. The Committ ee had then directed the Secretary to 
submit the Action Taken Note without further  delay in view of emerging shortage of 
vaccines and their increasing prices. 
 
1.5 Against this background, an attempt has been made to analyse the much-
delayed Action Taken Note submitted by the Ministry on the 38
th R e p o r t  o f  t h e  
Committee. The Committee also had the oppo rtunity to study the Interim Report 
submitted by the Javed Ch owdhary Committee on the 5 th February, 2010. This 
Committee was set up by the Government on the 25 th September, 2009 to review the 
reasons for the suspension of manufacturin g licenses of the three units and also to 
review the road map for their revival. The Committee was to give its Report within 
three months. However, only an Interim Repo rt could be submitte d by it on the 5 th 
February, 2010, with a request to submit its final report by the 25 th March, 2010. The 
Committee is not aware about any further re port given by this Expert Committee. 
However, on a perusal of the Interim Re port, the Committee is somewhat surprised 
to observe that the conclusions draw n by the four-member Expert Committee 
(including two technical members having exp ertise in the product/ manufacturing 
standards of drugs and pharmaceuticals), ar e not only  similar to its findings but 
also emphatically establish that the decisi on to suspend the manufacturing licence 
of the premier vaccine-producing institute s was not only ill-advised but has also 
resulted in acute shortage of vaccines, -  the most essential component of Universal 
Immunisation Programme.  The Committee has the following observations/ 
recommendations to make in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 

  
II. REVIVAL OF VACCINE -PRODUCING PSUs  
 
2.1 The Committee had made an attempt to anal yse the sequence of events so as to 
understand whether any initiative worth- mentioning had been undertaken for the 
revival of the three vaccine-producing units after the Drug Controller General’s orders 
for suspension of their manufacturing license coming into force w.e.f. 15 th January, 
2008. However, the feedback furnished by th e Ministry clearly indicated a bleak 
future for the three units. The only positi ve development was the setting up of the 
Javed Chowdhary Committee on the 25 th September, 2009. The Committee had made 
the following observations in its 38th Report: 
 
 
 The above sequence of events sinc e the suspension of manufacturing 
licenses of the three units in January, 2008 clearly establishes the fact that their 
revival is not envisaged by the Government in the near future. Rather every 
attempt has been made to create hurdles so as to ensure that the process of 
making them GMP compliant continues for long and manufacturing process 
of major vaccines of UIP at these ag e-old PSUs remains suspended. The 
Committee takes note of the fact that the Expert Committee headed by the 
Drug Controller General of India, the su preme authority for quality control of 
drugs in the country has expressed its in ability at arriving at a decision about 
the status of the three units inspite of persistent efforts by the Ministry. The 
Committee wonders how the Director General  Health Services who is directly 
under the control of the Ministry could si mply negate the report of the Expert 
Committee. The Committee is not aware of the fate of the latest Committee 
(Javed Chowdhary Committee) set up by the Ministry. But, the fact remains 
that the time is running out for the three vaccine producing units. (Para 2.3) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 Invoking  provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and  Rules, the 
recommendations contained in the Interim Report of Shri Javed Chowdhary Committee and 
taking into account  substantial compliance st atus furnished by the appellant Laboratory, 
evaluation of impact on the post-suspension era in terms of the availability and prices of these 
vaccines on the Universal Immunization Progra mme and the  above all public interest 
involved in generating mainta ining its own captive production  capacity in the Government 
sector,  revocation of suspension of the licen ses of the Institutes  have been ordered on 26
th 
February, 2010. These Institutes have also been  asked to ensure that the production line is 
made fully compliant with GMP standards within three years.  
 
 
 
 

  
Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli has planned the schedule for supply of DPT 
group of vaccines during 2010-11 as follows:-    
 
Month Name of the Vaccines ( In lakh doses) 
 DPT TT DT 
April 30 20 - 
May 30 30 - 
June - 60 - 
July - 60 - 
August - 60 7 
September - 80 - 
October - 80 - 
November 50 20 - 
December 50 20 - 
January 50 20 - 
Feburary 50 20 - 
March 50 20 - 
Total 310 490 7 
 
 Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor has  also anticipated following schedule for 
supply of DPT vaccine by December,2010 onwards.  In the meantime, some technical activities  
like Calibration, validation of functional equi pments, repairing of defective equipments, 
procurement of raw material, chemicals etc. would be completed:-    
 
Name of Vaccine Name of Mont h Quantity(In Million Doses) 
December, 2010 8.00 
January, 2011 8.00 
February, 2011 8.00 
 
DPT Vaccine 
March, 2011 8.00 
 TOTAL 32.00 
 
 
2.2 Before giving its observations on the action taken by the Ministry for revival 
of the three units, the Committee would like  to draw the attention to the Interim 
Report of Javed Chowdhary Committee wh ich has expressed serious reservations 
on the very motive behind such a move, in the following manner: 
"1.10   From the records it appears that the final decision to suspend the 
license was taken by the DCGI after extended consultations with the 
Ministry. The examination of the i ssue in the Ministry was extremely 
circumlocutory and scattered over several  files. An explicit decision has not 
been recorded at any place based on an analysis of the issues. At one point of 
the record it is cryptically stated that the Minister, Health and Family Welfare 
has approved the issuance of the show  cause notices for suspension of the 
licenses. This note is signed by everyone in the administrative line-of-
command including the Minister. However, as stated earlier, there is nothing 
substantial on record analyzing the grounds on which the decision was 
taken".               

  
2.3 The above observations clearly indicate  that the decision for discontinuance 
of vaccine production was not guided by sound reasoning. The Committee observes 
that finally the three vaccine producing PSUs i.e. CRI, Kasauli, PII, Coonoor and 
BCGVL, Guindy, which have been the  mainstay of vaccine production and supply 
in the country, have been conferred a new lease of life. The Department has 
informed that production of DT and TT va ccines at CRI, Kasauli was to start from 
the month of April, 2010. The Committee wo uld have appreciated if specific 
feedback about the actual production had been furnished by the Ministry. 
Similarly, production of DPT vaccine at P II, Coonoor is anticipated to begin from 
December, 2010. The Committee, however, fi nds that although suspension of 
manufacturing license of BCGVL, Guindy also stands revoked, the Ministry has 
remained silent as regards the revival of production schedule at this unit. The 
Committee would have appreciated if production had started here also.   
  
 
2.4 The Committee would like to quote from the Interim Report with regard to 
the status of manufacturing facilities at the three units: 
 
"7.1 The last detailed inspection report was submitted in early January, 
2008, after the receipt of the reply from the units to the show cause notice, 
and immediately prior to the suspension  of the manufacturing licenses. Out 
of the total of 129 deficiencies raised in the reports, about 71 observations 
are of a minor nature, not signific antly affecting the manufacturing 
standards. Some 58 others require improvement or upgradation - walls not 
having a smooth surface; junctions, corners, window/ door frames not 
being smooth and dust free; animal house requiring minor improvement; 
SOPs requiring revision; need for intr oduction of new documentation; need 
for calibration of different equipments ; separation of different work areas; 
etc. About 60% of this second category of work has already been completed. 
The remaining work in this category can comfortably be completed within 
two months. 
  
7.3 The existing production lines in th e three units, as upgraded after 
completion of some incomplete works, can safely be used till the new 
production lines are commissioned. Th e Committee are of the considered 
view that it would be absolutely safe and in public interest, to restart the 
manufacturing activities in the existi ng production lines with immediate 
effect. More explicitly, it is the co nsidered view of th e Committee that the 

  
operation of the units would, in the to tality of the prevailing circumstances, 
be in compliance with the GMP standards." 
 
2.5 The above analysis is self-explanatory about the present status of the three 
vaccine-producing units and establishes beyond doubt their manufacturing 
capacity. The Committee is happy to no te that its assessment about the 
circumstances leading to the closure of the premier vaccine-producing units and 
urgency for their revival has been emphatically endorsed by the fact-finding 
Committee appointed by the Ministry. The Committee would have appreciated if 
the Ministry was more forthcoming while furnishing details regarding the progress 
made in the manufacturing status an d quantum of vaccines produced from 
February onwards. Mere statement about planned and anticipated schedule of 
vaccine supply at these units not only fa lls much below the expectation but also 
indicates that the Ministry has failed to  show any pro-active action so far. The 
Committee, therefore, once again reiterate s that the Ministry has to vigorously 
monitor the functioning of these units so as to ensure the optimum utilization of 
their manufacturing capacity. 
 
INTEGRATED VACCINE COMPLEX, CHENGALPATTU. 
 
2.6 The Committee had made the follo wing observations in its 38
th Report in the 
context of the proposed Vaccine Complex at Chengalpattu: 
  What gives credence to Committee’s a pprehensions is the background for 
setting up the Integrated Vaccine Comple x at Chengalpattu (TN) and progress 
made so far. On a specific query, th e Committee was informed that capability 
of HLL Lifecare Limited, a ‘Mini Ratna’ Public Sector Enterprise in 
implementing Healthcare projects, tec hnology assimilation and expertise in 
vaccine business were the criteria for entr usting the company with the project. 
The Committee is, however, surprised to note that the only expertise of HLL 
Lifecare Limited in vaccine business so far has been marketing of Hepatitis B 
and Typhoid vaccines from 2005, followed by recent entry into marketing for 
Rabies Vaccine (Human) and sourcing ag ent for Government of India for the 
import and supply of JE vaccines sinc e 2006. Technology transfer discussions 
with Denmark, Korea and Belgium based Institutes and positioning of a project 
team are the technology assimilation credited to the company. (Para  2.4) 
 

  
     The Committee has also been informed  that the first phase of the IVC 
project focusing on formulation facilities is expected to start in January, 2010 
and to be completed in December, 2012. The second phase on bulk 
production units is expected to start in September, 2010 and to be 
completed in December, 2012. The Committee can, therefore, only conclude 
that at least for the next three years, supply of vaccines as per the 
requirements of the entire country will be met mainly by the private sector. 
Not only this, the quantum of manufact uring of UIP vaccines like DPT (100 
million doses), TT ( 200 million doses) , BCG (100 million doses), Measles 
(100 million doses), Hepatitis B (40 million doses) and Pentavalent 
combination vaccines (100 million doses) establishes the fact that the fate of 
the existing PSUs is sealed. (Para 2.5) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 Other than the three vaccine manufacturing Institutes which were 
manufacturing vaccines for the Govt. Programmes,  there are no Institution other than 
M/s HLL Lifecare Ltd under the Ministry of Health and F.W. capable of taking up the 
assignment for establishing of IVC and revi val of CRI, Kasauli. HLL Lifecare Ltd has 
also engaged M/s NNE Pharmaplan, a repu ted International Consultant based in 
Copenhagen, Denmark for setting up of IVC and revival of CRI, Kasauli.   
 
 Central Government in exercise of its powers under Sub rules (3) of Rule 85 of 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 have orde red revocation of suspension of the 
licenses of these Institutes vide or der No. X.11035/2/2010-DFQC dated 26/2/2010.  
The Institutes may start functioning and pr oduce the relevant vaccines which they 
were producing earlier before suspension of  the license. Necessary schedule has been 
planned for DPT group of vaccines to be supplied during 2010-11 by CRI, Kasauli.  
 
 
2.7 The Committee notes that as per the info rmation furnished by the Department, 
HLL Lifecare Ltd is the only agency in th e country capable of executing the ambitious 
project of Integrated Vaccine Complex at Ch engalpattu and presently, it has engaged 
M/s NNE Pharmaplan, a reputed Internatio nal Consultant based in Copenhagen, 
Denmark for setting up of IVC and revival of CRI, Kasauli.   
 
2.8 The Committee would like to point ou t that it has no objection to 
establishment of well-equipped vaccine manufacturing units meeting international 
standards in the country. However, that cannot be at the cost of our age-old premier 
units fulfilling the vaccine requirements of the country for the past hundred years 
or so. The foremost objective before th e Committee is to ensure availability of 

  
cheap and affordable health care for the infants and children in the country, - in 
this case availability of vaccines at affordable prices which was being accomplished 
by these units so far. The Committee would like to point out that PII, Coonoor had 
been issued the ISO 9001:2000 Certificate in February, 2003 which was valid till 
2006. Similarly, BCG Vaccine Laboratory, Gu indy had obtained a certificate under 
ISO 9001:2000 in October, 2001 which was extended upto January, 2007. Nobody 
would deny the fact that ISO certification implies recognition of a high standard of 
management systems in the establishment.  With the limited  experience and 
exposure to implementing health care pr ojects in the country, the Committee has 
had its own apprehension regarding HLL Life care Ltd's ability to give a final shape 
to the Integrated Vaccine Complex project. The Committee is not aware whether the 
selection of M/s NNE Pharmaplan has been based on its experience and expertise in 
the field of setting up of scientific infrastr ucture as required under the IVC project.  
The Ministry has chosen to remain silent on the progress made in the first phase of 
the IVC project which was to take off in January, 2010. From the time-line projected 
by the Ministry about the completion of this complex, it is anticipated to be 
completed by December, 2012.  
 
2.9 As pointed out by the Committee earlier, vaccine requirements of the 
country will be mainly met by the private sect or at least during this period of three 
years. This position has been further complicated by the three units remaining shut 
during the last two years. Not only this, it cannot be guaranteed that the proposed 
Integrated Vaccine Complex will be comple ted within the prescribed time-limit, 
specially due to lack of experience/ exper tise of the implementing agency, i.e. HLL 
Lifecare Ltd. The Committee, therefore, is of the firm view that priority should be  
making the three vaccine-producing units  fully functional by restoring their 
production capacity. Simultaneously, the process of making them GMP compliant 
may also continue. Besides that, the Committee would like to emphasize once 
again, that there is a need for review of the ambitious project of Integrated Vaccine 
Complex. If all the required support of every kind,- be it infrastructure, manpower, 

  
technical expertise, modern equipment and machinery is placed at the disposal of 
all the three units, the requirement of the proposed complex may perhaps not arise.  
 
VACCINE-PRODUCING PSUs vis-à-vis VACCINE POLICY 
 
2.10 The Committee made the following observ ations on the above issue in its 38 th 
Report: 
  Committee’s worst fears are confirmed by the assessment about the three 
units given by the Ministry. According to the Ministry, what these units are 
going to produce is to be determined by a vaccine policy, yet to be formulated 
by the Government. Secretary, Health Research has been requested to 
organize a discussion with all concerned. Only thereafter, the policy on what 
the three units should manufacture fo r ensuring vaccine safety would be 
developed. It has also been pointed out that the three units, given their 
heritage status have inherent capaci ty constraints to undergo the requisite 
modernization. Consequently, their prod uct mix can never be as dynamic as 
envisaged in the case of IVC. (Para 2.6) 
 
 The Committee is deeply disturbed by the conflicting signals emerging from 
the Government’s side on the status of  the three existing vaccine- producing 
PSUs. On the one hand it is being emphasized time and again at different fora 
that Government is determined for th e revival of the three units and every 
effort is being made to ensure thei r becoming GMP compliant, on the other 
hand it is also being categorically pointe d out that their fate is to be decided 
by a vaccine policy yet to be formulated and they can never equate with the 
proposed ‘state of the art’ IVC project. (Para 2.7) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 Government stands by  commitment made in the Presidential address to  both 
houses of the Parliament and at different fo ra from time to time  and is making every 
efforts to ensure their (these three Instit utes ) becoming cGMP compliant . Central 
Government in exercise of its powers unde r Sub rules (3) of Rule 85 of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Rules, 1945 have ordered revocation  of suspension of the licenses of the 
these  Institutes vide order No. X.11035/2/2010-DFQC dated 26/2/2010.  These 
Institutes have also been asked to ensure that the production line is made fully 
compliant with GMP standards within three years. These In stitutes have been asked 
to submit quarterly progress report to th e Ministry. IVC will network with PII, 
Coonoor, BCGVL, Guindy and CRI, Kasauli for the vaccines they are producing.  
 
2.11 The Committee finds that no mention has been made about the proposed 
move to formulate a vaccine policy which would be the deciding factor about the 
kind of production to be carried out at the three units. The Committee was given to 

  
understand that the Secretary, Department of Health Research had been requested 
to organize a discussion with all concerned. In the absence of any response from the 
Ministry in this regard, the Committee ca n presume that no such discussion has 
taken place so far. The Committee would like to point out that with the Interim 
Report of the Javed Chowdhary Comm ittee establishing beyond doubt the 
manufacturing capacity of the three units, their viability i.e. continuing to fulfill the 
vaccine requirement of the country has already been confirmed. Vaccine policy, as 
and when formulated, can focus on the policy-related issues and not on which units 
are to be closed down or to start functioning.  
 
III CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, KASAULI  
 
3.1 In its 34 th and 38 th Reports, the Committee ha d taken serious note of 
mishandling of a project for creating new facilities at CRI, Kasauli by M/s HSCC, 
Noida. Following recommendation for initiatio n of immediate corrective measures 
including action against the project agency was, accordingly, made by the 
Committee. 
 
       The Committee observes that the reply of the Ministry regarding the 
action taken against M/s HSCC, Noida for its failure to build a GMP 
compliant structure at CRI, Kasauli is simply untenable. The Committee also 
raises serious doubts on the process of awarding the contract to M/s HSCC, 
Noida. The process of awarding cont ract for building a GMP complaint 
structure to an agency which did not have the technical competence to build 
such a unit itself speaks volumes of a faulty process of selection ab initio .  
The Committee observes that it seem s that from 1997-98 until December, 
2006 – the time when M/s HSCC, Noida expressed its inability in 
completing the project, monitoring as required was not done by the Ministry 
to assess the progress of work undertaken by the agency. (Para 3.3) 
 
      The Committee also finds that the action initiated by the Ministry 
against M/s HSCC, Noida has been pe rfunctory in nature. Instead of 
pursuing the matter vigorously, the Ministry has moved at a snail’s pace 
which is evident from the fact that action against the company has been 
initiated only after the matter was repo rted upon by the Committee in its 
34
th Report in February 2009, and thereafter  also, it took the Ministry more 
than six months to reach a decision regarding referring the matter to CVC 
for advice and almost nine months to  issue a notice to M/s HSCC.  The 
reasons as to why the matter has remained pending from December, 2006 till 
date without any substantial action being initiated against the defaulter 

  
company simply escapes the Committ ee's comprehension. The Committee 
also feels that the tardy pace of action taken so far clearly indicates dilatory 
tactic on the part of the Ministry. The Committee’s apprehensions in this 
regard get reinforced from the fact that  the records pertaining to this case, 
which were forwarded to the CVC on 31 st August, 2009, were not furnished 
in the prescribed new reporting form at. The Committee is simply not ready 
to buy the argument that it took more  than two months for the CVO of the 
Ministry to come to know that the communication from the Ministry to CVC 
was not forwarded as per the new reporting format. The Committee is 
constrained to call into question the seriousness of the Ministry to take 
stringent action against those who wer e responsible for this mix-up. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends th at the Departmental Inquiry under 
progress may be completed within a strict time frame and action may be 
initiated against those responsible without further delay. The Committee 
would like the Ministry to provide a co py of the enquiry report as well as 
the follow-up action taken thereon. (Para 3.4) 
 
3.2 The Committee notes with surprise that  the Department has not furnished 
any information regarding the action take n by the Ministry against M/s HSCC, 
Noida for breach of agreement nor has fu rnished any details regarding the action 
taken against those who were responsible for the mix-up. The Committee expresses 
its grave concern on the matter and ob serves that the Ministry has been 
perfunctorily pursuing the matter. From the information furnished to it during 
September last year, the Committee is aware that the matter was in the process of 
being referred to the CVC for further inve stigation. The Committee is also aware 
that the CVO of the Ministry had advi sed that since the case pertained to 
professional impropriety rather than fi nancial impropriety, the administrative 
division should process the case for ta king administrative action against the 
officers as deemed fit. However, the abse nce of any committed action on the part of 
the Ministry only reinforces the Comm ittee's apprehensions that perhaps the 
Ministry is not keen to bring this issue of grave impropriety involving huge 
amount of public funds to a logical conclusion.  
 
3.3 The Committee fails to comprehend the sheer lack of action on the part of 
the Ministry. It seems that the observa tions/ recommendations of a Parliamentary 
Committee do not evoke any sense of pro-active initiative in the Ministry. Ideal 
position would have been that the Ministry had taken all the corrective measures 

  
on its own.  Considerable time has passed since M/s HSCC, Noida was issued a 
notice for breach of their agreement and ad ministrative division of the Ministry 
was advised by its CVO to process the case for taking administrative action against 
the officers as deemed fit. The very fact that the Ministry has chosen not to come 
forward with any further report speaks fo r itself that perhaps it is not keen to 
pursue the matter. The Committee strongly feels that such an approach of the 
Ministry is a fit case of a deliberate at tempt to ignore the recommendations of a 
Parliamentary Committee. The Committee, th erefore, calls upon the Ministry to 
expedite the required action with final disposal of the case and furnish a status 
report in this case as soon as the Committee Report is presented to Parliament.   
 
3.4 Following observation was made by the Committee in its 38 th Report with 
regard to HLL Lifecare Ltd. handling the revival project of CRI, Kasauli. 
 The Committee takes serious objectio n to the state of affairs emerging 
after submission of a project proposal  by CRI. The Committee wonders about 
the feasibility of the DPT unit at CRI becoming GMP complia nt by June, 2010 
as the process of selection of implementing agency is still continuing. Further, 
the rationale of inviting HLL Lifecare Ltd. for taking up the project by ignoring 
the names of experienced vendors suggested by WHO is also not known to the 
Committee. The Committee views with serious concern the involvement of 
HLL Lifecare Ltd., for Kasauli project when it is already set to start an 
ambitious Vaccine Park at Chengalpa ttu (TN). The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that the approved layout pl an for the DPT vaccine unit at CRI, 
Kasauli should be implemented in a transparent and time-bound manner. 
(Para 3.7) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
         To fulfill the commitment made at different fora and urgency involved in 
timely completion of the revival project, M/s HLL Lifecare Ltd was engaged as Project 
Management Consultant and M/s NNE Ph armaplan as their Detailed Engineering 
Consultant for developing DPT vaccine ma nufacturing facility at CRI, Kasauli and 
making it cGMP compliant. M/s HLL Lifecare  Ltd has been directed to take up the 
work on fast track mode. The project is cu rrently under execution and is being closely 
monitored. Various stakeholders , including the Vaccine Instit utes at CRI, Kasauli, the 
WHO and DCG(I) have been involved in preparing its drawings and design,    
identification and selection of equipments and machinery.  
 

  
 3.5 The latest feedback of the Ministry simply indicates that the project of CRI, 
Kasauli becoming GMP compliant is currently under execution by M/s HLL 
Lifecare Ltd. which had been directed to take up the work on fast-track mode and is 
being closely monitored. In the absence of any specific time-bound Action Plan 
indicated by the Ministry, the Committee is not in a position to assess the progress 
made so far. The only authentic informa tion available with the Committee is that 
the Javed Chowdhary Committee had visited the unit from 21 st to 23 rd November, 
2009 which had found that out of the 65 de ficiencies pointed out in the NRA 
Inspection Report, 44 deficiencies had b een rectified and in 21 deficiencies, the 
upgradation work was under way. These remaining deficiencies in the existing line 
could be rectified in 3 months. After co mpletion of the upgradation of the existing 
line, fresh production could start in 3 mo nths. The Committee hopes that the full 
manufacturing capacity of CRI, Kasauli must have been restored by now. 
 
3.6 On the issue of M/s HLL Lifecare Ltd. being engaged as the Project 
Consultant for making CRI, Kasauli GMP compliant, the Committee has a word of 
caution. Every conceivable step needs to be taken so as to ensure that the very 
discouraging experience of M/s HSCC, Noida is not repeated once again. 
Committee’s apprehensions arise from the fact that experience and expertise of HLL 
Lifecare Ltd. is of the same level as of M/s HSCC, Noida commented upon by the 
Javed Chowdhary Committee also. 
 
 
IV BCG VACCINE LABORATORY, CHENNAI. 
4.1 The Committee had, in its 34 th Report, taken note of the fact that out of the 55 
deficiencies pointed out by the WHO-NRA inspecting team which visited BCGVL, 
Chennai in August, 2007, 45 major deficiencies had already been rectified by it.  As 
regards the remaining 10 deficiencies, corre ctive action had either been already 
initiated or justification for the existing position had been given by the Institute. 
Subsequently, action was initiated by the Institute for renovation/upgradation of 
existing facilities for production of BCG vaccine. Attention of the Committee was also 
drawn to the fact that while the Inspecti on Team had observed 70 deficiencies, the 

  
compliance statement of the then Director listed out only 55 deficiencies. Feeling not 
very satisfied with the subsequent de velopments, the Committee had made the 
following observations in its 38th Report: 
 
 
      The Committee would like to point out that as per the status note of the 
Ministry, a proposal for upgradation/ renovation of BCGVL, Chennai was 
submitted to the Drug Controller General of India on the 30 th January, 2008. 
This was followed by a report of the Institute submitted to the Deputy Drugs 
Controller, South Zone on 26 th February, 2008 and later on 20 th March,2008 to 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  about the rectification work that it 
had carried out in the Institute. Not only this, the Institute had preferred 
appeals twice, - once on 24 th January, 2008 against DCGI’s decision to 
suspend its license, and again on 14th June, 2008 to the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare to revoke suspension of the license. However, the ATN did 
not mention as to what action was ta ken on the part of the Ministry to 
consider their case in the light of the re ctifications carried out by the Institute. 
(Para 4.2)    
 
The Committee would like to note here that the Ministry had furnished the 
Inspection Report of the WHO-NRA team that had visited BCG VL in August 
2007 along with the status no te vide its O.M. dated 24 th July 2008 to the 
Committee for its consideration.  The Co mmittee would like to point out that 
the onus of furnishing vetted informat ion to a Parliamentary Committee lies 
with the Ministry. The  Co mmittee finds it strange that the Ministry had not 
challenged the veracity of the report  submitted by the Institute while 
forwarding the same to it. The Ministry continued to remain silent on this 
issue even in its Action Taken Note. It  was only after a pointed query with 
regard to rectification of 45 deficiencies  out of the 55 deficiencies pointed out 
by the WHO-NRA assessment team, that th e Ministry has chosen to react. An 
attempt has been made by the Committe e to make a comparative analysis of 
55-deficiency and 70-deficiency Reports.  The Committee has no hesitation in 
arriving at the conclusion that the so-called additional 15 deficiencies are duly 
reflected in the original report, the on ly difference being that some of the 
deficiencies are in the expanded form  in the later report. The Committee is 
also not inclined to agree with the cont ention of the Ministry that the action 
taken information was not complete and did not indicate the manner of 
compliance/rectification of deficiencies. (Para 4.4)    
 
      The Committee takes note of th e fact that as per the Expert Committee 
constituted in April, 2008, the existing facilities had inhere nt problems for 
renovation and vaccines can be manufact ured only on the construction of 
new facilities. Feasibility of BCGVL becoming GMP compliant has become 
more difficult in the light of the la test report given by the Oversight 

  
Committee in October, 2009. Although, WHO GMP expert has been 
requested to prepare the preliminary layout  plan for the Institute, there is no 
land available for the same. A proposal is , therefore, in the pipeline to shift 
the work of the Institute along with its personnel to the upcoming Vaccine 
Complex at Chengalpattu. The Committee strongly feels that a pre-conceived 
view about there being no possibility of  BCGVL becoming GMP compliant is 
very dominant. The very fact that pers istent efforts made by the Institute 
authorities to rectify the deficien cies pointed out in the WHO-NRA 
assessment report and succeeding in remo ving the majority of the same with 
the remaining ones being the responsibility of the Ministry have been of no 
avail, confirms Committee’s observations. (Para 4.5)    
 
       
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 Invoking  provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and  Rules,  
evaluation of impact on the post-suspension era in terms of the availability and prices 
of these vaccines on the Universal Immunization Programme and  taking into account  
substantial compliance status furnished by the appellant Laboratory and the 
paramount public interest involved in  generating maintaining its own captive 
production capacity in the Government se ctor, revocation of suspension of the 
licenses of the Institutes including BCG VL, Guindy  have been ordered on 26 th 
February, 2010.  These Institutes have also b een asked to ensure that the production 
line is made fully compliant with GMP standards within three years.  
 
 
4.2     The Committee had observed that th e basis for suspension  of manufacturing 
license of BCGVL, Guindy, like the other tw o public sector vaccine producing units 
by the DCGI was the inspection reports of  the WHO-NRA inspecting team that had 
physically visited these institutes and fo und several deficiencies in pursuance to 
cGMP. The Committee had also observed th at the Institute had initiated all the 
required steps for rectification of defici encies. The Institute had also preferred 
appeals to both the DCGI and the Ministry for revocation of suspension of its license. 
The Committee finds it very strange that the Ministry has not indicated any action 
whatsoever on their part inspite of the In stitute approaching them time and again. 
The Committee takes note of the fact  the Javed Chowdhary Committee after 
inspecting the premises of the Institute from 19 th to 22nd December, 2009 has pointed 
out that out of the 23 deficiencies, 16  had been rectified or would need 
implementation only at the time of commencement of the operations. For the 

  
remaining 7 deficiencies, work on 4 would be completed in two months and the rest 
in three months time. Fresh production co uld, accordingly, commence after a period 
of three months. 
 
4.3     The Committee observes that consequent to submission of the Interim 
Report of the Javed Chowdhary Committee on the 5 th February, the three months’ 
time, as observed in the above Report, has already passed. The Committee can 
easily presume that work on a fast track mode had been initiated by the 
Department as per the assessm ent in the Interim Report. However, as no concrete 
information on the progress of work re lating to BCGVL, Guindy has been 
furnished in the ATN, the Committee has no other alternative but to conclude that 
the rectification exercise - as envisaged to  make these units fully functional, has 
not been completed.  The Committee, therefor e, apprehends that if such is the case 
then production of vaccines by the unit is bound to be stalled further. 
 
4.4        The Committee was given to un derstand that due to non-availability of 
land for making BCGVL GMP compliant, it was proposed to shift the production 
work along with the manpower to the upcomin g vaccine complex at Chengalpattu.   
However, from the perusal of the Inte rim Report of the Javed Chowdhary 
Committee, it has become abundantly clear that there should not be any problem 
in building multi-floored structure comp liant to international standards at 
BCGVL, Guindy as there is ample scope for additional construction at the plot of 
land on which the institute is situated . The additional permissible construction 
would not merely cover the requirement for the new production line but would 
also be available for subsequent expansion of the unit. In view of the factual 
position at the ground level and rectification of all the deficiencies, the only line of 
action on the part of the Ministry in co -ordination with the Institute authorities is 
to take all the required measures for restructuring the Institute. The Committee, 
accordingly, urges the Department to take utmost care and remain vigilant so that 
the revival of the institute is not trapped in the labyrinths of procedural 
formalities resulting in undue delays and cost-escalations.  The Committee would 
also appreciate if the proposed move of shifting the Institute along with its 

  
manpower to the Vaccine Complex at Chengalpattu is reviewed objectively and 
the correct decision taken. 
 
V PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF INDIA, COONOOR 
 
5.1 The Committee in its 38 th Report had examined in detail the progress 
made with regard to the work on the n ew facility for production of TCARV with 
GMP compliant facility at PII, Coonoor. The Committee had noted that the lay-out 
plans for construction of Tissue Culture An ti Rabies Vaccine (TCARV) facility were 
finalized on 20 th February, 2006, followed by submis sion of drawings prepared by 
HSCC (I) to the Coonoor Municipality du ring September 2006, and payment of fee 
for land development immediately after th e assessment in October 2006. Thereafter, 
correspondence continued with the Coonoor Municipality during 2007, 2008 and 
2009 for completion of various procedural fo rmalities. Additional set of drawings 
were submitted for approval for the construc tion of facility as per the layout plan 
without any deviation in the height limit. The matter was taken up with the 
Collector of Nilgiris District to gran t approval to the construction of the 
manufacturing facility on 29
th March, 2009 and again on 17 th July, 2009.  The matter 
rested with the submission of the drawings to the Assistant Director of Town 
Planning, Coimbatore on 10 th September, 2009 for examination and 
recommendations to the Hill Area Conser vation Authority (HACA) for forwarding 
to the Dept. of Town & Country planning , Govt. of Tamil Nadu, Chennai for final 
approval. However, after a visit of the Oversight Committee comprising of WHO-
GMP Expert, the DCGI and officials from  the Ministry to the Institute on 14 th and 
15th September 2009, the conceptual layout plans of all the proposed 
buildings/blocks of PII, Coonoor were modi fied and finalised by the Committee at 
its second meeting held on 21st October, 2009.  
 
5.2 The Committee made the following observations on this issue in its 38 th 
Report: 
 The Committee observes that till the 10 th September, 2009 the issues 
surrounding the commencement of the construction work at PII, Coonoor 

  
were yet to be finalized even after thr ee years, of the initial layout plans for 
the construction of TCARV facility being finalized on the 20 th February 2006. 
Another disturbing fact which came to  the notice of the Committee was that 
M/s HSCC (I), which had failed to build  a GMP compliant structure at CRI, 
Kasauli after spending nearly 12 crore of public money, was involved by the 
Department to prepare the drawings of TCARV facility at PII, Coonoor.  The 
Committee fails to understand as to ho w the services of an agency which 
expressed its inability to construct a GMP compliant structure in another 
Institute could be retained by the Ministry in  the case of a second unit again. 
The Ministry has informed that the layo ut plan was originally submitted to 
the local body i.e. Coonoor Muni cipality during September, 2006. In 
November, 2008 another set of drawings was submitted for approval for the 
construction of the facility. Subseq uently, the Oversight Committee visited 
the Institute in September, 2009 and th e conceptual layout plans of all 
proposed buildings/blocks of PII were modified and finalized by it in 
October, 2009. Thereafter, the revised layout plan was again resubmitted to 
the local authorities for approval. The Committee is constrained to observe 
that a gap of almost three and a half ye ars between the submission of the first 
layout plan and the last revised layout plan not only reflects poorly on the 
decision making process in the Ministry but also shows a lack of urgency on 
the part of the Ministry for reasons best  known to it, in addressing this vital 
issue in a proactive manner. The Committ ee apprehends that given the pace 
with which the approval of the previous plan had progressed, a similar 
situation may arise for the revised plan . The Committee, therefore, suggests 
that the Ministry should, henceforth, le ave no stone unturned to expedite the 
approval of the revised plan so that it is not inordinately delayed. (Para 5.5)      
 
 
5.3       The Committee is deeply disturbe d to note that once again the Department 
has no action taken report to offer. Reasons for such an approach by the Ministry 
are beyond the comprehension of the Committee. The Committee is forced to 
conclude that no progress worth mentioni ng has been made inspite of its very 
critical observations. Not only this, the Committee finds that the Javed Chowdhary 
Committee, after its inspection of the Institute from 19
th to 22 nd December, 2009, 
was of the view that the existing production line could resume operations for fresh 
production in 6 months. The Committee is not aware whether the requisite funds 
for the upgradation/ modification work  on the existing production line, as 
recommended by the Javed Chowdhary Comm ittee, have been made available to 
the Institute so far. If not, the Committee can only conclude that this is a sorry state 
of affairs. The Committee would also take the opportunity to po int out that this 

  
very Committee had also given its considered opinion about the viability of 
setting up a new production line at the Institu te due to the availability of enough 
naturally terraced land, ideal for su ch a requirement. The Committee would 
appreciate if the Department plays the ro le of a nodal authority for initiating the 
preparation of a detailed project report in this regard, if not already done so far. 
 
VI VACANCY POSITION IN THE VACCINE-PRODUCING UNITS 
 
6.1 The Committee had taken note of acute shortage of manpower, specially those 
having technical expertise in the three units, in its 34 th Report presented to Parliament 
on the 18 th February, 2009. Serious concerns about the vacancy position in CRI, 
Kasauli had also been expressed by it in its 38 th Report presented to Parliament on the 
18th December, 2009, as indicated below: 
The Committee is not happy with the stat us of duly sanctioned posts at CRI 
remaining vacant for so long leading to some posts getting lapsed. The fact 
that as many as 27 Group ‘A’ posts and 10 Group ‘B’ Non-Gazzetted Posts are 
still vacant at CRI requires the matter to be pursued vigorously and 
persistently. Not only this, action also needs to be initiated without any delay 
for reassessment of requirement of manp ower at CRI in accordance with the 
GMP norms and the revival plan. (Para 3.9)  
 
6.2 The Committee is somewhat surprised to  observe that no response has been 
forthcoming from the Ministry on such a vital issue. It seems that Committee’s 
repeated efforts to draw the attention of th e Ministry in this regard during the last 
two-three years have gone unnoticed. The Mini stry has not considered it important 
enough to initiate any action so far. This is the case when two of the units, i.e. CRI, 
Kasauli and BCG VL, Guindy are subordin ate offices of DGHS while PII, Coonoor 
is an autonomous body under the Ministry. 
 
6.3 The Committee has no other alternative but to draw the attention of the 
Ministry to the following recommendations made in the Interim Report of the 
Javed Chowdhary Committee, constituted by the Ministry itself: 
 
"10.1      For close to a decade now, these three vaccine manufacturing units 
have been tottering with poor continui ty in the tenure of the Directors. A 
large section of the vacant posts are those that lapsed after remaining vacant 

  
for over one year under the economy orders of the Ministry of Finance. The 
staff in these establishments have b een so comprehensively depleted that 
they do not even retain the critic al mass of man-power required to 
implement a revival programme. The filling up of vacant posts is urgently 
required. 
 
10.2   The new manufacturing lines, which will be for much larger 
capacities, will no doubt, require a pack age of additional posts. In order to 
kick-start the revival process, the Committee would urge that the creation of 
new technical posts for the new produc tion lines not be processed in the 
conventional manner. For this category of posts, the Committee would 
recommend that the authority to create  new technical posts be entrusted to 
an Empowered Group headed by a reputed scientist-administrator. Only 
such a modality will ensure that the additional staff required for the new 
production lines will be approved in reasonable time with well-informed 
objectivity. For the additional admini strative posts for th e new production 
lines, the normal procedure adopted in government would serve the 
purpose adequately. 
 
10.3 As for the vacant posts linked to  the existing production lines, 
government should consider a ‘singl e-shot’ revival methodology. These 
posts have fallen vacant only because there was no one to even plead the 
case for their continuance to run the units. The processing of these posts 
through the normal procedure applicable to new posts would take anything 
up to two years. Any plan of the Mini stry to implement the new projects 
would be critically handicapped as a result of such a large vacancy position. 
The posts had lapsed because of neglect after all it is no one’s case that the 
manpower requirement for the existi ng production line has diminished 
over time. It is in these circum stances that the Committee makes the 
unconventional recommendation that Go vernment as a special case (not to 
be treated as a precedent), revive th e vacant posts with immediate effect 
and to hasten the selection process, contractual appointments should be 
considered. It is felt that this would go a long way in strengthening the team 
that will have to implement the new projects." 
 
6.4 The purpose of the Committee for quoting from the Javed Chowdhary 
Committee Report is only to emphatically  impress upon the Ministry to initiate 
immediate action for making available the required manpower for the existing 
production lines. Similar exercise is require d to be initiated for the new production 
lines also. The Interim Report was subm itted by the Javed Chowdhary Committee 
on the 5 th February, 2010. The Committee would be happy if the sense of urgency 
for making available the required manpower at the three units reflected in the 

  
Report has not escaped the attention of the Ministry and some corrective exercise 
has already started. The Committee would apprec iate if a Status Note in this regard 
is submitted to it at the earliest. 
 
VII PROCUREMENT PRICE OF VACCINES 
 
7.1 The Committee has been drawing the a ttention of the Ministry towards the 
adverse impact on the procurement price of vaccines as a resu lt of closure of the three 
Public Sector Units which have been the mainstay in fulfilling the vaccine requirement 
of the country and contributing to the su ccessful implementation of the Universal 
Immunization Programme. Committee’s a pprehensions were confirmed by the 
following details about the increasing tren d in the vaccine prices noticed since the 
closure of the three PSUs. 
Vaccine Procurement Price 
BCG 
Years 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Rate (per vial of 10 doses in Rs.) 
Vaccine Institutes 
Other Public/ Private Sector 
 
 
 
13.00 
13.50 
 
  - 
17.50 
 
- 
27.85 (SII) 
DPT 
Years 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Rate (per vial of 10 doses in Rs.) 
Vaccine Institutes 
Other Public/ Private Sector 
 
11.80 
13.50 
 
- 
13.40(IIL, 
14.37(serum), 
16.88(BE) 
 
- 
23.59 (IIL & BE), 23.49 
(Shantha) 
DT 
Years 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Rate (per vial of 10 doses in Rs.) 
Vaccine Institutes 
Other Public/ Private Sector 
 
9.60 
9.14 
 
 
12.00(IIL),13.85 (BE) 
 
-- 
-- 
TT 
Years 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Rate (per vial of 10 doses in Rs.) 
Vaccine Institutes 
Other Public/ Private Sector 
 
6.20 
-- 
 
-- 
8.40 (IIL),11.85 (BE) 
 
-- 
17.69(IIL, BE & SII) 
 
 7.2 On this alarming trend, the Committ ee had made the following observations/ 
recommendations in its 38th Report. 
 

  
 The Committee observes that from the year 2004-05 onwards the 
prices of the four vaccines namely BC G, DPT, DT and TT remained stable 
until 2007-08. However, in the year 2008-09, and especially in 2009-10, the 
prices of vaccines have nearly doubled with the price of BCG rising from Rs. 
13.00 per vial of 10 doses in 2007-08 to Rs 17.50 in 2008-09 and to Rs 27.85 in 
2009-10. Similarly, in the case of DPT vaccine which was earlier procured 
from the other public/private sector un its at the rate of Rs 13.50 per vial of 
10 doses to Rs 13.40 for the quantities procured from Indian Immunological 
Limited (IIL), Rs 14.37 from Serum Insi tute of India (SII), Pune and Rs 16.88 
from Biological E. (BE) Ltd, Hy derabad during 2008-09. While, in 2009-10 
the price per vial of 10 doses for DPT rose to Rs 23.59 for supplies procured 
from IIL and BE, and Rs 23.49 from Shan ta. Similarly, the price of the DT 
vaccine rose from Rs 9.14 per vial of  10 doses in 2007-08 to Rs. 12.00 (IIL) 
and Rs 13.85 (BE) for the quantities procured for the year 2008-09. For TT 
vaccine, the price per vial of 10 doses was Rs 6.20 in  2007-08 which rose to 
Rs 8.40 (IIL) and Rs 11.85 (BE) for the quantities procured for the year 2008-
09 which again shot up to Rs 17.69 for the quantities procured from IIL, BE 
and SII for the year 2009-10. (Para 6.4) 
 
 The Committee observes that within  two years of the closure of the 
three PSUs, the competitive prices of vaccines have shot up to more than 
double the figures. The Committee note s that with the rising prices of 
vaccines, the expenditure incurred in the implementation of the Universal 
Immunization Programme in the country would surely add to the burden of 
the Public Exchequer and the very obje ctive of providing highly essential 
drugs like vaccines to the targeted popu lation at affordable prices would 
stand defeated. Thus it is beyond do ubt that the Ministry’s argument that 
the vaccines have been procured at relatively fair prices is not factually 
correct. It is also evident that after the closure of the captive units, the 
challenge to the private sector to provide vaccines at competitive prices has 
been nullified. Hence, the prices of vaccines have been spiraling upwards. 
The Committee has been given to unde rstand that the Integrated Vaccine 
Complex at Chengalpattu, Tamil Nadu would be completed by the year 
2012 and until then the vaccines requir ed under UIP would be procured 
through the process of tendering as has been continuing since the last two 
years. The Committee apprehends that gi ven the present trend of price rise, 
the prices of vaccine may rise manifold in the coming years which would 
hit hard the general public as we ll as the Government Exchequer. The 
Committee, therefore, observes, even at the cost of repetition, that for 
stabilizing the prices of vaccines, ther e may be no other alternative than 
revoking the suspension of the manufacturing license of the three vaccine 
Institutes to enable them to start production forthwith. (Para 6.5) 
 
 

  
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 Invoking  provisions of the Drugs and Co smetics Act, 1940 and  Rules , substantial 
compliance status furnished by the appellant La boratory and taking into account evaluation 
of impact on the post-suspension era in terms of the availability and prices of these vaccines 
on the Universal Immunization Programme and th e paramount public interest involved in 
generating maintaining its ow n captive production capacity in the Government sector, 
revocation of suspension of the licenses of  the Institutes have been ordered on 26 th February, 
2010.  These Institutes have also been asked to ensure that the production line is made fully 
compliant with GMP standards within three years.  
 
7.3    The Committee notes that the reply of the Department to very specific 
observations regarding rising prices of vaccines since the closure of three public 
sector vaccine producing institutes is completely evasive. The Committee would 
like to make it abundantly clear, even at  the cost of being repetitive, that the 
foremost objective before the Committee is  to ensure availability of cheap and 
affordable vaccines for infants and children in the country. It is for this reason that 
stabilization of the prices of vaccines in the country is critical and the role of 
public sector units in ensuring low and st able prices acquires utmost importance. 
It is an undisputed fact today that since the closure of CRI, Kasauli, BCGVL, 
Guindy and PII, Coonoor - the three vaccine producing units, the prices of vaccines 
supplied under UIP have shot up. Committee' s analysis of the rising procurement 
prices of vaccines and observations th ereto have been bolstered by similar 
findings in the Interim Report of the Javed Chowdhary Committee which has 
pointed out that between the years 2007- 08 and 2009-10, the prices of vaccines 
purchased per vial have increased by 30 per cent (2008-09) and by 59 per cent in 
2009-10 on a year-on-year basis over the prices of 2007-08 for BCG, between 25 to 63 
per cent for DPT  for the same time periods.   
 
7.4      Since it is not cl ear as to what quantum of vaccines have been procured 
during 2010-11 from the private sector vis-à-vis the public sector, the Committee 
apprehends that the prices of vaccines would have increased further over that of 
the past year. The Department has informed that CRI, Kasauli would be supplying 
DPT and TT vaccine since April, 2010, and also supply of DPT by PII, Coonoor 
from December 2010. Under the above circumstances, the cost of supply of the 

  
various vaccines by the private sector un its which were being supplied earlier by 
the three vaccine producing public sector units would remain a matter of concern.   
 
7.5     The Committee is in full agreem ent with the observation of the Javed 
Chowdhary Committee that by closing down the existing public sector vaccine 
production units in advance, the country  would be exposing itself to vaccine 
insecurity for five years or possibly, ev en a much longer period. The Committee, 
therefore, once again impresses upon the Mi nistry that keeping in view the public 
interest at large the three vaccine producing units are made fully functional 
without any further delay. The Commi ttee foresees no hindrances in 
accomplishment of this task due to the very specific and foolproof assessment 
made by the Javed Chowdhary Committee ab out the inbuilt capacity of the three 
premier units. With constant monitoring and availability of required funds and 
manpower, the Ministry - the nodal author ity in this crucial area, can very well 
succeed in achieving this social responsibility.     
 
VII SHORTAGE OF VACCINES 
 
8.1 Following observations were made by the Committee in its 38 th Report on the 
shortage of vaccine in the country: 
 
        Asked to comment on the shortfall of 11.22 crore doses of UIP vaccines 
in the year 2008-09 and 17 crore doses in  the year 2009-10 as admitted by the 
Ministry itself in reply to an RTI app lication, the Ministry in a written reply 
has tried to explain away the shortage by stating that the actual requirement 
of vaccines for any particular year for which procurement order is placed 
during the year may be more or less than the projected requirement shown 
by the states as the actual requiremen t depends on a number of factors such 
as balance reported by States/ GMSDs as on 1 st April of that year, pipeline 
supplies of previous year etc. The Dep artment has further stated that no 
shortage is anticipated during the year 2009-10. (Para 7.1) 
 
         The Committee is not inclined to ag ree with the explanation given by 
the Ministry about the actual requirem ent and the projected requirement of 
vaccines under UIP. The Committee wond ers as to how the Ministry could 
deny the information submitted by it under RTI. Fact of the matter is that 
somewhere something is gravely wrong.  Either the categorical information 

  
given under RTI supplemented by the fact  that requirement details of some 
states were yet to be received is wron g or the subsequent clarification given 
by the Ministry is misleading. Either way, position seems to be very 
disturbing. Besides that, requirements projected being not judiciously made 
or non-utilization of available vaccines in a year cannot be considered an 
ideal situation. The Committee, acco rdingly, recommends that necessary 
steps may be taken for assessment of actual requirements of vaccines by 
different states followed by monitori ng of their timely utilization. The 
Committee would also like to point out that inspite of overall coverage of 
states under UIP being satisfactory, very  low coverage in some of the crucial 
states is a cause of serious concern.  Committee’s attention has been drawn 
by the below- 50 per cent coverage of vaccines under UIP in Delhi in 2008-09, 
showing a downward trend when compared with 2007-08 figures. When this 
is the state of affairs in the capital ci ty of the country, factual position in 
respect of other states is likely to be different from what is shown on paper. 
(Para 7.2) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry                         
 
The observation has been noted for compliance.  
 
8.2     The Committee notes that the recommendation of the Committee for 
assessing the actual requirements of vacci nes by different States followed by 
monitoring of their timely utilization ha s been acknowledged by the Department 
for future compliance. However, this alon e would not serve the purpose. That the 
Committee's apprehensions in this regard were not baseless have been proved by 
the findings of Javed Chowdhary Committ ee contained in its Interim Report. 
While analysing the impact of the closure of the three pubic sector vaccine 
producing units on the UIP, it has been stat ed that a number of States like Orissa, 
Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Assa m, Punjab, West Bengal and Kerala did 
face shortfall of BCG, DPT, TT, OPV and Measles vaccine during 2008-09. As a 
result, the Ministry had to draw on the buffer stock available with these States.  
  
8.3          The Committee would like to po int out that many of the above States that 
have faced shortages have been placed under the category of High Focus States by 
the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the basis of their health indicator  
performance. Hence, shortage of vaccines in these States is bound to have an 

  
adverse impact on their immunization progr amme. In any case, the act of drawing 
upon buffer stock to mitigate shortfalls ca n never be termed as a healthy practice. 
The Committee would like to add here that the reason for price spiral of vaccines 
owes its origin to shortage s in its supply at the outs et. The Committee, therefore, 
advises the Department to bear this in mind for all future references relating to 
making available critical healthcare co mponent such as vaccines/ sera under 
various national healthcare initiatives.    
  
IX GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 
 
9.1 Committee’s attention has been drawn by critical analysis of three pertinent 
issues, directly and indirectly connected  with the closure of the three vaccine 
producing units made by the Javed Chowdhary Committee in its Interim Report.  
 
9.2 As per the analysis made in the Interi m Report, the three public sector vaccine-
producing units have been subjected to selective scrutiny under the law. DCGI has the 
jurisdiction over all drugs and pharmaceu tical manufacturing units in the country 
(nearly 10,000 units) includin g those categories for whic h the registration powers are 
with the State Governments. Central drug inspectors are carrying out inspection of 
only certain categories – vaccine & sera, l arge volume parenterals, notified medical 
devices, blood banks and units applying  under WHO-GMP Certification Scheme. 
Drug manufacturing units are being inspec ted only on request. The three vaccine 
producing units have been inspected by St ate and Central Drug Control authorities 
time and again, with NRA inspection s being conducted in 2001, 2004 and 2007. Total 
number of inspections by the Central Drug  Inspectors compared to the number of 
manufacturing units in the country is se lf-revealing. View of the Interim Committee 
was that the three vaccine-producing unit s have been given exceptional degree of 
attention by the regulatory authorities. The Committee is inclined to agree with the 
inference drawn by the Javed Chowdhary Committee. While inspection per se is a 
commendable course of action specially to en sure the quality of products related to 
the life of infants, it is also required to be followed by the requisite corrective 
measures. In units under Government control,  this should become the priority of 

  
all concerned. Unfortunately, this did not happen in the case of these three units. 
Track-record of the last decade is ampl e proof. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
feels that review and revamping of our drug regulatory machinery should be taken 
up at a priority level. 
 
9.3 Second critical issue analysed by th e Javed Chowdhary Committee is the scope 
of the provisions of the GMP standards no tified under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1944 and Rules made thereunder. Following facts are self-revealing: 
- GMP standards for drug manufacture are  largely identical to the WHO-GMP 
standards. 
- A large number of standards set out in Schedule ‘M’ of the Rules cannot be met 
to the fullest extent by every manufacturing facility. 
- Assessment of compliance of many of the standards spelt out in descriptive 
language would depend on the subjective perspective of the inspector. 
- Legal compliance does not require each norm to be met to the fullest extent, but 
overall compliance of various norms. 
- A shortcoming in some of the areas does not automatically call for the 
suspension/ cancellation of the license. 
- Deficiencies had been pointed out in th e statutory inspections of the public 
sector vaccines units carried out in th e past but suspension/ cancellation of 
license was not recommended. 
 
9.4  The Javed Chowdhary Committee ha d rightfully concluded that it 
needs to be recognized that the sudden-death approach to the implementation of 
the GMP standards would serve no public purpose; it would only bring about a 
crisis, as the operations of a larger po rtion of the domestic drug sector would 
come to a halt. The above facts clearly in dicate that so far judicious applicability 
of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules has been lacking. The case of the three public 
sector units is a classic example of total lack of accountability of all concerned. It 
is time that a fool-proof mechanism for regulating the manufacturing units of all 
categories- both in the private and public sector, is evolved. Simultaneously, 

  
review of infrastructure and manpower of the drug regulatory body also needs 
to be taken on a priority basis. 
 
9.5  The last but the most importan t issue highlighted in the Javed 
Chowdhary Report relates to the jurisdic tion of WHO Inspection team and the 
NRA team of India. Responsibilities of the Central License Approval Authority 
(Indian NRA) are not in any circumstances to be jointly discharged with the WHO. 
Accordingly, WHO was not permitted to  join the Indian NRA team in its 
inspections carried out in 2001 and 2004. However, request of WHO was accepted 
by the Ministry in 2007 inspection. Second ly, WHO in its capacity as a consultant 
to multi-lateral agencies (UNICEF, WB) which purchase drugs/ pharmaceuticals 
for their interventions in in ternational health programme s, sets certain norms for 
pre-qualifying manufacturers bidding for these contracts. As a result, WHO is 
entitled to exclude the public sector vacci ne units from their pr e-qualified lists of 
manufacturers for international health in terventions. However, NRA in India can 
take a differing view of the status of compliance for the very same units for its own 
purposes. Since WHO does not have any authority of superintendence over the 
Indian NRA, there can be no question of it de-recognising NRA. 
 
9.6  The Committee is of the firm view th at the in-depth analysis of all the 
critical issues related to the viability and manufacturing capacity of the three 
premier public sector vaccine producing units clears all the ambiguity, 
complexities and contradictions involved. The Committee can only say that the 
administrative Ministry which is the noda l authority for all such policy matters/ 
as well as objective interpretation of st atutory powers simply failed to come up 
to the rightful expectations. The Committee is not aware of the final report to be 
given by the Javed Chowdhary Committee by 25 th March, 2010. However, since 
the Interim Report of the Javed Chowdhary Committee given on the 5 th 
February, 2010, sufficient time has passed for the Government to take all the 
required corrective measures. The Committee believes that follow-up action on 
the Interim Report and recommendations made by the Committee in its present 

  
Report in the real sense will make available the required vaccines - both 
qualitative and cheap, for the infants. Status Note on the follow-up action taken 
on the Javed Chaudhary Committee Repo rt as well as the recommendations 
made in the present Report may be submitted to the Committee at the earliest. 
 
 
 