PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                   44 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
  
FORTY-FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
THE TRANSPLANTATION OF HUMAN ORGANS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
AUGUST, 2010/SRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
                                             E-mail:rsc-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
  
FORTY-FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
THE TRANSPLANTATION OF HUMAN ORGANS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
                                    AUGUST, 2010/SRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA) 

 
CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE......................................................................................  
(i)-(ii) 
2. P REFACE ..................................................................................................................
  
(iii)-(iv) 
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................... 1-24 
4. O BSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  AT A GLANCE 25-34 
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................
  
35-47 
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................. 49-69 
 A NNEXURE-I (COPY OF THE BILL) .......................................................................... 51-68 
 A NNEXURE-II (LIST OF WITNESSES) ...................................................................... 69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2009-2010) 
 1. Shri Amar Singh   -----  Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
 *3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
 5. Shri Balbir Punj 
 6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
 7. Shrimati Brinda Karat 
 8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
 
@9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy 
 #10. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid 
 12. Shri Ashok Argal 
 13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
 14. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
 15. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan 
 17. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
 18. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai 
 19 Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
 20. Shri N. Kristappa 
 21. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
 22. Shri Datta Meghe 
 23. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
 24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
 25. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
 26. Shri M. K. Raghavan 
 27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
 28. Shrimati Meena Singh 
 29. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
 31. Shri Ratan Singh 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 

  Shri R. B. Gupta, Director 
  Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director 
  Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director  
  Shri Satis Mesra, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PREFACE 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and 
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present 
this Forty-fourth Report of the Committee on the Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) 
Bill, 2009*. 
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of 
States, relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees the Hon'ble Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha, referred** the Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009 (Annexure-I), 
as introdued in the Lok Sabha on the 18th December 2009 and pending therein, to the Committee on 
the 22
nd January 2010 for examination and report. 
3. A Press Release inviting suggetions/comments from general public was issued on the 8th 
February 2010. In response thereto, the Committee received 32 memoranda. 
4.  The Committee considered the Bill in its meetings held on the 17 th February, 20th May, 9th June, 
and 6th July 2010. 
5. The Committee held wide ranging discussions with several stakeholders on different provisions 
of the Bill. Divergent views were expressed by many experts, representatives of organisations engaged 
in the field of deceased donor transplantation,  kidney, eye and tissue transplantation etc. The 
Committee also interacted with the Secretary and other officers of the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The list of witnesses is given in Annexure-II. 
The Committee sought clarifications from the above entities not only on the various viewpoints put 
forth before it on the Bill but also on how to make the parent Act more meaningful and in tune with 
the requirements of the society at large. 
6. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill at its meeting held on the 6
th 
July 2010. After a detailed discussion, the Committee arrived at a consensus on the various provisions 
of the Bill. At its meeting held on the 21 st July 2010, the Committee considered and adopted the draft 
Report. 
7.  The Committee has relied upon the following documents/information in finalizing its Report: 
(i) Background Note, Clause-by-Clause Note on the Bill, Parent Act, Report of the Transplant 
of Human Organs Act Review Committee constituted by the Delhi High Court, National 
Consultations on the Parent Act conceptualised and organised by the Rajiv Gandhi 
Foundation in Partnership with the Ministry, Feedbacks from State Governments and the 
Draft Guiding principles for organ transpla ntation prepared by WHO received from the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare; 
(ii) Presentation and clarificatio ns by the Secretary and other officers of the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare; 
(iii) Memoranda received on the Bill from various experts and other stakeholders; 
(iv) Oral evidence on the Bill; and 
(v) Comments of the Department received in respect of memoranda forwarded to it for their 
view on various issues raised therein. 

8. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks all the stakeholders who 
assisted the Committee in formulating its views on the various provisions of the Bill. 
9. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report: 
 
 
   AMAR  SINGH  
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
July 21,
 
2010 Department-related Parliamentary 
Asadha 30, 1932 (saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 The Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994 aimed at regulating the removal, storage and 
transplantation of human organs for therapeutic purposes and to prevent commercial dealings in 
human organs. Subsequent to its coming into for ce on 4th February, 1995 in the States of Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra and all the Unio n Territories, it has been adopted by all States 
except Andhra Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir, which have their own legislations in this regard. 
However, inspite of this legislation being in forc e, there have been numerous instances of organized 
human organ trading rackets. These cases have highlighted the loopholes in the Act that are being 
misused for such thriving business of illegal commercial transactions in human organs. The ultimate 
sufferer in all such cases is the economically weaker section of the society. Thus, on the one hand, this 
Act has not been able to curb commercial transactions in human organs; on the other hand, it has 
resulted in procedural delays in genuine cases of organ donation. 
2. The Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009, (hereinafter referred to as the 
“Bill”) is an initiative of the Government which is aimed to plug the loopholes in the existing Act. 
3. As per the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill, the amendments proposed 
alongwith the reasons warranting their need, are reproduced below: 
(i) presently the said Act regulates transplanta tion of the human organs, it has been proposed 
that the said Act also regulate the transplant ation of tissues of the human body. Therefore, 
it is proposed to amend the long title, short tit le of the Act and also to insert appropriate 
definition of “tissues” in the definition clause and consequential amendments in other 
sections of the Act; 
(ii) to expand the definition of “near relative” in order to include the grandfather, 
grandmother, grandson and granddaughter as near relative; 
(iii) to make mandatory for the Intensive Care Unit or Treating Medical Staff to request 
relatives of brain dead patients for organ donation and to provide for the enucleating of 
corneas by a trained technician. Further to enable a surgeon or a physician and an 
anaesthetist or intensivist to be included in the medical board in the event of non-
availability of a neurosurgeon or neurologist for certification of brain death; 
(iv) to regulate the transplantation of organs for foreign nationals, to prevent the exploitation 
of minors, to provide for Swap Donations of organs, to empower the Central Government 
to prescribe the composition of Authoris ation Committees and to empower State 
Governments and Union Territories to set up their own Authorisation Committees; 
(v) to constitute the Advisory Committees to advise the Appropriate Authorities; 
(vi) to empower the Appropriate Authoriti es to summon persons, seek production of 
documents, issue search warrants, etc.; 
vii) to establish a National Human Organs and Tissues Removal and Storage Network; 
(viii) to provide for the development and maintenance of a national registry of the recipients of 
human organs transplants; 

(ix) to appoint a "transplant coordinator" in all hospitals registered for organ retrieval and 
transplantation; and to provide for the registration of Non-Governmental Organisations 
working in the field of organ retrieval, banking and transplantation; 
(x) to enhance the penalties provided under the Act; and 
(xi) consequential amendment in section 24 in respect of the rule making power of the Central 
Government. 
 The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
4. The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, during her deposition before the 
Committee on the 17th February 2010 gave a brief idea about the Bill and expressed the hope that the 
amendments proposed vide the Bill would not only enable efficient implementation of the Act but 
more importantly reduce exploitation going on through illegal transplantations. The Committee was 
given a brief description of the demand and supply mismatch and the illegal transplantations through 
commercial trading of organs. The Committee was also apprised that the Bill was based on several 
documents/papers like recommendations of a Committee constituted by the Delhi High Court to 
examine lacunae in the Parent Act, recommendati ons of the Rajiv Gandhi Foundation, and draft 
guiding principles of the organ transplantation prepared by the World Health Organisation. 
5. As the Bill under considerat ion has far-reaching implications, the Committee decided to issue a 
Press Release seeking the views from all the stakeholde rs as well as the public at large. In response 
thereto, the Committee received a large number of memoranda. After scrutinizing them, the 
Committee concluded that it was necessary to interact with some experts and stakeholders for an in-
depth examination of all relevant aspects connected with the Bill. The Committee, accordingly, heard 
the views of some of the experts and stakeholders during its meetings held on the 20th May and the 
9th June, 2010. 
6. During the aforesaid meetings in Delhi, the Committee had the opportunity to interact with quite 
a few witnesses representing different stakeholde rs. These interactions enabled the Committee to 
understand the complexities and problem-areas which have resulted in the failure of the parent Act in 
its main objective, i.e. regulating the removal, storage and transplantation of human organs for 
therapeutic purposes. It also helped the Committee tremendously to analyse whether the present 
amendments were good enough to deal with the identi fied underlying problems related to commercial 
dealings of human organs. The Committee also sought the views/comments of the Department on the 
various issues/apprehensions raised by the stakeholders/experts through point-wise reply to their 
memoranda. 
7. Committee’s observations and recommendations contained in the Report reflect an extensive 
scrutiny of all the viewpoints put forth before it. 
8. The clauses where amendments have been su ggested by the Committee or it has been 
found necessary to comment thereon in view of  divergent views of the stakeholders, are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
9. CLAUSES 2, 3 AND 4  
9.1  Presently, the Act regulates transplantation of  human organs. Transplantation of tissues of the 
human body is also proposed to be brought under the ambit of the Act. Accordingly, clauses 2, 3 and 4 

seek to amend the Long Title of the Act as well as  make consequential amendments in other sections 
of the Act. 
9.2  The Committee was informed that with the advancement in medical technology, apart from 
human organs, even tissues and cells were being transplanted. While a separate law would be required 
for regulating cell transplantation and therapy, tissues with the exception of blood can be brought 
under the Act. 
9.3  During the course of its interaction with experts, it was emphasised again and again that human 
organs and tissues cannot be treated on the same footing so far as their removal, storage and 
transplantation and other allied aspects were concer ned. Accordingly, there was a need for specific 
provision for tissues wherever required in the Act.  The Committee is inclined to agree with the 
contention of the experts relating to tissues. The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead 
of having a general provision for inclusion of tissues along with human organs in the entire Act, 
as suggested in Clause 4 of the Bill, specific prov isions relating to tissues, keeping in view the 
characteristics of tissues as distinct from human organs, may be incorporated in the Act. 
10. CLAUSE-5  
10.1 Section 2 of the Act deals with ‘definitions’. 
Clause 5(a) of the Bill seeks to expand the definition of the term “near relative” to include 
grandparents and grandchildren as follows: 
‘(i) “near relative” means spouse, son, daughter, father, mother, brother, sister, grandfather, 
grandmother, grandson or granddaughter;’ 
10.2  Majority of the stakeholders who furnished memoranda on the subject or who appeared before 
the Committee suggested further expansion of the term “near relative”. It was emphasized that more 
addition of grandparents and grandchildren would not prove to be beneficial especially due to their 
age factor. It was also pointed out that joint family system was still prevalent in our society, 
Accordingly, the term ‘near relati ve’ needed to be made both more flexible and broader so as to 
include uncle/s and aunt/s both from maternal and paternal side along with their children. 
10.3  Attention of the Committee was also drawn to the impact of inclusion of wife in the “near 
relative” category. It was stated that keeping “wife” as an option under this term was prone to misuse 
as a female, more so a wife, is vulnerable to being forced to donate her organs in our social set up. 
Another suggestion came in the form of using the term “blood relative” instead of “near relative” so 
that only relatives like ‘biological’ son, ‘biological’ daughter, ‘biological’ father, ‘biological’ mother 
etc. are covered under it thereby eliminating the risk of persons being adopted or married with the sale 
purpose of getting their organs. 
10.4  The Committee was, however, presented with an altogether different point of view by medical 
experts involved in the transplantation work who appeared before the Committee. It was impressed 
upon the Committee that further expansion of the term was not desirable as it would lead to 
commercial exploitation and unfair dealings. Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that at 
present also, cases of all donors falling under the category of ‘near relative’ were being closely 
scrutinised by the doctors involved in organ transplantation work. Not only this, at most of the 
transplantation centres, near relatives were being allowed to donate their organs only after getting the 
clearance from the Authorisation Committee, although it was not statutorily required. It was, 

accordingly, contended that it was not advisable to furt her expand the definition as it would result in 
complexities where the relationship cannot be established even through genetic testing and beyond 
doubt. Further, it could also lead to undue pressure on the maternal side of the family, exposed by 
widening of the term, for donating the organ for the recipient of the groom family. Another significant 
impact pointed out to the Committee was that further expansion of the term ‘near relative’ would 
indirectly result in cadaveric transplantations not being encouraged, which was the need of the hour, 
especially due to comparatively easier availability of the same in our country. 
10.5 After a careful analysis of the opinion of th e stakeholders, the Commi ttee is inclined to 
agree with the view of the medical experts who have shown their reservations against inclusion 
of more relatives within the ambi t of the term “near relative”. Th e Committee opines that even 
though there is no dearth of technology like DNA tests etc. to prove a blood relation, yet the 
same is a very complex and time consuming proc ess. Besides, it also involves moral questions 
and cannot cover adopted relatives. Inclusion of more relatives may also lead to paying to 
potential donor relative either in cash or throug h a share in property. Thus, it may indirectly 
lead to commercialisation of organ donation, th ereby defeating the very purpose of the Act. 
Further, expansion by inclusion of  relations from the maternal side is likely to result in their 
being unnecessarily harassed and being forced to donate organs. 
10.6  The Committee is also of the opinion that the purpose of inclusion of relatives under 
“near relative” is to facilitate the donation of  organs by the close relatives to their immediate 
family members by not making the clearance of Authorisation Committe e mandatory in such 
cases. Nothing stops the ‘other’ relatives not c overed under the definition to come forward and 
donate their organs ‘out of love  and affection’ by following th e duly prescribed process as laid 
down in the Act. The Committee, accordingly,  recommends that apart from the proposed 
inclusion of grandparents and gra ndchildren no further expansion is required in the definition 
of “near relative”. 
10.7 Clause 5(c) seeks to insert the definition of the term ’tissue’ in the following manner: 
‘(oa) “tissue” means a group of cells except blood performing a particular function in the 
human body. 
10.8  The Committee observes that with the specific inclusion of tissues under the Act, definition of 
the term also needs to be incorporated in the Act, which is proposed to be provided under Section 2 
relating to ‘Definitions’. Howe ver, the representative from a reputed Tissue Bank, while appearing 
before the Committee suggested the following definition of the term tissue’: 
“Tissue means a portion of the human body other than an organ. It includes corneas, 
musculoskeletal tissues (e.g. bone, cartilage, fascia lata, tendon), cardiovascular tissues (e.g. 
heart valves, blood vessels), soft tissues (e.g. skin, dura mater) and cells (e.g. sperms and ova)”. 
10.9  The Committee notes that in respect of the afor esaid suggestion, the Department is of the view 
that this aspect can be further firmed up and taken up while carrying out amendments in the Rules and 
as such no amendment in the Act is required. 
10.10  The Committee is inclined to agree with the Department’s view that the issue of specifying 
various types of tissues can be taken up in the Rule s as including them in the Act itself may be a 
short-sighted approach as with every medical technological innovation in this field, an 

amendment would be required to be made in the Act. Therefore, the proposed definition of 
“tissue” will serve the purpose. 
10.11   A suggestion was also made to the Committee for the inclusion of following definition of the 
term ‘Tissue Bank’: 
“Tissue Bank” means a facility that is register ed and regulated under law to engage in the 
recovery, screening, testing, processing, storage or distribution of tissue or cells. It does not 
include blood banks.” 
10.12   The Committee opines that tissue being one of the focal poin ts of the present amendment 
Bill aiming at giving it a distinctly separate category vis-a-vis an organ, it would be advisable to 
include the definition of “Tissu e Bank” under the Act. Accordingly, definition of the term as 
suggested above may be included in this clause for clarity. 
10.13  The Committee also takes note of the following definition of the term ‘transplant coordinator’ 
proposed to be inserted in the Act: 
“transplant co-ordinator means a person of the hospital appointed for coordinating all matters 
relating to removal or transplantation of human organs or tissues or both.” 
10.14  The Committee feels that appointment of a ho spital employee as transplant coordinator 
would prove to be benefici al for better coordination of all matters relating to 
removal/transplantation of human organs. The Committee is, however, of the view that a person 
who is assigned the job of transplant co-o rdinator needs to possess all the specialised 
qualifications for such a crucial responsibility. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that 
specific rules in this regard under the Act may also be formulated. 
10.15  The Committee also recommends to the Departme nt to assign the transplant coordinator 
the task of the ‘required request’ which is pr oposed by the Departme nt to be given to a 
registered medical practitioner. This  task should be specifically spel t out in the definition itself 
for the-purpose of clarity. 
11. CLAUSE-6  
11.1 Section 3 deals with 'Authority for removal of human organs'. 
 Clause 6 (a) seeks to insert the following sub-sections after sub-section (1): 
“(lA) In respect of such human organs or tissues or both, as may be prescribed, it shall be the 
duty of a registered medical practitioner working in  a hospital registered under this Act, for the 
purpose of removal, storage or transplantation of human organs or tissues or both, 
(i) to ascertain from the person admitted to the Intensive Care Unit or from his near 
relative that such person had authorised at any time before his death the removal of any 
human organ or tissue or both of his body unde r sub-section (2), then the hospital shall 
proceed to obtain the documentation for such authorisation; 
(ii) where no such authority as referred to in sub-section (2) was made by such person, to 
make aware to that person or near relative for option to authorise or decline for donation 
of human organs or tissues or both;  

(iii) to require the hospital to inform in writing to the Human Organ Removal Centre for 
removal, storage or transplantation of huma n organs or tissues or both, of the donor 
identified in clauses (i) and (ii) in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(IB) The duties mentioned under clauses (i) to (iii) of sub-section (1A) from such date, as may 
be prescribed, shall also apply in the case of a registered medical practitioner working in an 
Intensive Care Unit in a hospital which is not registered under this Act for the purpose of 
removal, storage or transplantation of human organs or tissues or both.” 
11.2  The amendment proposes introduction of the concept of “Required Request” in respect of 
hospitals already registered under the Act or which are not registered for the purpose of removal, 
storage or transplantation of human organs or tissues or both. 
11.3  The Committee notes that the Review Committee set up by the Delhi High Court had 
recommended that every hospital should make it mandatory for the ICU/Tr eating Medical staff to 
request relatives of brain dead patients for organ donation. The Committee was informed that after the 
Uniform Anatomical Gift Act, 1987  came into force in USA, incorporating a required request clause, 
both awareness about organ donation and the nu mber of organ donors increased considerably. 
Justification given by the Department was that the condition of “required request” could be enforced 
in respect of hospitals registered as Centres for Retrieval or Transplantation of Organs. Not only this, 
it was also being proposed to make the condition of “required request” mandatory for registration of 
clinical establishments subsequent to the enacting of the Clinical Establishments (Registration and 
Regulation) Act. Accordingly, all hospitals with ICUs were targeted to be brought under this category. 
11.4  The Committee held extensive deliberations on this sensitive issue with quite a few experts. 
The Committee also had the opportunity to go through written memoranda received from many 
stakeholders highlighting the pros and cons of this proposed amendment.  The predominant view 
which emerged after this exercise highlighted very strong reservations on the involvement of 
attending/treating doctors in counselling of the patient/attendants for organ donation. The grounds for 
their reservation included very low doctor patient ratio; adverse impact on the patient/attendant’s mind 
leading to serious doubts being raised about quality care and last but not the least indirect 
encouragement of unethical organ trading. Equally  strong apprehensions were voiced against the 
involvement of doctors engaged in organ removal and transplantation in counselling the 
patient/attendant(s) for organ donation which may lead to conflict of interest. 
11.5  Therefore, it was argued th at the family should be approach ed only after a patient has been 
declared brain dead. A view was put forth that the Transplant Co-ordinator or the para-medical staff 
may be involved in this exercise. Some stakeholde rs from the eye discipline were of the opinion that 
for eye-donation, required request can be made after death and not necessarily at the ICU admission 
stage. 
11.6  Further, with even unregistered hospitals being covered under the proposed Amendment may 
encourage organs trading. It was also pointed out that very few ICU admissions ultimately result in 
brain death. 
11.7 When attention of the Department was drawn to these serious reservations, it was clarified that 
not an ICU patients would be requested for donation but only those with ‘brain stem death’ or with 
imminent death (non heart beating donor). 

11.8  The Committee fully shares the concerns raised by various experts regarding the efficacy 
of counselling the patient or his near relatives during patien t’s stay in ICU. The Committee 
strongly feels that even if the Department brings clarity by amending the Rules that not all ICU 
patients would be covered, it wo uld fail to achieve the desired obj ective. What is required to be 
ensured is that “trust” of a pati ent or his relatives does not take  a beating with the introduction 
of ‘required request’ concept, that too when the patient is battling for his life. Further, chances 
are that the conflict of interest mi ght lead to allegations of delib erate medical negligence against 
the treating doctors. 
11.9  The Committee would like to point out that required request can prove  to be a positive 
step if taken in the right earnest and judiciousl y. Keeping in view sheer lack of awareness about 
organ donation, the Committee is of the view that the task of counselling need not be assigned to 
the treating doctor not only due to the reservations stated above but also because of the fact that 
counselling is a professional ex ercise and the doctor might not be suitable for that task. The 
Committee recommends that the task of required  request and counselling may be assigned to 
the Transplant Co-ordinator having the required qualifications and professional training for the 
purpose. 
11.10  The Committee recommends that as eyes can easi ly be harvested even post-death and it is 
not a time taking exercise, requi red request procedure in respect of eye donation may be done 
after death of a patient. 
11.11  The Committee observes that although the amendments ma ke it mandatory for the 
hospital with ICU to inform in writing to  the Human Organ Removal Centre for removal, 
storage or transplantation of human organs or ti ssues or both, of the donor identified, neither 
the term ‘Human Organ Removal Centre’ has been defined nor specific func tions assigned to it 
indicated. The Committee, accordingly, recommends  proper definition and functions of such a 
Centre to be specified in the Act itself. 
11.12  The Committee does not find any merit in entr usting the ‘required request’ condition in 
hospitals with ICUs which are not registered. The Committee opines that it is really out of place 
to allow a hospital with ICU facilities to rem ain unregistered. With the Department admitting 
itself that a condition for registration may be set up during enforcement of the Clinical 
Establishments (Registration & Regulation) Act, there is no point in keeping Section 3 (1B). The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends a review of this and provide compul sory registration of 
all hospitals with ICU facility for the purposes of  THOA in order to maintain minimum medical 
standards. 
11.13  Clause 6 (b) seeks to insert the following proviso in sub-section (4) which provides that the task 
of organ removal can only be carried out by a registered medical practitioner: 
“Provided that a technician possessing such qualifications and experience, as may be 
prescribed, may enucleate a cornea.”; 
11.14  This clause seeks to authorize trained eye technicians possessing such qualification and 
experience to be prescribed, to remove corneas. Non- availability of eye-surgeons and ability of 
trained eye-technicians in the removal of cornea have  been cited as justification for this proposed 
amendment by the Department. It has also been emphasized that such a move would have a positive 
impact on the number of corneas collected in the country. 

11.15  All the experts and other stakeholders seemed to be unanimous on this issue of allowing trained 
eye technicians to enucleate a cornea. However, Committee was given to understand that the provision 
needed to be extended to tissues also. Specific suggestion given in this regard was to further modify 
the proposed proviso as follows: 
“Provided that a technician possessing such qualifications and experience, as may be 
prescribed, may enucleate a cornea or retrieve musculoskeletal tissues and/or cardiovascular 
tissues and/or soft tissues or cells”. 
11.16  The Department in its feedback to the Committ ee was also agreeable to the inclusion of tissues 
in the proviso.  
11.17   The Committee finds merit in the suggestion for a qualified and expe rienced technician 
handling the removal of corneas and tissues as indicated above. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends amendment of proviso to sub-section (4). The Committee would also appreciate if 
the exercise of necessary amendments in the Ru les is expedited after the proposed amendments 
come into effect. 
11.18  Clause 6 (c) seeks to insert the following proviso in clause (iii) of sub-section (6) of Section 3 : 
“Provided that where a neurologist or a neurosur geon is not available, the registered medical 
practitioner may nominate an independent registered medical practitioner, being a surgeon or a 
physician and an anaesthetist or intensivist subject to the condition that they are not members of 
the transplantation team for the concerned recipient and to such conditions as may be 
prescribed;”. 
11.19  Section 3 (6) of the Act provides for the composition of the Board of Medical Experts which 
can certify a person as brain-stem dead for the pu rpose of organ removal. The composition of the 
Board besides having the registered Medical Practitio ner in-charge of the hospital, also includes an 
independent registered medical practitioner (speci alist) and a neurologist/neurosurgeon to be 
nominated by the in-charge from the panel of names approved by the Appropriate Authority. 
However, the Committee is given to understand that the THOA Review Committee and the national 
consultations held by the Department had come out with a view that due to shortage of neuro-surgeons 
and neurologists, brain death certification has not picked up in the country. It was suggested that in the 
event of non-availability of a neuro-surgeon/neurologist, a surgeon/ physician and an 
anesthetist/intensivist could be nominated from a panel already approved by the Appropriate 
Authority, subject to their not being involved in the removal/transplantation of organ. Accordingly, 
proviso to sub-section (6) is proposed to be introduced. 
11.20  Divergent views were expressed on this issue by the experts appearing before the Committee. It 
was pointed out that as brain death is diagnosed by clinical assessment, the registered medical 
practitioner should have specialized training for assessment and diagnosis of brain death. 
Apprehensions have been expressed by some stakeholders about the need to have doctors on the 
Board from the panel of names approved by the Appr opriate Authority due to the prolonged process 
of approval for empanelment resulting in undue delay in arranging the panel to jointly declare a brain-
death. Attention of the Committee was drawn to the existing practice in most of the countries where 
any registered medical practitioner who is permitted to certify cardio-pulmonary death is permitted to 
certify brain death as well. The requirement of join t certification of brain st em death itself provides 
adequate safeguard for this. It was, accordingly, emphasised to do away with the system of keeping 

two doctors whose names are to be duly approved by the Appropriate Authority and instead the Rules 
may provide for hospitals sending monthly reports specifying names and registration numbers of 
doctors who have certified brain death. This would be an adequate safeguard. 
11.21  The Committee finds merit in Department’s pr oposal of substituting the requirement of 
neurologist or a neurosurgeon, in the event of  their non-availability, with a surgeon or a 
physician and an anaesthetist or intensivist.  The Committee opines that there is dearth of 
neurologists and neurosurgeons in the country a nd it is not possible to ensure their availability 
round the clock in the Board of Medical Exp erts to certify a patient as brain dead. The 
Committee notes that the Department  has tried to take due precauti on in the form of providing 
a condition that the surgeon or a physician and an anaesthetist or intensivist so substituted 
would not be members of the tran splantation team for the concerned recipient. This would, to a 
great extent, be a safeguard against conflict of interest. 
11.22  The Committee, however, finds that the prop osed proviso does not specify that the 
surgeon or a physician and an anaesthetist or intensivist would be from  an approved panel of 
the Appropriate Authority. Such an important aspect should be part of the Act itself and cannot 
be left unspecified for being covered in the Ru les. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 
insertion of the words “from a panel already a pproved by the Appropriate Authority” at the 
end of the proviso to remove any ambiguity in  this regard. The Committee also recommends to 
the Department to modify the Ru les/Act appropriately to keep a larger pool of such experts, 
duly approved by the Appropriate Authority, in  order to ensure that the Board of Medical 
Experts does not face manpower crunch in its functioning and remains fully operational. 
12. CLAUSE 7  
12.1  Section 9 of the Act deals with ‘Restrictions  on removal and transplantation of human organs’. 
 Clause 7 (a) seeks to inse rt the following sub-section after sub-section (1):  
“(1 A) Where the donor or the recipient being near relative is a foreign national, prior approval 
of the Authorisation Committee shall be required before removing or transplanting human 
organ or tissue or both: 
Provided that the Authorisation Committee shall not  approve such removal or transplantation if 
the recipient is a foreign national and the donor is an Indian national unless they are near 
relatives.” 
12.2  This clause seeks to make it mandatory for all cases involving a foreign national as a donor or 
recipient to be routed through the Authorization Co mmittee even if the donor and recipients are near 
relatives. This sub-clause also seeks to provide that the Authorization Committee shall not approve 
removal, or transplantation of orga ns or tissues or both if the recipient is a foreign national and the 
donor is an Indian national unless they are near relatives. 
12.3 Attention of the Committee was drawn to various reports appearing in the media regarding 
India becoming the hub for organ transplant tourism. Recent revelations in several such cases have 
confirmed this alarming trend. Therefore, it was co ntended that in order to protect the vulnerable 
sections of the society from exploitation as well  as to prevent India from becoming centre of this 
unethical and highly commercialised activity, the new provision has been proposed in the Act. As the 
law stands today, cases of near relatives are not required to be processed through the Authorisation 
Committee. 

12.4  The Committee is aware that vu lnerable sections of the so ciety are falling prey to 
middlemen and due to poverty, are being exploite d to provide their organs to foreigners in the 
garb of their near relatives. This  practice needs to be curbed e ffectively at the earliest. The 
Committee hopes that this amendment will, to a g reat extent, help in plugging the loopholes in 
the Parent Act. The Committee, therefore, welcomes the inclusion of this amendment. 
12.5 Clause 7 (a) also seeks to  insert the following sub-section after sub-section (1): 
“(1B) No human organs or tissues or both shall be removed from the body of a minor before his 
death for the purpose of transplantation except in the manner as may be prescribed.” 
12.6 The Committee was given to understand that the above amendment was based on the following 
Guiding Principle of WHO: 
“No cells, tissues or organs should be remove d from the body of a living minor for the purpose 
of transplantation other than narrow exceptions al lowed under national law. Specific measures 
should be in place to protect the minor and wherever possible the minor’s assent should be 
obtained before donation.” 
12.7 On being asked to clarify the circumstances under which human organ/ tissue could be removed 
from the body of a minor before his death, the Committee was informed that exceptions can be 
familial donation of regenerative cells when therapeutically compatible adult donor was not available 
or kidney transplant between identical twins. Fast developing medical technology and availability of 
newer treatment options in  future were cited for non-specifica tion of circumstances in the Act, 
especially due to the time-consuming process of bringing in an amendment in the Act. 
12.8  While not contesting the prolonged process of  bringing in amendments in an Act, the 
Committee is of the view that full protection needs to be provided to the most vulnerable section 
of the society. Accordingly, exceptional circum stances necessitating organ donation by minor 
need to be enumerated in the Act itself. The Co mmittee also feels that in  order to remove any 
sort of ambiguity, the definition of “minor” needs to be given in the Act itself. 
12.9 The Committee also takes note of the fact th at mentally challenged persons also need 
similar protection. The Committee, accordin gly, recommends that the provision may be 
extended to mentally challenged people also. 
12.10   Clause 7 (b) seeks to insert the following sub-section after sub-section (3):  
“(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), where 
(a) any donor has agreed to make a donation of his human organ or tissue or both before his 
death to a recipient, who is his near relative, but such donor is not compatible biologically as a 
donor for the recipient; and 
(b) the second donor has agreed to make a donation of his human organ or tissue or both before 
his death to such recipient, who is his near relative, but such donor is not compatible 
biologically as a donor for such recipient; then 
(c) the first donor who is compatible biologically as a donor for the second recipient and the 
second donor is compatible biologically as a do nor of a human organ or tissues or both for the 
first recipient and both donors and both recipients in the aforesaid group of donor and recipient 

have entered into a single agreement to donate and receive such human organ or tissue or both 
according to such biological compatibility in th e group, the removal and transplantation of the 
human organ or tissue or both, as per the agreement referred to above, shall not be done without 
prior approval of the Authorisation Committee”. 
12.11  The Committee is given to understand that, as of now, the law permits donation of an organ 
only by a near relative without requiring the approval of the Authorization Committee. All other cases 
are required to be routed through this Comm ittee. Proposed sub-section (3A) is based on the 
recommendations of the Review Committee set up by Hon’ble Delhi High Court which seeks to 
permit swap donations between one set of willing but incompatible “near relative” donors and a 
similar other donor-recipient incompatible relative pair. The intention is to permit donation of organs 
in exchange without any commercial interest and only due to the reason that despite willingness, their 
organ was not found medically compatible to the inte nded recipients. Swap donations are proposed to 
be considered by the Authorization Committees on a case-to-case basis as per existing provisions in 
the Act and the Rules. 
12.12  The proposal has been welcomed by all the stakeholders and is stated to be a positive step 
towards solving the miseries of many patients who have a willing but biologically incompatible “near 
relative” donor. However, a suggestion was made that instead of restricting it to two donor-recipient 
pairs, it needed to be expanded further. It was pointed out that the task of identifying and matching 
potential donors and recipients for a large number of pairs could be easily accomplished through the 
proposed National Registry. 
12.13  The Committee infers that the whole concept of “Swap” donation with the approval of the 
Authorisation Committee will prove to be a boon for millions of patients, who, inspite of having 
a willing near relative cannot have organ transp lantation due to biological incompatibility. Due 
to strict provisions of the Act and with only  one other condition laid down for donations, i.e. 
“out of love and affection”, such patients are forced to go through a silent death. The Committee 
also recommends that viability of expanding two do nor-recipient pairs may also be explored by 
the Department. With the proposed National  Registry becoming functional and well-
coordinated network both at national and regional level, such an initiative can be carried 
forward in an effective and transparent manner. 
12.14 The Committee was given to understand that in the case of tissues, compatibility was not 
required. Accordingly, swap donation may be restricted for human  organs only. The 
Committee, however, does not fi nd merit in excluding tissues al together from the ambit of the 
swapping provision especially with the advance ment in the field of medical science. The 
Authorisation Committee can well decide on a ca se-to-case basis whether a particular tissue 
swapping is justified or not. 
12.15  Clause 7 (c) seeks to substitute sub-section (4) as follows:  
"(4)(a) The composition of the Authorisation Committees shall be such as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government from time to time. 
(b) The State Governments and the Union Territories shall constitute, by notification, one or 
more Authorisation Committees consisting of su ch members as may be nominated by the State 
Governments and the Union Territories on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the 
notification for the purposes of this section." 

12.16  The Parent Act empowers the Central Government to constitute Authorisation Committees in 
case of Union Territories and the State Governme nts for their respective States. The proposed 
amendment seeks to provide for the Central Government to prescribe the composition and broad 
framework including the eligibility criteria for the persons to be nominated to the Authorization 
Committees. Actual nomination is to be done by the State Governments and the Union Territories. 
12.17  The Committee notes that the Review Committee set up by the Delhi High Court was of the 
view that the practice of hospital based Authorisation Committee was workable and practical in Metro 
cities and large capital cities of States. But in  non-metro and smaller capital cities, a single 
Authorization Committee for the entire district or a Division comprising several districts would serve 
the purpose. 
12.18  Most of the stakeholders have welcomed the move of the Department. However, one pertinent 
issue has been raised regarding jurisdiction of Authorisation Committee when the donor and recipient 
belong to different States or donor and recipient belong to other States and transplantation is taking 
place in a different State. The Department, in response to this issue has stated that this would be taken 
care of while amending the Rules and until then Supreme Court order of March, 2005 was being 
followed. 
12.19 Apprehensions were also voiced about too much involvement of Central Government in 
deciding the composition of the Authorisation Co mmittees. It was, accordingly, suggested that 
composition of such Committees should entirely be left to th e discretion of States/Union 
Territories. The Committee would like to point ou t that the States and Union Territories would 
continue to have the powers fo r actual constitution of such Committees. Only broad framework 
and eligibility criteria for members of Authorisation Committees is sought to be prescribed so as 
to ensure uniformity and high standard of these Committees. 
12.20 The Committee fully shares its concerns over th e issue of jurisdicti on of Authorisation 
Committees. After careful deliberations, the Commi ttee finds merit in gi ving jurisdictional 
powers to the Authorisation Committee of a part icular State/ District/ Hospital where organ 
transplantation is being carried out. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the 
Department to settle this issue of jurisdiction of Authorisatio n Committee in the Act itself to 
remove any sort of ambiguity and confer all su ch related powers to that Committee of the 
State/District/Hospital where transplantation is being carried out. 
13. CLAUSE 8 
 Clause 8 seeks to insert new sections after Section 13 as follows: 
 13A. Advisory Committees to advise Appropriate Authority. 
“13A. (1). The Central Government and the State Governments, as the case may be, by 
notification, shall constitute an Advisory Committee for a period of two years to aid and advise 
the Appropriate Authority to discharge its functions. 
(2) The Advisory Committee shall consist of: 
(a) one administrative expert not below the rank of Secretary to the State Government, 
to be nominated as Chairperson of the Advisory Committee; 
(b) two medical experts having such qualifications as may be prescribed; 

(c) one officer not below the rank of a Joint Director to represent the Ministry or 
Department of Health and Family Welfare, to be designated as Member-Secretary; 
(d) two eminent social workers of high social standing and integrity, one of whom shall 
be from amongst representatives of women’s organisation; 
(e) one legal expert who has held the position of an Additional District Judge or 
equivalent. 
(3) The terms and conditions for appointment to the Advisory Committee shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government.” 
13.1 On being asked to justify the need for having an Advisory Committee to the Appropriate 
Authority, the Department clarified that the poor conviction rate under the Act has often been 
attributed to the inability of State Health Officer, designated as the Appropriate Authority, to find time 
for a methodical and systematic discharge of duties assigned under the Act. It has, therefore, been 
proposed to provide for the constitution of an Advisory Committee to aid and assist the Appropriate 
Authority to discharge its functions. 
13.2 Consultations with various experts and suggestions received from various other stakeholders 
have brought forward several issues like questioning the gender bias with inclusion of representative 
from a woman’s organisation, inclusion of NGOs, qua lifications of the lega l expert, inclusion of 
experts from different specialities and inclusion of a legal advisor in crime therapeutic procedure. 
13.3  The Committee is of the view that the purpose of the clause should be to give a broad 
framework about the composition of the Advisory  Committee, with States being entrusted with 
the responsibility of deciding actual membership thereof. The Committee would like to point out 
that although such a Committee need not be a big body, yet it needs to be made more 
representative. Accordingly, the Committee recommends inclusion of representatives of reputed 
NGOs working in the field of Organ Donation and Human Rights Groups. The representation of 
medical experts may also be suit ably enhanced to cover experts of more specialities, with the 
binding condition that they are not members of any transplantation team. 
13.4  Following powers of Appropriate Authority are proposed to be specified through insertion of 
section 13B as indicated below: 
“13B. The Appropriate Authority shall for the pu rposes of this Act have all the powers of a 
civil court trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and, in particular, in respect of 
the following matters, namely: 
(a) summoning of any person who is in possession of any information relating to violation of 
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder; 
(b) discovery and production of any document or material object; 
(c) issuing search warrant for any place suspected to be indulging in unauthorised removal, 
procurement or transplantation of human organs or tissues or both; and 
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.” 
13.5  The Committee is of the view  that fully empowered Auth orisation Committee would go a 
long way in curbing the commercialisation of pr ocess of donation of human organs and also 
enabling the reach of much-needed organs to the rightful recipients. 

13.6 National Human Organs and Tissues Removal and Storage Network 
“13C The Central Government may, by notification, establish a National Human Organs and 
Tissues Removal and Storage Network at one or more places and Regional Network in such 
manner and to perform such functions, as may be prescribed.” 
13.7  The Department has stated that a need has been felt for the establishment of nationwide 
network on the lines of the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network of USA or UK to include 
transplant centres, retrieval centres, certified HLA te sting labs and in future trauma centres, dialysis 
centres and hospitals with ICUs. An efficient network that links organ retrieval and transplant centres 
to facilitate exchange information about availability of organs and data base of recipients holds the 
key to the success of any transplant programme. Accordingly, the Department has come up with the 
proposal of establishing a National Human Organs and Tissues Removal and Storage Network. 
13.8 The Committee has received several suggestions from stakeholders like, the word ‘may’ in 
Section 13C must be replaced by the word ‘s hall’; Government must spell out a time-bound 
commitment to establish such network and a National Registry of Donors and Recipients; Hospital 
networking and registry maintenance to be permitted as State level initiatives and therefore in the new 
section 13C and 13D, the words “Central Government” to be replaced by the words” Central and State 
Governments”. Committee’s attention has also been drawn to such Networks already set up in 
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. 
13.9  The Committee welcomes the initiative of establishing a National Human Organs and 
Tissues Removal and Storage Network as also Regional Networks. However, the Committee is of 
the view that too much control at central level may not prove to  be beneficial and result in 
practical difficulties. The Commi ttee would like to recommend to the Department to establish 
the Network on the lines of “National Register of Clinical Establishm ents” proposed under the 
Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regula tion) Act along with a replica of the same at 
State level to be termed as State Human Orga ns and Tissues Removal and Storage Network. 
This would facilitate in gathering and dissemi nation of information from the hospital and 
district level. For this the Department needs to assign powers to State Governments by replacing 
the word “Central Government” with Central and State Governments”. 
13.10  Similarly, the Committee recommends use of the word ‘shall’ in place of ‘may’ to give it a 
mandatory structure. The Committee also recomme nds to the Department to have a thorough 
study of such Networks set up in States like Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. Based 
on the experience of thes e States, a model framework can be ci rculated to all the States. Such 
Networks need to be set up within a definite time-frame. 
13.11  The Committee further recommends that all su ch information related to the Network 
may be put out on a dedicated website of all the State Health Departments at the State level and 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare at the Central level so that the same is available to 
the public at large. 
13.12  The Committee would also like to recommend to the Department to work out a 
proposition wherein critical patients (recipients) may be considered on priority basis. It is also 
suggested that priority of recipient may be give n to a patient (intended recipient) of the same 
Hospital/District as it is not possible to manage the priority list at State or National level. 
However, due checks may be incorporated so that such provisions are not subjected to misuse. 

13.13  While deliberating on the proposed National Human Organs and Tissues Removal and Storage 
Network in its meeting held on the 17th February, 2010, the Committee was apprised that the Network 
was going to be essentially IT-based. ERNET, an organisation under the Department of Information 
Technology was conducting a feasibility study of the proposal which was likely to be completed 
within three months. 
13.14  The Committee hopes that by the time the pr oposed amendments to the Act would come 
into effect, a feasibility model for the National Network would also be ready to be launched. The 
Committee would, however, be failing in its dut y if a mention about the status of the Organ 
Retrieval Banking Organisation of AIIMS is no t made. The Committee was of the view that 
ORBO would have stood out as a role model fo r the proposed National and Regional Network 
for human organs and tissues. However, on a pert inent query in this regard, the Committee was 
given to understand, both by the Ministry officials and the Head of ORBO, that due to inherent 
constraints relating to lack of infrastructure and trained manpower, the Organisation has so far 
failed to achieve its objective. As a result, its mandate has remained confined to deceased organ 
donors of AIIMS only. 
13.15  The Committee takes note of the fact that the purpose behind the proposed amendments 
is to make ORBO-like organizations grow out of AIIMS and have a nationwide reach. Likewise, 
a National Programme for Promotion of Organ Do nation is also being worked out which would 
conceptualise a structure that wo uld have a national as well as a State-wise reach so as to 
facilitate and replicate ORBO-like set-ups. While  welcoming all these ambitious plans, which 
would definitely contribute in extending the reach of needy patients for required organs, the 
Committee would like to emphasize that every con ceivable effort needs to  be made to make 
ORBO fully functional so that it can play the lead role for other similar set-ups. The Committee 
hopes that as assured by the Secretary, Health and Family Welfare, all the necessary procedural 
exercise for having the required funds, in frastructure and manpower for ORBO would be 
completed by the year end.  
13.16   National Registry. 
“13D. The Central Government shall maintain a registry of the donors and recipients of human 
organs and tissues and such registry shall have such information as may be prescribed to an 
ongoing evaluation of the scientific and clinical status of human organs and tissues”. 
13.17  The Department proposes the development and maintenance of a scientific registry called 
“National Registry” which will contain information of donors and recipients for ongoing evaluation of 
the scientific and clinical status of organ transplantation. 
13.18  The draft guiding principles for Organ  Transplantation prepared by WHO inter-alia 
state that the long-term outcomes of cell, tissu e and organ donation and transplantation should 
be assessed for the living donor as well as the recipient in order to docu ment benefit and harm. 
The Committee welcomes the propos al of establishing a National Registry and in its opinion it 
will help in achieving the aforesaid objective. 
13.19  The Committee, however, recommends setting up of State Registries, with due powers 
and duties to States similar to the National Registry as sugges ted in case of National Human 
Organs and Tissues Removal and Storage Network above. 

13.20  The Committee finds that no provision seems to have been made for keeping a record of donors 
who have pledged organ donation and of patients who need an organ donation for transplantation. The 
National Registry seems to suggest that it will contain only names of those who have already donated 
their organs and those who have already received organs through transplantation. Similarly, the 
National Human Organs and Tissues Removal and Storage Network seems to be a network that links 
organ retrieval and transplant centres to facilitate exchange information about availability of organs in 
case of cadaver. The Committee, accordingly recommends to the Department to keep a list of 
intended donors who have pledged their organs for donation after death as well as those who 
register as patients requiring organ donation. However, due process of verification may be 
carried out to ascertain the genuineness thereof. Th e same may also be put out on a dedicated 
website along with National Registry and Na tional Human Organs and Tissues Removal and 
Storage Network. 
14. CLAUSE 9  
14.1  Section 14 relates to ‘Registration of hospitals engaged in removal, storage or transplantation of 
human organs’. 
After sub-section (3), the following sub-section is proposed to be inserted:---- 
“(4) No hospital shall be registered under this Act, unless the Appropriate Authority is satisfied 
that such hospital has appointed a transplant coordinator having such qualifications and 
experience as may be prescribed.” 
14.2  Proposed new sub-section (4) seeks to make it mandatory for the hospitals to have the post of 
“Transplant Co-ordinator” before the Appropriate Authority gives his approval for the registration of 
the hospital under this Act. “Transplant Co-ordinator” recommended by the Review Committee may 
be a doctor/senior nursing staff member independent of the Transplant Team, possessing 
communication skills and who can liaison between the treating doctor and the potential brain-death 
donor. 
14.3 As recommended by the Committee in previous clauses, the Transplant Co-ordinator may 
also be entrusted with the dut ies of “required request” as specified under amendment clause 6 
(a). However, the Committee feels that the job of  the transplant coordinator would be more of a 
counsellor who is trained in dealing with human em otions and sentiments, if  he is assigned the 
duties of carrying out “required  request” in ICU. Accordingl y, it recommends that the 
prescribed qualification for such a post may include inter-alia qualifications required for a 
counsellor. 
15. CLAUSES 10, 11 AND 12  
15.1  Clause 10,11 and 12 relate to Sections 18, 19 and 20 regarding ‘Punishment for removal of 
human organ without authority’, ‘Punishment fo r commercial dealings in human organ’ and 
‘Punishment for contravention of any other provision of this Act’, respectively. 
15.2  The Committee was informed that the Re view Committee had recommended significant 
enhancements in the penalties for offences committed under the Act. The consensus that emerged in 
that Committee was that fines and term of imprisonment should be enhanced so as to act as deterrents 
for violators of law. 

15.3  The Committee notes that the main objective of the Bill is to regulate the removal, storage and 
transplantation of human organs and also to prev ent commercial dealings in human organs. Through 
the amendments proposed in S ections 18, 19 and 20, both fines and terms of imprisonment for 
different categories of violations are sought to be suitably enhanced. 
15.4  Various stakeholders who appeared before the Committee or who submitted written 
memoranda to the Committee have welcomed the enhancement in the various penalties both monetary 
as well as in the terms of imprisonment. However, it was suggested that tissues should not be placed 
on an equal footing with organs for the purpose of penalties and penalties in respect of them need to 
be relooked. 
15.5  The Committee is in full agreement with the De partment and appreciates its proposal of 
substantial hike in penalties fo r violation of various provisions of the Act. The Committee also 
welcomes the omission of discretionary power of  Courts to lower the sentence which does not 
stand justified in the current times and with a thriving illegal transplantation network 
throughout India. 
15.6  The Committee is also aware that with tissues  being included in the Act, the Department 
needs to be cautious in respect of penalties fo r tissue removal storage and transplantation. The 
Committee is, therefore, inclined to agree with th e suggestion put forth by some stakeholders 
regarding differential penalties for tissues and organs. The Committee concludes that the 
removal of many of the tissues, unlike in case of human organs, do not offer any threat to 
human life and even some of the tissues are a discarded medical waste.  Therefore, subjecting 
tissue transplants with the same punishment m ay be counterproductive and lead to unnecessary 
harassment of institutions engaged in the us age of tissues. The Co mmittee, accordingly, 
recommends to the Department to revisit its pena lties proposed in Sections 18, 19 and 20 for 
tissues. 
16. SUGGESTIONS ON SECTIONS NOT COVERED IN THE AMENDMENT BILL  
 During its interactions with experts as well as the feedback received from various stakeholders, 
the Committee had the opportunity to have a comp rehensive assessment of the entire Act. The 
Committee has no other alternative but to conclude th at some of the provisions of the Principal Act 
which were required to be amended have somehow been left unchanged. The Committee would be 
failing in the real accomplishment of its assigned task , if such valuable suggestions received by it are 
not highlighted. Following paras are an attempt in this direction. 
16.1 AMENDMENT IN SECTION 2 : DEFINITIONS  
 SUB-SECTION (k) defines the term ‘payment’ as follows: 
“Payment means payment in money or money’s worth but does not include any payment for 
defraying or reimbursing ---- 
(i) the cost of removing, transporting or pr eserving the human organ to be supplied; or 
(ii) any expenses or loss of earnings incurred by a person so far as reasonably and directly 
attributable to his supplying any human organ from his body.” 
16.1.1   A suggestion was put forth before the Committee to further expand the definition of the term 
‘payment’ in the following manner: 

(iii) the cost of maintaining deceased person in a state of functioning of the human organs till 
their removal and handing over the dead body to the person in lawful possession of it, 
inclusive of costs of brain death certificatio n and of clinical and laboratory assessment 
required to judge suitability of the organs for therapeutic purposes and to match specific 
recipients. 
(iv) Expenses incurred in transportation of the deceased donor between hospitals and from 
hospital to home and in burial or funeral as may be authorized by the State or Central 
Government. 
(v) Costs of any recognition or award or benef it accorded to the near relative of the deceased 
donor as authorized by the State or Central Government. 
16.1.2  It was argued that failure to exclude these from the definition of “payment” was causing 
confusion and it was necessary and correct to incu r such costs for the succ ess of deceased donor 
transplantation programme. It has been stated that the US Act provides for the deferment of organ 
procurement costs. The Department, on being asked about their views in this regard also found it to be 
agreeable. It was, accordingly, suggested that the same may be included in the Rules. 
16.1.3  The Committee is in full agreement with th e suggestion of excluding the cost of 
maintaining the functional stat e of organs of a deceased pers on, transportation costs and 
benefits/costs of award to near relative of deceased person, from th e term “payment”. The 
Committee, however, is not in favo ur of placing the same in Rules.  As the definition has already 
covered two exclusions in the Act, there is no point in moving these suggestions to the Rules. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Depa rtment to amend the de finition of “payment” 
suitably in Section 2 of the Act. 
16.2 AMENDMENT IN SECTION 3  
Authority for removal of human organs.  
“(2) If any donor had, in writing and in the presen ce of two or more witnesses (at least one of 
whom is a near relative of such person), unequivocally authorised at any time before his death, 
the removal of any human organ of his body, af ter his death, for therapeutic purposes, the 
person lawfully in possession of the dead body of the donor shall, unless he has any reason to 
believe that the donor had subsequently revoked the authority aforesaid, grant to a registered 
medical practitioner all reasonable facilities for the removal, for therapeutic purposes, of that 
human organ from the dead body of the donor.” 
16.2.1  This clause states that if a patient, before death, has given his consent for organ removal post-
death, the person who is legally in possession of his body would give all facilities to a registered 
medical practitioner for the removal of that human organ for therapeutic purposes from the dead body 
of the donor. 
16.2.2  Attention of the Committee was drawn to the fact that the term ‘lawfully in possession of the 
dead body’ was ambiguous as the Act failed to explai n the term. It was, accordingly, suggested that it 
may further be clarified according to the priority of relatives li ke ---- spouse, parents, children, 
brothers/sisters, grandparents, grandchildren etc. Th is would take care of an eventuality when the 
family member on the top of the list not being present, the decision could be taken by the next family 
member. Another view put forth before the Committee was that in those cases where verified donor 

consent was on record, the requirement to obtain the permission of a near relative for removal of the 
organs for transplant could be dispensed with. 
16.2.3  The Department’s response was that the definition of the term ‘lawfully in possession of the 
dead body’ was beyond the scope of the Act as th e concerned legal provisions under IPC/CrPC were 
dealt with by the Ministry of Home Affairs. It was also contended that permission of the near relative 
was taken to rule out the commercial aspect and any undue pressure to donate. 
16.2.4  The Committee is aware that certain legal issues covered under various provisions of IPC 
and CrPC come under the domain of the Ministry  of Home Affairs. Ho wever, the Committee 
does not find merit in keeping the term ‘lawfull y in possession of the dead body’ ambiguous in 
the present Act. The Committee finds no harm in relevant provisions of IPC/CrPC being 
referred to in the Act. The Department can ea sily work out an appropriate provision in 
consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs so that elemen t of ambiguity whatsoever does 
not remain. The Committee strongly feels that such  a provision will prove effective in checking 
both misinterpretation of the provision as well as misuse thereof. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends to the Department to move forward in this regard. 
16.2.5  The Committee has, in preceding paras, sugge sted that on the lines of the National 
Registry and National Human Organs and Tissu es Removal and Storage Network, a list of 
intended donors who have pledge d their organ for donation as well as those who register as 
patients requiring organ donation should be maintained after due verification process. If that 
recommendation is adhered to, then it would be mo re than enough proof fo r establishing that a 
patient has voluntarily offered donation of his orga ns before his death. In that eventuality, no 
formal permission of the relative should be mandatory for organ removal. The Authorisation 
Committee can move in at this point and proceed  with all relevant procedural formalities of 
organ removal as per the wish of the deceased do nor. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 
to the Department to come up with suitable amendment in the provisions of the Act. 
16.3 AMENDMENT IN SECTION 5  
 Section 5 relating to ‘Authority for removal of  human organ in case of unclaimed bodies 
in hospital or prison’ reads as follows: 
“5. (1) In the case of a dead body lying in hospital or prison and not claimed by any of the near 
relatives of the deceased person within forty-eight hours from the time of the death of the 
concerned person, the authority for the removal of any human organ from the dead body which 
so remain unclaimed may be given in the prescribed form, by the person in charge, for the time 
being, of the management or control of the ho spital or prison, or by an employee of such 
hospital or prison authorized in this behalf by  the person in charge of the management or 
control thereof. 
(2) No authority shall be given under sub-section (1) if the person empowered to give such 
authority has reason to believe that any near rela tive of the deceased person is likely to claim 
the dead body even though such near relative has not come forward to claim the body of the 
deceased person within the time specified in sub-section (1).” 
16.3.1  Some of the experts had stated that this whole provision had no meaning for organ donation 
unless such body that was left unclaimed in a hospital or a body from the prison was put on a 
ventilator. In ordinary circumstances in 48 hours the body would be decomposed and no organs could 

be utilized. Accordingly, it was suggested that in such situations, presumed consent for eyes, heart 
valves, bones and cartilages should be allowed. The Department, however, was of the view that the 
same was beyond the scope of the Act as legal provisions involved therein were dealt with by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs. It was also pointed out that the principle of “required request” and not 
“presumed consent” was the basis of the Act. 
16.3.2  The Committee is aware that legal issues are involved in case of unclaimed bodies and the 
same cannot be ignored. The Committee also notes th at ordinarily a dead bo dy is not useful for 
organ donation after 48  hours of death unless kept und er required medical conditions. The 
Committee understands that chances of preservation of a dead body  lying in prison may not be 
there. However, situation in hospitals would perh aps be far better. Theref ore, keeping in view 
acute shortage of human organs in the country, a beginning can be made in the case of well-
equipped hospitals where unclaimed dead bodies coul d be kept fit for organ donation. If that is 
not found viable, the Committee feels that at least tissues can be harvested from unclaimed dead 
bodies. The Committee, accordingly, recommends th at this sensitive issue may be examined, 
taking care of all types of comple xities, and a viable solution arrived at. Other legal issues, like 
keeping viscera or post-mortem et c. can simultaneously be taken care of as per the directions of 
the investigating officer and requirements of th e case. The identity of the donor could be 
established with the help of the Authorisation Committee of the hospital  where such death has 
occurred or the nearest hospital to the Police  Station where such unclaimed body is reported. 
The Department needs to work closely with the Ministry of Home Affairs in this regard. 
16.4 AMENDMENT IN SECTION 6  
 Section 6 of the Act deals with the procedure of  organ removal in case of bodies sent for post-
mortem examination for medico-legal or pathological purposes, as reproduced below: 
 “6. Where the body of a person has been sent for post-mortem examination---- 
(a) for medico-legal purposes by reason of the death of such person having been caused 
by accident or any other unnatural cause; or 
(b) for pathological purposes, 
the person competent under this Act to give authority for the removal of any human organ from 
such dead body may, if he has reason to believe that such human organ will not be required for 
the purpose for which such body has been sent for post-mortem examination, authorize the 
removal for therapeutic purposes, of that human organ of the deceased pe rson provided that he 
is satisfied that the deceased person had not expressed, before his death, any objection to any of 
his human organs being used, for therapeutic purp oses after his death or, where he had granted 
an authority for the use of any of his human or gans for therapeutic purposes after his death, 
such authority had not been revoked by him before his death,” 
16.4.1  The Committee has received some valid sugges tions in regard to the applicability of this 
provision at the ground level. Some of the experts were of the view that usually in accidents or other 
cases where post-mortem was to be held mandatorily, the family members often turn down the request 
or backtrack from the consent later on for organ donation due to long drawn procedural formalities 
resulting in undue delay in performing the last rites of the deceased. It was also pointed out that organ 
retrieval after the post-mortem required cutting the body again. Moreover, sometimes the body was 
required to be taken to a different place having facilities for organ retrieval. It was contended that the 

undue delay in handing over the body to the families of the deceased was a crucial factor for deceased 
organ donation success rate. Accordingly, it was suggested that the process of post-mortem could be 
clubbed with retrieval of organs. 
16.4.2  The Committee fully shares the reasoning that our social set up and the intrinsic values 
and emotions attached with such a sensitive issue like death of a re lative and the subsequent last 
rites, many a time, results in turning down or  withholding the request of organ donation. The 
Committee also understands that there is a need to  cut down the time taken between the post-
mortem, organ retrieval, and the subsequent handing over of the body to the relatives for the 
last rites. The Committee opines that a workable via media of conducting the post-mortem and 
organ retrieval simultaneously can perhaps be put  into place. However, the Committee is aware 
that to give effect to such a solution, legal pr ovisions might require an amendment. Accordingly, 
in the best interest of the civil society, th e Committee recommends to the Department to 
approach the Ministry of Home Affairs so as to come out with a proposition where the post-
mortem could simultaneously be carried out with the retrieval of the organs so as to minimise 
the delay in handing over body of the deceased to his relatives. 
16.5 AMENDMENT IN SECTION 10  
 Section 10 which relates to ‘Regulation of hospitals conducting the removal, storage or 
transplantation of human organs’ reads as follows:----  
 “10. (1) On and from the co mmencement of this Act,---- 
(a) no hospital, unless registered under this Act, shall conduct, or associate with, or help 
in, the removal, storage or transplantation of any human organ; 
(b) no medical practitioner or any other person shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, or 
aid in conducting by himself or through any other person, any activity relating to the 
removal, storage or transplantation of any human organ at a place other than a place 
registered under this Act; and 
(c) no place including a hospital registered under sub-section (1) of section 15 shall be 
used or cause to be used by any person for th e removal, storage or transplantation of any 
human organ except for therapeutic purposes. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the eyes or the ears may be removed 
at any place from the dead body of any donor, fo r therapeutic purposes, by a registered medical 
practitioner. 
Explanation- For the purposes of this sub-se ction, “ears” includes ear drums and ear 
bones.” 
16.5.1  The Section prohibits a hospital from the removal, storage or transplantation of any human 
organ or association with, or helping in such activities, unless it is registered under this Act. . 
16.5.2  Some of the experts submitted that removing organs from a cadaver did not require elaborate 
facilities and infrastructure. Further, if the death occurred in a hospital other than the registered one, 
then in such a scenario inspite of the relatives being willing to donate the organs, potential donation 
opportunity was lost if the relatives were told to take the body to nearest registered hospital for this 
purpose. Similarly, experts in the field of tissue harvesting stated that many of the tissues did not 

require specialised procedures/technicians for removal. Therefore, it was suggested that due protection 
needed to be given to tissues in this regard. 
16.5.3  The Committee is of the opinion that the wh ole idea of promotion of cadaveric organ 
donation would remain on paper if the condition of retrieval of organs only at the registered 
hospitals is enforced. The fact th at the relatives would be hesi tant to move the body to a 
registered hospital due to unnecessary delay, wo uld be a major stumbling block in success of 
cadaveric donation inspite of willing relatives or pledge of  the deceased. The Committee, 
accordingly, is in full agreement with the argu ment that unregistered hospitals where the death 
takes place may be allowed for organ retrieval. However, the organ retrieval should be allowed 
to be carried out only by the team from a registered hospital after following due process in order 
to ensure that no irregularities occur leading to illegal activiti es. For this, registered hospitals 
for the purpose can be made coor dinating units in the area with  jurisdiction over other small 
and unregistered hospitals and nursing homes for the purpose of organ retrieval. This can easily 
be done once the Clinical Establishments (Reg istration and Regulation) Act is enforced by 
suitably inserting a provision in this regard. The Committee,  therefore, recommends to the 
Department to make appropriate amendment in this Section in this regard. 
16.5.4  The Committee also agrees that surgical tissu e residues that are routinely discarded may 
be stored at a tissue bank for subsequent tran splantation. A surgery may take place in any 
nursing home or hospital  which is not engaged in organ tr ansplantation and hence may not be 
registered under the present Act. In order to utilise such tissues , and other forms of tissues 
which do not require specialised infrastructure, so me kind of exemption is required on the lines 
of eyes and ears in sub-section (2) above. Th e Committee, accordingly, recommends suitable 
exemption of tissues in sub-section (2) of this s ection. However, details of the exempted tissues 
may be given in the Rules as it may not be prac tical to exempt all tissues from the purview on 
account of their specialised procedures of retrieval. 
16.6 AMENDMENT IN SECTION 14  
Section 14: which relates to ‘Registration of  hospitals engaged in removal, storage or 
transportation of human organs’ reads as follows: 
“(1) No hospital shall commence any activity relating to the removal, storage or 
transplantation of any human organ for therapeu tic purposes after the commencement of this 
Act unless such hospital is duly registered under this Act: 
 Provided that every hospital engaged, either partly or exclusively, in any activity relating 
to the removal, storage or transplantation of any human organ far therapeutic purposes 
immediately before the commencement of this Ac t, shall apply for registration within sixty 
days from the date of such commencement: 
 Provided further that every hospital engaged in any activity relating to the removal, 
storage or transplantation of any human organ shall cease to engage in any such activity on the 
expiry of three months from the date of commencement of this Act unless such hospital has 
applied for registration and is so registered or till such application is disposed of, whichever is 
earlier. 

(2) Every application for registration under sub-section (1) shall be made to the Appropriate 
Authority in such form and in such manner and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) No hospital shall be registered under this Act unless the Appropriate Authority is 
satisfied that such hospital is in a position to provide such specialised services and facilities, 
possess such skilled manpower and equipments and maintain such standards as may be 
prescribed.” 
16.6.1 The Section provides for the need of compulsory registration of hospitals engaged in removal, 
storage or transportation of human organs. With the addition of “ tissues” after the present amendment 
Bill is passed, even hospitals engaged in the removal, storage and transplantation of tissues would be 
required to be registered under the Act. 
16.6.2  During the course of the deliberations, representatives of a prominent Tissue Bank put forth a 
view that Section 14 (1) needs to be amended in view of the introduction of tissues in the Act. They 
were of the view that it is necessary to separate the processes of removal storage and transplantation in 
case of tissues. It was argued that the tissues removed from living donors as surgical waste in any 
hospital or nursing home may be donated to tissue banks, where they are stored. In the case of 
deceased donors any death, even one occurring at home is an occasion for potential donation. Tissues 
(cornea or skin) can be recovered at home or a funera l home. Similarly, with regard to transplantation, 
it was stated that tissues could be transplanted even in a clinic (e.g. dental clinic) as an outpatient 
procedure. These clinics/ nursing homes cannot be required to register under the Act. It was 
accordingly suggested that procurement organizations  may be registered and not the hospitals or 
facilities donating tissues. Further, in Section 14, “hospital” could be replaced by “hospital or tissue 
bank”.  
16.6.3  These suggestions were also found agreeable by the Department, which stated that the same 
may be included in the Rules. 
16.6.4  The Committee is inclined to agree with th e arguments put forth before it regarding 
giving a special treatment/status to tissues here as they differ from the organ, in removal, 
manner and time of storage and transplantation. However, as the proposed amendments are 
putting the word “tissues” in the Act itself, the Committee does not find any reason why they 
should be covered just in Rule s as stated by the Department. The Committee also finds merit in 
the logic that in case of tissues, only Tissu e Banks need to be registered. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends to the Department to  specify broadly the extent of waiver for 
registration of institutions engag ed in tissues removal, storage and transplantation. However, 
specific tissues which need specific procedures fo r removal etc. need to be treated differently 
and status with regard to them can be taken care of in Rules. 
17. MISCELLANEOUS  
17.1 The Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994 was enacted with the objective of regulation 
of removal, storage and transplantation of human organs for therapeutic purposes and also for the 
prevention of commercial dealings in human orga ns. The proposed amendments have been brought 
forward against the backdrop of the Act not being effective enough in curbing commercial 
transactions in organ transplantation complicated and long drawn process of organ donation. 

17.2  During the course of the Committee’s extensive deliberations with the stakeholders as well as 
the representation of the Ministry, one disturbing trend which was raised again and again was wide 
disparity between the demand and availability of human organs in the country. The Committee was 
given to understand that organ donation rate was only 0.08 per million in our country. Against a 
requirement of around 1,00,000 eyes donation, availability was only of 38,000. Similarly, only 4,000 
kidneys against 1,50,000, only 10 livers against demand of 50,000 and just 43 hearts against a 
requirement of around 5,000 was being reported. The black marketing or trafficking in organs was 
mainly attributable to this gap in demand and supply. A viable solution in this regard repeatedly 
emphasized by experts was that a cadaver could be a source of many organs and tissues that could be 
retrieved and transplanted in many recipients. It  has been stated that even countries like Greece, 
Poland and Turkey could manage to have 4-6 per million donation rate. It was pointed out that India 
had 1,00,000 brain death cases in fatal accidents. If the donation rate was increased to 1 per million 
rate, there would be 1,100 organ donors donating 2, 200 kidneys, 1,000 hearts, 1,100 livers and 2,200 
eyes. 
17.3 Keeping in view the ground realit ies in the country, the Committee is of the view that it is 
high time that the Department gives some attention to cadaveric donations, also. The Committee 
has received some very good suggestions to prom ote organ donation, particularly cadaveric and 
accordingly it would like to recommend to the Department to incorporate them while coming up 
with a revised Bill so as to achieve the larger goal s of the Act. Some of the viable suggestions are 
indicated below: 
(1) One of the foremost suggestions that came  from across the spectrum of stakeholders was 
creating opportunities for the public at large to ex ercise the option of donation of organs through 
various means. The Committee finds the idea very health y and sound as otherwise it is not 
feasible and practical to enforce “presumed consent”  in our multi-cultural society. Taking into 
account various suggestions, the Committee rec ommends to the Department to make it 
mandatory for the citizens of the country to exerc ise this option during the ongoing exercise of 
preparing Biometric National ID Card and data registry. This way, it would help in making 
available a secure data as regards to consent of the donor which can easily be used in case of 
death. With the passage of time, the Committee hopes that the lost o pportunity of potential 
cadaver donation due to 48 hour mandatory period  in case of unclaimed  bodies can also be 
taken care of. 
 Another viable option can be exercising the option of organ donation while applying for 
driving license. The Committee is of the view th at this initiative can easily be taken in 
coordination with the concerned Ministries. 
 Similarly, all persons while filing their annual income tax returns and paying their 
property tax can indicate their option for organ donation. Again, the Department would need to 
coordinate with the concerned Ministries in this regard. 
 Similar initiative can be ta ken with regard to CGHS and other medical facility cards. 
 All the data so collected by the above sources can be utilised to update the proposed donor 
list: as recommended by the Committee on the lines of National Registry, on regular basis. 
(2) The Committee also takes note of the fact  that the Department in co-ordination with 
many State Governments is in th e process of setting up of trau ma centres on highways across 

the country. These trauma centres, which receive large number of brain dead accident victims, 
may easily be utilised as centres of organ retrieval after following the due process under the Act. 
(3) The Committee notes that or gan donation is directly related to IEC campaigns. The 
Committee finds that the citizens of the country lack basic knowledge about organ donation and 
even educated people do not know how they can dona te their organs. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends to the Department to undertake an in tensive publicity drive through IEC activities 
like pamphlets, advertisements in mass media, small documentaries on TV channels and radio 
etc in close co-ordination with the Stale Governments. 
(4) In order to promote organ donation, the child ren and youth of the nation need to be made 
aware about the issues related with it from  the beginning. Therefore, the Department in 
consultation with the Ministry of Human Resource Development can start compulsory 
educational material in the curriculum of schools and universities. 
(5) In order to promote organ donation, families  of cadaveric donors need to be given due 
recognition. Therefore, all the State Governments may be advised to organise such programmes 
to facilitate the families of organ donors. Simila rly all live donors need to be facilitated by 
respective State Governments. 
(6) The Department should frame a policy to pr ovide free medical facilities to all live donors 
who donate their organs to unrelated patients. 
(7) The Department should try to provide necessa ry infrastructure so as to ensure that there 
is at least one registered hospital for the purpose of retrieval, storage and transplantation within 
say 50-75 Kms. radius in the country. 
(8) A National Organ Donation Day may be declared. This would help in generating 
awareness among people about organ donation. Special functions and camps may be organised 
to celebrate the day. 
(9) In order to generate awar eness about organ donation and solve queries of general public 
in this regard, the Department can also start a national toll free te lephone helpline on the 
pattern of other help lines already functioning like for children and women harassment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERVATIONS ---- AT A GLANCE 
 The clauses where amendments have been su ggested by the Committee or it has been 
found necessary to comment thereon in view of divergent views of the stakeholders, are discussed 
in the succeeding paragraphs.  (Para 8) 
 The Committee is inclined to agree with the co ntention of the expert s relating to tissues. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of having a general provision for inclusion 
of tissues along with human organs in the entire Act, as suggested in Clause 4 of the Bill, specific 
provisions relating to tissues, keeping in view the characteristics of tissues as distinct from 
human organs, may be incorporated in the Act.  (Para 9.3) 
 After a careful analysis of the opinion of the stakeholders, the Co mmittee is inclined to 
agree with the view of the medical experts who have shown their reservations against inclusion 
of more relatives within the ambi t of the term “near relative”. Th e Committee opines that even 
though there is no dearth of technology like DNA tests etc. to prove a blood relation, yet the 
same is a very complex and time consuming proc ess. Besides, it also involves moral questions 
and cannot cover adopted relatives. Inclusion of more relatives may also lead to paying to 
potential donor relative either in cash or throug h a share in property. Thus, it may indirectly 
lead to commercialisation of organ donation, th ereby defeating the very purpose of the Act. 
Further, expansion by inclusion of  relations from the maternal side is likely to result in their 
being unnecessarily harassed and being forced to donate organs.  (Para 10.5) 
 The Committee is also of the opinion that th e purpose of inclusion of relatives under “near 
relative” is to facilitate the donation of organs by the close relatives to their immediate family 
members by not making the clearance of Author isation Committee mandatory in such cases. 
Nothing stops the ‘other’ relatives not covered under the defini tion to come forward and donate 
their organs ‘out of love and a ffection’ by following the duly prescribed process as laid down in 
the Act. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that apart from the pr oposed inclusion of 
grandparents and gra ndchildren no further expa nsion is required in the definition of “near 
relative”.  (Para 10.6) 
 The Committee is inclined to agree with the De partment’s view that the issue of specifying 
various types of tissues can be taken up in the Rule s as including them in the Act itself may be a 
short-sighted approach as with every medical technological innovation in this field, an 
amendment would be required to be made in the Act. Therefore, the proposed definition of 
“tissue” will serve the purpose.    
 The Committee opines that tissu e being one of the focal poin ts of the present amendment 
Bill aiming at giving it a distinctly separate category vis a-vis an organ, it would be advisable to 
include the definition of “Tissu e Bank” under the Act. Accordingly, definition of the term as 
suggested above may be included in this clause for clarity.  (Para 10.12) 
 The Committee feels that appointment of a ho spital employee as tr ansplant coordinator 
would prove to be benefici al for better coordination of all matters relating to 
removal/transplantation of human organs. The Committee is, however, of the view that a person 
who is assigned the job of transplant co-o rdinator needs to possess all the specialised 

qualifications for such a crucial responsibility. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that 
specific rules in this regard under the Act may also be formulated.  (Para 10.14) 
 The Committee also recommends to the Departme nt to assign the transplant co-ordinator 
the task of ‘required request’ which is proposed by the Department to be given to a registered 
medical practitioner. This task should be specifi cally spelt out in the definition itself for the 
purpose of clarity.    (Para 10.15) 
 The Committee fully shares the concerns raised  by various experts regarding the efficacy 
of counselling the patient or his near relatives during patien t’s stay in ICU. The Committee 
strongly feels that even if the Department brings clarity by amending the Rules that not all ICU 
patients would be covered, it wo uld fail to achieve the desired obj ective. What is required to be 
ensured is that “trust” of a pati ent or his relatives does not take  a beating with the introduction 
of ‘required request’ concept, that too when the patient is battling for his life. Further, chances 
are that the conflict of interest mi ght lead to allegations of delib erate medical negligence against 
the treating doctors.    (Para 11.8) 
 The Committee would like to point out that required request can prov e to be a positive 
step if taken in the right earnest and judiciousl y. Keeping in view sheer lack of awareness about 
organ donation, the Committee is of the view that the task of counselling need not be assigned to 
the treating doctor not only due to the reservations stated above but also because of the fact that 
counselling is a professional ex ercise and the doctor might not be suitable for that task. The 
Committee recommends that the task of required  request and counselling may be assigned to 
the Transplant Co-ordinator having the required qualifications and professional training for the 
purpose. 
(Para 11.9) 
 The Committee recommends that as eyes can easi ly be harvested even post-death and it is 
not a time taking exercise, requi red request procedure in respect of eye donation may be done 
after death of a patient.   (Para 11.10) 
 The Committee observes that  although the amendments make it mandatory for the 
hospital with ICU to inform in writing to  the Human Organ Removal Centre for removal, 
storage or transplantation of human organs or ti ssues or both, of the donor identified, neither 
the term ‘Human Organ Removal Centre’ has been defined nor specific func tions assigned to it 
indicated. The Committee, accordingly, recommends  proper definition and functions of such a 
Centre to be specified in the Act itself.    
 The Committee does not find any merit in entr usting the ‘required request’ condition in 
hospitals with ICUs which are not registered. The Committee opines that it is really out of place 
to allow a hospital with ICU facilities to rem ain unregistered. With the Department admitting 
itself that a condition for registration may be set up during enforcement of the Clinical 
Establishments (Registration & Regulation) Act, there is no point in keeping Section 3 (1B). The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends a review of this and provide compul sory registration of 
all hospitals with ICU facility for the purposes of  THOA in order to maintain minimum medical 
standards. 
(Para 11.12) 

The Committee finds merit in the suggestion for a qualified and experienced technician handling 
the removal of corneas and tissues as indi cated above. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends amendment of proviso to sub-section (4). The Committee would also appreciate if 
the exercise of necessary amendments in the Ru les is expedited after the proposed amendments 
come into effect.  
(Para 11.17) 
 The Committee finds merit in Department’s pr oposal of substituting the requirement of 
neurologist or a neurosurgeon, in the event of their non-availability, with a surgeon or a 
physician and an anaesthetist or intensivist.  The Committee opines that there is dearth of 
neurologists and neurosurgeons in the country a nd it is not possible to ensure their availability 
round the clock in the Board of Medical Exp erts to certify a patient as brain dead. The 
Committee notes that the Department  has tried to take due precauti on in the form of providing 
a condition that the surgeon or a physician and an anaesthetist or intensivist so substituted 
would not be members of the tran splantation team for the concerned recipient. This would, to a 
great extent, be a safeguard against conflict of interest.  
(Para 11.21) 
 The Committee, however, finds that the propos ed proviso does not specify that the surgeon 
or a physician and an anaesthetist or intens ivist would be from an  approved panel of the 
Appropriate Authority. Such an important aspect sh ould be part of the Act itself and cannot be 
left unspecified for being covered in the Ru les. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 
insertion of the words “from a panel already a pproved by the Appropriate Authority” at the 
end of the proviso to remove any ambiguity in  this regard. The Committee also recommends to 
the Department to modify the Ru les/Act appropriately to keep a larger pool of such experts, 
duly approved by the Appropriate Authority, in  order to ensure that the Board of Medical 
Experts does not face manpower crunch in its functioning and remains fully operational.  (Para 11.22) 
 The Committee is aware that vulnerable sect ions of the society are falling prey to 
middlemen and due to poverty, are being exploite d to provide their organs to foreigners in the 
garb of their near relatives. This  practice needs to be curbed e ffectively at the earliest. The 
Committee hopes that this amendment will, to a g reat extent, help in plugging the loopholes in 
the Parent Act. The Committee, therefore, welcomes the inclusion of this amendment. (Para 12.4) 
 While not contesting the prolonged process of  bringing in amendments in an Act, the 
Committee is of the view that full protection needs to be provided to the most vulnerable section 
of the society. Accordingly, exceptional circum stances necessitating organ donation by minor 
need to be enumerated in the Act itself. The Co mmittee also feels that in  order to remove any 
sort of ambiguity, the definition of “minor” needs to be given in the Act itself.  (Para 12.8) 
 The Committee also takes note of the fact th at mentally challenged  persons also need 
similar protection. The Committee, accordin gly, recommends that the provision may be 
extended to mentally challenged people also.  (Para 12.9) 
 The Committee infers that the whole concept of “Swap” donation with the approval of the 
Authorisation Committee will prove to be a boon for millions of patients, who, inspite of having 
a willing near relative cannot have organ transp lantation due to biological incompatibility. Due 
to strict provisions of the Act and with only on e other condition laid down for donations, i.e. 

“out of love and affection”, such patients are forced to go through a silent death. The Committee 
also recommends that viability of expanding two do nor-recipient pairs may also be explored by 
the Department. With the proposed. National  Registry becoming functional and well 
coordinated network both at national and regional level, such an initiative can be carried 
forward in an effective and transparent manner.  
(Para 12.13) 
 The Committee was given to understand that in  the case of tissues, compatibility was not 
required. Accordingly, swap donation may be restricted for human  organs only. The 
Committee, however, does not fi nd merit in excluding tissues al together from the ambit of the 
swapping provision especially with the advance ment in the field of medical science. The 
Authorisation Committee can well decide on a ca se-to-case basis whether a particular tissue 
swapping is justified or not. 
(Para 12.14) 
 Apprehensions were also voiced  about too much involvement of Central Government in 
deciding the composition of the Authorisation Co mmittees. It was, accordingly, suggested that 
composition of such Committees should entirely be left to th e discretion of States/Union 
Territories. The Committee would like to point ou t that the States and Union Territories would 
continue to have the powers for actual consti ttttion of such Committees. Only broad framework 
and eligibility criteria for members of Authorisation Committees is sought to be prescribed so as 
to ensure uniformity and high standard of these Committees.  (Para 12.19) 
 The Committee fully shares it s concerns over the issue of ju risdiction of Authorisation 
Committees. After careful deliberations, the Commi ttee finds merit in gi ving jurisdictional 
powers to the Authorisation Committee of a part icular State/ District/ Hospital where organ 
transplantation is being carried out. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the 
Department to settle this issue of jurisdiction of Authorisatio n Committee in the Act itself to 
remove any sort of ambiguity and confer all su ch related powers to that Committee of the 
State/District/Hospital where transplantation is being carried out.  (Para 12.20) 
 The Committee is of the view that the purpose  of the clause should be to give a broad 
framework about the composition of the Advisory  Committee, with States being entrusted with 
the responsibility of deciding actual membership thereof. The Committee would like to point out 
that although such a Committee need not be a big body, yet it needs to be made more 
representative. Accordingly, the Committee recommends inclusion of representatives of reputed 
NGOs working in the field of Organ Donation and Human Rights Groups. The representation of 
medical experts may also be suit ably enhanced to cover experts of more specialities, with the 
binding condition that they are not members of any transplantation team.  (Para 13.3) 
 The Committee is of the view that fully empowered Authorisation Committee would go a 
long way in curbing the commercialisation of pr ocess of donation of human organs and also 
enabling the reach of much-needed organs to the rightful recipients.  (Para 13.5) 
 The Committee welcomes the initiative of establishing a Nation al Human Organs and 
Tissues Removal and Storage Network as also Regional Networks. However, the Committee is of 
the view that too much control at central level may not prove to  be beneficial and result in 
practical difficulties. The Commi ttee would like to recommend to the Department to establish 

the Network on the lines of “National Register of Clinical Establishm ents” proposed under the 
Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regula tion) Act along with a replica of the same at 
State level to be termed as State Human Orga ns and Tissues Removal and Storage Network. 
This would facilitate in gathering and dissemi nation of information from the hospital and 
district level. For this the Department needs to assign powers to State Governments by replacing 
the word “Central Government” with Central and State Governments”. (Para 13.9) 
 Similarly, the Committee recommends use of the word ‘shall’ in place of ‘may’ to give it a 
mandatory structure. The Committee also recomme nds to the Department to have a thorough 
study of such Networks set up in States like Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. Based 
on the experience of thes e States, a model framework can be ci rculated to all the States. Such 
Networks need to be set up within a definite time-frame.  (Para 13.10) 
 The Committee further recommends that all su ch information related to the Network may 
be put out on a dedicated website of all the Stat e Health Departments at the State level and the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare at the Ce ntral level so that the same is available to the 
public at large.  
(Para 13.11 ) 
 The Committee would also like to recomme nd to the Department to work out a 
proposition wherein critical patients (recipients) may be considered on priority basis. It is also 
suggested that priority of recipient may be give n to a patient (intended recipient) of the same 
Hospital/District as it is not possible to manage the priority list at State or National level. 
However, due checks may be incorporated so that such provisions are not subjected to misuse.   
(Para 13.12) 
 The Committee hopes that by the time the pr oposed amendments to the Act would come 
into effect, a feasibility model for the National Network would also be ready to be launched. The 
Committee would, however, be failing in its dut y if a mention about the status of the Organ 
Retrieval Banking Organisation of AIIMS is no t made. The Committee was of the view that 
ORBG would have stood out as a role model fo r the proposed National and Regional Network 
for human organs and tissues. However, on a pert inent query in this regard, the Committee was 
given to understand, both by the Ministry officials and the Head of ORBO, that due to inherent 
constraints relating to lack of infrastructure and trained manpower, the Organisation has so far 
failed to achieve its objective. As a result, its mandate has remained confined to deceased organ 
donors of AIIMS only.                                                                                                  (Para 13.14) 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that the purpose behind the proposed amendments is 
to make ORBO-like organizations grow out of AIIMS and have a nation wide reach. Likewise, a 
National Programme for Promotion of Organ Dona tion is also being worked out which would 
conceptualise a structure that wo uld have a national as well as a state-wise reach so as to 
facilitate and replicate ORB O- like set-ups. While welcoming all these ambitious plans, which 
would definitely contribute in extending the reach of needy patients for required organs, the 
Committee would like to emphasize that every con ceivable effort needs to  be made to make 
ORBO fully functional so that it can play the lead role for other similar set-ups. The Committee 
hopes that as assured by the Secretary, Health and Family Welfare, all the necessary procedural 

exercise for having the required funds, in frastructure and manpower for ORBO would be 
completed by the year end.                                                                                                 (Para 13.15) 
 The draft guiding principles for Or gan Transplantation prepared by WHO inter-alia state 
that the long-term outcomes of cell, tissue and organ donation and transplantation should be 
assessed for the living donor as well as the recipient in order to document benefit and harm. The 
Committee welcomes the proposal of establishing a National Registry and in its opinion it will 
help in achieving the aforesaid objective.  (Para 13.18) 
 The Committee, however, recommends setting up of State Registries, with due powers and 
duties to States similar to the Na tional Registry as suggested in  case of National Human Organs 
and Tissues Removal and Storage Network above.  (Para 13.19) 
 The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Department to keep a list of intended 
donors who have pledged their organs for donation  after death as well as those who register as 
patients requiring organ donation. However, due process of ve rification may be carried out to 
ascertain the genuineness thereof. The same may al so be put out on a dedicated website along 
with National Registry and National Hu man Organs and Tissues Removal and Storage 
Network.                                                                                                                       (Para 13.20) 
 As recommended by the Committee in previous clauses, the Transplant Co-ordinator may 
also be entrusted with the dut ies of “required request” as specified under amendment clause 6 
(a). However, the Committee feels that the job of the transplant co-ordinator would be more of a 
counsellor who is trained in dealing with human em otions and sentiments, if  he is assigned the 
duties of carrying out “required  request” in ICU. Accordingl y, it recommends that the 
prescribed qualification for such a post may include inter-alia qualifications required for a 
counsellor.                                                                                                                       (Para 14.3) 
 The Committee is in full agreement with the Department and appreciates its proposal of 
substantial hike in penalties fo r violation of various provisions of the Act. The Committee also 
welcomes the omission of discretionary power of  Courts to lower the sentence which does not 
stand justified, in the current times and with  a thriving illegal transplantation network 
throughout India.  
(Para 15.5) 
 The Committee is also aware that with tissues  being included in the Act, the Department 
needs to be cautious in respect  of penalties for tissue removal, storage and transplantation. The 
Committee is, therefore, inclined to agree with th e suggestion put forth by some stakeholders 
regarding differential penalties for tissues and organs. The Committee concludes that the 
removal of many of the tissues, unlike in case of human organs, do not offer any threat to 
human life and even some of the tissues are a discarded medical waste.  Therefore, subjecting 
tissue transplants with the same punishment m ay be counterproductive and lead to unnecessary 
harassment of institutions engaged in the us age of tissues. The Co mmittee, accordingly, 
recommends to the Department to revisit its pena lties proposed in Sections 18, 19 and 20 for 
tissues.  (Para 15.6) 
 The Committee is in full agreement with  the suggestion of excluding the cost of 
maintaining the functional stat e of organs of a deceased pers on, transportation costs and 
benefits/costs of award to near relative of deceased person, from th e term “payment”. The 

Committee, however, is not in favo ur of placing the same in Rules.  As the definition has already 
covered two. exclusions in the Act, there is no point in moving these suggestions to the Rules. 
The Committee, accordingly, recommends to th e Department to amend the definition of 
“payment” suitably in Section 2 of the Act. 
(Para 16.1.3) 
 The Committee is aware that certain legal issues covered und er various provisions of IPC 
and CrPC come under the domain of the Ministry  of Home Affairs. Ho wever, the Committee 
does not find merit in keeping the term ‘lawfull y in possession of the dead body’ ambiguous in 
the present Act. The Committee finds no harm in relevant provisions of IPC/CrPC being 
referred to in the Act. The Department can ea sily work out an appropriate provision in 
consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs so that elemen t of ambiguity whatsoever does 
not remain. The Committee strongly feels that such  a provision’ will prove effective in checking 
both misinterpretation of the provision as well as misuse thereof. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends to the Department to move forward in this regard.  (Para 16.2.4) 
 The Committee has, in preceding paras, sugg ested that on the lines of the National 
Registry and National Human Organs and Tissu es Removal and Storage Network, a list of 
intended donors who have pledge d their organ for donation as well as those who register as 
patients requiring organ donation should be maintained after due verification process. If that 
recommendation is adhered to, then it would be mo re than enough proof fo r establishing that a 
patient has voluntarily offered donation of his orga ns before his death. In that eventuality, no 
formal permission of the relative should be mandatory for organ removal. The Authorisation 
Committee can move in at this point and proceed  with all relevant procedural formalities of 
organ removal as per the wish of the deceased do nor. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 
to the Department to come up with suitable amendment in the provisions of the Ad.  (Para 16.2.5) 
 The Committee is aware that lega l issues are involved in case  of unclaimed bodies and the 
same cannot be ignored. The Committee also notes th at ordinarily a dead bo dy is not useful for 
organ donation after 48  hours of death unless kept und er required medical conditions. The 
Committee understands that chances of preservation of a dead body  lying in prison may not be 
there. However, situation in hospitals would perh aps be far better. Theref ore, keeping in view 
acute shortage of human organs in the country, a beginning can be made in the case of well-
equipped hospitals where unclaimed dead bodies coul d be kept fit for organ donation. If that is 
not found viable, the Committee feels that at least tissues can be harvested from unclaimed dead 
bodies. The Committee, accordingly, recommends th at this sensitive issue may be examined, 
taking care of all types of comple xities, and a viable solution arrived at. Other legal issues, like 
keeping viscera or post-mortem etc. can simultaneo usly be taken care of as per the directions of 
the investigating officer and requirements of th e case. The identity of the donor could be 
established. with the help of the Authorisatio n Committee of the hospital where such death has 
occurred or the nearest hospital to the Police  Station where such unclaimed body is reported. 
The Department needs to work closely with the Ministry of Home Affairs in this regard.  
(Para 16.3.2) 
 The Committee fully shares the reasoning that  our social set up and the intrinsic values 
and emotions attached with such a sensitive issue like death of a re lative and the subsequent last 
rites, many a time, results in turning down or  withholding the request of organ donation. The 

Committee also understands that there is a need to  cut down the time taken between the post-
mortem, organ retrieval, and the subsequent handing over of the body to the relatives for the 
last rites. The Committee opines that a workable via media of conducting the post-mortem and 
organ retrieval simultaneously can perhaps be put  into place. However, the Committee is aware 
that to give effect to such a solution, legal pr ovisions might require an amendment. Accordingly, 
in the best interest of the civil society, th e Committee recommends to the Department to 
approach the Ministry of Home Affairs so as to come out with a proposition where the post-
mortem could simultaneously be carried out with the retrieval of the organs so as to minimise 
the delay in handing over body of the deceased to his relatives.    
 The Committee is of the opinion that the wh ole idea of promotion of cadaveric organ 
donation would remain on paper if the condition of retrieval of organs only at the registered 
hospitals is enforced. The fact th at the relatives would be hesi tant to move the body to a 
registered hospital due to unnecessary delay, wo uld be a major stumbling block in success of 
cadaveric donation inspite of willing relatives or pledge of  the deceased. The Committee, 
accordingly, is in full agreement with the argu ment that unregistered hospitals where the death 
takes place may be allowed for organ retrieval. However, the organ retrieval should be allowed 
to be carried out only by the team from a registered hospital after following due process in order 
to ensure that no irregularities occur leading to illegal activiti es. For this, registered hospitals 
for the purpose can be ma de co-ordinating units in the area with jurisdiction over other small 
and unregistered hospitals and nursing homes for the purpose of organ retrieval. This can easily 
be done once the Clinical Establishments (Reg istration and Regulation) Act is enforced by 
suitably inserting a provision in this regard. The Committee,  therefore, recommends to the 
Department to make appropriate amendment in this Section in this regard.    
 The Committee also agrees that surgical ti ssue residues that are routinely discarded may 
be stored at a tissue bank for subsequent tran splantation. A surgery may take place in any 
nursing home or hospital  which is not engaged in organ tr ansplantation and hence may not be 
registered under the present Act. In order to utilise such tissues, and other forms of  tissues 
which do not require specialised infrastructure, so me kind of exemption is required on the lines 
of eyes and ears in sub-section (2) above. Th e Committee, accordingly, recommends suitable 
exemption of tissues in sub-section (2) of this s ection. However, details of the exempted tissues 
may be given in the Rules as it may not be prac tical to exempt all tissues from the purview on 
account of their specialised procedures of retrieval.    
 The Committee is inclined to agree with the arguments put forth before it regarding giving 
a special treatment/status to ti ssues here as they differ from the organ in removal, manner and 
time of storage and transplantation. However,  as the proposed amendments are putting the 
word “tissues” in the Act itself, the Committee does not find any reason why they should be 
covered just in Rules as stated  by the Department. The Committee also finds merit in the logic 
that in case of tissues, only Tissue Banks need to be registere d. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends to the Department to specify broadly the extent of waiver for registration of 
institutions engaged in tissues removal, storage and transplantation. However, specific tissues 
which need specific procedures for removal etc. need to be treated differently and status with 
regard to them can be taken care of in Rules.  
(Para 16.6.4) 

 Keeping in view the ground realit ies in the country, the Committee is of the view that it is 
high time that the Department gives some attention to cadaveric donations, also. The Committee 
has received some very good suggestions to prom ote organ donation, particularly cadaveric and 
accordingly it would like to recommend to the Department to incorporate them while coming up 
with a revised Bill so as to achieve the larger goal s of the Act. Some of the viable suggestions are 
indicated below: 
(1)  One of the foremost suggestions that ca me from across the spectrum of stakeholders 
was creating opportunities for the public at la rge to exercise the option of donation of 
organs through various means. The Committee finds the idea very healthy and sound as 
otherwise it is not feasible and practical to enforce “presumed co nsent” in our multi-
cultural society. Taking into account va rious suggestions, the Committee recommends to 
the Department to make it manda tory for the citizens of the co untry to exercise this option 
during the ongoing exercise of preparing Biometric National ID Card and data registry. 
This way, it would help in making available  a secure data as regards to consent of the 
donor which can easily be used in case of death. With the passage of time, the Committee 
hopes that the lost opportunity of potentia l cadaver donation due to 48 hour mandatory 
period in case of unclaimed bodies can also be taken care of.  
 Another viable option can be exercising th e option of organ donation while applying 
for driving license. The Committee is of the view that this initiative can easily be taken in 
coordination with the concerned Ministries. Si milarly, all persons wh ile filing their annual 
income tax returns and paying their propert y tax can indicate their option for organ 
donation. Again, the Department  would need to coordinate wi th the concerned Ministries 
in this regard. 
 Similar initiative can be ta ken with regard to CGHS and other medical facility cards. 
All the data so collected by the above sources  can be utilised to update the proposed donor 
list, as recommended by the Committee on the lines of National Registry, on regular basis. 
(2) The Committee also takes no te of the fact that the Depa rtment in co-ordination with 
many State Governments is in the process of setting up of trauma centres on highways 
across the country. These trauma centres, which receive large number of brain dead 
accident victims, may easily be utilised as cen tres of organ retrieval after following the due 
process under the Act. 
(3)  The Committee notes that organ donation is directly related to IEC campaigns. The 
Committee finds that the citizens of the country lack basic knowledge about organ 
donation and even educated people do no t know how they can donate their organs. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends to th e Department to undertake an intensive 
publicity drive through IEC activities like pam phlets, advertisements in mass media, small 
documentaries on TV channels  and radio etc. in close co-ordination with the State 
Governments. 
(4) In order to promote organ donation, the ch ildren and youth of the nation need to be 
made aware about the issues related with it from the beginning. Therefore, the Department 

in consultation with the Ministry of Huma n Resource Development can start compulsory 
educational material in the curriculum of schools and universities. 
(5) In order to promote organ donation, families of cadaveric donors need to be given 
due recognition. Therefore, all the State Go vernments may be advised to organise such 
programmes to facilitate the families of organ donors. Similarly all live donors need to be 
facilitated by respective State Governments. 
(6) The Department should frame a policy to  provide free medical facilities to all live 
donors who donate their organs to unrelated patients. 
(7) The Department should try to provide n ecessary infrastructure so as to ensure that 
there is at least one registered hospital for the purpose of retrieval, storage and 
transplantation within say 50-75 Kms. radius in the country. 
(8) A National Organ Donation Day may be declared. This would help in generating 
awareness among people about organ donati on. Special functions and camps may be 
organised to celebrate the day. 
(9) In order to generate awareness about or gan donation and solv e queries of general 
public in this regard, the Department can also  start a national toll free telephone helpline 
on the pattern of other he lp lines already functioning like for children and women 
harassment.   
(Para 17.3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VI 
SIXTH MEETING  
(2009-10) 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 17 February, 2010 in Committee Room 'A', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 1. Shri Amar Singh  –––  Chairman 
 2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
 3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
 4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
 5. Shrimati Brinda Karat 
 6. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
  LOK SABHA 
 7.  Shri Ashok Argal 
 8.  Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
 9.  Dr.(Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
 10.  Shri N. Kristappa 
 11.  Shri M.K. Raghavan 
 12.  Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
 13.  Shrimati Meena Singh 
 14.  Shri Ratan Singh 
  WITNESSES 
  Representatives of the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
 1. Ms. K. Sujatha Rao, Secretary 
 2. Dr. R.K. Srivastava, Director Ge neral of Health Services (DGHS)  
 3. Shri Vineet Chaudhary, Joint Secretary 
 4. Dr. N.K. Mohanty, Medical Superintendent, Safdarjung Hospital  
 5. Shri V.P. Singh , Deputy Secretary 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
  Shri R. B. Gupta, Director 
  Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director 
  Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director 
2.   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and informed them about the 
salient features of the Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009 that had been 
referred to the Committee on 22nd January, 2010 for examination and report within a period of three 

months. He also informed that a press release has been issued by the Secretariat to invite written 
memoranda from various stakeholders interested in the subject matter of the Bill. 
3.  * * * 
4.   Thereafter, the Committee took oral eviden ce of the Secretary and other officers of the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare on the Transplantation of Humari Organs (Amendment) 
Bill, 2009. The Committee was given an idea about the background and the compelling reasons 
warranting the proposed amendments in the Parent Act. Some of the issues highlighted were the big 
mismatch between the supply and demand of human organs leading to malpractices, global and Indian 
scenario in the field of organ transplantation and in frastructure available. Members raised a number of 
queries, which were replied to by the Secretary and other officers of the Ministry. 
5.  * * * 
6.  * * * 
7.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M. 
 
*** Relates to other matters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

X 
TENTH MEETING 
(2009-10) 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 20th May, 2010 in Room No. ‘A’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 1. Shrimati Brinda Karat       –––       In the Chair 
 2.  Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
 3.  Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
 4.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
 5.  Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
 6.  Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
  LOK SABHA 
 7. Shri Ashok Argal 
 8.  Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
 9.  Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
 10.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 11.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
 12.  Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
 13.  Shri N. Kristappa 
 14.  Dr. Tarun Mandal 
 15.  Shri Datta Meghe 
 16.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
 17.  Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
 18.  Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
 19.  Shri M.K Raghavan 
 20.  Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
 21.  Shrimati Meena Singh 
 22.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 23.  Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
 24.  Shri Ratan Singh 
  SPECIAL INVITEE 
  Dr. Arjun K. Sengupta 
  WITNESSES 
 I. The Transplantation of Hu man Organs (Amendment) Bill-2009 
(i) Major General Dr. R.P. Chaubey, MG (M edical), Mumbai, Gujarat and Goa Region; 

(ii) Dr. Samiran Nundy, Head of the Department, GI Surgery, Dr, Sunil Shroff and Dr 
Arvinder Soin, from Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi,; 
(iii) Dr. Vatsala Trivedi, President, and Shri  M. Karunakaran, Joint Secretary from National 
Deceased Donor Transplantation Network, Mumbai; 
(iv) Dr. P.S. Joshi from Radha Soami Satsang, Beas, Punjab 
 II. * * * 
 III. * * * 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Committee Officer 
2.   In the absence of the Chairman, Shrimati Brinda Karat, M.P, Rajya Sabha and Member of the 
Committee, presided over the meeting. 
3.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed Me mbers of the Committee and apprised them of the 
agenda of the meeting, i.e. oral evidence of the experts on the Transplantation of Human Organs 
(Amendment) Bill, 2009, *  *   *  
4.   The Committee then took the oral evidence of the experts on the Transplantation of Human 
Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009. Place of organ retrieval, definition of “lawful possession of the body 
of the deceased”, simplification of procedures relating to cadaveric donations, clarity regarding terms 
of reference of the Advisory Council proposed in the Bill, emulation of Tamil Nadu-model of organ 
transplantation, registration of NGO(s) for the purpose of facilitating’ organ donation’, public 
notification of donor and recipient by the Authorisation Committee, setting up of an Organ Retrieval 
Fund, sensitization and building public awareness about organ transplantation etc. were some of issues 
that came up for discussion during the course of the meeting. The Committee directed the Secretariat 
to procure a copy of the Government of Tamil Na du’s orders concerning Organ Transplantation and 
make the same available to the Members of the Committee. 
5.  * * * 
6.  * * * 
7.  A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 
P.M. 
 
*** Relates to other matters. 
 
 
 

XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
(2009-10) 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday the 9th June, 2010 in Committee Room’ A’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 1. Shri Amar Singh  –––  Chairman 
 2.  Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
 3.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
 4.  Shrimati Brinda Karat 
 5.  Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
  LOK SABHA 
 6.  Shri.Ashok Argal 
 7.  Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
 8.  Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
 9.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 10.  Shri S. R. Jeyadurai 
 11.  Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
 12.  Shri N. Kristappa 
 13.  Dr. Tarun MandaI 
 14.  Shri Datta Meghe 
 15.  Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
 16.  Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
 17.  Shri M.K Raghavan 
 18.  Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
 19.  Shrimati Meena Singh 
 20.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 21.  Shri Ratan Singh 
  WITNESSES 
 I. All India Institute of  Medical Sciences (AIIMS) 
 1. Dr. Aarti Vij, Incharge, Organ Retrieval Banking Organisation 
 2. Dr. Sanjay K. Agarwal, Head, Department of Nephrology 
 3. Dr. Jitender Mehta, CMO 
 II. Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai  
  Dr. Astrid Lobo Gajiwala, Head, Tissue Bank 
 III. Eye Bank Associatio n of India, Hyderabad 
 1. Shri G Ganesh, Executive Director 

 2. Col. Dr. J K S Parihar, Joint Secretary  
 3. Dr. Radhika Tandon 
 IV. * * * 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Me mbers of the Committee and apprised them of the 
agenda of the meeting, i.e. oral evidence of the experts on the Transplantation of Human Organs 
(Amendment) Bill, 2009 and *   *   * 
3.   The Committee took stock of the progress made  towards examination of the Transplantation of 
Human Organs (Amendment) Bill 2009. The Chairman informed the Committee that after hearing the 
views of experts scheduled for the meeting, the process of interaction with various stakeholders would 
be completed. Views of the Department on the memoranda received on the Bill were awaited. 
Thereafter, the Committee would be taking up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. *   *    * 
4.   The Committee felt that it would not be possible to present its Reports on the Transplantation of 
Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009 and *  *  * within the time given to it, i.e. 21st July, 2010 and 
* * *. The Committee, accordingly, decided to seek extension of time till the first day of the last week 
of the Monsoon Session 2010 for presenting its Reports on the Bills to the Parliament and authorized 
the Chairman to approach the Hon’ble Chairman in this regard. 
5.  * * * 
6.   The Committee then took oral evidence of experts on the Transplantation of Human Organs 
(Amendment) Bill, 2009. A number of pertinent issues like inclusion of Bone Marrow transplantation; 
registration and regutation of non transplant centres  for brain death declaration and organ retrieval; 
specialized training for Registered Medical Practitioners for assessment and diagnosis of brain death; 
inclusion of medical experts from neurosciences, Tansplant management programme, forensic science 
and representatives from Home/Police Department in the Advisory Committee; forming a National 
level organization with statutory mandate with a fair degree of autonomy to assist the states in smooth 
facilitation; regulation and successful implementation of the organ transplant programme; inclusion of 
eyes as Tissue and not as organ; differentiation of  tissues and organs etc. were highlighted by the 
experts. The Members also raised a number of queries relevant to the Bill which were answered by the 
experts. 
7.   Thereafter, the witnesses on the Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) Bill withdrew. 
8.  * * * 
9.  A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept. 

10.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.25 P.M. 
 
*** Relates to other matters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
(2009-10) 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 6th July, 2010 in Committee Room ‘A’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Amar Singh  –––  Chairman 
 2.  Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
 3.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
 4.  Shrimati Brinda Karat 
 5.  Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
  LOK SABHA 
 6.  Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid 
 7.  Shri Ashok Argal 
 8.  Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
 9.  Shri N. Kristappa 
 10.  Dr. Tarun Mandal 
 11.  Shri Datta Meghe 
 12.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
 13.  Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
 14.  Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
 15. Shri M.K Raghavan 
 16.  Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
 17.  Shrimati Meena Singh 
 18.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 19.  Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
 20.  Shri Ratan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri R B. Gupta, Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Me mbers of the Committee. He  then apprised them 
that extension of time has been granted upto the 20th July, 2010 on the two Bills, i.e. the 
Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009 and the Indian Medicine Central Council 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha. Clause-by-Clause consideration of 
the Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009 was to be taken up. Thereafter, the 
Committee would consider and adopt the Report. * * * While considering all these facts, the 

Committee felt that it would not be possible to present the reports on the Bills by 20th July, 2010. The 
Committee, accordingly, decided to seek further extension of time on both the Bills up to 13th August, 
2010 for presenting its Reports and authorized the Chairman to approach the Hon’ble Chairman in this 
regard. 
3.  * * * 
4.   The Committee then took up the Clause-by-Cl ause consideration of the Transplantation of 
Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009 in the light of the implications of various amendments 
proposed by the Ministry and the suggestions received from various stakeholders. After detailed 
deliberations, the Committee finalized its views on the amendments proposed in the specific clauses of 
the Bill. 
5.  * * * 
6.   The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet again at 3.00 
P.M. on 21st July, 2010. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
 
*** Relates to other matters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
(2009-10) 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 21st July, 2010 in Committee Room 'A', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Amar Singh  –––  Chairman 
 2.  Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
 3.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
 4.  Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
 5.  Shrimati Brinda Karat 
 6.  Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
  LOK SABHA 
 7.  Shri Ashok Argal 
 8.  Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
 9.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 10.  Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
 11.  Shri N. Kristappa 
 12.  Dr. Tarun Mandal 
 13.  Shri Datta Meghe 
 14.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
 15.  Shri M.K Raghavan 
 16.  Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
 17.  Shrimati Meena Singh 
 18.  Shri Ratan Singh 
  WITNESSES 
  * * * 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri R B. Gupta, Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director 
Shri Satis Mesra, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee to the meeting and briefed 
them about the agenda of the meeting. 
3.   The Chairman then informed the Members that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha has granted 
extension of time upto the 13th August, 2010, for presenting its Reports on (i) the Transplantation of 
Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009 and *  *  * to the Parliament. 

4.  * * * 
5.   The Committee, thereafter, considered the Dr aft 44th and * on (i) the Transplantation of Human 
Organs (Amendment) Bill 2009 and (ii) *  *  * and after a brief discussion adopted the same. 
6.  The Committee also decided *  *  *, 44th and on the subjects mentioned in the para above, be 
presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Monday, the 4th August 2010. 
The Committee authorized the Chai rman and in his absence Shri Janardan Dwivedi and in their 
absence, Smt. Viplove Thakur to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Jyoti Mirdha, and in her 
absence Dr. Tarun MandaI to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
7.  * * * 
8.  A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9.   The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet again at 4.00 
P.M. on 9th August, 2010. 
10.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. 
 
*** Relates to other matters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - I 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
18 Dec. 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 136 of 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE TRANSPLANTATION OF HUMAN ORGANS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009 
A 
BIIL 
to amend the Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994. 
 W HEREAS it is expedient to amend the said law 
enacted by Parliament relating to regulation of removal, 
storage and transplantation of human organs for 
therapeutic purposes and fo r prevention of commercial 
dealings in human organs; 
 A ND WHEREAS  Parliament has no power to make 
or amend laws for the States with respect to any of the 
matters aforesaid except as provided in articles 249 and 
250 of the Constitution; 
 A ND WHEREAS in pursuance of clause (1) of article 
252 of the Constitution, resolutions have been passed by 
all the Houses of the Legislat ures of the States of Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh and West Bengal to the effect that the 
aforesaid Act should be amended by Parliament; 
 B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of 
the Republic of India as follows:– 
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Transplantation of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title, application, and com- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of long title. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 1. 
 
 
 
Substitution of references 
of certain expressions by 
certain other expressions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Organs (Amendment) Act, 2009. 
 ( 2) It applies, in the first instance, to the whole of 
the States of Goa, Himachal Pradesh and West Bengal 
and to all the Union territories and it shall also apply to 
such other State which adopts this Act by resolution 
passed in that behalf under clause (1) of article 252 of the 
Constitution. 
 ( 3) It shall come into force in the States of Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh and West Bengal and in all the Union 
territories on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification, appoint and in any other State which 
adopts this Act under clause (1) of article 252 of the 
Constitution on the date of such adoption and any 
reference in this Act to the commencement of this Act 
shall in relation to any State or Union territory, means the 
date on which this Act comes into force in such State or 
Union Territory. 
2.  In the Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994 
(hereinafter referred to as principal Act), in the long title, 
for the words “human organs for therapeutic purposes 
and for the prevention of commercial dealings in human 
organs”, the words “human organs and tissues for 
therapeutic purposes and for the prevention of 
commercial dealings in human organs and tissues” shall 
be substituted. 
3.  In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) 
for the words “Human Organs the words “Human Organs 
and Tissues” shall be substituted. 
4.  Throughout the principal Act [except clause (h) of 
section 2]. unless otherwise expressly provided for the 
words “human organ” and “human organs”, wherever 
they  occur the words “human organ or tissue or both” 
and “human organs or tissues or both” shall respectively 
be substituted with such consequential amendments as 
the rules of grammar may require. 
5.  In section 2 of the principal Act,– 
 ( a) for clause (i) the follo wing clause shall be 
substituted, namely:– 
 ( i) “near relative” means spouse, son, daughter, 
father, mother, brother, sister, grandfather, grandmother, 
grandson or granddaughter; 
mencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 of 1994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ( b) in clause (o), the word “and” shall be omitted; 
 ( c) after clause ( o) the following clauses shall he 
inserted, namely:– 
 ( oa) “tissue” means a group of cells except blood 
performing a particular function in the human body;  
 ( ob) “transplant coordinator” means a person of 
the hospital appointed for coordinating all matters 
relating to removal or transplantation of human organs or 
tissues or both and. 
6.  In section 3 of the principal Act,-  
 ( a) after sub-section (I), th e following sub-sections 
shall be inserted, namely:– 
 “( 1A) In respect of such human organs or tissues or 
both, as may be prescribed, it shall be the duty of a 
registered medical practitioner working in a hospital 
registered under this Act for the purpose of removal 
storage or transplantation of human organs or tissues or 
both,–  
 ( i) to ascertain from the person admitted to the 
Intensive Care Unit or from his near relative that such 
person had authorized at any time before his death the 
removal of any human organ or tissue or both of his body 
under sub-section (2), then the hospital shall proceed to 
obtain the documentation for such authorization;  
 ( ii) where no such authority as referred to in sub-
section ( 2) was made by such person to make aware to 
that person or near relative for option to authorise or 
decline for donation of human organs or tissues or both; 
 ( iii) to require the hospital to inform in writing to 
the Human Organ Removal Centre for removal, storage 
or transplantation of human or gans or tissues or both, of 
the donor identified in clauses (i) and (ii) in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 
 ( 1B) The duties mentioned under clauses (i) to (iii) 
of sub-section (1A) from such date, as may prescribed, 
shall also apply in the case of a registered medical 
practitioner working in an Intensive Care Unit in a 
hospital which is hot registered under this Act for the 
purpose of removal, storage or transplantation of human 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 9. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organs or tissues or both.”; 
 ( b) in sub-section (4), the following proviso shall 
be inserted, namely:- 
 “Provided that a technician possessing such 
qualifications and experience, as may be prescribed, may 
enucleate a cornea.”; 
 ( c) in sub-section (6), in clause (iii),– 
 ( i) the word “and” shall be omitted; and 
 ( ii) the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:– 
 “Provided that where a neurologist or a 
neurosurgeon is not available, the registered medical 
practitioner may nominate an independent registered 
medical practitioner, being a surgeon or a physician and 
an anaesthetist or intensivist subject to the condition that 
they are not members of the transplantation team for the 
concerned recipient and to such conditions as may be 
prescribed”. . 
7.  In section 9 of the principal Act, 
 ( a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections 
shall be inserted namely:– 
 “( I A) Where the donor or the recipient being near 
relative is a foreign national, prior approval of the 
Authorisation Committee shall be required before 
removing or transplanting human organ or tissue or both: 
 Provided that the Authorisation Committee shall 
not approve such removal or transplantation if the 
recipient is a foreign national  and the donor is an Indian 
national unless they are near relatives. 
 ( 1B) No human organs or tissues or both shall be 
removed from the body of a minor before his death for 
the purpose of transplantation except in the manner as 
may be prescribed.” 
 ( b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted. namely: 
 “( 3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (3), where 
 ( a) any donor has agreed to make a donation of his 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
human organ or tissue or both before his death to a 
recipient, who is his near relative, but such donor is not 
compatible biologically as a donor for the recipient; and . 
 ( b) the second donor has agreed to make a 
donation of his human organ or tissue or both before his 
death to such recipient, who is his near relative, but such 
donor is not compatible biologically as a donor for such 
recipient; then 
 ( c) the first donor who is compatible biologically 
as a donor for the second re cipient and the second donor 
is compatible biologically as a donor of a human organ or 
tissues or both for the first recipient and both donors and 
both recipient in the aforesaid group of donor and 
recipient have entered into a single agreement to donate 
and receive such human organ or tissue or both according 
to such biological compatibility in the group, 
 The removal and transplantation of the human 
organ or tissue or both, as per the agreement referred to 
above, shall not be done without prior approval of the 
Authorisation Committee.”;.  
 ( c) for sub-section ( 4); the following sub-section 
shall be substituted, namely:– 
 “( 4)(a) The composition of the Authorisation 
Committees shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government from time to time. 
 ( b) The State Governments and the Union 
Territories shall constitute, by notification, one or more 
Authorisation Committees consisting of such members as 
may be nominated by the State Governments and the 
Union Territories on such terms and conditions as may be 
specified in the notification for the purposes of this 
section.”. 
8.  After section 13 of the principal Act, the following 
sections shall be inserted, namely:– 
 “13A. ( 1) The Central Government and the State 
Governments, as the case may be, by notification, shall 
constitute an Advisory Committee for a period of two 
years to aid and advise th e Appropriate Authority to 
discharge its functions. 
 ( 2) The Advisory Committee shall consist of---- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new sections 13A, 
13B, 3C and 13D.  
Advisory Committees to advice 
Appropriate Authority. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Powers of Appropriate 
Authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Human Organs 
and Tissues Removal and 
Storage Network. 
 
 
 
National registry. 
 
 ( a) one administrative expert not below the rank of 
Secretary to the State Government, to be nominated as 
Chairperson of the Advisory Committee;  
 ( b) two medical experts having such qualifications 
as may be prescribed; 
 ( c) one officer not below the rank of a Joint 
Director to represent the Ministry or Department of 
Health and Family Welfare, to be designated as Member-
Secretary; 
 ( d) two eminent social workers of high social 
standing and integrity, one of whom shall be from 
amongst representatives of women’s organisation; 
 ( e) one legal expert who has held the position of an 
Additional District Judge or equivalent. 
 ( 3) The terms and conditio ns for appointment to 
the Advisory Committee shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
 13B. The Appropriate Authority shall for the 
purposes of this Act have all the powers of a civil court 
trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
and, in particular, in respect of the fol1owing matters, 
namely:– 
 ( a) summoning-of any person who is in possession 
of any information relating to violation of the provisions 
of this Actor the rules made thereunder;  
 ( b) discovery and production of any document or 
material object; 
 ( c) issuing search warrant for any place suspected 
to be indulging in unauthorized removal, procurement or 
transplantation of human organs or tissues or both; and 
 ( d) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
 13C. The Central Government may, by 
notification, establish a Na tional Human Organs and 
Tissues Removal and Storage Network at one or more 
places and Regional Networ k in such manner and to 
perform such functions, as may be prescribed. 
 13D. The Central Government shall maintain a 
national registry of the donors and recipients of human 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 of 1908 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 14. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organs and tissues and such registry shall have such 
information as may be prescribed to an ongoing 
evaluation of the scientific and clinical status of human 
organs and tissues.”. 
9.  In section 14 of the principal Act, after sub-section 
(3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:–   
 “( 4) No hospital shall be registered under this Act, 
unless the Appropriate Authority is satisfied that such 
hospital has appointed a transplant coordinator having 
such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed. 
 ( 5) The non-governmental organisations, 
registered societies, charitable trusts and such other 
entities engaged, either par tly or exclusively, in any 
activity relating to the removal, storage or transplantation 
of any human organ and tissues for therapeutic purposes, 
shall immediately apply for registration in such manner 
as may be prescribed.”. 
10.  In section 18 of the principal Act,– 
 ( a) in sub-section (1), for the words “five years and 
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees”, the 
words “ten years and with fine  which may extend to five 
lakh rupees” shall be substituted; 
 ( b) in sub-section ( 2), for the words “two years”, 
the words “three years” shall be substituted. 
11.  In section 19 of the principal Act, 
 ( a) after clause (f) the foll owing clause shall be 
inserted, namely:– 
 “( g) abets in the preparation or submission of false 
documents including giving false affidavits to establish 
that the donor is making the donation of the human 
organs or tissues or both, as a near relative or by reason 
of affection or attachment towards the recipient.”; 
 ( b) for the words “two years but which may extend 
to seven years and shall be 30 liable to fine which shall 
not be less than ten thousand rupees but may extend to 
twenty thousand rupees”, the words “five years but which 
may extend to ten years and shall be liable to fine which 
shall not be less than five lakh rupees but may extend to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 18. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 19. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

twenty lakh rupees” shall be substituted; 
 ( c) the proviso shall be omitted. 
12.  In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words 
“three years or with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees”, the words “five years or with fine 
which may extend to five lakh rupees” shall be 
substituted. 
13.  In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section 
(2),– 
 ( a) after clause ( a), the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:– 
 “( aa) the human organs or tissues or both under 
sub-section ( 1 A ) and the manner of informing to the 
Human Organ Removal Centre under clause ( iii) of sub-
section (1A) of section 3 and the date from which duties 
mentioned in clauses (i) to (iii) of sub-section (1A) are to 
apply to a registered medical practioner working in a 
Intensive Care Unit of a hospital which is not registered 
under this Act under sub-section (1B) of that section; 
 ( ab) the qualifications and experience of a 
technician under the proviso to sub-section ( 4) of section 
3;”; 
 ( b) after clause (b), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 “( ba) the condition for nomination of surgeon or a 
physician and an anaesthetist or intensivist to be included 
in the Board of medical experts under the proviso to 
clause (iii) of sub-section (6) of Section 3;”; 
 ( c) after clause ( e), the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely: 
 “( ea) the manner of removal of human organs or 
tissues or both from the body of a minor before his death 
for transplantation under sub-section,(1B) of section 9; 
 ( eb) the composition of the Authorisation 
Committees under sub-section (4) of section 9;”;  
 ( d) after clause ( i), the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:– 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 20. 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 24. 
 

 “( ia) the qualifications of medical experts and the 
terms and conditions for appointment to Advisory 
Committee under sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 13A; 
 ( ib) the power of the Appropriate Authority in any 
other matter under clause (d) of section 13B; 
 ( ic) the manner of establishment of a National 
Human Organs and Tissues Removal and Storage 
Network and Regional Network and functions to be 
performed by them under section l3C; 
 ( id) the information, in the national registry of the 
donors and recipients of human organs and tissues and 
information under section 13D;”; 
 ( e) after clause ( k), the following clause shall be 
inserted namely:- 
 “( ka) the qualifications and experience of 
transplant coordinator under sub-section ( 4) of section 
14;  
 ( kb) the manner of registration of the non-
governmental organizations, registered societies, 
charitable trusts and such other entities under sub-section 
(5) of section 14;”. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
  The Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994 came into force on the 4th day of February, 
1995 in the States of Goa, Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra and all the Union territories. Thereafter, 
it has been adopted by all the States except the States of Jammu and Kashmir and Andhra Pradesh 
which have enacted their own legislation to regulate transplantation of human organs. The main 
purpose of the Act is to regulate the removal, storage and transplantation of human organs for 
therapeutic purposes and to prevent commercial dealings inhuman organs. 
2.   It has been observed that despite having put into place a regulatory mechanism for 
transplantation of human organs, there has been a sp ate of reports in the print and electronic media 
about thriving human organ trade in India and the consequential exploitation of economically weaker 
sections of the society. There has, therefore, been an increasing perception in civil society that the said 
Act has not been effective in curbing commercial transactions in organ transplant and thwarted 
genuine cases due to the complicated and long drawn process of organ donation. 
3.   On the above issue, Hon’ble High Court of Delhi in its judgment dated 6-9-2004 in W.P. No. 
813 of 2004 Balbir Singh v.s. Union of India and Others constituted a committee to examine the 
lacunae in implementation of the said Act. The recommendations of the said Committee were 
examined along with the recommendations of th e Rajiv Gandhi Foundation. The draft guiding 
principles of the organ transplantation prepared by the World Health Organisation were also taken into 
consideration and after wide consultation, the administrative Ministry proposes to amend the said Act. 
4.   The amendments proposed, inter alia, are as follows:– 
(i)  presently the said Act regulates transplant ation of the human organs, it has been proposed 
that the said Act also regulate the transplant ation of tissues of the human body. Therefore, 
it is proposed to amend the long title, short tit le of the Act and also to insert appropriate 
definition of “tissues” in the definition clause and consequential amendments in other 
sections of the Act; 
(ii)  to expand the definition of “near relative” in order to include the grandfather, 
grandmother, grandson and granddaughter as near relative; 
(iii)  amendment of section 3 with a view to make mandatory for the Intensive Care Unit or 
Treating Medical Staff to request relatives of brain dead patients for organ donation and to 
provide for the enucleating of corneas by a trained technician. Further to enable a surgeon 
or a physician and an anaesthetist or intensivist to be included in the medical board in the 
event of non-availability of a neurosurgeon or neurologist for certification of brain death; 
(iv)  amendment of section 9 to regulate the transplantation of organs for foreign nationals, to 
prevent the exploitation of minors, to provid e for Swap Donations of organs, to empower 
the Central Government to prescribe the co mposition of Authorisation Committees and to 
empower State Governments and Union territories to set up their own Authorisation 
Committees; 
(v)  insertion of a new section 13A to constitute the Advisory Committees to advise the 
Appropriate Authorities; . 

(vi)  insertion of a new section 13B to empower the Appropriate Authorities to summon 
persons, seek production of documents, issue search warrants, etc.; 
(vii)  insertion of new section 13C to establish a National Human Organs and Tissues Removal 
and Storage Network; 
(viii)  to provide for the development and maintenance of a national registry of the recipients of 
human organs transplants; 
(ix) amendment of section 14 to appoint a ‘’transplant coordinator” in all hospitals registered 
for organ retrieval and transplantation; and to provide for the registration of non-
governmental organisations working in the field of organ retrieval, banking and 
transplantation; 
(x)  amendment of sections 18, 19 and 20 to enhance the penalties provided under the Act; and 
(xi)  consequential amendment in section24 in respect of the rule making power of the Central 
Government. 
5.   The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
   NEW DELHI; 
The 17th November, 2009   GHULAM  NABI  AZAD 
 
 
 
____________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF 
INDIA 
  [Copy of letter No. 8.120 11/13/2007---- MS dated the 30th No vember, 2009 from Shri Ghulam 
Nabi Azad, Minister of Health and Family Welfare to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha] 
  The President, having been informed of the su bject matter of the proposed Transplantation of 
Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009 recommends to the House the consideration of the Bill under 
article 117(3) of the Constitution. 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
  Clause 8 of the Bill, inter alia,  seeks to insert section 13C which empowers the Central 
Government to establish a National Human Organs and Tissues Removal and Storage Network that 
links organ retrieval and transplant centres to facilitate exchange of information about availability of 
organs and data base of recipients which holds th e key to the success of any transplant programme. A 
similar role was expected of Organ Retrieval and Banking Organisation (ORBO). However, 
experience indicates that ORBO has got confined to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Delhi 
only. Therefore, the need has been felt for the establishment of a nationwide network to maintain a 
waiting list of patients awaiting transplantation through computerised network and data base. The 
expenditure on account of procurement and maintenance of electronic equipments and setting up of 
network with the State Government will have to be borne by the Central Government. The Bill, if 
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India which may be of both 
recurring and non-recurring in nature. The estimated total expenditure per annum will be to the tune of 
rupees five crore. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
  Sub-clause ( a) of clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section ( 1A) in section 3 which 
empowers the Central Government to prescribe human organs or tissues or both for the purpose of 
their removal, storage or transplantation, the manner in which the hospitals will be required to inform 
in writing to the Human Organ Removal Centre for removal, storage or transplantation of human 
organs or tissues or both of th e donor and also the date from which duties mentioned in clauses ( i) to 
(iii) of sub-section ( 1A) are to apply in the case of a registered medical practitioner working in a 
Intensive Care Unit of a hospital which is not registered under this Act. 
  Sub-clause ( b) of clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert a proviso to sub-section ( 4) of section 3 
‘which empower the Central Government to prescrib e qualifications and experience of the technicians 
to be authorised to remove corneas. 
  Sub-clause ( c) of clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert proviso after clause (iii) to sub-section (6) of 
section 3 to prescribe the condi tions for the nomination by a registered medical practitioner of a 
surgeon or a physician and an anaesthetist or intensivist to be included in the Board of medical experts 
to certify brain-stem death of a person for the purpose of removal of human organs or tissues or both. 
  Sub-clause ( a) of clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert sub-section ( 1B) in section 9 which 
empowers the Central Government to prescribe the manner of removal of organs or tissues or both 
from the body of a minor before his death for the purpose of transplantation. 
  Sub clause ( c) clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section ( 4) of section 9 which empowers 
the Central Government to prescribe the compos ition of Authorisation Committee and empowers the 
State Governments and the Union territories to notify the constitution and terms and conditions of the 
Authorisation Committees. 
  Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 13A to the Act which empowers the Central 
Government and the State Governments to notify the constitution of the Advisory Committee and the 
Central Government to prescribe the terms and conditions, for appointment to the Advisory 
Committee to aid and advise the Appropriate Authority in the discharge of its functions. 
  Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 13B to the Act which empowers the Central 
Government to prescribe other matters where the Appropriate Authorities can exercise the powers of a 
civil court. 
  Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 13C to the Act which empowers the Central 
Government to notify the establishment of National Human Organs and Tissues Removal and Storage 
Network and to prescribe the manner of establishment thereof and the functions to be performed by 
such a Network. 
  Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 13D to the Act which empowers the Central 
Government to maintain a national registry of donor s and recipients of human organs and tissues and 
to prescribe information for such registry for an ongoing evaluation of the scientific and clinical status 
of human organs and tissues. 
  Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert sub-sections ( 4) and ( 5) in section 14 which empowers the 
Central Government to prescribe the qualifications and experience required of the person for his 

appointment as a transplant coordinator; and to prescribe the manner for registration of non-
governmental organisations, registered societies, charitable trusts and such other entities that are 
engaged in transplantation of human organs and tissues for thereapeutic purposes. 
  The matters in respect of which notifications may be issued or rules to be made under the 
aforesaid provisions pertain to procedure or administ rative detail and it is not practicable to provide 
for them in the Bill itself, the delegation of legislative power is therefore of a normal character. 
  The rules made under the said provisions shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title, application and 
com- mencement. 
 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Authority for removal of 
human organs. 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE TRANSPLANTATION OF HUMAN ORGANS ACT, 
1994 
 (42 OF 1994) 
 An Act to provide for the regulation of removal, 
storage and transplantation of human organs for therapeutic 
purposes and for the prevention of commercial dealings in 
human organs and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
* * * * * 
CHAPTER I 
P
RELIMINARY 
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Transplantation of 
Human Organs Act, 1994. 
* * * * * 
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––– 
* * * * * 
 ( i) “near relative” means spouse, son, daughter, father, 
mother, brother or sister; 
* * * * * 
 ( o) “therapeutic purposes” means systematic treatment 
of any disease or the measures to improve health according to 
any particular method or modality; and 
* * * * * 
CHAPTER II 
A
UTHORITY FOR THE REMOVAL OF HUMAN ORGANS 
3. (1)  *   * * *
 ( 4) The authority given under sub-section ( 1) or sub-
section ( 2) or, as the case may be, sub-section ( 3) shall be 
sufficient warrant for the rem oval, for therapeutic purposes, 
of the human organ; but no such removal shall be made by 
any person other than the registered medical practitioner. 
* * * * * 
 ( 6) Where any human organ is to be removed from the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Punishment for 
commercial dealings in 
body of a person in the event of his brain-stem death, no such 
removal shall be undertaken unless such death is certified, in 
such’ form and in such manner  and on satisfaction of such 
conditions and requirements as may be prescribed, by a 
Board of medical experts consisting of the following, 
namely:– 
* * * * * 
 ( iii) a neurologist or a neurosurgeon to be nominated 
by the registered medical practitioner specified in clause ( i), 
from the panel of names approved by the Appropriate 
Authority; and 
* * * * * 
9. (1)  *   * * *
 ( 4) ( a) The Central Government shall constitute, by 
notification, one, or more Authorisation Committees 
consisting of such members as may be nominated by the 
Central Government on such terms and conditions as may be 
specified in the notification for each of the Union territories 
for the purposes of this section. 
 ( b) The State Government shall constitute, by 
notification, one or more Authorisation Committees 
consisting of such members as may be nominated by the State 
Government on such terms and conditions as may be 
specified in the notification for the purposes of this section. 
* * * * * 
CHAPTER VI 
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES 
18.  ( 1) Any person who renders his services to or at any 
hospital and who, for purposes of transplantation, conducts, 
associates with, or helps in any manner in, the removal of any 
human organ without authority, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and 
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees. 
 ( 2) Where any person convicted under sub-section ( 1) 
is a registered medical practitioner, his name shall be reported 
by the Appropriate Authority to  the respective State Medical 
Council for taking necessary action including the removal of 
his name from the register of the Council for a period of two 
years for the first offence and permanently for the subsequent 
offence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Restrictions on removal 
and transplantation of 
human organs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Punishment for removal of 
human organ without 
authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

human organs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Punishment for 
contravention of any other 
provision of this Act. 
19.  Whoever– 
 ( a) makes or receives any payment for the supply of, or 
for an offer to supply any human organ; 
 ( b) seeks to find a person willing to supply for payment 
any human organ; 
 ( c) offers to supply any human organ for payment; 
 ( d) initiates or negotiates any arrangement involving 
the making of any payment for the supply of, or for an offer 
to supply, any human organ; 
 ( e) takes part in the management or contral of a body 
of persons, whether a society, firm or company, whose 
activities consist of or include the initiation or negotiation of 
any arrangement referred to in clause (d); or 
 ( f) publishes or distributes or causes to be published or 
distributed any advertisement,– 
 ( a) inviting persons to supply for payment of any 
human organ: 
 ( b) offering to supply any human organ for payment; or 
 ( c) indicating that the advertiser is willing to initiate or 
nego any arrangement referred to in clause (d), 
 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than two years but which may extend 
to seven years and shall be liable to fine which shall not be 
less than ten thousand rupees but may extend to twenty 
thousand rupees: 
 Provided that the court may, for any adequate and 
special reason to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a 
sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than two years 
and a fine less than ten thousand rupees. 
20.  Whoever contravenes any provision of this Actor any 
rule made, or any condition of the registration granted, 
thereunder for which no punishment is separately provided in 
this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years or with fine which may 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

extend to five thousand rupees.  
* * * * * 
24. (1)  *   * * *
 ( 2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality 
of the foregoing power, such ru les may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely:– 
* * * * * 
 
 
 
Power to make rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LOK SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994 
_______ 
 (Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, Minister of Health and Family Welfare) 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - II 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE 
17th February, 2010 
Representatives of the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
1. Ms. K. Sujatha Rao, Secretary 
2. Dr. R.K. Srivastava, Director Ge neral of Health Services (DGHS) 
3. Sh. Vineet Chaudh ary, Joint Secretary 
4. Dr. N.K. Mohanty, Medical Superintendent, Safdurjung Hospital 
5. Sh. V.P. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
20th May, 2010 
1. Major General Dr. R.P. Chaubey, MG (Medical), Mumbai, Gujarat and Goa Region; 
2. Dr. Samiran Nundy, Head of the Department, GI Surgery, Dr. Sunil Shroff and Dr. 
Arvinder Soin from Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi; 
3. Dr. Vatsala Trivedi, President, and Shri M. Karunakaran, Joint Secretary from National 
Deceased Donor Transplantation Network, Mumbai; 
4. Dr. P.S. Joshi from Radha Soami Satsang, Beas, Punjab 
9th June, 2010 
 I. All India Institute of  Medical Sciences (AIIMS) 
1. Dr. Aarti Vij, Incharge, Organ Retrieval Banking Organisation  
2. Dr. Sanjay K. Agarwal, He ad, Department of Nephrology 
3. Dr. Jitender Mehta, CMO 
 II. Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai  
  Dr. Astrid Lobo Gajiwala, Head, Tissue Bank 
 III. Eye Bank Associatio n of India, Hyderabad. 
1. Shri G. Ganesh, Executive Director  
2. Col. Dr. J. K. S. Parihar, Joint Secretary 
     3. Dr. Radhika Tandon
 