       
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2022/Asvina, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
138 
138 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
"MEDICAL DEVICES: REGULATION & CONTROL"  
PERTAINING TO 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH &FAMILY WELFARE 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
 
  
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail :  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2022/Asvina, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
"MEDICAL DEVICES: REGULATION & CONTROL"   
PERTAINING TO 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH &FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12th September, 2022) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2022) 
 
  
  
  
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)   
2.  PREFACE (ii) - (iii) 
3.  ACRONYMS (iv) - (v) 
4.  Chapter- I       
                INTRODUCTION 
Chapter-II   
                 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK;   STANDARDS & 
QUALITY CONTROL 
 Chapter - III   
                 MANUFACTURING, PRODUCTION, PROMOTION&          
                PRICING  
 
Chapter - IV  
 
                 VIEWS OF THE GOVERNMENT & OTHER 
STAKEHOLDERS  
 
1 - 4 
 
5 - 12 
 
13 - 23 
 
24 -39 
 
5.  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A 
GLANCE 
40 - 54 
6.  MINUTES 55 - 80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
2. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
3. Vacant 
4. Vacant 
5. Dr. Santanu Sen 
6. Shri A. D. Singh  
7. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu   
8. Vacant 
9. Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
10. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
11. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
12. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
13. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
14. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
15. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
16. Shrimati Kavitha Malothu 
17. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
18. Shri Arjun Lal Meena 
19. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
20. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
21. Shri K. Navaskani 
22. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
27. Shri Anurag Sharma 
28. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
29. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
30. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                       Additional Director 
4. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary  
5. Shrimati Harshita Shankar     Deputy Secretary 
6. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma  Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Ms. Monika Garbyal   Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 (i)  

PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this One -Hundred Thirty Eighth Report on the Medical Devices: Regulation and 
Control.   
 
2. The primary objective behind identifying the subject – ―Medical Devices: Regulation and 
Control‖ by the Committee is to assess recent developments in the medical device industry, the 
regulatory structure, measures which can be  taken to improve the manufacturing scenario in the 
country, steps needed to improve promotion and production of medical devices in the country.    
3. The Committee took the subject "Medical Devices: Regulation and Control" on 14 th 
December, 2016 and held first meeting on the subject on 28 th December, 2016 by hearing the 
views of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The consideration remained inconclusive 
due to other impending works with the Committee. In the meanwhile the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare notified the Medical Device Rules, 2017 under the provisions of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940. The Committee decided to issue a Press Release on the subject in January 
2018 to elicit feedback from the concerned stakeholders and general public.  In response thereto, 
24 memoranda were received. The Committee continued actively deliberating on the subject 
post-covid, to understand the recent developments on the subject and the immense importance of 
the medical devices industry in the recent times. The Committee again heard the views of 
Department of Health and Family Welfare on  1st December, 2021.  Following this, during the 
course of its deliberations on the subject, the Committee held several meetings with other 
Government Departments, private organizations, industry bodies like FICCI, CII and also sought 
written view of various stakeholders. Accordingly, the Committee, deliberated on the subject 
during the course of 5 meetings. The meetings  of the Committee were held on 1, December, 
2021, 12th, 13th and 30th May, 2022.  
4. During the finalization of its Report, the Committee relied upon the following 
documents/ papers:- 
(i) Background Note on "Medical Devices: Regulation and Control" received from 
Department of Health and Family Welfare; 
(ii)  Background Note on "Medical Devices: Regulation and Control" received 
from Department of  Pharmaceuticals; 
(iii) Oral Evidences tendered by Secretaries, Department of Health and Family 
Welfare and Department of Pharmaceuticals; 
(iv) Oral evidences tendered by stakeholders and their written submissions;  
(v) Written submissions of various Organizations/Associations; 
(vi) Response of the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the issues raised 
in memoranda received by the Committee; 
(vii) Replies to the questionnaires received from the Department of  Health and 
Family Welfare;  
(viii) Written submissions of various State Governments; and 
(ix) Other relevant documents pertaining to the subject. 
 
 (ii) 

5. The Report is divided into four chapters, viz: - (i) Chapter 1 deals with introduction to 
the subject, definition and classification of Medical Devices in India, (ii) Chapter 2 focuses on 
regulation on medical devices industry and quality control measures (iii) Chapter 3 deals with 
manufacturing, promotion, production and pricing and (iv) Chapter 4 enlists the views of 
Ministry and other stakeholders. 
6. The Committee, in its meeting held on 8th August, 2022, considered the draft Report 
and adopted the same. 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body  of the Report and also reproduced 
at the end of the Report at ‗Observations/Recommendations -at a Glance‘ . 
8. On behalf of the Committee and on my own behalf, I extend special thanks to 
Secretaries and officers of the (i) Department of Health and Family Welfare (ii) Department of 
Pharmaceuticals for their useful inputs on the subject. I also acknowledge the contri bution of 
the stakeholders for their deep insight and useful suggestions during the course of interactions. I 
further extend special appreciation to the officers of the Committee Section for their useful 
efforts in assimilating all relevant information and  enabling the Committee in producing this 
quality Report.  
     
 
New Delhi 
8th August, 2022 
Sravana , 1944 (Saka) 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
Chairman, Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
                          ACRONYMS 
 
ABDM 
AMTZ 
ASSOCHAM 
Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission 
Andhra Pradesh Medtech Zone Ltd. 
Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India 
AERB 
ASTM 
AIMeD 
AIIMS 
ADMI 
Atomic Energy Regulatory Board  
American Society for Testing and Materials 
Association of Indian Medical Device Industry 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
Association of Diagnostics Manufacturers of India 
BIS 
BCD 
Bureau of Indian Standards 
Basic Customs Duty 
CAGR 
CDSCO 
CII 
Compounded Annual Growth Rate 
Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation 
Confederation of Indian Industry 
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
D&CA Drugs and Cosmetics Act 
DCGI 
DPR 
DRPSC 
DoP 
DPIIT 
DPCO 
DRDO 
Drugs Controller General of India  
Detailed Project Reports 
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
Department of  Pharmaceuticals 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
Drugs (Prices Control) Order 
Defense Research and Development Organisation 
ETP 
EPC 
Effluent Treatment Plant  
Export Promotion Council 
FDI 
FICCI 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
ICMED Indian Certification of Medical Devices 
ICMR 
IEC 
IISC 
IIT 
ISO 
Indian Council of Medical Research 
International Electrotechemical Commission  
Indian Institute of Science 
Indian Institute of Technology 
International Standards Organisation  
IVD 
INI 
In-vitro Diagnostics 
Institutes of National Importance 
MoH&FW 
MTAI 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
Medical Technology Association of India 
MvPI Materiovigilance Programme of India  
MDR 
MoCA 
MoEF&CC 
MNC 
Medical Device Rules 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change  
Multi National Company 
 
(iv) 

 
 
NABL 
NABCB 
National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories  
National Accreditation Board for Certification Bodies  
NIPER National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
NITI   National Institution for Transforming India 
NLEM 
NPPA 
National List of Essential Medicines   
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
PLI Production Linked Incentive 
QCBS 
QCI 
Quality-cum-Cost Based Selection 
Quality Council of India  
RCVRDL Resource Centre for Virus Research; Diagnostic Laboratories 
RDTL 
R&D 
Regional Drugs Testing Laboratory  
Research and Development 
SAD Special Additional Duty 
SLA 
SIA 
State Licensing Authorities  
State Implementing Agency 
SME 
SSC 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
Scheme Steering Committee 
TMR Trade Margin Rationalisation 
US-FDA 
WHO-GMP 
United States- Food and Drug Administration 
World Health Organisation- Good Manufacturing Practices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 Vaccines, drugs and medical devices are the three vital pillars of the modern healthcare 
industry. Like vaccines and drugs, medical devices  play a key role in screening, monitoring, 
diagnosing, treating patients and also in restoring patients to normal  lives. With technological 
advancements in recent decades, medical devices have become an essential and integral 
constituent of the healthcare sector and prov ed fundamental in providing quality health care 
across each stage of the healthcare continuum.  In India, the Medical Devices sector forms an 
important pillar in the healthcare delivery system along with healthcare providers, 
pharmaceuticals and health insurance industry.  Owing to the recent spurt in demand, 
improvements in regulation and government  support, the Indian Medical Device industry is on a 
high growth trajectory having evolved significantly in the last decade.  
 
1.2 High-end technology and innovative products originate from a well -developed eco -
system and innovation cycle, which is yet to be fully developed in India. In 2014, taking note of 
the need to address these issues, "Medical Device Industry" has been recognize d as a key 
industry under the ‗Make in India‘ initiative and accorded the status of ―Sunshine Sector‖ of 
‗Make in India‘ initiative.  
 
A. Medical Devices: Definition and Classification 
 
1.3 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submitted to the Committee that presently 
the medical devices are regulated as "drugs" under Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. To have 
comprehensive regulatory provisions for import, manufacture, sale and distribution of medical 
devices based on risk based criteria, the Ministry notifi ed Medical Device Rules, 2017 under the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. A s per the Medical Device Rules 2017 
notified by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and effective from 1st January, 2018 , 
―Medical Device‖ means:- 
 
a) substances used for in -vitro diagnosis and surgical dressings, surgical 
bandages, surgical staples, surgical sutures, ligatures, blood and blood 
component collection bag with or without anticoagulant covered under 
sub-clause (i )(of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940),  
b) substances including mechanical contraceptives (condoms, intrauterine 
devices, tubal rings), disinfectants and insecticides notified in the Official 
Gazette under sub-clause (ii) (of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940),  
c) Specific devices intended for internal or external use in the diagnosis, 
treatment, mitigation or prevention  
of disease or disorder in human beings or animals which are notified from 
time to time under sub -clause (iv), of clause (b) of section 3 of the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act. 
 
1.4 On 11th February, 2020, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare issued a notification 
giving a new definition of medical devices, the new definition is:- 

2 
 
 
All devices including an instrument, apparatus, appliance, implant, material or other 
article, whether use d alone or in combination, including a software or an accessory, 
intended by its manufacturer to be used  
specially for human beings or animals which does not achieve the primary inte nded 
action in or on human body or animals by any pharmacological or immun ological or 
metabolic means, but which may assist in its intended  
function by such means for one or more of the specific purposes of ― 
 
a) diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or alleviation o f any disease or 
disorder; 
b) diagnosis, monitoring, treatment, alleviation or assistance  for, any injury or 
disability; 
c) investigation, replacement or modification or support of th e anatomy or of a 
physiological process; 
d) supporting or sustaining life; 
e) disinfection of medical devices; and 
f) Control of conception. 
 
1.5 Medical Devices Rules, 2017 has introduced risk based classification of medical devices. 
The classification of medical devices is as follows:- 
 
Risk Criteria Risk Class 
Low Class A 
Low Moderate Class B 
Moderate High Class C 
High Risk Class D 
 
1.6 Under the said rules, import of all classes of Medical Devices as well as manufacturing of 
Class C & D Medical Devices are regulated by CDSCO(Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation), while manufacturing  of Class A &  B Medical devices is regulated by the 
concerned State Licensing Authorities (SLA) appointed by the State Governments. However, 
sale and distribution of all classes of Medical Devices are regulated by the SLAs. 
 
1.7 In India the Medical devices are segregated into five major segments: 
 Consumables & Disposables which includes needles and syringes, etc 
 Diagnostic Imaging which includes MRI, X-Ray, Ultrasounds, etc 
 Dental Products which includes dentures, braces, etc 
 Orthopaedics & Prosthetics which includes knee implants, artificial joints 
 Patient Aids which includes hearing aids and pacemakers, etc 
1.8 The medical devices industry in India is mainly governed by Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare (through CDSCO) for regulatory framework and Department of Pharmaceuticals 
(Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers) for promotion, production and manufacturing. For other 

3 
 
aspects of the industry like pricing, availability of raw materials, standardization, consumer 
affairs etc, following government bodies/departments also regulate the industry:- 
 
 National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority- for pricing control; 
 Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change - for environment 
clearances; 
 Department of Telecommunications; 
 Department of Consumer Affairs - for labeling requirements; 
 Department of Revenue- for taxation and other related issues; 
 Department of Heavy Industries - for establishment of industries and factories; 
 Department of Animal husbandry- for raw materials like proteins; 
 Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade; 
 Bureau of Indian Standards- for standardization of devices; 
 Quality Council of India- for quality aspects; and  
 Atomic Energy Regulatory Board. 
 
B. Market Scenario of Medical Devices in the Country 
 
1.9 Over the last decades, India has become a global leader in development of  
pharmaceuticals and biotechnology so much so that the country is now known as the "Pharmacy" 
of the world . The recent Covid -19 pandemic  saw India's pharma and biotech prowess as it 
developed and manufactured two vaccines (Covaxin and Covishield with former being 
indigenously developed and manufactured) at large scale for the local population  and promoted 
vaccine diplomacy by exporting  the vaccines to different countries under the " Vaccine Maitri" 
initiative. However, the same cannot be said about medical device industry in the country.  
  
1.10 The current market size of the medical devices sector in India is estimated to be USD 11 
billion and its share in the global medical device market is estimated to be 1.5%. India is the 4 th 
largest market for medical devices in Asia after Japan, China and South Korea and is amongst 
the top 20 markets in the world. Today, the medical devices industry in Ind ia consists of large 
multinational companies as well as small and medium enterprises (SMEs) growing at an 
unprecedented scale. The medical device sector has been growing steadily at a CAGR  
(Compounded Annual Growth Rate) of 15% over the last 3 years. Now w ith 100% FDI (Foreign 
Direct Investment) being allowed under the automatic route for both Brownfield and Greenfield 
setups, the medical device sector is expected to grow at higher rate. 
 
1.11 Medical Devices industry has a lot of potential in India. In the recent years the medical 
device industry has grown tremendously but still remains under -penetrated with a large gap 
between demand and supply . Almost 80% (by value) of the domestic requirements are met by 
imports. In India disposables and consumables make  up the major portion of products 
manufactured, therefore, to meet the medical devices' needs of the population, expensive medical 
devices are imported. 
 
 
 

4 
 
C.  Impact of Covid-19 on the Medical Device Industry 
 
1.12 The Committee observes that Covid-19 pandemic wrecked havoc on the world for 
almost two years and still lingers as a looming threat. The pandemic caused great human 
and financial loss and severely affected almost all the sectors of the economy. The 
Healthcare system of India like of other cou ntries was put to severe test and the healthcare 
resources were stretched to their limits. Like other segments of the healthcare system, the 
Medical devices industry had to work overtime to meet the surge in demands of medical 
equipments and devices. During the first wave of pandemic, owing to its sudden nature, the 
country faced severe shortages of medical equipments like testing kits, PPE  (Personal 
Protective Equipment)  kits, masks, sanitisers,  and other related critical items  as domestic 
and international supply chains got disrupted leading to almost stoppage of imports. The 
situation was compounded by poor domestic manufacturing capacity.  
 
1.13 The Committee further notes that a midst the prevailing pandemic situation the  
domestic manufactures saw opportunity in adversity and ramped up their production 
capacities to meet the sudden surge in the demand of medical equipments like PPE Kits, 
masks, sanitisers etc . The Government supported the lo cal manufactures and start -ups 
were provided/extended soft loans and other incentives. The assured procurement and 
predictable demand encouraged Indian manufacturers to step forward and serve the 
country in crisis. Within months of the Covid-19 pandemic India went from importing PPE 
kits, masks, testing kits to not only self -reliant but the country also exported these devices 
to other countries. However, the current situation is that India still remains  largely an 
import dependent nation w.r.t medical devices, but the very least the pandemic has done to 
the industry is that it has  brought the industry to the limelight and gradually with 
government attending to the industry with improvements in regulation, manufacturi ng 
facilities, incentives, India in all probability would be a major player in global medical 
devices industry.  
 
1.14 The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare (DRPSC-H&FW) has taken up the subject - "Medical Devices: Regulatory and Control" 
to address range of issues plaguing the industry today viz. existing regulatory framework, 
manufacturing, promotion, quality and pricing aspects, standardisation of devices, availability of 
raw materials etc. The Committee's objective in undertaking this subject for study is to 
recommend the Government to make co ncerted efforts for transforming India as a "self -reliant" 
country in Medical Device sector and thus provide a competitive edge to the sector so as to 
increase the market share, thereby making India a major exporter of medical devices  and their 
spare parts in the global market as also to make it a Medical Devices Repairs Hub for the world.   
  

5 
 
CHAPTER- II 
 
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK:  STANDARDS & QUALITY CONTROL 
 
2.1 In India, prior to notification of Medical Device Rules in 2017 there were no specific 
medical device regulations and devices were regulated under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940. The definition of "drugs" under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (D &CA, 1940) was 
amended in November, 1982 to include such medical devices as may be notified by the 
Government from time -to-time. Post notification these devices would then be governed by the 
DCA's regulatory framework. Interestingly, to this day, to be recognised as a medical device, a 
device must first be notified as a "drug" under DCA and thereafter be governed by the regulatory 
framework meant for drugs. In 2005 the Health Ministry notified the requirements and guidelines 
to be followed for obtaining permission to import or manufacture new drugs and for conducting 
clinical trial. In the same year the Mi nistry of Health & Family Welfare notified 10 sterile 
devices: Cardiac Stents; Drug -Eluting Stents; Catheters; Intra Ocular Lenses; I.V. Cannulae; 
Bone Cement; Heart Valves; Scalp Vein Set; Orthopaedic Implants; Internal Prosthetic 
replacements. Thus till 2005, only 12 medical devices in India were recognised. In January, 
2017, the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) under the Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare notified the Medical Device Rules, 2017 (MDR, 2017). In 2020, the Ministry 
expanded the definition of "drugs" in Section 3(b), the new definition covered almost all the 
medical devices including softwares, digital wearables etc.  
 
A. Medical Device Rules, 2017 
 
2.2 In India the primary legislation regulating  manufacturing, authorization,  import, export 
and sale of medical devices is the  Medical Device Rules, 2017 (MDR -2017). The Medical 
Device Rules are a set of rules framed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (D&C Act). 
The D&C Act (including the MDR) is enforced by the CDSCO at the central level and the SLAs 
at the state level.  In 2020, the Ministry expanded the definition of "Medical Devices" which 
almost brings all medical devices under the ambit of regulation.  
2.3 Responding to a query, whether MoH&FW/CDSCO is in the process of bringing separate 
law for regulation of Medical Devices in the country, the Ministry submitted that it intends to 
bring Drugs, Medical Devices and Cosmetics Bill which will contain separate provisions for 
Medical Devices. A committee has been constituted to draft the new Drugs, Medical Devices and 
Cosmetics Bill. It further submitted that appropriate action will be taken after review of the draft 
bill. The bill is meant for regulation of Drugs, Medical Devices and Cosmetics with separate 
provisions for Medical Devices. Currently all Medical Devices, be it an implant or a n MRI 
machine are classified as ―drugs‖ under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
 
2.4 Medical Technology Association of India (MTaI) in its Memorandum to the Com mittee 
submitted that – Drugs, which are chemical entities, are drastically different from Medical 
Devices which are technology solutions for diagnosis and treatment for various diseases. The 
technology is so varied that it can be radiation based technolog y or and electronic based 
technology. Unlike Pharmaceutical products, the product life cycle of some of the Medical 

6 
 
Devices is very short. Based on the scientific and technical parameters, there is a need for a 
separate Medical Device Act for regulation of medical devices.  
 
2.5 In reply to this submission by MTaI, the MoH&FW apprised the Committee that Medical 
Device Rules (MDR) 2017 under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 includes comprehensive 
regulatory provisions to regulate the Clinical Investigation, Manufacture, Import, Sale and 
Distribution of the notified medical d evices in the country as per risk based classification. These 
rules have already been implemented from 01, January 2018. Prior to grant of Import or 
Manufacturing licence along with schedule V compliance  various quality, effectiveness, 
performance parameters are checked and inspected thoroughly as per requirements of Medical 
Device Rules, 2017. Further, for import or manufacture of medical device which does not have 
predicate device (Investigational New Medical Devices), the permission is granted after 
completion of clinical investigation i.e. trial on human being for proving safety, effectiveness 
and performance.  
 
2.6 The Central Licensing Authority (CDSCO) issue the permission to initiate / conduct a 
clinical investigation including pilot or pivotal clini cal study, after evaluation of preclinical data 
which include biocompatibility data and animal trials data. The data generated during clinical 
investigation is evaluated by CDSCO in consultation with the Subject Expert Committee in the 
relevant therapeutic areas and if the data is found satisfactory to prove that the device is safe, 
effective and performs as per intended use, the authority shall grant the permission to 
manufacture or import the Investigational Medical Devices. Subsequent to approval of a ne w 
Medical Device (Investigational Medical Device), the applicant is required to closely monitor the 
device for their clinical safety. The applicant is required to submit Periodic Safety Update 
Reports (PSURs) to CDSCO. Globally medical devices are regulate d by the Drug and Device 
Regulatory Authority under the Health ministry. During the meeting of Secretaries held in NITI 
Aayog on 03.07.2018 there was no consensus on separate legislation on medical devices. 
Therefore, Government preferred to continue the same as it related to patient safety. 
 
2.7 The Committee notes that Drugs and Cosmetics Act lacks offences and penalties for 
malpractices like manufacturing  of sub -standard devices, fake USFDA/CE certifications. 
The D&C Act does contain a penal prov ision for the manufacture of sub -standard drugs 
but does not penalize the manufacturers of sub standard medical devices (although medical 
devices are legally defined in terms of drugs) because the legally binding standards which 
are recognised in the Act pertain only to drugs. Therefore, d ue to lack of penal provisions 
for Medical Devices in the said Act, the manufacturers of sub -standard medical devices 
move scot free. The scope of Medical Devices Rules, 2017 is restricted to only those medical 
devices which are notified by the Government from time to time as „drugs‟. The Committee 
appreciates the initiatives of the Ministry to change the  definition of Medical Devices in 
2020 to make it more inclusive and thus include almost all medical dev ices for regulation. 
However, the Committee feels that the definition of "Medical Devices" be such that any  
product which falls under the definition is automatically eligible for regulation.  
2.8 The Committee notes that in the recent years the Medical Devices has become a vast 
industry. Improvements in economy, life -expectancy, rise in  income levels and overall rise 
in awareness about health coupled with surge in communicable and non -communicable 

7 
 
diseases have been some of the key drivers behind growth of the industry. Th is has 
necessitated better regulation and control of the industry. The Committee believes that 
there is a need for a well -researched, organised an d inclusive legal architecture for 
regulating activities of manufacturing units, medical institutions, laborat ories, clini cal 
trials having well defined responsibility, roles and accountability f or all the stakeholders of 
the industry. 
2.9 The Committee, while welcoming, the initiative of the Ministry to set up a panel to 
make the new Drugs, Medical Devices and Co smetics Bill with separate provisions for 
Medical Devices strongly recommends that instead of drafting a combined legislation for 
Drugs, Medical Devices and Cosmetics, the Ministry should appreciate the potential of the 
Medical Device industry and formulate a separate legilsation for Medical Devices.  
2.10 The Committee believes that the new legislation on Medical Devices should have the 
provisions to transform the medical device s industry and bring about a Medical Device 
Revolution in the country . The Committee further recommends that instead of the panel 
the Government should come up with a  „National Commission on Medical Devices ‟ to 
examine all aspects of the Industry in detail and bring forth a comprehensive law 
supported by a holistic policy an d institutional infrastructure for the purpose.  The 
Committee further recommends that this Commission should study the aspect of 
centralizing the Medical Device licensing with the Central regulator so as to make the 
approval process easy. The Ministry shou ld also focus on guaranteeing transparency by 
designing this legislation so that the citizens/ experts get a right to participate in decision 
making. The legal provisions should be such that citizens/experts can participate in the 
regulatory process & regi ster their objections. The blueprint for the new legislation must 
also include a 10 -15 year roadmap with a clear policy plan & target s. The Committee 
strongly believes that with a 15 year roadmap with annual targets for the Medical Device 
industry, India w ould emerge as the world's biggest centre for manufacture & service of 
Medical Devices and thus also a leader in medical tourism. 
B. Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) 
2.11 The Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) comes under the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare (MoH &FW) as the national regulating authority for medical devices 
and pharmaceuticals in India. The CDSCO works to regulate and monitor the health standards of 
pharmaceuticals and medical devices, specificall y their safety, efficacy, and quality levels. The 
standards to which devices are held are outlined under the Drug s and Cosmetics (D&C) Act, 
1940 Act. The Central Drugs Standa rd Control Organization (CDSCO) headed by the Drugs 
Controller General of India (DCGI) is primarily responsible for coordinating the activities of the 
State Drugs Licensing Authorities (SL As), formulating policies, and ensuring uniform 
implementation of the DCA and MDR throughout India. 
2.12 As per the information submitted by the Minis try of Health and Family Welfare, the 
import of all classes of Medical Devices as well as manufacture of Class C &D Medical Devices 
are regulated by CDSCO, while manufacture of Class A & B Medical Devices are regulated by 
the concerned State Licensing Authorities (SLA) appointed by the State Governments. However, 
sale and distribution of all classes of Medical Devices are regulated by the SLAs. In case of new 
Medical Devices, the safety, efficacy and perfor mance data are evaluated by CDSCO in 

8 
 
consultation with the Subject Expert Committee in the relevant therapeutic areas.  According to 
the website of the CDSCO, the functions of CDSCO are:- 
 
2.13 The Committee observes that the functions of CDSCO primarily focus on the 
regulation of drugs as the regulatory body was originally set up to regulate Pharma and 
other related segments. The MDR 2017 mandated the CDSCO to regulate the Medical 
Devices segment as well. However, the existing structure and expertise (whi ch is more 
pharma centric) of the workforce in CDSCO is falling short in effectively  regulating the 
medical devices industry.  
2.14 The Committee recommends that the new legislation should set up a new  set of 
regulator at different levels for regulating the Medical Devices industry. Unlike the present 
structure, the proposed regulator should license the manufacturing of all classes of medical 
devices i.e. Class A, B, C, and D. This would help harmonise the regulation process 
throughout the country as it would do away with different regulating procedures employed 
by different States. This step would greatly help  the manufacturers and will reduce the 
time required to start a manufacturing unit thereby facilitating ease of doing business. The 
Committee also recommends that to undertake the regulation for all Classes of medical 
devices throughout the country, the proposed regulator should be adequately staffed with 
workforce which is technically skilled and is well -versed with the functioning of me dical 
devices industry. The Committee recommends the Ministry to work in synergy with State 
Governments and impart the necessary skills to the local medical device officers and also 
devise a mechanism to regularly designate State Medical personnel as Medic al Device/ 
Medical Device Testing Officers so that the mandate of the legislation can be implemented 
effectively. The Committee believes that with industry growing by leaps & bounds,  the 


9 
 
government should not afford regulation of medical devices by pharma  experts and its 
time that at ground level the medical device regulations are dispensed with by qualified and 
well-trained Medical Device Officers to give a fillip to the Medical Device industry in the 
country.  
2.15 The Committee recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to allow 
the new regulator to involve institutions like IISC, CSIR, DRDO and network of IITs to 
test medical devices for safety and efficacy.  The Committee is of the firm view that these 
institutes have high -tech labs and thus can be used to test medical devices for their 
electronic, electromagnetic, biochemical -run aspects. The Committee further recommends 
that additional investment s should be made to raise the standards of these labs as per the 
requirements.  
2.16 Presently, in India primarily the following regulatory authorities have jurisdiction over 
medical devices in India: - 
 The Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) 
 State Drug Licensing Authorities (also referred to as the state licensing authorities 
or SLAs). 
 National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA). 
 Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) 
2.17 Apart from the above -mentioned bodies, for different aspects, the medical devices 
industry is also regulated by bodies like Ministry of Environment, Forest and Cli mate 
Change (MoEF&CC), Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB), Bureau of Indian Standards 
(BIS), Ministry of Consumer Affairs (MoCA) etc.  
2.18 The Committee notes that multiplicity of regulations exists at the component level  
from different departments/ mi nistries. The Committee recommends that CDSCO which 
operates a single window clearing platform  for application of license for manufacturing, 
export, import shall also integrate all these bodies involved in the regulation of medical 
devices. A single window  clearance for all the department/ ministries would significantly 
boost investment in R&D in the field of medical  devices and would also reduce the time 
required for obtaining approvals from different departments/ ministries. The Ministry 
must incorporate such an all -encompassing “single window clearing/approval system” in 
the proposed new separate Act for the regulation of Medical Devices.  
2.19 The Orthopaedic Implant Manufacturers Association in its submission apprised the 
Committee that all produc ts standards are not yet available. The association further stated that 
most of raw materials and testing standard in world are based on ASTM (American Society for 
Testing and Materials) standard. Hence, ISO and another International standard like ASTM 
should be allowed to be used.  
2.20 Replying to a query regarding standards of Medical Devices in the country the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare submitted to the Committee that as per the Rule 7 of Medical 
Devices Rules, 2017, the medical devices shall  conform to the standards laid down by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) – India‘s national standards body – or those notified by 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. In the absence of such standards, the device should 
conform to standards laid down b y the International Standards Organisation  (―ISO‖) or the 

10 
 
International Electrotechemical Commission (―IEC‖). If ISO or IEC standards are also not 
available, the device may conform to the validated manufacturer‘s standards. 
2.21 The Committee opines that while setting the standards and benchmark of medical 
devices the foremost factor which should be considered is “health”, the standards devised 
must prioritise health and wellness. In this regard, the Committee believes that BIS should 
focus on harmonising the Indian standards with world -class and globally accepted quality 
standards. Adapting Indian standards as per global standards would also help Indian 
medical device manufacturers in global market as it would make them more competitive 
and acceptable, which in turn would transform India into a net exporter of medical devices, 
spare parts and services . The Committee, therefore, recommends BIS to periodically 
update Indian Standards to corresponding global medical device standards as complying 
with Indian st andards is affordable for local manufactures in comparison to global 
standards.  
2.22 The Committee further recommends that BIS should encoura ge manufacturers to 
demonstrate/adhere to conformance to essential principles of the medical device concerned, 
as this would reorganise Indian products achieve greater international acceptance. This 
will engineer a shift towards increase in India's global share in the medical devices sector. 
2.23 Replying to the issue of quality standards and the number of Medical Dev ice testing 
laboratories established so far, the Ministry in its written reply has informed that the Government 
has designated the following 5 Medical Device Testing Laboratories so far: 
 The National Institute of Biologicals, Noida. 
 The Central Drugs Testing laboratory, Chennai. 
 The Central Drugs Laboratory, Kolkata 
 The Regional Drugs Testing Laboratory (RDTL), Guwahati 
 The Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, Mumbai 
2.24 The Ministry further  informed that the laboratories having NABL certifications which  
were willing to function for performance evaluation or testing of medical devices would be 
designated across the country under Medical Device Rules 2017, which will also take care of 
regional parity.  In addition , to  carry out Test or Evaluation of a medic al device on behalf of 
manufacturer, CDSCO may issue Certificate of registration to Medical Device testing Laboratory 
in Form MD-40 under Medical Devices Rules, 2017. 
2.25 As per the submission by the Government of  National Capital Territory of Delhi, as o n 
10.12.2021, a total number of 18 certified Medical Device Testing Laboratories have been 
approved by CDSCO, Govt. of India under the provision of Medical Devices Rules, 2017 across 
the country to carry out test or evaluation of Medical Devices on behalf of Manufacturers.  
2.26 The state of Kerala in its submission to the Committee pointed out that manufacturers 
have to send their medical devices to Tamil Nadu and Karnataka for conducting 
Biocompatibility Tests as per ISO 10993 standards. Manufacturers of electrically operated 
devices including the operation theatre tables, OT lights etc. need to send those products to 
Maharashtra or Delhi for IEC Testing. Similarly, there is lack of sterilization centres in the State.  
2.27 The Committee notes that the country has only  18 certified Medical Device Testing 
Laboratories that have been approved by CDSCO and that is grossly insufficient keeping 

11 
 
in view the size of the country. The Com mittee is of the considered opinion that having 
adequate common infrastructure including accredited laboratories in different regions of 
the country for standard testing would significantly encourage local manufacturers to get 
their products tested for sta ndards and such measures undertaken would also help in 
reducing the cost of production which ultimately will improve the availability and 
affordability of medical devices in the domestic market.  
2.28 The Committee finds that there is a dire need for developing a robust IT enabled 
feedback driven post market surveillance system for Medical Devices to evaluate the 
efficiency of specific Medical Devices. A medical device registry, particularly for implant s 
should also be made to ensure traceability of patient who has received the implant in order 
to assess the performance of the implant and ascertain upto what extent the implant has 
made the life of the patient comfortable  and also to seek feedback of func tional capacity of 
medical devices.  Such measures would ensure that patients get access to good quality and 
approved medical devices.  
C. Quality Control 
2.29 Quality Council of India (QCI) was established as a National body for Accreditation 
through a Ca binet decision in 1996. Accordingly, QCI was set up through a PPP model as an 
independent autonomous organization with the support of Government of India and the Indian 
Industry represented by the three premier industry associations, (i) Associated Chamber s of 
Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), (ii) Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and 
(iii) Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI).  QCI is a non -profit 
organization registered under the Societies Registration Act XXI of 1 860. The Department of 
Industrial Policy and Promotion, Ministry of Commerce and Industry was designated as the 
nodal point for all matters connected with quality and QCI. 
2.30 QCI has been established to create a mechanism for independent third -party assessment 
of products, services and processes. It plays a pivotal role at the national level in propagating, 
adoption and adherence to quality standards in all important spheres of activities including 
education, healthcare, environment protection, governance , social sectors, infrastructure sector 
and such other areas of organized activities that have significant bearing in improving the quality 
of life and wellbeing of the citizens of India. 
2.31 The Quality Council of India, in its submission, apprised  the Committee that globally, 
the international standard ISO 13485:2016 is used by the regulators, industry, accreditation & 
conformity bodies to ensure that medical device manufacturers have implemented quality 
management systems and they consistently met cust omer and applicable regulatory 
requirements. In India too, the relevan t stakeholders such as CDSCO/ D CGI (Drugs Controller 
General of India) -the regulator, NABCB- the Accreditation Body, the Medical Devices Industry 
and the Certification Bodies apply this  standard for ensuring quality systems in the medical 
devices sector, apart from product-specific standards. In line with the international best practices, 
the Medical Device Rules, 2017 prescribes NABCB accreditation for certification bodies for 
performing audits of medical devices manufacturers and NABL accreditation for testing 
laboratories for testing of medical devices. 
2.32 Various international certifications for medical devices such as CE Mark, US FDA 
approval etc are being recognized and accepted b y CDSCO/DCGI while registration and 

12 
 
granting approvals to medical devices manufacturers for selling their medical devices in the 
Indian market. However, the reciprocal treatment may not be available in foreign countries for 
the medical devices manufactured in India. The buyers of medical devices in India, especially in 
the private sector, many a times prescribe international certifications while procuring medical 
devices instead of relying on Indian standards and certifications. In 2021, the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry announced the launch of the "Indian Certification of Medical Devices 
(ICMED-13485) Plus" voluntary certification scheme established by  QCI with AIMED 
(Association of Indian Medical Device Industry) . This is the first scheme around the wo rld 
wherein quality management and product certification standards were integrated w ith regulatory 
requirements. ICMED-13485 along with the compliance requirements mentioned in ISO -13485 
has additional essential and regulatory requirements. 
2.33 The Committee is of the considered view that quality and affordability are two vital 
factors regarding medical devices. India n Medical Device s Industry presently lacks 
research ecosystem and infrastructure for manufacturing of high tech, advan ced medical 
devices (Class C&D) and  Indian Medical Devices Industry  doesn‟t have facilities to 
produce such medical devices comparable to global standards . Here, the Committee 
appreciates QCI for filling up th e vacuum in quality certification space by extending the 
option of Indian Certification of Medical Devices (ICMED) 13485. The Committee believes 
that QCI can play a pivotal  role in establishing norms of quality and ensuring that Indian 
manufactured products have competitive product advantage, vis-à-vis, the international 
standards in terms of quality. The Committee , therefore,  recommends the Ministry to 
introduce standards and certification process (particularly for Class C&D products)  
comparable to global standards . The Ministry, along with compulsory compliance to 
Quality Management System as per schedule 5 of the MDR, 2017, should also allow 
cognizance to 3rd party assurance schemes like ICMED 13485. 
2.34 In response to the query of mandatory requirement of USFDA, CE or other international 
certification, the Ministry has  stated that since, Medical devices rules has already specified 
procedure to grant a licence for manufacture or import or sale of medical devices therefore 
further need of any certification process may not be required. Further BIS has stated that where 
India Standards are not available, gap analysis is under progress with the procurement agencies 
of Government of India, for formulation of Indian Standards as per norms. 
2.35 Further, regarding the measures being taken to ensure certification of all medical devices 
under BIS, the Ministry has informed that BIS are having specifications for various medical 
devices and medical equipments and some of the commonly used devices like MRI, PET, 
Ultrasound, Dialysis Machines are presently not covered under the BIS.  The BIS has been 
requested vide letter dated 01.03.2018 and 26.04.2018 by CDSCO to develop standards for all 
medical devices and medical equipments for which ISO standard s are already available and list 
of commonly used equipments was also forwarded. 
2.36 The Committee further recommends that till such time the Indian Medical Device 
Industry come up with comparable standards and certification process, the Ministry 
should extend financial support to the local manufacturers in capacity building for 
compliance to USFDA/CE regulations considering that USFDA and CE certification 
processes are costly affairs. The Government support would facilitate local manufacturers 
to gain access to US and European markets thereby boosting exports.   

13 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
MANUFACTURING, PRODUCTION, PROMOTION& PRICING 
 
3.1 Department of Pharmaceuticals, in its submission, to the Committee highlighted that 
Medical Device industry is a continuously growing sector and this sector has one of the highest 
potential for growth among all the sectors in the healthcare market. Various categories of devices 
starting from consumables to implantable medical devices are being manufactured in India. 
Major manufacturing of medical devices in the country relates to disposables such as catheters, 
perfusion sets, extension lines, cannula, feeding tubes, needles, syringes, and implants such as 
cardiac stents, drug -eluting stents, intra -ocular lenses and orthopaedic implants. The Medical 
Device industry is highly capital intensive with a long gestation period a nd requires 
development/induction of new technologies. The sector also requires continuous training of 
healthcare providers to adapt to new technologies. Most of the high technology and innovative 
products originate from a well -developed ecosystem and inno vation cycle, which is yet to be 
fully developed in India. India depends on imports to an extent of 80% by value of its domestic 
requirements of medical devices. 
3.2  As per the Department of Pharmaceuticals, following schemes are being implemented in 
the country for the promotion of manufacturing of medical devices:-  
a. Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing of 
Medical Devices:  
 
3.3 The Department apprised the Committee that the domestic medical devices industry faces 
challenges related to considerable cost of manufacturing, among other things, on account of lack 
of adequate infrastructure, domestic supply chain and logistics, high cost of finance, inadequate 
availability of quality power, limited design capabilities and l ow investments on R&D and skill 
development. With a view to address these challenges in manufacturing of medical devices in 
India vis -à-vis other major manufacturing economies, a scheme called ―Production Linked 
Incentive Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manu facturing of Medical Devices‖ has been 
approved by the Government of India on 20thMarch, 2020. 
 
3.4 The Scheme is applicable only to the Greenfield projects and intends to boost domestic 
manufacturing and attract large investments in the Medical Devices Sector. Under the Scheme, 
financial incentive is given to selected companies at the rate of 5% of incr emental sales of 
medical devices manufactured in India and covered under the Target segments of the scheme, for 
a period of five (5) years. The tenure of the scheme is from FY 2020-21 to FY 2027-28. The total 
financial outlay of the Scheme is Rs. 3,420 cro re. The four Target Segments of medical devices 
are- 

i. Cancer care/ Radiotherapy medical devices  
ii. Radiology & Imaging medical devices (both ionizing & non-ionizing radiation 
products) and Nuclear Imaging devices  
iii. Anaesthetics & Cardio-Respiratory medical devices including Catheters of Cardio 
Respiratory Category & Renal Care medical devices  

14 
 
iv. All Implants including implantable electronic devices  

3.5 The Scheme is being implemented through a Project Management Agency (PMA). An 
Empowered Committee under the c hairmanship of CEO, NITI  Aayog oversees various issues 
under the scheme from time to time. 21 applications have been approved with a total committed 
Investment of Rs.1059 Crore and expected incentive utilisation of Rs 2,541 crore. The next 
round of applications will be considered with suitable amendment in the guidelines, if approved. 
 
3.6 The Committee has found that the Medical Device Industry is facing following 
challenges: 
o Inadequacy of indigenous research and development (R&D) in high end 
technology including lack of adequate funding; 
o Non-availability of adequate, trained and qualified manpower in high end/cutting 
edge technology with entrepreneurial skills; 
o Failure to undertake research in academic institutions in cutting edge technologies 
and establis hing clear pathways for translation from lab to manufacturing 
facilities; 
o Non-availability of adequate finances at concessional rates and other fiscal 
incentives as compared with countries like Ireland; 
o Higher cost of development of indigenous technology a nd failure to ensure 
transfer of technology from other countries to set up manufacturing facilities in 
the country. 
o Industry has been introduced to digitalization methods such as artificial 
intelligence and robotics. These have modernized the whole process , making 
things easier, faster, and more efficient. However, the same technological 
advancements have paved the way for the cyber security threat. 
 
3.7 The Committee is of the considered view that in order to encourage indigenous 
manufacturing, the Government should provide incentives or encourage preferential 
purchase for domestically manufactured products in Government procurement. In this 
regard, the Department sho uld ensure that in all public procurement, the preference must 
be given to Indian manufactured medical devices having domestic content of at least 50%.  
Given the size of Government's (both Ce ntral and State) purchase, the P referential 
Purchase Agreement would have a significant pull for a number of medical devices 
companies to manufacture medical devices in India. Also, the PLI scheme should be broad 
based and all the medical devices should be covered under the scheme. 
 
3.8 The Committee notes that most of the high -end technology and innovative products 
originate from a well -developed ecosystem and innovation cycle. The Committee is pained 
to note that despite boasting of several IT hubs like Bengaluru, Pune, Hyderabad, Delhi -
NCR the desired ecosystem for manufacturing of highly advanced medical devices is yet to 
be fully developed in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends prioritizing and 
developing a robust funding mechanism to nurture an ecosystem for innovation for medical 
devices industry. In this regard, the Committee recommends the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals to have a dedicated corpus to fund start -ups and Small & Medium 

15 
 
Enterprises (SMEs) undertaking research projects that aim for improving quality, 
efficiency of existing devices and other healthcare outcomes.  
 
3.9 In response to a question regarding the institutes conducting Research & Development in 
high end medical device technology, the Committee had been  informed that as of now the 
following 13 institutions/organizations we re conducting Research and development in high end 
medical device technology: 
 
1. Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) 
2. Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Delhi 
3. Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) 
4. HLL, Chennai 
5. Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Chennai 
6. Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Mumbai 
7. Christian Medical College, Vellore 
8. Veterinary Medical College, Chennai 
9. PSG Institute of Medical Science and Research, Coimbatore 
10. Sree Chitra Tirunal Inst itute for Medical Sciences and T echnology, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
11. Society for Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering and Research, Mumbai 
12. Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advance Scientific Research (JNCASR), Bengaluru 
13. IISC, Bangalore 
 
3.10 To invigorate the cultur e of research and development in medical devices in 
institutions like IITs, NITs and other academic institutions the Committee recommends the 
Department to start Research Linked Incentive (RLI) Scheme in Line with PLI scheme. 
The Department should facilitate academia- industry partnership for undertaking research 
projects on industry challenges and incentivize the successful outcomes.  
 
3.11 The Committee had been informed that for making India a dominant global player in the 
Medical Device Industry , seven National Institutes o f Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
(NIPERs), have been set up in various parts of the country as Institutes of National I mportance, 
to nurture and promote quality and excellence in the pharmaceutical education & research. 
NIPER at Ahmedabad, in addition to other courses, is running MS Pharma (Medical Devices) 
and PhD courses in medical devices. The Department also intends to set up a national center of 
excellence in medical devices at NIPER Ahmedabad. NIPERs at Mohali, Hyderabad an d 
Guwahati have started courses in M. Tech. (Medical Devices). NIPER, Kolkata has also started 
course from this Academic year. 
 
3.12 The Committee realizes that biomedical engineers are integral to develop ecosystem 
for research in medical devices in India . These engineers are trained in the principles of 
physics and mathematical computation for the development of safe and effective medical 
devices that best fit the needs of medical providers and patients. However, biomedical 
engineers generally do not interface directly with patients to the same extent as physicians; 
therefore, biomedical engineers may not fully understand the specific needs of patients in 
the same way that medical professionals and manufacturers do. The Committee, therefore, 

16 
 
strongly recom mends the Department to facilitate regular interactions of biomedical 
engineers with leading physicians and manufacturers and thus encourage them to 
undertake research on medical devices. Furthermore, the Committee recommends 
expediting setting up centers of excellence in medical devices at all the National Institutes of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research  (NIPERs). The courses may commence in these 
centers of excellence to train and educate biomedical engineers on ongoing challenges faced 
by medical device industry. 
 
3.13 The Committee also recomme nds that the Government should arrange to provide 
international exposures to domestic manufactures and to their products.  
 
b.  Scheme for Promotion of Medical Device Parks: 
3.14 The sub-scheme termed as ―Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility 
Centre‖ is a Central Sector Scheme under the umbrella scheme for Development of 
Pharmaceutical Industry. The total size of the above sub -scheme was Rs. 100 crore for 2018 -
2020. The sub -scheme provi des a one -time grant -in-aid of Rs. 25 crore or 70% of the project 
cost, whichever is less, to be released for creation of identified infrastructure and common 
facilities to a State Implementing Agency (SIA) set up for the purpose. The purpose of the grant 
is to render financial assistance for establishment of common facilities in any upcoming Medical 
Device Park promoted by a State Government/State Corporation. The Department has approved 
the proposal for creation of Common Facility for superconducting magn etic coils testing & 
research facility of Andhra Pradesh Medtech Zone Ltd. (AMTZ), Andhra Pradesh under the said 
sub-scheme. 
3.15 Recognizing the need for higher levels of investments for the creation of testing and 
laboratory facilities, the sub -scheme ―A ssistance to Medical Device Industry for Common 
Facility Centre‖ has been revised and renamed as ―Promotion of Medical Device Parks‖ which 
has been approved by the Government of India on 20th March 2020. The parks will provide 
common testing and laboratory  facilities / centre at one place reducing the manufacturing cost 
significantly and will help in creating a robust ecosystem for medical device manufacturing in 
the country. The total financial outlay of the scheme is Rs. 400 crore. The tenure of the scheme is 
from FY 2020-2021 to FY 2024-2025. 
 
3.16 Financial assistance to a selected Medical Device Park would be 70% of the project cost 
of common infrastructure facilities. In case of North Eastern States and Hilly States, financial 
assistance would be 90% o f the project cost. Maximum assistance under the scheme for one 
Medical Device Park would be limited to Rs 100 crore. A Medical Device Park project selected 
under the Scheme will be implemented by a State Implementing Agency (SIA). The proposals 
under the scheme are to be approved by the Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) constituted by 
Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP). A Project Management Agency (PMA) will assist DoP 
for effective implementation of the Scheme. 
 
3.17 The Department apprised the Committee t hat 16 States submitted their proposals under 
the scheme. The Department gave in -principle approval to the proposal from Himachal Pradesh, 
Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. Thereafter, based on the evaluation of the 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of the said 4 States, the SSC gave the final approval to 4 States 

17 
 
viz Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. The expected date of 
completion of the Parks is January, 2024. As per scheme guidelines, first tranche of grant -in-aid 
of Rs. 30 crore each has been released to the four States in the 4th Quarter of Financial year 
2021-22. 
 
3.18 The Committee commends the Department for launching Scheme for Promotion of 
Medical Device Parks in India. The Committee believes that India has huge growth 
potential in manufacturing of medical devices. Well -coordinated inter -ministerial and 
inter-governmental (central and state) strategies aimed at offering manufacturers 
competitive advantage in manufacturing in India will result in importers finding it more 
profitable to manufacture in India than to import it. The Committee believes that logistical 
support in shared manufacturing facilities like Medtech parks would significantly reduce 
capital expenditure of manufacturers and thus giving a boost to manufacturing in India.  
 
3.19 The Committee recommends following steps for improving the efficiency and 
overall facilities of Medtech Parks in India:- 
 
i. The M ediparks should have NABL (National Accreditation Board for Testing 
and Calibration Laboratories) approved medical device testing laboratories to 
reduce time required in manufacturing a product; 
ii. Each park s hould have dedicated office for skilled and unskilled labor force. 
This said office should maintain a registry of registered workers so as to 
maintain the continuous availability of workforce; 
iii. To control pollution, each Medipark should have Effluent Treatm ent Plant 
(ETP); 
iv. Availability of subsidized power and water ;and  
v. For promoting the  Indian medical device market, M ediparks should organize -
"Medical Device Exhibitions" and workshops. 
 
3.20 The Committee furth er recommends that some of the M ediparks should  focus on 
manufacturing medical device components and thus make the country self reliant on spare 
parts with provision for extending necessary services. This can further strengthen into 
India emerging as hotspot for medical devices spare parts and hub for medical devices 
repairing and service centres for other countries.  Thus Medical Devices industry would 
have added advantage of huge employment generation capacity. 
  
3.21 As per the information furnished by the Department of Pharmaceuticals, the import and 
export data of medical devices over the past two financial years is as under:- 
(in USD million) 
Import Export 
2020-21 2021-22 2020-21 2021-22 
6240.55 8539.5 2532.16 2923.16 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
A. Export Data (USD million) 
(in USD million) 
Si.No. Segment FY 2020-21 FY2021-22 Growth% 
1. Consumables &Disposables 1290.43 1378.48 7% 
2. Electronic Equipments 985.09 1162.58 18% 
3. Implants 98.81 135.18 37% 
4. IVD Reagent 104.19 175.71 69% 
5. Surgical Instrument 53.64 71.21 33% 
 Total  2532.16 2923.16 15% 
 
B.  Import Data (USD million) 
(in USD million) 
Si.No. Segment FY 2020-21 FY2021-22 Growth% 
1. Consumables &Disposables 1471 1623.55 10% 
2. Electronic Equipments 3569 5441.22 52% 
3. Implants 225.6 423.06 88% 
4. IVD Reagent 871.9 882.65 1% 
5. Surgical Instrument 169.02 169.02 63% 
 Total  6241 8539.5 37% 
 
3.22 The Committee observes that India imported medical devices worth USD 8.5 billion 
in 2021 -22 and the corresponding export figure for 2021 -22 was only 2.9 billion. The 
Committee is of the firm view that three segments viz. electronic equipments, implants and 
surgical instruments account for the highest imports in the medical devices sector .  These 
segments include highly important and widely used high -end technology devices such as CT 
Scanners, MRI, Ultrasound  & X -Ray machines, knee and hip implants, dental fixtures, 
Cancer diagnostics and other sophisticated surgical instruments.  The Committee observes 
that manufacturing of high -end technology devices would require evolved medical devices 
sector having a robu st Research and Development infrastructure and trained workforce, 
therefore, the Government must strive towards improving R&D infrastructure in the 
country.  
 
3.23 The Committee recommends that to realise the goal of making India a USD 50 
billion market by 2025, all the three pillars of the medical devices sector viz. Government, 
Industry and Academia should work in synergy on a common vision and roadmap. With 
the ultimate goal of becoming "self -reliant" the focus shou ld be on increasing the 
manufacturing capacity by having a simplified yet effective regulatory regime and liberal 
taxation system. The Government must also focus and invest in R&D in premier 
technological institutions like IITs; stress must also be laid on  skill development to have a 
trained and qualified workforce for the sector. The Committee strongly feels that 
Industries must also take a lead in R&D and the  leading manufacturers and 
manufacturers' associations should establish convergence and collaborat ion between the 
Industry and academia.  
 

19 
 
3.24 The Committee believes that indigenous manufacturing can only be fostered if there 
is local availability of raw materials and critical components; the 80% dependency on 
imported products is primarily due to the lack of (i) high end technology and (ii) poor  
availability of raw materials. The Committee, therefore, recommends that t he Government 
must incentivize such institutes, start -ups, manufacturing units which are engaged in 
manufacturing of raw materials and spare parts locally. Academic institutions lik e IITs, 
AIIMS & IISCs and research bodies like CSIR who have the technical know -how and the 
technology required should be allowed and encouraged to produce certain raw materials 
like antibodies, synthetic antigens, proteins etc. Additionally , the Committee recommends 
that PLI scheme should be expanded to cover raw material and component manufacturing 
as well so that India can become a hub for raw material for the world.  
 
3.25 Regarding rationalization of Duty Structure to encourage companies to manufacture in 
India, the Ministry has informed that the rate of Basic Customs D uty (BCD) on certain specified 
medical devices was increased from 5% to 7.5%.  Simultaneously, the exemption from Special 
Additional Duty (SAD) on these medical devices was withdrawn, and they now attract 4% SAD. 
 
3.26 Market in developing countries like Ind ia is generally price sensitive,  this result in strong 
emergence for refurbished medical devices, such medical devices are cheaper and save out of 
pocket expenditure of the patients to a large extent. Therefore, till the domestic medical device 
manufacturing industry does not achieve the  maturation state, the refurbished Medical Devices 
be allowed in the country but with certain conditions ensuring the safety of the medical device on 
the patient.  
 
3.27 The Committee feels that the Medical Devices segments in which India is 80% 
dependent upon imports are the highly  capital intensive, having long gestation period and 
requiring more R&D segment.  Simultaneously, the devices are essential for the people as 
they are mostly the diagnostic devices which help one detect any disease. If such detections 
are early, the chances of their control would also be more. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government must chalk out specific strategy for import of 
refurbished diagnostic devices to increase the penetration of such devices in each district of 
the country, till such devices are not manufactured at low cost domestically. The 
Committee also recommends that domestic manufacturers s hould be supported in 
installation of manufacturing plants in collaboration with international players, thus 
promoting production of high quality medical devices at low cost.  The Committee also 
recommends that the safety parameters of the incoming medical devices should be ensured 
so that only those medical devices which qualify the set parameters of safety and quality 
enter the Indian market. Sub-standard and obsolete medical devices shall not be allowed to 
enter the Indian market. 
 
3.28  The Committee observed following factors that affect Indian domestic 
manufacturers and recommends certain additional measures for boosting manufacturing 
and exports and improve ease of doing business which inter-alia include:- 
 
i. Reviewing import duty structure - Lower import duty makes it cheaper to import 
than manufacture in India. Lower import duty on imported devices coupled with 

20 
 
12% GST on locally manufactured products discourages manufacturing in India.  
Moreover, 18% GST o n sanitizer and IVD equipments is regressive and should be 
reduced to 12%.   
ii. US/UK manufacturers design medical products like implants on bone structures of 
Caucasian people, such products are not ideal for Indian population, however, due 
to deficiency of Indian designs, surgeons recommend such products to the patients. 
In this regard, the Department shall reward/ incentivize products that carry Design 
India Ce rtificate issued by Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade ( DPIIT). Incentivizing  products built on Indian design would boost 
innovation in India.  
iii. Due to lack of local availability, machinery for setting up manufacturing plants is 
imported from countries like China, till the time India is capable of producing such 
machinery on its own, the Government should reduce excise duty on importing of 
machinery to set up plants. H igh excise duty on raw materials and parts of devices 
adds to the cost of production and this encourages import of finished products.  
iv. Considering the potential of growth in the medical device industry, the Committee 
strongly recommends that there is urgen t need to have a separate EPC for 
promotion of exports in the medical devices sector.  
 
3.29 The Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals apprised the Committee that to promote 
'Make in India' products for the public procurement, the Department has come out with the 
Medical Device Policy.  The draft has already been circulated for inter -Departmental 
consultation. 
 
3.30 The Committee commends the Department for preparing the Draft Medical Device 
Policy 2022 that proposes regulations to ease patent processes, create ecosystem for R&D, 
skilling the regulatory workforce, streamline regulatory clearances, and establi sh „Centres 
of Excellence‟. The, Committee, however expresses its concern over absence of provisions 
regarding data security of patients in the proposed policy. With the Government's push for 
health records digitization under Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM), the 
Committee understands that there is  an urgent need to regulate digital devices likes  
"wearables (smart watches)" to protect health data of people. Therefore, considering huge 
data generation , the Committee recommends the Department to i nclude stringent data 
protection norms in the Draft Medical Device Policy, 2022.  
 
3.31 The Committee further recommends that the government should come up with an 
enabling environment for the growth of the industry in multiple ways viz. manufacturing, 
import, capacity building, spare parts and a centre for repairs of medical devices thus 
bringing forth a medical device revolution in the country. The policies should contain 
supportive and continuous tax structure for encouraging international players to set up 
industries in India thus reducing the cost of the medical devices. 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
Regulation of Pricing by the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
3.32 The mandate of the NPPA is to implement and enforce the provisions of the Drugs 
(Prices Control) Order  (DPCO), 2013 in accordance with the powers delegated to it and to 
monitor the availability of drugs, identify shortages, if any, and to take remedial steps. 
 
3.33 Scheduled Medical Devices: There are 4 Medical Devices (Cardiac stents, drug eluting 
stents, condoms and intra uterine devices)  that have been included in the National List of 
Essential Medicines and hence they are in Schedule-I of the DPCO, 2013. The Ceiling Prices are 
notified for these 4 Scheduled Medical Devices by NPPA. 
 
3.34 Non - Scheduled Medical Devices: Under Para 19 of DPCO, 2013, NPPA fixed the 
ceiling price for Knee Implants vide notification dated 16.08.2017. During the Surge of Covid-19 
in May – June 2021, 6 COVID ess ential medical devices, namely, Oxygen Concentrators, Pulse 
Oximeters, BP Monitoring Machine, Glucometer, Digital Thermometer and Nebuliser were 
brought under price regulation.  
 
3.35 Apart from the above, the remaining medical devices are also non -scheduled Medical 
Devices under the DPCO, 2013 issued under section 3 of Essential Commodities Act, 1955. 
Under Para 20 of the DPCO, 2013, NPPA monitors the Maximum Retail Prices of all non -
scheduled medical devices and ensure that no manufacturer increases the m aximum retail price 
of any medical device more than ten percent of maximum retail prices during preceding twelve 
months. Where the increase is beyond ten percent of maximum retail price, the overcharged 
amounts are recovered as per the provisions of DPCO, 2013. 
 
3.36 Collection of Price related information from non -scheduled Medical Devices: NPPA 
vide OM dated 16th February 2021 sought price related information from the 
manufacturers/importers of all the notified 24 categories of non -scheduled Medical Devic es in 
order to monitor the MRPs under Para 20 of the DPCO, 2013 to ensure that no 
manufacturers/importers increased the MRP more than 10% in preceding twelve months. 
 
3.37 Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT), issued Public 
Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Order (PPO), 2017 dated 15.06.2017 (revised on 
16.09.2020). In order to facilitate the implementation of the PPO, 2017, DPIIT vide D.O. dated 
14.08.2017 identified Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) as the Nodal Department for 
implementing the provisions of the PPO 2017 relating to goods & services related to 
Pharmaceuticals Sector. Based on the above, DoP issued guidelines dated 16.02.2 021 for 
implementation of the Order. DoP vide Order dated 16.02.2021 and 25.03.2021 further notified 
135 & 19 medical devices respectively where there is sufficient local capacity and local 
competition available in the country, under Para 3(a) of PPO Order  dated 16.09.2020 to enable 
procurement of these medical devices only from the ―Class-I local suppliers‖. 
 
3.38 The Committee notes that there are only 4 Medical Devices (Cardiac stents, drug 
eluting stents, condoms and intra uterine devices) that have bee n included in the National 
List of Essential Medicines. The Ceiling Prices are notified for these 4 Scheduled Medical 
Devices by National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority  (NPPA). Apart from the above, the 
remaining medical devices come under non -scheduled Medical Devices under the DPCO, 

22 
 
2013. The Committee has learnt that NPPA monitors the Maximum Retail Prices of all 
non-scheduled medical devices and ensures that no manufacturer i ncreases the maximum 
retail price of any medical device more than ten percent of maximum retail prices during 
preceding twelve months. The Committee believes that allowing a maximum increase of 
10% may result in serious jump in prices in a span of few year s. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends that instead of this „same size fits all‟ approach; the Department like 
risk-based classification of devices should create separate baskets for medical devices for 
pricing depending upon their cost, availability, need and affordability by the patients. The 
devices which are required for critical care to the patients should ideally be categorized 
under "Scheduled Medical Devices" and be listed under National List of Essential 
Medicines.  
 
3.39 Additionally, the pricing of medical devices should also take into consideration the 
cost of the manufacturing and the value the medical device adds to the patient experience 
and ease it brings to the physician. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department 
to st rike a balance between providing affordable healthcare and providing quality 
healthcare. As mere providing healthcare services without considering how a product can 
best deliver desired outcomes for sustainable period goes against the basic policy and 
principles of the welfare State. In this regard, the Committee welcomes the Government's 
decision to move from L1 (lowest price) procurement method to Quality-cum-Cost Based 
Selection (QCBS), thus incorporating the element of quality in public procurement.  
 
3.40 The Committee further believes that quality comes from innovation and in medtech 
sector, more than completely new inventions, incremental innovations to add features and 
improve accuracy & efficiency of the existing devices is the norm, so much so that more 
than 60% of the innovation is incremental innovation. A lot of effort and cost go into R&D, 
designing, testing, approvals and marketing before innovative products are provided to the 
needy persons. The Committee is of the opinion that till the time the desired synergy 
between Government policies, initiatives, academic institutes and Medtech industry is 
established to create an ecosystem for innovation and R&D in India, so that cost of 
production of innovative products comes down,  the Government shall continue with steps 
like price exemptions , value based procurement and subsidy support to the domestic 
manufacturers. The Committee is of the opinion that the measures so undertaken would 
result in boost of demand generation as good quality products would be available at 
affordable prices.  
 
3.41 The Committee has been given to understand that besides the factors like 
availability of technology and raw materials , the phenomenon of inflation in medical 
devices is due to unfair trade practices by certain entities. The Committee lists following 
measures to provide a level playing field to the domestic medical device manufacturers and 
curb the artificial inflation in the prices of medical devices:- 
 
i. Certain MNCs (Multi National Companies)  avoid printing of MRP on each unit of 
product, so that the buyer (large distributors and hospitals) can list such a price to 
derive high profits, result ing in unnecessary surge in pri ces of medical devices. The 
DoP, in co-ordination with Ministry of Finance, must ensure strict adherence to the 

23 
 
compliance of the rule which necessarily mandates the printing of MRP on each 
product. The Department through the Ministry concerned should inst ruct the Port 
officials to check each medical device consignment for compliance of the said rule, 
so that the issue can be addressed at the origin.  
ii. Some manufacturers indulge in manufacturing of lo w-cost but substandard 
products that  wholly disturbs the market for genuine manufacturers who comply 
with all the regulations and standards. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends for strict surveil lance over entry of sub -standard Medical device into 
Indian Market so as to avoid hazardous impact on patient‟s health.  
 
3.42 Regarding the initiatives of the Government to reduce trade margin rationalization, the 
Ministry has informed that NPPA has suggested that in case of medical devices, the trade 
margins upto maximum of 30% is within acceptable norms. In this regard, DoP was also 
requested to consider fixing trade margin upto maximum 30% and the issue of trade margin 
rationalization is under active examination of Department of Pharmaceuticals.  
3.43 The Committee recommends the Departm ent to effectively implement the "Trade 
Margin Rationalization" policy  to address the issue of arbitrary pricing by importers . 
Considering the number of supply chain in a vast country like India, the Department needs 
to have consultation with all the stakeholders in the industry. The Committee believes that 
thorough consultation with all the stakeholders would help the Department in arriving at a 
justified trade margin by whi ch not only the interests of c onsumers, suppliers and 
manufacturers would be t aken care of but also the problem of irrational pricing would be 
resolved. Effective implementation of "Trade Margin Rationalisation" (TMR) would result 
in lower out -of-pocket expenditure which ensures that families are not pushed below the 
poverty line due to the medical expenses. 
3.44 Regarding the manpower upscaling for medical devices sector, the Secretary, Department 
of Pharmaceuticals apprised the Committee about the initiatives taken by the Department which 
would supply skilled work force across the innovation value chain e.g. scientists, regulators, 
health experts, man agers, technicians, etc.  She also informed that 20 courses have been started 
relating to biotechnology engineering across the country.  The National Institutes of 
Pharmaceuticals Education and Research is being run by the Department of Pharmaceuticals to 
impart training for different roles in medical device sector.  Sh e further informed that draft 
National Medical Device Policy, 2022 has been prepared to set up National Institutes of 
MedTech Education and Research (NIMERs) on the lines of NIPERs, as Institutes of National 
Importance (INIs) and to leverage the Skill Indi a Mission platform for development of skill sets 
in medical device sector.  
3.45 The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Depar tment of Pharmaceuticals in 
upscaling of manpower for the sector, however, feels that considering the potential of 
growth of the medical device sector, there is an urgent need to prepare a mammoth skilled 
manpower at various levels, hence more steps should be taken on priority.  
 
 
 

24 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
 
VIEWS OF THE GOVERNMENT & OTHER STAKEHOLDERS 
4.1 During the course of its deliberations on the subject, the Committee held several meetings 
with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, other Government Departments, private 
organizations, industry bodies like FICCI, CII etc.  
A. Oral Evidence by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
 
4.2 The Committee in its meeting held on 01 st December, 2021 heard the views of Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare. The Joint -Secretary, gave a presentation on the subject during the 
course of his presentation he apprised the Com mittee that medical device industry was regulated 
by Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 which was a Central Act and aim  to ensure safety, efficacy 
and quality of not only drugs but als o medical devices and cosmetics. T here are four types of 
medical devices viz.  medical equipments, medical implants, medical disposables and medical 
furniture. At present 37 medical devices are notified.  Difference between drugs and devices is 
that while the former is based on chemistry and biochemistry, the latter one is based on 
engineering. 
 
4.3 Medical Devices Rules, 2017 (MDR -2017) became effective from 1 st January, 2018. 
These rules regulated Medical Devices and IVDs (In -vitro diagnostics). According to these rules 
the devices are classified into Class -A, Class-B, Class-C and Class-D. Class A and B of devices 
are low/moderate -risk devices and C and D are of high-risk devices. Further State Licensing 
Authorities are responsible for regulating of manufacturing of Class A&B devices and regulation 
of C&D devices is done by Central Regulating Authority. MDR 2017 also govern clinical 
investigation, the standard of  medical devices, perpetual validity of licenses, registration and 
regulation of notified bodies, online submission, processing and approval of applications, quality 
management system and timelines for approval. 
 
4.4 All manufacturers and importers of non -regulated Medical Dev ices should register with 
CDSCO. Initially such registrations are on a voluntary basis up to 18 months. After submission 
of information by the applicant on the SUGAM portal registration number is generated, this is 
required to be print ed on label by the manufacturer or importer. R egistration process of Class 
A&B devices must be completed in 30 months (18 months for voluntary registration and 12 
months for mandatory registration) and for the Class C&D devices this period is of 42 months 
(18 months for voluntary registration and 24 mon ths for mandatory registration). 5 Central 
Medical Device Testing Laboratories have been notified for statutory testing and 19 Medical 
Device Testing Laboratories are registered by the CDSCO for TEST or Evaluation of a medical 
device on behalf of the manufacturer. 
 
4.5 Materiovigilance Programme of India (MvPI), intended to ensure the safety of devices 
which was launched in 2015 at the Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Ghaziabad. Under MvPI, 
124 Medical Devices Adverse Events Monitoring Centres have been identified in the country to 
report the events on a voluntary    basis. Presently there is a need to create 754 posts for separate 
vertical of medical devices comprising 449 posts for regulatory officials and 305 for laboratory 
officials. 

25 
 
 
 
B. Oral Evidence by Department of Pharmaceuticals 
4.6 The Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) is  a key department concerning Medical 
Devices industry. The Mandate of the department is to work on industry issues relating to 
promotion, production and manufacture; and the department through NPPA (National 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority) also aims to r egulate prices of medical devices in the country. 
Continuing its deliberations on the subject the Committee heard the views of Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers on 30th May, 2022. The Secretary made a 
brief presentation b efore the Committee, during the course of her presentation she apprised the 
Committee that major manufacturing of medical devices in the country is happening with respect 
to disposables such as catheters, perfusion sets, extension lines, cannula, feeding t ubes, needles, 
syringes, and implants such as cardiac stents, drug -eluting stents, intra -ocular le nses and 
orthopaedic implants. T he Medical Device industry is highly capital intensive with a long 
gestation period and requires development/induction of new technologies. 
4.7 India depends on imports to an extent of 80% by value of its domestic re quirements of 
medical devices. T he Department runs a scheme called ―Production Linked Incentive" scheme 
for promoting domestic manufacturing of medical devices, under  the scheme, financial incentive 
is given to selected companies at the rate of 5% of incremental sales of medical devices 
manufactured in India. T here are four types  of Medical Devices covered under the scheme, 
namely (i) Cancer care/ Radiotherapy medical devices; (ii) Radiology & Imaging medical 
devices (both ionizing & non -ionizing radiation products) and Nuclear Imaging devices (iii) 
Anaesthetics & Cardio -Respiratory medical devices including Catheters of Cardio Respiratory 
Category & Renal Care medical devices; and (iv) All Implants including  implantable electronic 
devices. 
4.8 There is another scheme called " Scheme for Promotion of Medical Device Parks", this 
scheme was started with objective of giving financial assistance to State Governments for 
supporting specific infrastructure in medical device parks. The total financial outlay of the 
scheme is Rs. 400 crore. The tenure of the scheme is from FY 2020 -2021 to FY 2024-2025. The 
Department gave in -principle approval to the proposal from Himachal Pradesh , Tamil Nadu, 
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. The first instalment of Rs. 30 crore each has been released to 
the four States in the 4th Quarter of Financial year 2021-22. 
4.9 The NPPA takes various steps to control price of medical devices which are cate gorized 
as Scheduled Medical Devices and Non -Scheduled Medical Devices. NPPA monitors the 
maximum retail prices of all non -scheduled medical devices and ensure that no manufacturer 
increase the maximum retail price of any medical device more than 10% of ma ximum retail 
prices during preceding 12 months;  Jan Aushadhi  Kendras aims to improve access of medical 
products, apart from generic drugs, the Government has made available 250 types of surgical 
items in over 8700 stores of Jan Aushadhi  Kendras at highly affordable prices under the Pradhan 
Mantri Bharatiya Jan Aushadhi Pariyojana; National Institutes of Pharmaceuticals Education and 
Research is being run by the DoP to impart training for different roles in medical device sector.   
4.10 The Department of Ph armaceuticals is entrusted with the responsibility of policy, 
planning, development and regulation of Pharmaceuticals Industries as detailed below:- 

26 
 
1. Drugs and Pharmaceuticals, excluding those specifically allotted to other 
departments. 
2. Medical Devices - Industry issues relating to promotion, production and 
manufacture; excluding those specifically allotted to other Departments. 
3. Promotion and co -ordination of basic, applied and other research in areas related to 
the pharmaceutical sector. 
4. Development of in frastructure, manpower and skills for the pharmaceutical sector 
and management of related information. 
5. Education and training including high end research and grant of fellowships in India 
and abroad, exchange of information and technical guidance on all matters relating to 
pharmaceutical sector. 
6. Promotion of public – private – partnership in pharmaceutical related areas. 
7. International co -operation in pharmaceutical research, including work related to 
international conferences in related areas in India and abroad. 
8. Inter-sectoral coordination including coordination between organizations and 
institutes under the Central and State Governments in areas related to the subjects 
entrusted to the Department. 
9. Technical support for dealing with national hazards in pharmaceutical sector. 
10. All matters relating to National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority including related 
functions of price control/monitoring. 
11. All matters relating to National Institutes for Pharmacy Education and Research. 
12. Planning, development and control  of, and assistance to, all industries dealt with by 
the Department. 
13. Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited. 
14. Hindustan Antibiotics Limited. 
15. Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited. 
16. Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Limited. 
17. Rajasthan Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited. 
4.11 The Committee feels that the mandate of the Department of Pharmaceuticals is very 
much related to the health sector like drugs & medical devices, their production, 
development, control, promotion, education, training  & research.  Hence, the Committee 
strongly feels that, for better coordination, the Department should be brought alongwith 
Department of Health and Family Welfare under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
from the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers by amending the Government of  India 
(Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961.  
C. Oral Evidence by Other Stakeholders 
4.12 To understand the industry view on the subject, the Committee during the course of its 
deliberations heard several experts from the industry. On 12th May, 2022, the Committee heard 
the views of leading industry organization Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) and 
Orthopaedic Implant Manufacturers Association  (OIMA) which is the largest group of the 
medical device manufacturers regulated and  certified by CDSCO . CII's National Medical 
Technology Forum  (NMTF) has membership covering all MedTech - implantables, 
consumables, In-vitro Diagnostics ( IVD) and equipment. On 13 th May, 2022, the Committee 

27 
 
heard the views of Association of Indian Medical Device Industry (AiMeD), New Delhi and 
leading industry body Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI).  
4.13 The Committee in its meeting held on 30 th May, 2022 heard the views of Association of 
Diagnostics Manufacturers of India. Association of Diagnostic Manufacturers of India (ADMI) 
is an organization of IVD (in-vitro diagnostic) manufacturers in India.  
i. Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) 
4.14 The Committee heard the views of CII- NMTF (National Medical Technology Forum) on 
12th May, 2022. The Chairman, CII NMTF gave a presentation to the Committee on the subject 
and during the course of his presentation he apprised the Committee that  Medical Device Rules 
(MDR) 2017 (under the aegis of Drugs and C osmetics (D&C) Act) is the pr ime medical device 
regulation. There is an urgent need of its alignment with the best regulatory practices globally 
and establishing a level playing field for manufacturers,  importers and distributors so that 
flexibility to cope up with ever changing landscape of medical technology innovations is 
achieved. There is need of decriminali zing the provisions of current A ct and exemption from 
Legal Metrology, Quality Control Orders etc. In public procurement of medical devices in I ndia, 
there are three essential criteria: (a) Conformance to applicable standards (IS/ISO/IEC); (ii) 
Regulatory Approval (CDSCO (Central Drugs Standa rd Control Organisation), MoHFW , and 
(iii) Product Technical Specifications  
4.15 The Government must regul ate import of refurbished equi pment and refurbishing in 
India. Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme should be opened for a ll medical devices 
categories. Inverted duty structure  needs to be corrected especially for medical devices t hat are 
manufactured in India. There is ne ed for schemes to support medical device manufactu ring 
infrastructure beyond PLI. They also suggested the need for recognition to incremen tal 
innovation, differential pricing,  Value Based Procurement / Health Economics Driven 
Reimbursement Models, export inc entivization and making Indian manufacturers globally 
competitive. 
ii. Orthopedic Implants Manufacturing Association (OIMA) 
4.16 The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, OIMA (Othopaedic Implant 
Manufacturers Association) on 12 th May, 2022.  He in his submission to the Committee stated 
that in India around 70 -80 per cent of the companies were CDSCO (Central Drugs Standard 
Control Organisation) approved. The indigenous manufacturing industry have been adversely 
affected by reduced import duties and were facing tough times competing with imported 
products.  He apprised the Committee that even though Covid -19 had an adverse impact on the 
medical devices industry but the loan provided by the Government helped the industry survive 
through the pandemic. There was shortage of raw material during the pandemic and there was a 
need of design and regulatory framework to cope up with future emergencies. Regarding quality 
control and standards of medical devices in line with best international p ractices, he suggested 
that CDSCO should harmonize standards with the standards of international companies,   but 
obtaining international certification like CE (Conformitè  Europëenne) and USFDA (United 
States' Food and Drug Administration) has increasingly become costly thus, the industry needs 
Government  intervention in this regard. Another representative of OIMA apprised the 
Committee that in orthopaedic implants two raw materials i.e. stainless steel and titanium are 

28 
 
extensively used but owing to absence  of indigenous manufacturers of these two, the industry is 
dependent on expensive imports.  
iii. Association of Indian Medical Device Industry (AiMeD) 
4.17 The Committee heard the views of Forum Coordinator of Association of Indian Medical 
Device Industry (AiMeD), New Delhi on 13 th May, 2022. He in his presentation apprised the 
Committee that the industry is mostly dependent on imports and there is need for separate act on 
medical devices. They stated that  rules and regulations must clearly define roles and  
responsibilities of regulating bodies. They further sought  supportive polices like predictive tariff 
policy, restrictions on second hand imports, preferential public procurement to significantly 
boost domestic manufacturing of medical devices.  
4.18   In 1989 the medical devices were classified as drugs and in 2017 Medical Device rules 
were notified; certain section of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act like Section 17 (on misbranded 
drugs), Section 17A (adulterated drugs), Section 34 (offences of companies ) are needed to be 
made "not applicab le" or they should be amended. P atient safety must be ensured without 
affecting investment and Small and Medium Enterp rises (SMEs). He also suggested that  all 
manufacturers and importers should be registered and manufac turers of Class -A non -sterile 
should be allowed self-certification. 
4.19 They proposed that the G overnment must aim towards building a pool of competent 
auditors, medical device officers and manufacturers along with a comprehensive infrastructure of 
NABL accredited testing labs, regulatory controls need to be split, shared and delegated between 
the Center, State a nd Conformity Assessment Bodies. They stated that  overpriced imported 
medical devices are severely affecting India's manufacturing growth. 
4.20  The Association of India n Medical Devices Industry in their further communication 
stated that in medical devices India is dependent on imports to the tune of 80% and the imports 
crossed Rs. 63,000 crores in 2021 -22 and the estimated market is of Rs. 1,60,0 00 crores. The 
Association emphasized upon the creation of separate Department for Medical Devices. They 
stated that there should be a separate law, separate rules and a separate regulatory authority to 
make India as one of the top 5 manufacturing hubs for  Medical Devices. They further mentioned 
that the Department of Pharmaceuticals and the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers had 
limited understanding and expertise of the medical devices industry and therefore limited output 
to show in terms of results a nd outcomes. Accordingly, they suggested that the administrative 
department of Medical Devices should ideally be with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
which is the key stakeholder of the industry. According to them  the CDSCO, a regulator being 
asked to make policies for medical devices was not appropriate.  
4.21  The Association also proposed that although ensuring the patient safety was the foremost 
objective of the law but any lapse in the manufacturing must not be made a criminal offence as it 
might lead to manufacturers leaving the field due to fear of being prosecuted. They suggested 
that criminality should be only for those manufacturers who do not take proper license for 
manufacturing and enter the industry illegally . Th ey said that th ere was a n eed to do market 
surveillance and monitor adverse events to enable needful systematic action to prevent 
recurrence of such incidences for enabling greater patient safety.  

29 
 
 
iv. Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) 
4.22 Thereafter, on 13th May, 2022, the Committee heard the views of FICCI, the FICCI 
representative in his presentation apprised the Committee that India constitutes 1.6% of total 
global market and almost 86% of the Indian medical device industry is import dependent; right 
policy decisions can help India grow by at least 12 times of the present market size; medical 
device industry is capital intensive and has long gestation period and requires continuous 
induction of new technologies. India lacks well developed ecosystem and innovation cycle for 
medical device industry to flourish. 
4.23 They informed that w orking on Demand Generation, Policy Predictability and Ease of 
Doing Business can make India a hub for med -tech in  the next two decades (by 2047). India 
currently has only 1 .3 hospital beds/1000 population and thus addition al 3 million beds are 
required. India only has 0.65 physicians per 1000 people and the WHO standard is 1 per 1,000 
people. S imilarly 1.54 million doctors and 2.4 million nurses would be requ ired to meet the  
growing demand. 60% of India's health infrastructure is concentrated in the large cities across the 
country. There is need to skill, upskill and reskill healthcare professionals and those in 
manufacturing of medical devices as well. Trade Margin Rationali sation from first point of sale 
also needs attention along with s tandardized, streamlined and digitized implementation of 
PCPNDT (Pre-Conception and Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques) Act. 
4.24 They also proposed that t he Government must develop a process fo r defining and 
rewarding incremental innovat ion and breakthrough innovation. I mplementation of Medical 
Device Rules 2017 should be harmonized with global practices. There is  need to have single 
window clearance system and interface between ministries dealing with medical device rules 
2017 and to develop and operationlise more medical device parks and lend support to ancillary 
industry.  
v. Association of Diagnostics Manufacturers of India (ADMI) 
4.25  The Committee in its deliberations on the subjects held a meeting on 30 th May, 2022. In 
this meeting the Committee heard the views of the President of Association of Diagnostic 
Manufacturers of India (ADMI). In her presentation, the  President of ADMI apprised the 
Committee that in-vitro Diagnostics or IVD is a niche industry within the Healthcare sector. It is 
a subset of the Medical Devices industry and it was estimated to be worth US$ 1.8 billion in 
2020, the industry is estimated to reach US $ 5 billion by 2027. The IVD Medical Devices 
encompasses diagnostics tests performed outside the body of the patient, in pathology 
laboratories, hospitals and blood banks. IVD industry has two major components in reagents and 
instruments, currently the demand for both the components is largely met by imports. 
4.26  To meet the sudden rise in demand in view of Covid -19, the number of local 
manufacturers in IVD industry increased fr om 60 in 2019 to 180 post Covid. T he IVD industry 
should continue to be regulated under the purview of the MDR 2017  and the  CDSCO. She 
proposed that the government should avoid the burden of over -regulation on the IVD industry 
and foster ease of doing business; the government should facilitate ecosystem for innovation and 
incentivize investment in R&D and policies for local availability of critical raw materials that are 
currently being imported at reasonable prices should be formulated.  She further stated that t he 

30 
 
import duty on all components and spare parts should be reduced; clinical samples from labs and 
hospitals for all types of diseases and infections should be provided to the industry; and  the 
government must aim towards integration of industry and academia for boosting innovation. 
4.27 The Committee, during its deliberations on the subject observed issues in the 
functioning of current regulation and the  Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
incorporating suitable provisions in the new Bill so as to overcome the shortcomings in 
MDR. As per MDR-2017, sale and testing of Class A/B/C/D medical devices along with IVD 
(In-vitro diagnostics) is vested with the State Governments, however, the Drug Testing 
Laboratories are not notif ied and Medical Device Testing Officers of State are not  
designated regularly by the CDSCO thus causing inordin ate delay in granting approvals. 
Presently, there is n either a  provision in the online portal for referring the licensed 
manufacturing unit (for Class A devices) for audit by the notified body  nor there is any 
feedback mechanism in the CDSCO portal to refer the technically deficient audit reports 
which are prepared by notified bodies . Further, there is  no mechanism for registering 
complaints regarding functioning of CDSCO portal. The Committee also foun d that there 
is non-adherence of timelines for audit and report as per MDR-2017 by the notified bodies.  
4.28 The Committee feels that for a strong regulator it needs to be supported with 
required expertise from the backgrounds of Medical, Biomedical Engineering, Product 
Development and Marketing . The Committee further recommends that there is u tmost 
requirement of training programmes for regulatory official s (both central and State level) 
as well as for industry persons for effective implementati on of  the rules and regulations. 
The Committee feels that d eveloping skilled and trained manpower possess ing technical 
know-how of the medical devices is essential for smooth implementation of the regulations. 
This could be done through long-term, short -term and crash  courses on medical device 
manufacturing and quality control in institutes like IITs , NITs and medical colleges  for 
new regulatory officers.  The Ministry of Skill Development may also be requested to 
formulate courses related to medical devices, m anufacturing, use and maintenance. There 
is a need for d evising a mechanism to pre -empt exigencies and provision for "emergency 
use authorization" of medical  devices in case of emergencies. The Ministry should also 
lower h igh fee charged by notified medica l devices testing laboratories like NIB 
particularly for Class C&D devices. The Committee observes that there is l ack of co -
ordination between academic instituti ons and industrial requirements. The Committee 
recommends that the innovators and  scientists at  research institutions should be made 
aware of the required standards and regulations, otherwise it's difficult to commercialize 
their innovation/creation.  
4.29 Another major issue that hampers R& D and delays operations in  IVD (in -vitro 
diagnostic) industry is the non-availability of bio specimens required for the preparation of 
QC (Quality Check) panels for testing manufactured products. Such panels are also 
required for testing the working of ne w /improved projects. In this regard, the Ministry 
must devise a mechanism so that such specimens and related data are shared by labs and 
hospitals with the IVD manufactures.  
4.30 Taking into account the potential growth and independent development of Ind ian 
Medical Device s in the country, the Committee recommends that the  separate Act on 

31 
 
medical devices should have rules and regulations with clearly defined roles and 
responsibilities of regulating bodies; supportive polices like predictive tariff policy, 
refurbished imports to enable spread of unavailable medical devices at a low cost for 
deeper penetration in the smaller cities and rural areas and preferential public 
procurement to boost domestic manufacturing.  The Committee has already recommended 
for a single window clearance system . The Committee further recommends that interface 
between ministries dealing with Medical Device Rules, 2017 should be organised to carve 
out Road Maps for growth and development of Medical Device Industry in the country. 
The Committee is of the considered view that development of more number of medical 
device parks in differential space would operationlise linkage along with lending support to 
ancillary industry that can proliferate the Medical Device Industry in the country.   
 
4.31 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to expedite the process of 
formulating the new  separate legislation having adequate provisions to give Medical 
Devices industry in the country a kick start for pacing up with global market.  
4.32 The Committee expresses concern over the fact that the highly technical medical 
devices industry, having no synergy with the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers is being 
promoted by them instead of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that since the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is the key 
stakeholder and the medical devices' being very diverse in range with respect to technology 
and material sciences, inter -ministry co -ordination is required between various 
departments, which should be done by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare only. 
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that to nurture the nascent medical devices 
industry, the government should consider creation of a separate Department of Medical 
Devices for playing the role of a policy maker, facilitator as well as regulator. The 
Committee recommends that the new Department of Medical Devices can co -ordinate with 
the Ministries connected with the industry to perform the following key functions:- 
i. Catalyze Growth of the Indian Medical Device Sector; 
ii. Define Priority Devices to fight Priority Diseases in consultation with national and 
international bodies; 
iii. Implement Strategy to Shift India's Import Dependency from around 8 0% to less 
than 30% in next 5 years for Priority Devices and Next 10 years for all Devices; 
iv. Facilitate Creation and Development of clusters for Medical Devices; 
v. Facilitate Creation of Laboratories and service centers under PPP; 
vi. Facilitate Skill Development of Personnel in the field of manufac turing, sales, 
service and regulations of medical devices; 
vii. Create a forum for close cooperation between user, developers, manufacturers and 
academia; 
viii. Create and manage a Special Purpose Vehicle Fund for long gestation R&D projects 
under Made by India and Make for India projects for enterprises. 
 
4.33 The Committee is given to understand that in medical devices India is dependent on 
imports to the tune of 80% and the imports crossed Rs. 63,000 crores in 2021 -22 and the 
estimated market is of Rs. 1,60,000 cro res. The Committee, therefore,  recommends a 

32 
 
separate simple, implementable regulation for Medical Devices to encourage 'Make in 
India' of Medical Devices to deal with the 80% import dependence. The Quality 
Management System (QMS) and Quality Assurance of the medical devices should be 
ensured to prev ent zero defectives from reaching the market and for consistent 
performance.  
4.34 The Committee feels that the law to regulate Medical Devices need to have provision 
for risk proportionate regulatory controls and for risk proportionate penal system and 
provide clarity of exemptions or diluted regulatory requirements for very Low Risk Non 
Sterile Surgical Instruments and other non measuring Non Sterile Medical Devices. The 
Committee feels that in the new legislation regulatory controls need to be shared bet ween 
Centre, State and Conformity Assessment Notified Bodies in Law. There should be no 
duplication of State and Central Government regulations. There needs to be accountability 
fixed on State Regulator to the Central Licensing Authority (or a National Reg ulator) to 
ensure harmonious enforcement. As regards the quality certification of the medical devices, 
the Committee feels that following the international practices, voluntary certification 
system for indigenous medical devices should also be promoted to a large extent for their 
better acceptability in the world market.  
4.35 Chairman and Managing Director of Shalby Multi -Specialty Hospitals in his submission 
apprised the Committee that most of 90% companies which are into medical device 
manufacturing in India are having turnover within the range of INR 5 to 50 crores turnover and 
only 10% of the manufacturing companies are in the range of INR 50 to 500 crores turnover. He 
further said that the need is to have proper standards operating protocol for manufac turers, 
licensing, product quality, design verification, validation and testing certificate. The strategy 
should be to conduct clinical studies, biocompatibility studies, post market surveillance, pre -
testing studies for implants/ equipments etc. This will  enable the medical devices including 
implants to have a very high quality and safety standards to provide good healthcare. 
Furthermore, he gave following inputs regarding Orthopaedic implants:- 
 
a. Create Private Bone Banks - Hugely dependent on Tat a memorial and imported 
synthetic bone graft. 
b. Regulate implant manufacture- Various type of quality, alloys of implants without 
any Biocompatibility studies products are sold, thus leading to poor patient and 
clinical outcome. 
c. Support and adapt product regi stry for orthopaedic implant usage as mandatory 
for better tracking of patients and implants success/ failure outcome. 
d. Currently, failure of products is an economic offence as a rare case; however need 
to make it as a criminal offence.  
 
4.36  The Committee appreciates the views of Chairman and Managing Director of 
Shalby Multi-Specialty Hospitals and the need for bone banks for grafting. The Committee 
recommends the MoH&FW to consider creating  "Bone Banks" to facilitate its easy 
availability. T he Committee also recommends that the "Biocompatibility studies" should 
be made mandatory so as to prevent poor quality products from entering the market and 
failure of implants that end up being life -threatening should have stringent penalty to 
discourage such faulty products.  

33 
 
4.37 The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare also went on a visit to Union Territories of Jammu & Kashmir and Chandigarh from 6th 
to 9 th September, 2021 in connection with the examination of the subject Medical Devices: 
Regulation & Control . The Committee had a firsthand account of the present status of medical 
device industry in the respective UTs/States; steps taken by local governments to boost 
promotion and facilitate setting up of medical devices manufacturing facilities etc.  
4.38 During its study visit the Committee was apprised of the status of Medical Device s 
Industry in the UTs of Jammu & Kashmir and the States of Punjab and Haryana. 
 
 
Jammu and Kashmir 
 
4.39 At present 11 Medical Device Industry exist in the UT of J ammu & Kashmir and there 
are no testing laboratories in the UT. Setting up of Medical Device Parks with common utilities 
and incentivizing domestic manufacturers are two key steps to strengthen the Medical Device 
Industry in the UT of J&K. Non-availability of raw materials, high input and transportation cost 
and lack of skilled labor resource are major challenges identified by UT administration for the 
medical device industry. 
 
4.40 Regulatory mechanism to monitor quality of Medical Devices manufactured in India 
needs to  be strengthened. Random Sampling of such products is the only option to ensure 
availability of Quality Medical Devices. As far as import of Medical Devices is concerned, the 
same can be monitored through a strict regulatory surveillance to be put in place  at the site of 
import (Ports, Airlines, other intercepts). For the regulation of medical devices, a system of 
'Third Party Conformity Assessment and Certification" can be an effective tool to secure fast 
track regulatory clearances in respect of Medical Device Units.  
 
4.41 At present, the presence of CDSCO is very thin across the country. The Government of 
India should expand its size as per size of population & industry. Zone wise special trainings for 
Medical Device Officers/ Medical Device Testing Offi cers can be organized by National Drug 
Authority on routine basis so that technical expertise of officers gets enhanced. Regular Capacity 
Building Programmes / Skill Enhancement Workshops can also help the regulators to perform 
their legitimate duties in a better and pragmatic manner.  
 
Haryana 
 
4.42 The Government of Haryana stated that h igh cost of land and electricity in the State are 
major challenges in the Medical Device industry. To enhance the quality and cost -effectiveness, 
the Cluster Labs may be established, along with the subsidy of testing of equipments to the 
individual entrepreneurs. According to them, th e States must be given administration autonomy 
regarding category C &D devices and States must be involved in the licensing procedure as 
drugs fall in the concurrent list. A representative from State FDA may be made part of the  
inspection/ audit, carried out by the notified body; so that uniformity of the inspection procedure 
may be ascertained. State Officers are proposed to be included for inspection of C&D category 
medical devices. Also, State Officers/ members must be part o f CDSCO to make its operations 
more effective. 

34 
 
 
4.43 The Notified Bodies have very high fee for audit and for grant of license. Audit fee must 
be fixed at low prices by the Government so as to encourage indigenous industries.  The 
Government of India must establish dedicated R&D wings in teaching institutes e.g. Medical 
Colleges, Pharmacy Colleges, Bio -medical engineering Colleges, etc along with in large 
manufacturing units to encourage research in high end Medical Device technology. To promote 
"Make in In dia" the Government must give incentives, subsidies, tax rebates and other benefits 
to the manufacturers and entrepreneurs. Also, industrial park shall be developed in area s having 
good logistics and sufficient skilled manpower, along with ease of accessib ility. 
Materiovigilance Programme (MvPI) may be extended to medical devices to ensure the safety of 
medical devices in the country.  
 
Chandigarh 
 
4.44 The Chandigarh administration suggested that  a representative from State FDA may be 
made part of the insp ection/ audit, c arried out by the notified body,  so that uniformity of the 
inspection procedure may be ascertained. State Officers are proposed to be included for 
inspection of C&D category medical devices. Also, State Officers/ members must be part of 
CDSCO to make its operations more effective. Materiovigilance Programme (MvPI) may be 
extended to medical devices to ensure the safety of medical devices in the country. 
 
4.45 Apart from this, the Committee sought written comments from various States/ UTs on the 
subject "Medical Device: Regulation and Control". The Committee received detailed responses 
from several States. Views of the State Governments on the subject are listed below: 
 
1. Assam 
 
4.46 Presently the State of Assam has only one licensed manufacturing facility for class -B 
Medical Devices. The Medical Device segment has good market potential in the State. Due to 
effective monitoring, surveillance and co -ordination with all the stake  holders no shortage has  
been reported in medical devices during pandemic. 
 
 
2. Delhi 
 
4.47 Presently there are 44 Medical Device Manufacturing units in the Union Territory of 
Delhi. Most of these industries are involved in manufacturing of medical devices falling under 
Class A&B.  
 
4.48 Medical Device officers appointed by the State Government a re not getting opportunity 
for site inspection in case of application for manufacturing of Class A&B Medical Devices. Also, 
there is utmost requirement of training programmes both for regulatory official as well as for 
industry personnels for effective imp lementation of Medical Devices Rules, 2017. Since the 
Medical Device industry is largely technology based and is increasingly becoming more tech - 
centric, the need is to have regulators who are highly skilled and have sound technology 
knowledge. 

35 
 
 
4.49 Out of the 18 certified Medical Device Testing Laboratories approved by C DSCO, 05 are 
located in Delhi. The Delhi Government has suggested that e very medical devic e approved for 
manufacture, sale, distribution or import should bear a unique device identification 
mark/number. Indian products which qualify as L1 are generally of sub-standard quality and thus 
are not preferred by doctors as most of them are life saving equipments also Indian Standards are 
not available for product standardization certi fication in case of many products.  Due to the 
pandemic Covid -19, several new manufacturers started production in the country resulting in 
manifold increase in the production of medical devices. This has not only eased out the 
availability of these medical devices but has also made their availability at affordable price to the 
general public.  
 
3. Gujarat 
 
4.50 The Gujarat Government stated that due  to current dual licensing procedure in Medical 
Devices Rules 2017, MSME manufacturer from the state are having difficulties in getting license 
from central licensing authority. As per the MDR -2017 manufacturing license premises for class 
A & B medical devices is audited by the notified body.  Due to limited number of notified bodies 
in the State and less staff man y times new  manufacturers experience delay in audit. It is 
recommended to carry out audit by state drug authority for class A& B medical device.  
 
4. Himachal Pradesh  
 
4.51 The Himachal Government has suggested that the lack of regulatory systems, harmonized 
standards, accreditation, legal requirements, proper guidance on quality and best practices etc. 
are affecting the medical devices industry in the State. Experts and device manufacturers are  
demanding to bring a se parate Medical Devices Act, to regulate the medical devices industry in 
India. Presently, India does not have any legal provisions to compensate patients facing health 
problems due to implants or the use of faulty medical devices. Under the law, companies are 
liable to pay compensation only when something goes wrong during a clinical trial.  The State‘s 
upcoming Medical Devices Park project is located in  Nalagarh. The project cost for the Medical 
Devices Park is around Rs 350 Cr. and the expected investment for Medical Devices Park is Rs 
5000 Cr. with expected gainful employment of 10,000 persons.  The State intends to be a leader 
in the medical device industry in next 5 years. 
 
5. Jharkhand 
 
4.52 The Jharkhand Government has stated that c urrently, a very  few medical device 
industries are situated in Jharkhand which manufactured the limited  categories of medical 
Devices. Therefore, the current demand and supply side dynamics  provide a significant 
opportunity and rationale for manufacturing medical devices i n the State. Medical Device Rules 
2017 (MDR) at some instances provide incomplete and inconsistent  information. For example, if 
we compare clinical investigation and clinical performance  evaluation mentioned in the MDR,  
while talking about clinical perform ance evaluation, the rules seldom mentions the plan as a 
clinical investigation plan  instead of the clinical performance  evaluation plan; the reporting of 
suspected unexpected serious adverse reaction is mentioned for clinical investigation, but it is not 

36 
 
mentioned for clinical performance evaluation;  similarly clinical performance evaluation section 
does not talk about  the compensation to the  patient in case of death or injury  which the clinical 
investigation section talks about. 
 
4.53 The Government shoul d incentivize manufacturing in this emerging sector and 
specifically in early stages of creating the manufacturing ecosystem. Also, Quality certifications 
that are globally recognised are critical for indigenously  manufactured medical devices to 
compete with products from other countries. This  requires domestic manufacturers to align their 
product quality and processes to global standards. To encourage indigenous manufacturing, the 
Government could provide a price preference for incentives for domestically manufactured 
products. As healthcare is  increasingly being financed by public and private insurance any 
preference in reimbursement for indigenously manufactured products would be a key demand -
side driver for manufacturing in India. 
 
4.54 The State Government suggested that human resource availability for both manufacturing 
and Research & Development in medical devices should be improved. The need is to promote 
research, innovation and India specific  products for the  innovation and manufacturing needs to  
be aligned to generate domestic demand. Creating an ecosystem with  research institutions, 
technology parks, incubators is key for the development of industry in the State.  In the State, the 
level of indigenous manufacturing is high for consumables  and implants. However, within this 
segment too, there is still dependence on imports for  mid to high tech products. Several factors 
relating to the policy' framework and tax  structure lead to high dependence on imports these 
include inverted duty structure  favouring imports of finished goods over raw materials, limited 
access to technology, intellectual property right protection and, size and scale of indigenous 
manufacturers. In the current state  indigenous manufacturing is limited to products in the lower 
end of technology value chain, and driven by the consumables and implants segment. Jharkhand 
does not have the existing base of the medical device industries. Therefore, it is difficult to 
compete with the more developed state. Hence, the Government of India needs  to give special  
attention and support to the state of Jharkhand to develop favorable ecosystem support,  to 
established the indigenous  'Quality Certification' authority in State and also some exemption in 
PLI scheme. 
 
6. Kerala 
 
4.55 The State Government apprised the Committee that presently, there are 15 manufacturing 
firms licensed for  the manufacture of Class A  & B  category of medical devices, and  05 
manufacturing firms licensed f or the manufacture of Class C &D medical devices in Kerala  
State. Total tu rnover of medical  devices & in -vitro diagnostic  devices industry in the state is  
approximately 800 Crore.  CDSCO has stopped issuing WHO -GMP (Good Manufacturing 
Practices) certification after the implementation of  Medical Devices Rules (MDR)  2017. The 
reasons for not issuing  the certificate are not mentioned in  the manufacturing licence issued.  
Hence all manufacturers have to  explain the reasons for not having  GMP certificates, to every  
overseas customers. As per MDR 2017, even  though the manufacturing licence is  perpetually 
valid for five years,  the validity is not mentioned in  the license, which creates  confusion to 
overseas customers. 
 

37 
 
4.56 The State Government suggested that p rovisions for fast track ing of applications, in case 
of emergency situations needs to be  considered. Standards are mandated for  finished medical 
devices but, not always required for raw materials. The challenges faced by the medical devices 
industry in the State are - lack of availability of  manufacturers of indigenous ra w materials, 
electronics parts in the  State, delay in licensing of Class C  and D products from CDSCO,  Delhi 
& South Zone, Chennai , fee charged for many applications are very high which  ranges in lakhs 
(Rs. 50,000- Rs. 500000) which is a burden for small  enterpreneurs/startups to develop  their 
products. 
 
7. Meghalaya 
4.57 The manufacturing status of Medical Devices industry in the state is Nil. The market 
potential in the state is huge. With the increase in consumption there are marginal opportunities 
to facilitate contribution to the economy. A development trajectory is needed to cope with future 
emergencies by reviewing and assessing the current regulatory system for Medical Devices and 
regulatory capacity building in cooperation with the national regulatory authority. 
 
8. Odisha 
 
4.58 The Odisha Government apprised the Committee that there  are very few medical device 
manufacturing industries or units in the State. Presently, there are around 25 manufacturers in the 
State. One of the main reasons for the very low number of Medical Device Manufacturing units 
is non-availability of any electronics components manufacturing units.  The State of Orissa has 
excellent growth opportunities for Medical Equipment industries as it shares a common border 
with states of southern, central as well as eastern parts of  India. Odisha is a power surplus State 
and provides electricity to nearby States. Odisha is drained by 11 major rivers  and their 
tributaries provide ample water supply. The State has demanded to set up an office of CDSCO in 
the state of Odisha to help entrepreneurs understand the requirement of starting a new venture in 
Medical Device. Laboratories should also be set up in the State with necessary accreditations for 
testing of medical equipment. 
 
4.59 Classification based on risk assessment is not present with the BIS standards. Besides, 
BIS standards are not available for many critical medical devices. In view of this, international 
certification for procurement becomes nece ssary. The students passing out of technical institutes 
should be industry ready to meet the basic requirement of the field/place of work, they should be 
well versed with electrical and electronics components: their use, application and common 
variants available in the market. In order to achieve this in the State of Odisha, Bachelors/ Master 
/ Diploma courses maybe opened in prestigious Govt . Technical institutes such as IIT -
Bhubaneswar, NIT - Rourkela where Bio -Medical engineering courses can be merged wit h 
medical colleges/ institutions for hands on experience. 
  
9. Punjab 
 
4.60 Total number of existing medical devices manu facturing units in the State is  12. 
Licensing of only Class -A & B Medical Devices is being done by State Licensing Authority. 

38 
 
However, inspection for grant of medical devices of Class C and D category are being carried 
out by Drugs Regulators of CDSCO (GOI). It is suggested that inspection of Class A & B (which 
includes Surgical Dressing, Disinfectants & Syringes etc.) may be done by Stat e Drugs 
Regulators instead of 3rd party audit.  There is need to strengthen the medical device testing 
facilities at State level. 
 
10. Tamil Nadu 
 
4.61 The TN Government has stated that every here are around 100 Medical  devices/ I VD 
manufacturing units in the State. The Drugs Testing Laboratories of the State have not been 
notified by the Union Government and the Medical Device Testing Officers of the State have not 
been designated by the Union Government to analyse  & issue of Test reports of Medical 
Devices. In Medical Devices Rules 2017, no provision has been made in the online portal to refer 
cases of audit of manufacturing units to the notified body for audit. Also, the reports of the 
notified bodies are not technically sound and the remarks are incomple te as per Medical Devices 
Rules 2017. There is no provision in the portal to refer back such deficient audit reports to the 
notified bodies for clarification.  There is no uniform procedure for the issue of manufacturing 
approvals for Class A/B and Class C/ D Medical Devices. There is no timeline for Class C/D as 
that of Class A/B. There is huge difference in Fee structure between Class A/B and Class C/D. 
 
4.62 High end and sophisticated Medical  equipment need to have standards comparable with 
USFDA and European CE certification, till such time the Country  could come up with 
comparable standards and certification process.  Non-availability of proven technology, 
dependence on import of raw materials and its high cost,  limitation on infrastructure facilities  in 
manufacturing and marketing, lack of proper regulatory mechanism for ensuring the quality, non 
- availability of BIS for  Medical devices in line with international standards and finance are 
some of the major challenges in the growth of manufacturing of medical devices in the State.  
4.63 The Committee endorses the views of some of the State Governments for Zone wise 
special trainin gs for Medical Device Officers. Trainings for Medical Device Testing 
Officers can be organized by National Drug Authority on routine basis so that technical 
expertise of officers gets enhanced. The Committee feels that  Capacity Building 
Programmes/ Skill Enhancement Workshops will also help the regula tors to perform their 
legitimate duties in a better and pragmatic manner. 
  
4.64 The Committee feels that Materiovigilance Programme (MvPI) may be extended to 
medical devices to ensure the safety of medical devices in the country and uniformity of the 
inspection procedure may be ascertained.  The Committee also recommends that lower 
rates of audit fee by the Government would also encourage indigenous manufacturers. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
Conclusion 
4.65 The recent surge in demand and  improvement in manufacturing scenario of medical 
devices coupled with robust regulatory regime addressing the challenges being faced by the 
indigenous manufacturers, importers, exporters and more importantly patients provides great 
opportunity to Indian m edical device industry to establish itself as a major player in the global 
medical devices market.  
4.66 The Committee, in this r eport has extensively examined the subject  and identified 
key concern areas and challenges that are yet to be resolved. The Committee believes that 
separate legislation exclusively for the Medical Devices and bringing the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals (DoP) under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare would really help 
solve some of the major challenges being faced by the medical device manufacturers.  
4.67 The Committee notes that the Covid-19 pandemic has highlighted the need to 
support indigenous manufacturers of Medical Devices. The pandemic laid bare various 
issues like insufficient infrastructure and fund for research and development, lack of public 
funding for research, dearth of skilled manpower, lack of synergy between Central -State 
regulatory authorities, inappropriate regulations for medical devices, lack of global -level 
quality standards etc plaguing the medical devic e industry in India . With the immense 
potential for the me dical devices industry anticipated , the Ministry should focus on 
resolving the challenges and develop a detailed "Roadmap with Practical and Actionable 
Strategy".  
 
  

40 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON THE MEDICAL DEVICE INDUSTRY 
 
The Committee observes that Covid -19 pandemic wrecked havoc on the world for 
almost two years and still lingers as a looming threat. The pandemic caused great human 
and financial loss and sev erely affected almost all the sectors of the economy. The 
Healthcare system of India like of other countries was put to severe test and the healthcare 
resources were stretched to their limits. Like other segments of the healthcare system, the 
Medical devices industry had to work overtime to meet the surge in demands of medical 
equipments and devices. During the first wave of pandemic, owing to its sudden nature, the 
country faced severe shortages of medical equipments like testing kits, PPE (Personal 
Protective Equipment)  kits, masks, sanitisers,  and other related critical items as domestic 
and international supply chains got disrupted leading to almost stoppage of imports. The 
situation was compounded by poor domestic manufacturing capacity.  
(Para 1.12) 
 
 The Committee further notes that amidst the prevailing pandemic situation the 
domestic manufactures saw opportunity in adversity and ramped up their production 
capacities to meet the sudden surge in the demand of medical equipments like PPE Kits, 
masks, sa nitisers etc. The Government supported the local manufactures and start -ups 
were provided/extended soft loans and other incentives. The assured procurement and 
predictable demand encouraged Indian manufacturers to step forward and serve the 
country in crisis. Within months of the Covid-19 pandemic India went from importing PPE 
kits, masks, testing kits to not only self -reliant but the country also exported these devices 
to other countries. However, the current situation is that India still remains largely a n 
import dependent nation w.r.t medical devices, but the very least the pandemic has done to 
the industry is that it has brought the industry to the limelight and gradually with 
government attending to the industry with improvements in regulation, manufact uring 
facilities, incentives, India in all probability would be a major player in global medical 
devices industry.  
(Para 1.13) 
 
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK:  STANDARDS & QUALITY CONTROL 
The Committee notes that Drugs and Cosmetics Act lacks offences and penaltie s for 
malpractices like manufacturing of sub -standard devices, fake USFDA/CE certifications. 
The D&C Act does contain a penal provision for the manufacture of sub -standard drugs 
but does not penalize the manufacturers of sub standard medical devices (although medical 
devices are legally defined in terms of drugs) because the legally binding standards which 
are recognised in the Act pertain only to drugs. Therefore, due to lack of penal provisions 
for Medical Devices in the said Act, the manufacturers of sub -standard medical devices 
move scot free. The scope of Medical Devices Rules, 2017 is restricted to only those medical 
devices which are notified by the Government from time to time as „drugs‟. The Committee 
appreciates the initiatives of the Ministry to change the  definition of Medical Devices in 

41 
 
2020 to make it more inclusive and thus include almost all medical devices for regulation. 
However, the Committee feels that the definition of "Medical Devices" be such that any 
product which falls under the definition is automatically eligible for regulation.  
(Para 2.7) 
 The Committee notes that in the recent years the Medical Devices has become a vast 
industry. Improvements in economy, life -expectancy, rise in income levels and overall rise 
in awareness about h ealth coupled with surge in communicable and non -communicable 
diseases have been some of the key drivers behind growth of the industry. This has 
necessitated better regulation and control of the industry. The Committee believes that 
there is a need for a w ell-researched, organised and inclusive legal architecture for 
regulating activities of manufacturing units, medical institutions, laboratories, clinical 
trials having well defined responsibility, roles and accountability for all the stakeholders of 
the industry. 
(Para 2.8) 
 
 The Committee, while welcoming, the initiative of the Ministry to set up a panel to 
make the new Drugs, Medical Devices and Cosmetics Bill with separate provisions for 
Medical Devices strongly recommends that instead of drafting a combined legislation for 
Drugs, Medical Devices and Cosmetics, the Ministry should appreciate the potential of the 
Medical Device industry and formulate a separate legilsation for Medical Devices.  
(Para 2.9) 
 
 The Committee believes that the new legislati on on Medical Devices should have the 
provisions to transform the medical devices industry and bring about a Medical Device 
Revolution in the country. The Committee further recommends that instead of the panel 
the Government should come up with a „National  Commission on Medical Devices‟ to 
examine all aspects of the Industry in detail and bring forth a comprehensive law 
supported by a holistic policy and institutional infrastructure for the purpose. The 
Committee further recommends that this Commission shou ld study the aspect of 
centralizing the Medical Device licensing with the Central regulator so as to make the 
approval process easy. The Ministry should also focus on guaranteeing transparency by 
designing this legislation so that the citizens/ experts get  a right to participate in decision 
making. The legal provisions should be such that citizens/experts can participate in the 
regulatory process & register their objections. The blueprint for the new legislation must 
also include a 10 -15 year roadmap with a  clear policy plan & targets. The Committee 
strongly believes that with a 15 year roadmap with annual targets for the Medical Device 
industry, India would emerge as the world's biggest centre for manufacture & service of 
Medical Devices and thus also a leader in medical tourism. 
(Para 2.10) 
 
 

42 
 
CENTRAL DRUGS STANDARD CONTROL ORGANIZATION (CDSCO) 
 The Committee observes that the functions of CDSCO primarily focus on the 
regulation of drugs as the regulatory body was originally set up to regulate Pharma and 
other related segments. The MDR 2017 mandated the CDSCO to regulate the Medical 
Devices segment as well. However, the existing structure and expertise (which is more 
pharma centric) of the workforce in CDSCO is falling short in effectively regulating the 
medical devices industry.  
(Para 2.13) 
 
 The Committee recommends that the new legislation should set up a new set of 
regulator at different levels for regulating the Medical Devices industry. Unlike the present 
structure, the proposed regulator should license the manufacturing of all classes of medical 
devices i.e. Class A, B, C, and D. This would help harmonise the regulation process 
throughout the country as it would do away with different regulating procedures employed 
by different States. This step would greatly help  the manufacturers and wi ll reduce the 
time required to start a manufacturing unit thereby facilitating ease of doing business. The 
Committee also recommends that to undertake the regulation for all Classes of medical 
devices throughout the country, the proposed regulator should b e adequately staffed with 
workforce which is technically skilled and is well -versed with the functioning of medical 
devices industry. The Committee recommends the Ministry to work in synergy with State 
Governments and impart the necessary skills to the loc al medical device officers and also 
devise a mechanism to regularly designate State Medical personnel as Medical Device/ 
Medical Device Testing Officers so that the mandate of the legislation can be implemented 
effectively. The Committee believes that with  industry growing by leaps & bounds, the 
government should not afford regulation of medical devices by pharma  experts and its 
time that at ground level the medical device regulations are dispensed with by qualified and 
well-trained Medical Device Officers  to give a fillip to the Medical Device industry in the 
country.  
(Para 2.14) 
 
 The Committee recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to allow 
the new regulator to involve institutions like IISC, CSIR, DRDO and network of IITs to 
test medical devices for safety and efficacy. The Committee is of the firm view that these 
institutes have high -tech labs and thus can be used to test medical devices for their 
electronic, electromagnetic, biochemical -run aspects. The Committee further recommends 
that additional investments should be made to raise the standards of these labs as per the 
requirements.  
(Para 2.15) 
 
 The Committee notes that multiplicity of regulations exists at the component level 
from different departments/ ministries. The Committee reco mmends that CDSCO which 

43 
 
operates a single window clearing platform for application of license for manufacturing, 
export, import shall also integrate all these bodies involved in the regulation of medical 
devices. A single window clearance for all the depar tment/ ministries would significantly 
boost investment in R&D in the field of medical  devices and would also reduce the time 
required for obtaining approvals from different departments/ ministries. The Ministry 
must incorporate such an all -encompassing “s ingle window clearing/approval system” in 
the proposed new separate Act for the regulation of Medical Devices.  
(Para 2.18) 
 
 The Committee opines that while setting the standards and benchmark of medical 
devices the foremost factor which should be conside red is “health”, the standards devised 
must prioritise health and wellness. In this regard, the Committee believes that BIS should 
focus on harmonising the Indian standards with world -class and globally accepted quality 
standards. Adapting Indian standards  as per global standards would also help Indian 
medical device manufacturers in global market as it would make them more competitive 
and acceptable, which in turn would transform India into a net exporter of medical devices, 
spare parts and services. The C ommittee, therefore, recommends BIS to periodically 
update Indian Standards to corresponding global medical device standards as complying 
with Indian standards is affordable for local manufactures in comparison to global 
standards.  
(Para 2.21) 
 
 The Committee further recommends that BIS should encourage manufacturers to 
demonstrate/adhere to conformance to essential principles of the medical device concerned, 
as this would reorganise Indian products achieve greater international acceptance. This 
will engineer a shift towards increase in India's global share in the medical devices sector. 
(Para 2.22) 
 
 The Committee notes that the country has only 18 certified Medical Device Testing 
Laboratories that have been approved by CDSCO and that is grossly insuf ficient keeping 
in view the size of the country. The Committee is of the considered opinion that having 
adequate common infrastructure including accredited laboratories in different regions of 
the country for standard testing would significantly encourage local manufacturers to get 
their products tested for standards and such measures undertaken would also help in 
reducing the cost of production which ultimately will improve the availability and 
affordability of medical devices in the domestic market.  
(Para 2.27) 
 
 The Committee finds that there is a dire need for developing a robust IT enabled 
feedback driven post market surveillance system for Medical Devices to evaluate the 
efficiency of specific Medical Devices. A medical device registry, particularly f or implants 
should also be made to ensure traceability of patient who has received the implant in order 

44 
 
to assess the performance of the implant and ascertain upto what extent the implant has 
made the life of the patient comfortable and also to seek feedba ck of functional capacity of 
medical devices.  Such measures would ensure that patients get access to good quality and 
approved medical devices.  
(Para 2.28) 
QUALITY CONTROL 
 The Committee is of the considered view that quality and affordability are two vi tal 
factors regarding medical devices. Indian Medical Devices Industry presently lacks 
research ecosystem and infrastructure for manufacturing of high tech, advanced medical 
devices (Class C&D) and Indian Medical Devices Industry doesn‟t have facilities to  
produce such medical devices comparable to global standards. Here, the Committee 
appreciates QCI for filling up the vacuum in quality certification space by extending the 
option of Indian Certification of Medical Devices (ICMED) 13485. The Committee belie ves 
that QCI can play a pivotal role in establishing norms of quality and ensuring that Indian 
manufactured products have competitive product advantage, vis-à-vis, the international 
standards in terms of quality. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Mi nistry to 
introduce standards and certification process (particularly for Class C&D products) 
comparable to global standards. The Ministry, along with compulsory compliance to 
Quality Management System as per schedule 5 of the MDR, 2017, should also allow 
cognizance to 3rd party assurance schemes like ICMED 13485. 
(Para 2.33) 
 
 The Committee further recommends that till such time the Indian Medical Device 
Industry come up with comparable standards and certification process, the Ministry 
should extend financ ial support to the local manufacturers in capacity building for 
compliance to USFDA/CE regulations considering that USFDA and CE certification 
processes are costly affairs. The Government support would facilitate local manufacturers 
to gain access to US and European markets thereby boosting exports.   
(Para 2.36) 
MANUFACTURING, PRODUCTION, PROMOTION& PRICING 
 
 The Committee is of the considered view that in order to encourage indigenous 
manufacturing, the Government should provide incentives or encourage preferential 
purchase for domestically manufactured products in Government procurement. In this 
regard, the Department should ensure that in all public procurement, the preference must 
be given to Indian manufactured medical devices having domestic content  of at least 50%.  
Given the size of Government's (both Central and State) purchase, the Preferential 
Purchase Agreement would have a significant pull for a number of medical devices 
companies to manufacture medical devices in India. Also, the PLI scheme s hould be broad 
based and all the medical devices should be covered under the scheme. 
(Para 3.7) 
 
 

45 
 
 The Committee notes that most of the high -end technology and innovative products 
originate from a well -developed ecosystem and innovation cycle. The Committe e is pained 
to note that despite boasting of several IT hubs like Bengaluru, Pune, Hyderabad, Delhi -
NCR the desired ecosystem for manufacturing of highly advanced medical devices is yet to 
be fully developed in the country. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends prioritizing and 
developing a robust funding mechanism to nurture an ecosystem for innovation for medical 
devices industry. In this regard, the Committee recommends the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals to have a dedicated corpus to fund start -ups and Sma ll & Medium 
Enterprises (SMEs) undertaking research projects that aim for improving quality, 
efficiency of existing devices and other healthcare outcomes.  
(Para 3.8) 
 
 To invigorate the culture of research and development in medical devices in 
institutions like IITs, NITs and other academic institutions the Committee recommends the 
Department to start Research Linked Incentive (RLI) Scheme in Line with PLI scheme. 
The Department should facilitate academia- industry partnership for undertaking research 
projects on industry challenges and incentivize the successful outcomes.  
(Para 3.10) 
 
 The Committee realizes that biomedical engineers are integral to develop ecosystem 
for research in medical devices in India. These engineers are trained in the principles o f 
physics and mathematical computation for the development of safe and effective medical 
devices that best fit the needs of medical providers and patients. However, biomedical 
engineers generally do not interface directly with patients to the same extent a s physicians; 
therefore, biomedical engineers may not fully understand the specific needs of patients in 
the same way that medical professionals and manufacturers do. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends the Department to facilitate regular intera ctions of biomedical 
engineers with leading physicians and manufacturers and thus encourage them to 
undertake research on medical devices. Furthermore, the Committee recommends 
expediting setting up centers of excellence in medical devices at all the National Institutes of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research  (NIPERs). The courses may commence in these 
centers of excellence to train and educate biomedical engineers on ongoing challenges faced 
by medical device industry. 
(Para 3.12) 
 
 The Committee also rec ommends that the Government should arrange to provide 
international exposures to domestic manufactures and to their products.  
(Para 3.13) 
 
SCHEME FOR PROMOTION OF MEDICAL DEVICE PARKS 
 The Committee commends the Department for launching Scheme for Promotion of 
Medical Device Parks in India. The Committee believes that India has huge growth 
potential in manufacturing of medical devices. Well -coordinated inter -ministerial and 
inter-governmental (central and state) strategies aimed at offering manufacturers 
competitive advantage in manufacturing in India will result in importers finding it more 

46 
 
profitable to manufacture in India than to import it. The Committee believes that logistical 
support in shared manufacturing facilities like Medtech parks would significantly reduce 
capital expenditure of manufacturers and thus giving a boost to manufacturing in India.  
(Para 3.18) 
 
 
 The Committee recommends following steps for improving the efficiency and 
overall facilities of Medtech Parks in India:- 
 
vi. The Mediparks should have NABL (National Accreditation Board for Testing 
and Calibration Laboratories) approved medical device testing laboratories to 
reduce time required in manufacturing a product; 
vii. Each park should have dedicated office for skilled and unskilled labor force. 
This said office should maintain a registry of registered workers so as to 
maintain the continuous availability of workforce; 
viii. To control pollution, each Medipark should ha ve Effluent Treatment Plant 
(ETP); 
ix. Availability of subsidized power and water ;and  
x. For promoting the Indian medical device market, Mediparks should organize -
"Medical Device Exhibitions" and workshops. 
(Para 3.19) 
 
 The Committee further recommends that so me of the Mediparks should focus on 
manufacturing medical device components and thus make the country self reliant on spare 
parts with provision for extending necessary services. This can further strengthen into 
India emerging as hotspot for medical device s spare parts and hub for medical devices 
repairing and service centres for other countries.  Thus Medical Devices industry would 
have added advantage of huge employment generation capacity. 
 (Para 3.20) 
 
 The Committee observes that India imported medical devices worth USD 8.5 billion 
in 2021 -22 and the corresponding export figure for 2021 -22 was only 2.9 billion. The 
Committee is of the firm view that three segments viz. electronic equipments, implants and  
surgical instruments account for the highest imports in the medical devices sector.  These 
segments include highly important and widely used high -end technology devices such as 
CT Scanners, MRI, Ultrasound & X -Ray machines, knee and hip implants, dental f ixtures, 
Cancer diagnostics and other sophisticated surgical instruments.  The Committee observes 
that manufacturing of high -end technology devices would require evolved medical devices 
sector having a robust Research and Development infrastructure and tra ined workforce, 
therefore, the Government must strive towards improving R&D infrastructure in the 
country.  
(Para 3.22) 
 
 The Committee recommends that to realise the goal of making India a USD 50 
billion market by 2025, all the three pillars of the medica l devices sector viz. Government, 
Industry and Academia should work in synergy on a common vision and roadmap. With 

47 
 
the ultimate goal of becoming "self -reliant" the focus should be on increasing the 
manufacturing capacity by having a simplified yet effecti ve regulatory regime and liberal 
taxation system. The Government must also focus and invest in R&D in premier 
technological institutions like IITs; stress must also be laid on skill development to have a 
trained and qualified workforce for the sector. The Committee strongly feels that 
Industries must also take a lead in R&D and the leading manufacturers and 
manufacturers' associations should establish convergence and collaboration between the 
Industry and academia.  
(Para 3.23) 
 
 The Committee believes that indigenous manufacturing can only be fostered if there 
is local availability of raw materials and critical components; the 80% dependency on 
imported products is primarily due to the lack of (i) high end technology and (ii) poor 
availability of raw materials. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government 
must incentivize such institutes, start -ups, manufacturing units which are engaged in 
manufacturing of raw materials and spare parts locally. Academic institutions like IITs, 
AIIMS & IISCs and r esearch bodies like CSIR who have the technical know -how and the 
technology required should be allowed and encouraged to produce certain raw materials 
like antibodies, synthetic antigens, proteins etc. Additionally, the Committee recommends 
that PLI scheme should be expanded to cover raw material and component manufacturing 
as well so that India can become a hub for raw material for the world.  
(Para 3.24) 
 
 The Committee feels that the Medical Devices segments in which India is 80% 
dependent upon imports are the highly capital intensive, having long gestation period and 
requiring more R&D segment.  Simultaneously, the devices are essential for the people as 
they are mostly the diagnostic devices which help one detect any disease. If such detections 
are ear ly, the chances of their control would also be more. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government must chalk out specific strategy for import of 
refurbished diagnostic devices to increase the penetration of such devices in each district of 
the country, till such devices are not manufactured at low cost domestically. The 
Committee also recommends that domestic manufacturers should be supported in 
installation of manufacturing plants in collaboration with international players, thus 
promoting prod uction of high quality medical devices at low cost.  The Committee also 
recommends that the safety parameters of the incoming medical devices should be ensured 
so that only those medical devices which qualify the set parameters of safety and quality 
enter the Indian market. Sub-standard and obsolete medical devices shall not be allowed to 
enter the Indian market. 
(Para 3.27) 
 
  The Committee observed following factors that affect Indian domestic 
manufacturers and recommends certain additional measures for boosting manufacturing 
and exports and improve ease of doing business which inter-alia include:- 
 
i. Reviewing import duty struc ture- Lower import duty makes it cheaper to import 
than manufacture in India. Lower import duty on imported devices coupled with 

48 
 
12% GST on locally manufactured products discourages manufacturing in India.  
Moreover, 18% GST on sanitizer and IVD equipments is regressive and should be 
reduced to 12%.   
ii. US/UK manufacturers design medical products like implants on bone structures of 
Caucasian people, such products are not ideal for Indian population, however, due 
to deficiency of Indian designs, surgeons recomm end such products to the patients. 
In this regard, the Department shall reward/ incentivize products that carry Design 
India Certificate issued by Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade (DPIIT). Incentivizing products built on Indian desig n would boost 
innovation in India.  
iii. Due to lack of local availability, machinery for setting up manufacturing plants is 
imported from countries like China, till the time India is capable of producing such 
machinery on its own, the Government should reduce excise duty on importing of 
machinery to set up plants. High excise duty on raw materials and parts of devices 
adds to the cost of production and this encourages import of finished products.  
iv. Considering the potential of growth in the medical device indust ry, the Committee 
strongly recommends that there is urgent need to have a separate EPC for 
promotion of exports in the medical devices sector.  
(Para 3.28) 
 
 The Committee commends the Department for preparing the Draft Medical Device 
Policy 2022 that prop oses regulations to ease patent processes, create ecosystem for R&D, 
skilling the regulatory workforce, streamline regulatory clearances, and establish „Centres 
of Excellence‟. The, Committee, however expresses its concern over absence of provisions 
regarding data security of patients in the proposed policy. With the Government's push for 
health records digitization under Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM), the 
Committee understands that there is an urgent need to regulate digital devices likes 
"wearables (smart watches)" to protect health data of people. Therefore, considering huge 
data generation, the Committee recommends the Department to include stringent data 
protection norms in the Draft Medical Device Policy, 2022.  
(Para 3.30) 
 
 The Committee further recommends that the government should come up with an 
enabling environment for the growth of the industry in multiple ways viz. manufacturing, 
import, capacity building, spare parts and a centre for repairs of medical devices thus 
bringing forth a medical device revolution in the country. The policies should contain 
supportive and continuous tax structure for encouraging international players to set up 
industries in India thus reducing the cost of the medical devices. 
 
(Para 3.31) 
 
REGULATION OF PRICING BY THE NATIONAL PHARMACEUTICAL PRICING 
AUTHORITY (NPPA) 
 
 The Committee notes that there are only 4 Medical Devices (Cardiac stents, drug 
eluting stents, condoms and intra uterine devices) that have been included in the National 

49 
 
List of Essential Medicines. The Ceiling Prices are notified for these 4 Scheduled Medical 
Devices by National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority  (NPPA). Apart from the above, the 
remaining medical devices come under non -scheduled Medical Devices under the DPCO, 
2013. The Committee has learnt that NPPA monitors the Maximum Retail Prices of all 
non-scheduled medical devices and ensures that no manufacturer increases the maximum 
retail price of any medical device more than ten percent of maximum retail prices during 
preceding twelve months. The Committee believes that allowing a maximum increase of 
10% may result in serious jump in prices in a span of few years. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends that instead of this „same size fits all‟ approach; the Departm ent like 
risk-based classification of devices should create separate baskets for medical devices for 
pricing depending upon their cost, availability, need and affordability by the patients. The 
devices which are required for critical care to the patients should ideally be categorized 
under "Scheduled Medica l Devices" and be listed under National List of Essential 
Medicines.  
(Para  3.38) 
 Additionally, the pricing of medical devices should also take into consideration the 
cost of the manufacturing and the value the medical device adds to the patient experien ce 
and ease it brings to the physician. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department 
to strike a balance between providing affordable healthcare and providing quality 
healthcare. As mere providing healthcare services without considering how a produc t can 
best deliver desired outcomes for sustainable period goes against the basic policy and 
principles of the welfare State. In this regard, the Committee welcomes the Government's 
decision to move from L1 (lowest price) procurement method to Quality-cum-Cost Based 
Selection (QCBS), thus incorporating the element of quality in public procurement.  
(Para 3.39) 
 The Committee further believes that quality comes from innovation and in medtech 
sector, more than completely new inventions, incremental innovation s to add features and 
improve accuracy & efficiency of the existing devices is the norm, so much so that more 
than 60% of the innovation is incremental innovation. A lot of effort and cost go into R&D, 
designing, testing, approvals and marketing before inn ovative products are provided to the 
needy persons. The Committee is of the opinion that till the time the desired synergy 
between Government policies, initiatives, academic institutes and Medtech industry is 
established to create an ecosystem for innovati on and R&D in India, so that cost of 
production of innovative products comes down,  the Government shall continue with steps 
like price exemptions, value based procurement and subsidy support to the domestic 
manufacturers. The Committee is of the opinion t hat the measures so undertaken would 
result in boost of demand generation as good quality products would be available at 
affordable prices.  
(Para 3.40) 
 
 The Committee has been given to understand that besides the factors like 
availability of technology and raw materials, the phenomenon of inflation in medical 
devices is due to unfair trade practices by certain entities. The Committee lists following 
measures to provide a level playing field to the domestic medical device manufacturers and 
curb the artificial inflation in the prices of medical devices:- 
 

50 
 
i. Certain MNCs (Multi National Companies) avoid printing of MRP on each unit of 
product, so that the buyer (large distributors and hospitals) can list such a price to 
derive high profits, resulting in unnece ssary surge in prices of medical devices. The 
DoP, in co-ordination with Ministry of Finance, must ensure strict adherence to the 
compliance of the rule which necessarily mandates the printing of MRP on each 
product. The Department through the Ministry con cerned should instruct the Port 
officials to check each medical device consignment for compliance of the said rule, 
so that the issue can be addressed at the origin.  
ii. Some manufacturers indulge in manufacturing of low -cost but substandard 
products that who lly disturbs the market for genuine manufacturers who comply 
with all the regulations and standards. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends for strict surveillance over entry of sub -standard Medical device into 
Indian Market so as to avoid hazardous impact on patient‟s health.  
(Para 3.41) 
 
 The Committee recommends the Department to effectively implement the "Trade 
Margin Rationalization" policy to address the issue of arbitrary pricing by importers. 
Considering the number of supply chain in a vast country like India, the Department needs 
to have consultation with all the stakeholders in the industry. The Committee believes that 
thorough consultation with all the stakeholders would help the Department in arriving at a 
justified trade margin by which not only the interests of consumers, suppliers and 
manufacturers would be taken care of but also the problem of irrational pricing would be 
resolved. Effective implementation of "Trade Margin Rationalisation" (TMR) would result 
in lower out -of-pocket expen diture which ensures that families are not pushed below the 
poverty line due to the medical expenses. 
(Para 3.43) 
 
 The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Department of Pharmaceuticals in 
upscaling of manpower for the sector, however, feels that c onsidering the potential of 
growth of the medical device sector, there is an urgent need to prepare a mammoth skilled 
manpower at various levels, hence more steps should be taken on priority.  
(Para 3.45) 
 
VIEWS OF THE GOVERNMENT & OTHER STAKEHOLDERS 
 The Committee feels that the mandate of the Department of Pharmaceuticals is very 
much related to the health sector like drugs & medical devices, their production, 
development, control, promotion, education, training & research.  Hence, the Committee 
strongly feels that, for better coordination, the Department should be brought alongwith 
Department of Health and Family Welfare under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
from the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers by amending the Government of  India 
(Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961.  
(Para 4.11) 

51 
 
 The Committee, during its deliberations on the subject observed issues in the functioning 
of current regulation and the  Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
incorporating suitable provisions in the new Bill  so as to overcome the shortcomings in 
MDR. As per MDR-2017, sale and testing of Class A/B/C/D medical devices along with IVD 
(In-vitro diagnostics) is vested with the State Governments, however, the Drug Testing 
Laboratories are not notified and Medical D evice Testing Officers of State are not 
designated regularly by the CDSCO thus causing inordinate delay in granting approvals. 
Presently, there is neither a provision in the online portal for referring the licensed 
manufacturing unit (for Class A devices) for audit by the notified body nor there is any 
feedback mechanism in the CDSCO portal to refer the technically deficient audit reports 
which are prepared by notified bodies. Further, there is no mechanism for registering 
complaints regarding functioning o f CDSCO portal. The Committee also found that there 
is non-adherence of timelines for audit and report as per MDR-2017 by the notified bodies.  
(Para 4.27) 
 
 The Committee feels that for a strong regulator it needs to be supported with required 
expertise from the backgrounds of Medical, Biomedical Engineering, Product Development 
and Marketing. The Committee further recommends that there is utmost requirement of 
training programmes for regulatory officials (both central and State level) as well as for 
industry persons for effective implementation of the rules and regulations. The Committee 
feels that developing skilled and trained manpower possessing technical know -how of the 
medical devices is essential for smooth implementation of the regulations. This could be 
done through long -term, short-term and crash courses on medical device manufacturing 
and quality control in institutes like IITs, NITs and medical colleges for new regulatory 
officers. The Ministry of Skill Development may also be requested to formulate courses 
related to medical devices, manufacturing, use and maintenance. There is a need  for 
devising a mechanism to pre -empt exigencies and provision for "emergency use 
authorization" of medical devices in case of emergencies. The Ministry should also lower 
high fee charged by notified medical devices testing laboratories like NIB particular ly for 
Class C&D devices. The Committee observes that there is lack of co -ordination between 
academic institutions and industrial requirements. The Committee recommends that the 
innovators and scientists at research institutions should be made aware of the  required 
standards and regulations, otherwise it's difficult to commercialize their 
innovation/creation.  
(Para 4.28) 
 
 Another major issue that hampers R& D and delays operations in  IVD (in -vitro 
diagnostic) industry is the non-availability of bio specimens required for the preparation of 
QC (Quality Check) panels for testing manufactured products. Such panels are also 
required for testing the working of ne w /improved projects. In this regard, the Ministry 
must devise a mechanism so that such specimens and related data are shared by labs and 
hospitals with the IVD manufactures.  
(Para 4.29) 

52 
 
 Taking into account the potential growth and independent developmen t of Indian 
Medical Devices in the country, the Committee recommends that the separate Act on 
medical devices should have rules and regulations with clearly defined roles and 
responsibilities of regulating bodies; supportive polices like predictive tariff policy, 
refurbished imports to enable spread of unavailable medical devices at a low cost for 
deeper penetration in the smaller cities and rural areas and preferential public 
procurement to boost domestic manufacturing. The Committee has already recommende d 
for a single window clearance system. The Committee further recommends that interface 
between ministries dealing with Medical Device Rules, 2017 should be organised to carve 
out Road Maps for growth and development of Medical Device Industry in the count ry. 
The Committee is of the considered view that development of more number of medical 
device parks in differential space would operationlise linkage along with lending support to 
ancillary industry that can proliferate the Medical Device Industry in the country.   
(Para 4.30) 
 
 
 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to expedite the process of 
formulating the new separate legislation having adequate provisions to give Medical 
Devices industry in the country a kick start for pacing up with global market.  
(Para 4.31) 
 
 The Committee expresses concern over the fact that the highly technical medical 
devices industry, having no synergy with the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers is being 
promoted by them instead of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that since the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is the key 
stakeholder and the medical devices' being very diverse in range with respect to technology 
and material sciences, inter -ministry co -ordination is require d between various 
departments, which should be done by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare only. 
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that to nurture the nascent medical devices 
industry, the government should consider creation of a separate Depart ment of Medical 
Devices for playing the role of a policy maker, facilitator as well as regulator. The 
Committee recommends that the new Department of Medical Devices can co -ordinate with 
the Ministries connected with the industry to perform the following key functions:- 
i. Catalyze Growth of the Indian Medical Device Sector; 
ii. Define Priority Devices to fight Priority Diseases in consultation with national and 
international bodies; 
iii. Implement Strategy to Shift India's Import Dependency from around 80% to less 
than 30% in next 5 years for Priority Devices and Next 10 years for all Devices; 
iv. Facilitate Creation and Development of clusters for Medical Devices; 
v. Facilitate Creation of Laboratories and service centers under PPP; 
vi. Facilitate Skill Development of Personnel in the field of manufacturing, sales, 
service and regulations of medical devices; 
vii. Create a forum for close cooperation between user, developers, manufacturers and 
academia; 

53 
 
viii. Create and manage a Special Purpose Vehicle Fund for long gestation R&D projects 
under Made by India and Make for India projects for enterprises. 
(Para 4.32) 
 
 The Committee is given to understand that in medical devices India is dependent on 
imports to the tune of 80% and the imports crossed Rs. 63,000 crores in 2021 -22 and the 
estimated market is of Rs. 1,60,000 crores. The Committee, therefore, recommends a 
separate simple, implementable regulation for Medical Devices to encourage 'Make in 
India' of Medical Devices to deal with the 80% import dependence. The Quality 
Management System ( QMS) and Quality Assurance of the medical devices should be 
ensured to prevent zero defectives from reaching the market and for consistent 
performance.  
(Para 4.33) 
 
 The Committee feels that the law to regulate Medical Devices need to have provision 
for risk proportionate regulatory controls and for risk proportionate penal system and 
provide clarity of exemptions or diluted regulatory requirements for very Low Risk No n 
Sterile Surgical Instruments and other non measuring Non Sterile Medical Devices. The 
Committee feels that in the new legislation regulatory controls need to be shared between 
Centre, State and Conformity Assessment Notified Bodies in Law. There should b e no 
duplication of State and Central Government regulations. There needs to be accountability 
fixed on State Regulator to the Central Licensing Authority (or a National Regulator) to 
ensure harmonious enforcement. As regards the quality certification of the medical devices, 
the Committee feels that following the international practices, voluntary certification 
system for indigenous medical devices should also be promoted to a large extent for their 
better acceptability in the world market.  
(Para 4.34) 
 
  The Committee appreciates the views of Chairman and Managing Director of 
Shalby Multi-Specialty Hospitals and the need for bone banks for grafting. The Committee 
recommends the MoH&FW to consider creating "Bone Banks" to facilitate its easy 
availability. T he Committee also recommends that the "Biocompatibility studies" should 
be made mandatory so as to prevent poor quality products from entering the market and 
failure of implants that end up being life -threatening should have stringent penalty to 
discourage such faulty products.  
(Para 4.36) 
 
 
 The Committee endorses the views of some of the State Governments for Zone wise 
special trainings for Medical Device Officers. Trainings for Medical Device Testing 
Officers can be organized by National Drug Authority on routine basis so that technical 

54 
 
expertise of officers gets enhanced. The Committee feels that Capacity Building 
Programmes/ Skill Enhancement Workshops will also help the regulators to perform their 
legitimate duties in a better and pragmatic manner. 
 (Para 4.63) 
 
 The Committee feels that Materiovigilance Programme (MvPI) may be extended to 
medical devices to ensure the safety of medical devices in the country and uniformity of the 
inspection procedure may be ascertained. The Committee also recommends t hat lower 
rates of audit fee by the Government would also encourage indigenous manufacturers. 
(Para 4.64) 
 
The Committee, in this r eport has extensively examined the subject  and identified 
key concern areas and challenges that are yet to be resolved. The Committee believes that 
separate legislation exclusively for the Medical Devices and bringing the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals (DoP) under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare would really help 
solve some of the major challenges being faced by the medical device manufacturers.  
(Para 4.66) 
 
 The Committee notes that the Covid-19 pandemic has highlighted the need to 
support indigenous manufacturers of Medical Devices. The pandemic laid bare various 
issues like insufficient infrastructure and fund for research and development, lack of public 
funding for research, dearth of skilled manpower, lack of synergy between Central -State 
regulatory authorities, inappropriate regulations for medical devices, lack of global -level 
quality standards etc plaguing t he medical device  industry in India . With the immense 
potential for the medical devices industry anticipated, the Ministry should focus on 
resolving the challenges and develop a detailed "Roadmap with Practical and Actionable 
Strategy".  
(Para 4.67) 
  

55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
  

56 
 
III 
 
THIRD MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 14 th December, 2016 in  Room  No 
‗139‘, First  Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   -   Chairman 
  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 
  2.        Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury 
3.        Dr. Vikas Mahatme 
 4.        Shri Ashok Siddharth 
 5.        Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
 6.        Shri K. Somaprasad 
  7.        Dr. C.P. Thakur 
  
  
 
 LOK SABHA  
 
  8.      Shri Thangso Baite 
  9.      Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
 10.    Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
 11.    Shri Arjunlal Meena  
  12.    Shri Chirag Paswan  
  13.    Shri C. R. Patil  
 14.    Shri M.K. Raghavan  
 15.    Dr. Manoj Rajoria  
 16.    Shri R.K. Singh (Arrah) 
 17.    Shri Bharat Singh  
18.    Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
19.    Shrimati Rita Tarai 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu                              Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Arpana Mendiratta                 Director 
3. Shri Rakesh Naithani     Joint Director 
4. Shri Dinesh Singh      Joint Director 
5. Smt. Harshita Shankar      Assistant Director 
6. Shri Pratap Shenoy                             Committee Officer 
 

57 
 
I. OPENING REMARKS 
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the Members of the Committe e and apprised 
them of the agenda of the meeting, ***. 
II.       *** 
3. ***  
III. Future course of action 
4. During the course of the meeting, the Committee expressed concern about the exorbitant 
cost of stents and took note of the fact that stents are manufactured at a low cost but sold at a 
very high cost in the Indian Market. The Committee felt that in absence  of any control and 
regulation of medical devices including stents, the patients are dependent on imported stents 
which sharply escalate the health expenses of helpless patients. In view of this, the Committee 
felt that there was a need to strengthen regul ation of medical devices and hence decided to take 
up the subject "Medical Devices: Regulation and Control" for detailed examination. In this 
connection, the Committee decided to have evidence of the Health Secretary in its next meeting.  
The Committee also discussed the issue of access of quality medicines at affordable prices to the 
people and felt that promotion of the use of generic drugs would substantially reduce drug costs 
and increase drug availability.  The Committee, therefore, also decided to tak e up the subject of 
"Promotion of the use of generic medicines" for detailed examination.  
 
5. *** 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.20 p.m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter 
 
 

58 
 
IV 
 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 28 th December, 2016 in  Committee 
Room ‗B‘, Ground  Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   -   Chairman 
  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 
  2.        Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury 
3.        Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot 
4.        Dr. Vikas Mahatme 
 5.        Shri Jairam Ramesh 
6.        Shri Ashok Siddharth 
 7.        Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
 8.        Shri K. Somaprasad 
  
 
 
 LOK SABHA  
 
  9.      Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
             10.     Dr.(Smt.) Heena Vijay Gavit 
 11.    Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
 12.    Dr. K. Kamaraj  
  13.    Shri J. Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee 
  14.    Shri C. R. Patil  
 15.    Dr. Manoj Rajoria  
 16.    Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
17.    Shri R.K. Singh (Arrah) 
 18.    Shri Bharat Singh  
19.    Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
20.    Shrimati Rita Tarai 
  
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Arpana Mendiratta         Director 
2. Shri Rakesh Naithani        Joint Director 
3. Shri Dinesh Singh         Joint Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar                                     Assistant Director 
 
 
 

59 
 
WITNESSES          
 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
1. Sh. C. K. Mishra  Secretary 
2. Sh. K. L. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
3. Sh. Arun Singhal  Joint Secretary 
4. Sh. G. N. Singh             Drugs Controller General of India DCG (I) 
5. Dr. Eshwara Reddy             Joint Drugs Controller (India) 
 
A. OPENING REMARKS 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them 
of the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to hear the views of the Secretary of the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare on the subject- 'Medical Devices: Regulation & Control.' 
 
B. ORAL EVIDENCE OF HEALTH SECRETARY  
3.  The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare then gave a brief background 
of the medical devices industry in the country, present regulatory system, the challenges faced 
and the initiatives taken by the Department for better regulation and control. He highlighted that 
the medical devices industry was worth Rs. 40,000 crore.  He admitted that currently  there was 
no proper framework for regulation of medical devices and lack of certification hampers growth 
of medical devices industry in the country. He also informed that quality, safety and performance 
aspects of medical devices is under Ministry of Heal th and Family Welfare and promotion, 
production & manufacture of medical devices is under Department of Pharmaceuticals. Only 15 
groups of devices have been notified by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare presently and 
there was a need to increase th is basket of devices. He further stated that as of now, medical 
devices were notified as drugs under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, however, since devices 
were different from drugs, the Department was working towards distinguishing between drugs 
and de vices which need distinct testing and treatment and hence there was a need to have a 
separate vertical structure within the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation  (CDSCO) to 
regulate medical devices and the Ministry was working on it.  
 
4. Thereafter, an official from the Department made a power -point presentation on the 
subject.  He  inter-alia covered the following points during the course of the presentation: - (i) 
import of devices;(ii) approval and clinical trials of new devices which is regulated under 
CDSCO while manufacturing, sale and distribution is governed by State Licensing Authority 
(SLA); (iii) certification of medical devices as followed in the country; (iv) Good Manufacturing 
Practice (GMP) requirements for drugs and Quality Management S ystem (QMS) requirements 
for devices; (v) distinction between clinical trials (drugs) and clinical investigation (Medical 
devices); (vi) recent changes in Drugs and Cosmetics (D&C) rules for medical devices like 
replacement of Schedule M III of Drugs and C osmetics Rules  by a new Quality Management 
System i.e. ISO 13485, etc; (vii) proposing separate medical devices rules with the objective of 
increasing the number of devices to be regulated, certification of medical devices and to have a 
transparent and ob jective process to attract investment and industry growth; (viii)  steps being  
taken for notification of final Rules in Gazette by January, 2017;  (ix) classification of medical 

60 
 
devices and risk criteria for classification based on intended use of devices  as well as 
international classification of devices; (x) approval process by Central Licensing Authority 
through online central portal for  import, manufacturing and sale of medical devices; (xi) clinical 
investigation of drugs and devices and review by Central Licensing Authority (CLA), etc.  
 
5. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications from the Secretary regarding   nodal Ministry 
for controlling and  regulating medical devices; revision of import duty structure; licensing of 
new age medicines and technologies for treating various diseases; need for standardization of 
medical devices; relooking at the classification between drugs and devices; use of imported 
machinery lying idle for the poor; category of stents and pacemakers; pricing of stents; 
certification of stents;  need for prior permission for X -ray machines/radiation based 
technologies before selling / buying; exercising control over doctors/hospitals on commission 
received for  using  highly priced devices/stents; need  for Indian certification for manufacturing 
devices instead  of require ment of  foreign certification like Conformite‘ Europe’enne (CE) 
marking and United States Food and Drug A dministration(USFDA); reviewing exemption list 
and category of devices w.r.t. import/export; reviewing manufacturers' validation, etc.  The 
Chairman, then, directed the Secretariat to forward a questionnaire on the subject to the Ministry 
for their written  replies and also asked the Health Secretary to furnish replies to the queries 
raised in the meeting which remained unanswered within a week.   
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.33 p.m.  
 
 
  

61 
 
II 
 
SECOND MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 1 st December, 2021 in Committee 
Room-A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2.      Shri AK. Antony 
3.      Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4.      Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5.      Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6.      Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
7.      Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
8.      Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
9.      Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
10.      Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
11.      Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
12.      Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
13.      Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
14.      Shri Arjunlal Meena 
15.      Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
16.      Shri K. Navaskani 
17.      Adv. Adoor Prakash 
18.      Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
19.      Dr. DNV Senthilkumar. S 
20.      Shri Anurag Sharma 
21.      Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
22.      Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal                Joint Secretary  
2. Shri V.S.P. Singh   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar                    Under Secretary 
 
  

62 
 
WITNESSES 
Department of Health and Family Welfare  
1. Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Secretary (Health) 
2. Shri Vikas Sheel, Additional Secretary 
3. Dr. Mandeep K. Bhandari, Joint Secretary 
4. Dr. V.G. Somani, DCG(I), CDSCO 
5. Shri Rajiv Wadhawan, Director 
6. Shri Pardeep Dahiya, Drugs Inspector, CDSCO 
2. *** 
2.1 He also informed that after the consideration and adoption of reports, the Committee 
would be hearing the views of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare on the 
subject "Medical Devices: Regulation and Control".  
3. *** 
 
3.1 *** 
 
4. The Chairman thereafter informed the members that the Committee is presently 
considering the subject - Medical Devices: Regulation and Control. The Committee felt that a 
favourable regulatory climate and better infrastructure are fundamental in incentivising the 
medical device industry to set up their manufacturing facilities in the States and the support of 
the States Government is crucial in the effective implementation of the medical device policies. 
For a comprehensive and critical examination of the subject, the Committee, therefore, decided 
that it should seek the comments/views of the State/UT Governments on the subject.  
 
Oral Evidence of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare on Medical 
Devices: Regulation and Control:  
 
5. ***  
6. The Secretary in his deposition to the Committee gave a brief about the medical device 
industry in the country which is essentially governed by three bodies - Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare oversees the regulatory aspects, Department of Pharmaceutica ls is responsible 
for production, promotion and manufacturing and National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) tasked with the implementation of provisions and monitoring of availability of drugs.  
 
6.1 The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, then, gave a presentation on 
the subject and inter-alia highlighted the following key points: 
i. Medical device industry is regulated by Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 which is a 
Central Act and aims to ensure safety, efficacy and quality of not only drugs but also 
medical devices and cosmetics; 
 
* Pertains to other matter 

63 
 
ii. There are four types of medical devices viz. medical equipments, medical implants, 
medical disposables and medical furniture; At present 37 medic al devices are notified; 
Differences between drugs and devices; while the former is based on chemistry and 
biochemistry, the latter one is based on engineering; 
iii. Medical Devices Rules, 2017 became effective from 1 st January, 2018. These rules 
regulated Medical Devices and IVDs (In -vitro diagnostics). According to these rules the 
devices are classified into Class -A, Class-B, Class -C and Class -D. Class A and B are 
devices are low/moderate -risk devices and C and D are high -risk devices. Further State 
Licensing Authorities are responsible for regulating of manufacturing of Class A&B 
devices and regulation of C&D devices is done by Central Regulating Authority; 
iv. Medical Devices Rules, 2017 also govern clinical investigation, the standard of medical 
devices, perpetual validity of licenses, registration and regulation of notified bodies, 
online submission, processing and approval of applications, quality management system 
and timelines for approval; 
v. All manufacturers and importers of non -regulated Medical Devices should register with 
CDSCO, initially, such registrations are on a voluntary basis up to 18 months. After 
submission of information by the applicant on the SUGAM portal registration number is 
generated, which shall be printed on label by the manufacturer or importer; 
vi. Registration process of Class A&B devices must be completed in 30 months (18 months 
for voluntary registration and 12 months for mandatory registration) and for the Class 
C&D devices this period is of 42 months (18 months for volu ntary registration and 24 
months for mandatory registration); 
vii. 5 Central Medical Device Testing Laboratories are notified for statutory testing and 19 
Medical Device Testing Laboratories are registered by the CDSCO for TEST or 
Evaluation of a medical device on behalf of the manufacturer; 
viii. Materiovigilance programme of India (MvPI), intended to ensure the safety of devices 
was launched in 2015 at the Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Ghaziabad. Under 
MvPI, 124 Medical Devices Adverse Events Monitoring Centres have been identified in 
the country to report the events on a voluntary basis; 
ix. Presently there is a need to create 754 posts for separate vertical of medical devices 
comprising 449 posts for regulatory officials and 305 for laboratory officials; 
x. Medical Devices sector has the highest growth potential amongst all the sectors in the 
healthcare market; 
xi. India depends on imports to an extent of more than 70%. 
 
6.2 Thereafter, the Chairman and the members of the Committee raised cert ain issues/queries 
on the regulation and control of medical devices which are as follows:- 
 
 

64 
 
i. Need for a separate legislative framework for regulating medical devices as these 
continue to be regulated as drugs in India under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940; 
ii. Ambiguity in the law and rules regarding the regulation of the medical devices by the 
Central and State governments; 
iii. Clarity on the purpose behind the controlling and regulation of the medical device 
industry; 
iv. Including devices of Dental  care, hearing and vision aids in the rules for regulation of 
medical devices; 
v. Standardization of materials used in the manufacturing of medical devices; 
vi. Importance of effectiveness of medical devices along with safety features; 
vii. Effective implementation of regulating laws so that they serve the intended purpose; 
viii. Control over the manufacturers or the distributors of drugs to regulate their prices; 
disparity in pricing of implants and other devices in the government and private hospitals; 
ix. Provisions in regulation for promoting indigenous manufacturing, innovation and export;   
x.  Inclusion of medical software, devices used in physiotherapy, occupational therapy along 
with laboratory reagents under the category of medical devices; 
xi. Laws to deter overstocking of medical devices and regulation of online selling of medical 
devices; 
xii. Laws and rules for the regulation of medical devices should cover entire paraphernalia of 
medical implants encompass along with devices used for prosthetic s, orthotics, stents, 
coils etc; 
xiii. Bringing more devices under the category of "Notified Medical Devices", 
xiv. Licensing of Class A&B medical devices would be effective from 2022 and for C&D 
devices the licensing would be effective from 2023, hence th e system put in place till 
these licensing regulations become effective; 
xv. Effective disposal of medical devices; and 
xvi. Creation of posts to increase manpower for the better regulation of the medical device 
industry. 
6.3 After that, the Chairman point ed out that, of late, there has been a tendency of the 
Ministry to pick and choose queries raised by members for answering as per their convenience 
thereby avoiding the important questions. The Chairman asked the officials to furnish replies to 
all the questions/queries raised by the members. 
6.4 The Secretary, the Department of Health and Family Welfare, thereafter, responded to 
some of the queries of the Chairman and the members as enumerated below: 
i. On the issue of separate legislative framework for regulating medical devices, the 
Secretary, DoH&FW informed the committee that it is a global practice to not to have an 
independent Act but to have separate chapters for the regulation of Drugs, Devices and 
Cosmetics in the same act; 

65 
 
ii. Regarding making t he laws comprehensive for the Medical Device, the Department has 
already undertaken the exercise of comprehensive amendment of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act; 
iii. On creation of posts in the Department for appropriate deployment the Department had 
already pursued the matter with the Ministry of Finance and   
iv. The need for more experts bioengineers in the medical devices' vertical structure in the 
central regulator's office; 
 
6.5 The Chairman then directed the Department to send written replies to the queries raised 
by the Members within a week's time. ***.  
 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
8. The Committee then adjourned at 4:17 p.m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter 
 
  

66 
 
IX    
  
NINTH MEETING 
  
        The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 12 th May, 2022 in Committee Room -4, 
Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
  
    1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav                    -        Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA                                         
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
5. Shri A.D. Singh 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
7. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
8. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil 
9. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
10. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
11. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
12. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
 SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari                          Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                  Additional Director  
3. Shri Praveen Kumar                         Deputy Secretary 
  
WITNESSES: 
A. Representatives of CII National Medical Technology Forum (NMTF) 
i. Mr Himanshu Baid, Chairman -CII NMTF 
ii. Mr Vibhav Garg, Director-Health Economics & Govt Affairs 
iii. Ms. Elizabeth Jose, Deputy Director, NMTF 
iv. Mr. Deepak Sharma, Executive Officer, NMTF 
B. Representatives of Othopaedic Implant Manufacturers Association (OIMA), 
Mumbai 
i. Mr. Hemkumar Patel, Secretary-Mumbai 

67 
 
ii. Mr. Anuj Dureja 
2.       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised the 
Members that the Committee would be hearing the views of two organizations, namely, (i) 
Confederation of Indian Industries - National Medical Technology Forum (CII -NMTF), New 
Delhi and (ii) Orthopaedic Implant Manufacturers Associ ation (OIMA), Mumbai on the subject, 
"Medical Device: Regulation and Control". 
3.       The Committee first heard the views of Chairman, CII NMTF who inter-alia highlighted 
the following points: 
i. CII NMTF membership covers all MedTech - implantables, consum ables, IVD and 
equipment; 
ii. Medical Device Rules (MDR) 2017 (under the aegis of Drugs and Cosmetics (D&C) Act) 
is the prime medical device regulation;  
iii. Need of alignment with the best Regulatory Affairs practices globally;  
iv. Establishing a level playing field for manufacturers; importers or distributors; 
v. Flexibility to cope up with ever changing landscape of medical technology innovations; 
vi. Need of decriminalizing the provisions of current act; 
vii. Exemption from Legal Metrology, Quality Control Orders etc;  
viii. In public procurement of medical devices in India, there are three essential criteria: (a) 
Conformance to applicable standards (IS/ISO/IEC); (ii) Regulatory Approval (CDSCO 
(Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation), MoHFW), and (iii) Product Technical 
Specifications; Third party certification beyond regulatory approvals are redundant; 
ix. Regulating Import of Refurbished Equipment and refurbishing in India;  
x. (Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme should be opened for all medical devices 
categories ; 
xi. Inverted duty structure to be corrected especially for medical devices that are 
manufactured in India;  
xii. Need for Schemes to support medical device manufacturing infrastructure beyond PLI;  
xiii. Need for Scheme for Promotion of manufacturing of Electronic Components an d 
Semiconductors (SPECS);  
xiv. Recognition to Incremental Innovation; Differential Pricing; 
xv. Need of Value Based Procurement / Health Economics Driven Reimbursement Models; 
xvi. Need for export incentivization and making Indian Manufacturers Globally Competitive;  
xvii. Multiple regulators for med tech industry hampers ease of doing business 
  
4.       The Committee then heard the views of the Secretary, OIMA (Othopaedic Implant 
Manufacturers Association) who stated that in India around 70 -80 per cent of the companies 
were CDSCO (Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation) approved. The indigenous 
manufacturing industry have been adversely affected by reduced import duties and were facing 
tough times competing with imported products.   He apprised the Committee that even th ough 
Covid-19 had an adverse impact on the medical devices industry but the loan provided by the 
Government helped the industry survive through the pandemic. There was shortage of raw 
material during the pandemic and there was a need of design and regulato ry framework to cope 
up with future emergencies. Regarding quality control and standards of medical devices in line 

68 
 
with best international practices, he suggested that CDSCO should harmonize standards with the 
standards of international companies,   but ob taining international certification like CE 
(Conformitè Europëenne) and USFDA (United States' Food and Drug Administration) has 
increasingly become costly thus, the industry needed Government  intervention in this regard.  
 
5.       Another representative of OIMA apprised the Committee that in orthopedic implants two 
raw materials i.e. stainless steel and titanium are extensively used but owing to absence of 
indigenous manufacturers of these two, the industry is dependent on expensive imports.  
 
 
6.       Thereafter, the members raised certain queries which are as follows:- 
a. Whether digitalisation has improved the systems for approval to start a business; need for 
single-window approval system; 
b. Steps required to balance the tra de issues in medical device industry; import -export 
imbalance; 
c. How can the new legislation be made beneficial to both industry and the patients?; 
d. Self regulatory measures required to be taken by industry to regulate pricing of medical 
devices; measures taken to ensure quality of devices while keeping prices in control; 
e. In India CDSCO approved medical devices should be given the same value vis-à-vis CE 
and USFDA approved devices; 
f. Quality Council of India (QCI) can play an active role in ensuring quality of medical 
devices manufactured in India; 
g. Need to promote research in product used in biodegradable implants; industry should also 
invest in research and development of medical device industry ; 
h. Promoting manufacturing of devices and implants which are design ed specifically for 
Indians considering their bone structure and other parameters; 
i. Boosting domestic manufacturing to boost exports and employment; 
j. Educating officials about medical industry, its working, structure, international standards 
for better regulation and quality control; 
k. Steps required to sustain the Covid induced spurt in domestic manufacturing of medical 
equipments and devices; and 
l. The ultimate and unanimous goal of all the stakeholders of the industry should be that the 
patients must get quality treatment at affordable prices. 
7.       Thereafter, Director Health Economics & Govt Affairs of CII answered few of the queries 
raised by the Members; he submitted that medical device being an innovation -driven industry  
needed 'Innovate in India' as m uch as  'Make in India' for the medical devices. He apprised the 
Committee that reason behind sudden increase in manufacturing of devices/ equipments during 
Covid was a definite demand for such devices/ equipments in the market and from the 
Government of India. He stated that assured and predictable demand boosts investment and thus 
manufacturing and supply.  
 
8.  The Chairman then asked the witnesses to submit a written response to the queries raised 
by the Members within seven days. 
 

69 
 
9.   A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.41 p.m to meet again at 11.00 am on 13th May, 2022.  
  

70 
 
RECORD OF DISCUSSION  
 
 The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, the 13th May, 2022 in Committee Room-D, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA      
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
3. Shri A.D. Singh 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
5. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
6. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
7. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
8. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
9. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
2. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
 
A. Representatives of Association of Indian Medical Device Industry (AiMeD), New 
Delhi 
 
i.  Mr. Rajiv Nath, Forum Coordinator  
ii. Mr. P.K. Sharma, Technical Officer 
 
B. Representatives of Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and  Industry 
 
i. Mr. Praveen Kumar Mittal, Senior Director, Federation of Indian Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry 
ii. Mr. Arnab Basumallik, Business Unit Head - Critical Care &Vascular, Edwards 
Lifesciences (India) Pvt Ltd  
iii. Mr. Sudhakar Mairpadi, Director - Regulatory and Govt Affairs (Health care, 
Personal health) India and Indian subcontinent, Philips India Limited. 
iv. Mr. Ravi Valia,  General Manager -Govt Affairs, Market Access and CSR, B 
Braun Medical (India) Pvt. Ltd 
v. Mr. Gaurav Verma, Director - RA & GA, Becton Dickinson India Pvt. Ltd. 

71 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised the 
Members that  the Committee would be hearing the views of two organizations, namely, (i) 
Association of Indian Medical Device Industry (AiMeD), New Delhi and (ii) Federation of 
Indian Chambers of Commerce and  Industry (FICCI) on the subject, "Medical Device: 
Regulation and Control". 
3. The Committee first heard the views of Forum Coordinator, AiMED who inter -alia 
highlighted the following points: 
i. The industry is 80-85% dependent on imports; 
ii. Introduction of separate act on medical devices; rules and regulations must cle arly define 
roles and responsibilities regulating bodies; 
iii. Supportive polices like predictive tariff Policy, restrictions on second hand imports, 
preferential public procurement can significantly boost domestic manufacturing; 
iv. In 1989 the medical devices wer e classified as drugs and in 2017 Medical Device rules 
were notified; 
v. Certain section of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act like Section 17 (on misbranded drugs), 
Section 17A (adulterated drugs), Section 34 (offences of companies) are needed to be 
made  
"not applicable" or they should be amended; 
vi. Patient safety must be ensured without affecting investment and Small and Medium 
Enterprises (SMEs); 
vii. All manufacturers and importers should be registered and manufacturers of of Class -A 
non-sterile should be allowed self-certification;\ 
viii. Build a pool of competent auditors, medical device officers and manufacturers along with 
a comprehensive infrastructure of NABL accredited testing labs; 
ix. Regulatory controls need to be split, shared and delegated between the Center, State an d 
Conformity Assessment Bodies; and 
x. Overpriced imported medical devices are severely affecting India's manufacturing 
growth. 
4. The Committee then heard the views of United Head of FICCI, his presentation to the 
Committee included following major points:- 
i. India constitutes 1.6% of total global market and almost 86% of the Indian medical 
device industry is import dependent; 
ii. Right policy decisions can help India grow by at least 12 times of the present market size; 
iii. Medical device industry is capital intensive ; has long gestation period and requires 
continuous induction of new technologies; 
iv. India lacks well developed ecosystem and innovation cycle for medical device industry to 
flourish;  
v. Working on Demand Generation, Policy Predictability and Ease of Doing Business can 
make India a hub for med-tech in the next two decades (by 2047); 
vi. India currently has only 1.3 hospital beds/1000 population and thus additional 3 million 
beds are required; India only has 0.65 physicians per 1000 people and the WHO standard 
is 1 per 1,000 people; 
vii. Similarly 1.54 million doctors and 2.4 million nurses would be required to meet the 
growing demand; 

72 
 
viii. 60% of India's health infrastructure is concentrated in the large cities across the country; 
ix. Need to skill, upskill and reskill healthc are professionals and those in manufacturing of 
medical devices as well; 
x. Trade Margin Rationalisation from first point of sale;  
xi. Standardized, streamlined and digitized implementation of PCPNDT (Pre -Conception 
and Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques)Act; 
xii. Developing a process for defining and rewarding incremental innovation and 
breakthrough innovation; 
xiii. Implementation of Medical Device Rules 2017 harmonized with global practices; 
xiv. Need to have single window clearance system and interface between ministries dealin g 
with medical device rules 2017; 
xv. Need to develop and operationlise more medical device parks and lend support to 
ancillary industry; and  
xvi. Encourage export -oriented industries by facilitating smooth approvals and providing 
technical and fiscal assistance. 
 
5. Thereafter, the members raised certain queries which are as follows:- 
 
i. Need for price capping in medical device industry; 
ii. Requirement for a separate legislation for the regulation of medical device industry; 
iii. Indigenous manufacturing of medical devices would boost exports; 
iv. Regulating self-certification of medical devices; 
v. Need for Government  and industry led support in improving the Research and 
Development;  
vi. Establishing medical device parks in various States; 
vii. Need for public manufacturing of medical devices which are used in large scale; 
viii. Providing capital to the industry at reduced interest rates; 
ix. Reduction of import duty is adversely impacting domestic manufacturers; \ 
x. Need to identify and control unscrupulous elements who create artificial inflation; 
xi. Need to address wide variation in prices of medical devices available in the market; 
xii. Research-linked incentive scheme on the lines of Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
scheme; 
xiii. Harmonisation of Medical Device Rules (2007) with the global best practice; 
xiv. Single window clearance system to obtain various clearances for the operationalization of 
medical device industries; and 
xv. Health Budget should be at least 5% of the GDP. 
 
6. The stakeholders then answered few of the queries, regarding need for industry support  
for research; the business Unit Head  of FICCI replied that the industry is doing fantastically in 
terms of research and innovation.  Regarding price regulation, he said that the country needed to 
focus on Health Technology Assessment (HTA). In this assessm ent there are methodologies 
which see the health benefit along with the cost.  Regarding regulation of medical devices, the 
forum co-ordinator of Association of Indian Medical Device Industry (AiMeD) submitted that  
there was a need for separate department for medical devices and the legislation, regulation and 
promotion, manufacturing should be dealt by the same department. He recommended self -

73 
 
certification for the non -sterile low risk medical devices. He also highlighted the issue of fake 
certification and usage of wrong labeling on the devices by certain manufacturers. 
7.  The Chairman then asked the witnesses to submit a written response to the queries raised 
by the Members within seven days. 
 
8.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9.  The Committee then adjourned at 12.49 p.m. 
  

74 
 
X 
 
TENTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 30th May, 2022 in Main Committee Room, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA      
2. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
3. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
4. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
6. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
7. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
8. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
9. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
10. Shri K. Navaskani 
11. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
12. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
13. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
14. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
15. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
16. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
4. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Harshita Shankar                 Deputy  Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Government of 
India 
1. Ms. S. Aparna, Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals 
2. Shri Kamlesh Kumar Pant, Chairman, National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority 
3. Dr. N. Yuvaraj, Joint Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals  

75 
 
4. Shri Rajneesh Tingal, Joint Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals  
5. Smt. Vinod Kotwal, Member Secretary, National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
1. Dr. Mandeep Kumar Bhandari, Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. V. G. Somani, Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI) 
Association of Diagnostics Manufacturers of India (ADMI) 
1. Ms. Veena Kohli, President 
2. Shri Jatin Mahajan 
2.       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them 
the agenda of the meeting i.e. examination of the subject "Medical Devices: Regulation and 
Control" and to hear the views of stakeholders like t he Department of Pharmaceuticals and 
Association of Diagnostics Manufacturers of India. 
3.    The Committee first heard the views of   the Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals who 
gave a brief introduction on the subject explaining the mandate of the De partment of 
Pharmaceuticals. The submission to the Committee included following points:- 
i. Medical Device industry has the highest potential for growth among all the sectors in the 
healthcare market; 
ii. Major manufacturing of medical devices in the country is h appening with respect to 
disposables such as catheters, perfusion sets, extension lines, cannula, feeding tubes, 
needles, syringes, and implants such as cardiac stents, drug -eluting stents, intra -ocular 
lenses and orthopaedic implants; 
iii. The Medical Device i ndustry is highly capital intensive with a long gestation period and 
requires development/induction of new technologies; 
iv. Need for a well-developed ecosystem and innovation cycle in India; 
v. India depends on imports to an extent of 80% by value of its domesti c requirements of 
medical devices; 
vi. The current market size of the medical devices sector in India is estimated to be $11 
billion and its share in the global medical device market is estimated to be 1.5%.  
vii. Audit/Inspection is done by Notified body accredite d by National Accreditation Board 
for Certification Bodies (NABCB) for class A and class B (low and moderate risk).  
viii. Tests and evaluations of medical devices are carried out by Medical Device Testing 
Laboratory (MDTL) with 5 MDTL notified for statutory tes ting and 24 MDTL registered 
on behalf of manufacturer.  
4.       The Joint Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals explained the schemes/initiatives 
being implemented by the Department:- 
i. A scheme called ―Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Promoting Do mestic 
Manufacturing of Medical Devices‖ was approved by the Government of India on 
20th March, 2020. Under the Scheme, financial incentive will be given to selected 

76 
 
companies at the rate of 5% of incremental sales of medical devices manufactured in 
India and covered under the Target segments of the scheme, for a period of five (5) years.  
ii. The Scheme is applicable only to the Greenfield projects with total financial outlay of the 
scheme being Rs. 3,420 crore. The Scheme is being implemented through a Project 
Management Agency (PMA).  
iii. A Scheme for Promotion of Medical Device Parks was started  with the objective of 
giving financial assistance to State Governments for supporting specific infrastructure in 
medical device parks.  
iv. The scheme ―Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre‖ has 
been revised and renamed as ―Promotion of Medical Device Parks‖ and the total financial 
outlay of the scheme is Rs. 400 crore.   So far, 16 States/UTs have submitted their 
proposals  in which the proposals of 4 States namely, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, 
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh have been approved. 
v. Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Pharmaceuticals covers In -vitro 
diagnostic medical devices amongst other pharmaceutical goods. Five (5) industry 
applicants have been selected under the scheme for In -vitro diagnostic medical devi ces 
and the scheme provides for incentives based on their incremental sales for 6 years.  
vi. A draft National Medical Device Policy, 2022 has been prepared in consultation with the 
medical device industry.  
vii. The Standing Forum of Medical Devices Associations h as provided inputs to the 
Department based on consensus approach between the industry associations.  
viii. The sector requires special co -ordination and communication among Industry and 
Department since the regulators of medical devices are spread across differe nt 
Departments like MoHFW, D/o Consumer Affairs, Indian Council of Medical Research, 
Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Bureau of Indian Standards etc.  
ix. Medical Device Sector is one of the attractive sectors for Foreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) in India. Up to 100% foreign direct investment is allowed under automatic route in 
Medical Device sector without Government approval. India has recorded significant 
growth in FDI inflow in Medical Device sector in the recent past, however, the inflow in 
2020-21 was low due to impact of Covid-19.  
5.    The Committee was also apprised by the Department of Pharmaceuticals about the 
mandate of the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority (NPPA) to implement and enforce 
the provisions of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 2013 and to monitor the availability of drugs, 
identify shortages, if any, and to take remedial steps. The Secretary further informed the 
Committee about the steps taken by the NPPA to control price of medical devices which are 
categorized as Scheduled Medic al Devices and Non -Scheduled Medical Devices. NPPA 
monitors the maximum retail prices of all non -scheduled medical devices and ensures that no 
manufacturer increases the maximum retail price of any medical device more than 10% of 
maximum retail prices duri ng preceding 12 months. If any manufacturer increases the price 
beyond 10% of maximum retail price, the overcharged amounts are recovered as per the 
provision of Drugs (Price Control) Order, 2013.  
  
6.   The Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals further informed the Committee about the 
Jan Aushadhi Kendras which aims to improve access of medical products, apart from generic 
drugs. The Government has made available 250 types of surgical items in over 8700 stores of Jan 

77 
 
Aushadhi Kendras at highly affordable prices under the Pradhan Mantri Bharatiya Jan Aushadhi 
Pariyojana. 
7.   The Secretary apprised the Committee about the initiatives taken by the Department for 
up scaling of manpower for medical devices sector which would supply skilled work force across 
the innovation value chain e.g. scientists, regulators, health experts, managers, technicians, etc.   
She also informed that 20 courses have been started related to biotechnology engineering across 
the country.  The National Institutes of Pharmaceuticals Education and Research is being run by 
the Department of Pharmaceuticals to impart training for different roles in medical device 
sector.  She further informed that draft National Medical Device Policy, 202 2 has been prepared 
to set up National Institutes of MedTech Education and Research (NIMERs) on the lines of 
NIPERs, as Institutes of National Importance (INIs) and to leverage the Skill India Mission 
platform for development of skill sets in medical device sector.  
8.       Thereafter, the Members raised certain queries which are as follows:- 
i. Mechanism being adopted to find out the volume and value of products that are 
consumed, at the same time. 
ii. Steps to be taken to regulate the prices of stents all over the country.  
iii. Overpricing of oxygen concentrators during the COVID -19 times as also the exorbitant 
prices of the devices used for the prosthesis, orthopedics and stents in the cardiac 
department.   
iv. Measures being taken to develop and promote medical tourism in India.  
v. Identification/ development of Key Performance Indicators to assist the quality and 
performance of medical devices and to enable manufacturers to sell their devices to 
doctors and hospitals instead of patients directly.   
vi. Need to create a fram ework to facilitate direct link between the medical device 
manufacturers and patients while protecting the health data of the patients. 
vii. Steps being taken regarding Central Drug Standard Control Organisations (CDSCO) 
approved devices.  
viii. The scheme for promotion of medical device parts and its selection criteria.  
ix. Control of Central Government on price fixation of pharmaceuticals and medical 
equipments.   
x. Proposal to manufacture Computed Tomography (CT) scan machine and the Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging (MRI) machine in medical devices parks of four States.  
xi. Regulatory control on the import of medical devices. 
xii. Status on   availability of all medicines and steps  taken by the Government to ensure 
availability of regularly-used medicines in 8,700 Jan Aushadhi Kendras. 
xiii. Inclusion of hip implants in non -scheduled medical devices to reduce its price for the 
benefit of large section of population. 
xiv. Availability and price control of life supporting drugs, especially in organ transplantation.  
xv. Formulation of a policy on various diseases in which patients require drugs for a longer 
period of time.   
xvi. Regulation of import of cochlear implant from U.S.A along with removal of import duty. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 

78 
 
9.       Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the President of ADMI.   She informed the 
Committee on the following points :- 
 It is estimated that the Indian IVD market size will exceed the US$ 5.0 Bn mark by the 
year 2027 while growing at a rate of 20% per annum with the help of these parameters (i) 
Increasing awareness, affordability and demand for quality healthcare (ii) Rapidly rising 
burden of chronic and lifestyle related diseases like Diabetes mellitus, cardiac disorders 
etc. (iii) Spurt in communicable infections like Dengue, Chikungunya, Typhoid etc., 
resulting in a significant increase in the number of IVD tests being conducted in the 
country; (iv) In order to meet the increased work load and to mainta in the quality 
turnaround times, the market is rapidly moving towards automation. This in turn, is 
giving an impetus to the growth of the industry; (v) Increase in adoption of healthcare 
insurance; (vi) Growth of the medical tourism industry in India.  
 Overlapping and duplication with respect to the labelling requirements under the Legal 
Metrology Act and eight additional requirements under the Multiple Drug 
Resistant (MDR) for labelling of In vitro diagnostics (IVDs) and two extra requirements 
of the Legal Metrology Act, and these two extra ones are the display of MRP on the box 
label of the product and also that the consumer details should be displayed which is the 
phone number and the E-mail ID.   
 Covid-19 assisted to democratize molecular diagnostics within a year and the share of the 
segment dramatically soared from 4% in 2019 to 54% in 2020. 
 Entry of several players into in-vitro diagnostics from the adjacent segments like Pharma, 
in-vivo Medical Devices, Life Sciences etc. 
 India therefore contributed 10% to the new tests developed in the world for the detection 
of Covid-19 during the years 2020 and 2021. 
 The regulatory framework for in-vitro Diagnostics (IVD) Medical Devices was 
elucidated and implemented very recently, in January 2018 in the form of t he Medical 
Devices Rules (MDR), 2017. 
 The IVD industry requires the listed Guidance Documents from the CDSCO, to guide 
and hand -hold the industry in understanding and implementing the MDR Rules 
comprehensively and uniformly. 
 The aim of the Vision @2047 of Indian IVD industry is to catalyse Research & 
Development and Innovation in the IVD Sector, in order to be amongst the top 5 
geographies in the global market with 10% share by 2047, to reduce import dependence 
and ensure a self -reliance quotient of 80% in the IVD sector by 2047 with SMART 
milestones and to achieve continued backward integration in manufacturing through 
industry-academia collaborations.   
10.     A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
11.     The Committee then adjourned at 1.05 p.m. 
 
 
  

79 
 
XV 
 
FIFTEENTH  MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 8th August, 2022 in Committee Room-A, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Santanu Sen 
3. Shri A. D. Singh      
 
LOK SABHA 
 
4. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
5. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
6. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
7. Shri K. Navaskani 
8. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil 
9. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
10. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
11. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
12. Shri Anurag Sharma 
13. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
14. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
15. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director  
2. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
3. Shri Praveen Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar                  Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that 
the meeting has been convened to consider and adopt *** draft 138 th Report on the subject 
"Medical Devices: Regulations and Control".   
 
* Pertains to other matter 
 

80 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft *** and 138 th Reports of 
the Committee. The Chairman informed the Committee that *** and 49 
observations/recommendations were there in the draft 138 th Report. He invited 
views/suggestions/modifications, if any, from the Members in the draft reports. During the brief 
deliberation, some Members highlighted the issues involved in implementation of GST on 
medical devices manufactured in India. The members suggested that the GST rate on medical 
devices should be reduced to benefit the patients. However, while deciding the GST on medical 
devices, cost of manufacturing and GST rates on parts and components required in 
manufacturing of medical devices should also be cons idered. After a brief discussion, the 
Committee adopted both reports with some modifications. 
 
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the aforementioned two Reports may be 
presented to the Rajya Sabha and simultaneously laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 
Wednesday, the 10 th August, 2022. The Committee authorized its Chairman Prof. Ram Gopal 
Yadav, MP, Rajya Sabha  and in his absence Dr. Anil Agrawal , MP, Rajya Sabha  and in the 
absence of both members, Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu to present the Reports in Rajy a Sabha. 
The Committee also authorized Dr. Rajdeep Roy, MP, Lok Sabha and in his absence Dr. 
Sanghamitra Maurya MP, Lok Sabha to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.  
 
5. The Committee further decided that in case the Parliament gets adjourned sine die, the 
reports would be presented to the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha during the inter - session 
period.  
 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 3:18 p.m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter 
 
 
 