 1 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
47 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
      THE JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST-GRADUATE MEDICAL 
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH, PUDUCHERRY (AMENDMENT) BILL 2010 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 29 TH  OCTOBER, 2010)                       
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 29 TH  OCTOBER, 2010) 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 10 TH  NOVEMBER, 2010)             
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 10 TH  NOVEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
NOVEMBER, 2010/KARTIKA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 


 2 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
  ON 
 
THE JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST-GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCA TION  
AND RESEARCH, PUDUCHERRY (AMENDMENT) BILL 2010  
 
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 29 TH  OCTOBER, 2010)                       
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 29 TH  OCTOBER, 2010) 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 10 TH   NOVEMBER, 2010)             
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 10 TH   NOVEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
NOVEMBER, 2010/KARTIKA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 


 3 
C O N T E N T S 
 
       PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE------------------- --------           (i) 
 
2. PREFACE----------------------------------------- -------------------------           (ii) 
  
3. REPORT------------------------------------------ --------------------------           1-8 
   4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE          
   5.         MINUTES                
 6. ANNEXURE (copy of the Bill) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) 
        
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.  Shri Brajesh Pathak     -    Chairman  
2.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi  
3.  Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
4.  Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
5.  Shri Balbir Punj 
6.  Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
7.  Shrimati Brinda Karat 
8.  Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
9.  Shri Rasheed Masood  
*10. Shrimati B. Jayashree 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shri Ashok Argal 
12.  Shrimati Sarika Devendra Baghel Singh 
13.  Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
14.  Shrimati Tabassum Hasan 
15.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
16.  Shri S. R. Jeyadurai 
17.  Dr. Kruparani Killi 
18.  Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
19.  Dr. Tarun Mandal 
20.  Shri Datta Meghe 
21.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
22.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
23.  Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
24.  Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
25.  Shri M. K Raghavan 
26.  Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid 
27.  Dr. Anup Kumar Saha  
28.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma   
29.  Shrimati Meena Singh   
30.  Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
31.  Shri Ratan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
              
 Shrimati Vandana Garg,          Additional Secreta ry 
Shri R.B.Gupta,                           Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta,   Joint Director 
               Shri Dinesh Singh,                     Assistant Director 
 Shri Satis Mesra                          Committe e Officer 
 
 
___________________________________________________ __________________________________ 
*     nominated to the Committee w.e.f  21/9/2010 
 
(i) 

 5 
PREFACE 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-relat ed Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare, having been authorized b y the Committee to present the Report 
on its behalf, present this Forty-seventh Report of  the Committee on the Jawaharlal Institute 
of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry (Amendment) Bill 2010.* 
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business i n 
the Council of States  relating to the Department-related Parliamentary S tanding 
Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** J awaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate 
Medical Education and Research, Puducherry (Amendme nt) Bill 2010 ( Annexure) as 
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 5 th  August, 2010 and pending therein, to the Committee  
on the 13 th  September, 2010 for examination and report, by 31 st  October 2010. 
3. The Committee considered the Bill in two meeting s held on the 27 th  September and 
15 th  October 2010. 
4.         In its meeting held on the 27 th  September, 2010, the Committee heard the Secretary  of 
the Department of Health and Family Welfare and the  Director JIPMER. Thereafter, the 
Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same on 15 th  October, 2010.  
5.         The Committee has relied on the following documents in finalizing the Report: 
(i)          Background Note and Clause-by-Clause N ote on the Bill received from the   
Department of Health and Family Welfare; and 
(ii)        Presentation, clarification and Oral ev idence by Secretary of the Department 
and the Director JIPMER; 
 
6.        On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions 
made by those who deposed before the Committee. 
7.     For facility of reference and convenience, t he observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.    
 
NEW DELHI 
15 October , 2010  
Asvina 23, 1932 (Saka)  
BRAJESH PATHAK 
 
           Chairman ,  
 Department-related Parliamentary   
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare  
______________________________________________________________________ 
*          Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary part II Section 2, dated 5 th  August, 2010. 
**        Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No 47225, dated 13 th  September 2010. 
 
      (ii) 
 
 
 
 
 

 6 
 
REPORT 
 
The Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, 
Puducherry (Amendment) Bill, 2010,( hereinafter referred to as the Bill), was 
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 5 th  August, 2010 and referred to the 
Committee for examination and report on the 13 th  September, 2010.  
 
2. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to  the Bill, reproduced below, 
gives the background justifying the need for bringing an amendment to the 
JIPMER, Puducherry Act, 2008.  
 “ The Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical E ducation and Research, Puducherry 
was declared as an institution of national importan ce by the Jawaharlal Institute of Post- 
Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry  Act, 2008. The Act was brought into 
force on the 14th July, 2008 by the Central Governm ent under sub-section (2) of section 1 of  
the Act. 
 
2. Prior to its incorporation as an autonomous body  under section 4 of the aforesaid Act, the 
Institute was functioning as an institution under t he Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
Hence, on the incorporation of the institution, eve ry employee of the Institute prior to its 
conversion was given option under sub-section (1) o f section 28 of the aforesaid Act to 
exercise his or her option within a period of one y ear from the date of commencement of the 
Act either to remain as an employee of the autonomo us Institute or to opt out of the Institute 
and continue to remain as a Central Government empl oyee. A number of employees of the 
institution have already exercised their option in terms of sub-section (1) of section 28 of the 
aforesaid Act. However, a total number of about 124 1 representations from Group B, C and D 
employees have been received in the Ministry of Hea lth and Family Welfare requesting for 
extension of the period for exercising the option t o two years from the existing one year as 
provided by the said Act. Majority of the employees  working in the Institute have not so far 
exercised their option.  
 
3. In order to avoid any discrimination and to prov ide equal opportunity to all the 
employees, it has been decided to extend the benefi t of enhanced option period from the 
existing one year to two and one-half years includi ng those employees who have already 
exercised their option and to allow them to exercis e option afresh. However, due to practical 
reasons this benefit of extension of time may be li mited to only those employees who have 
not been transferred out of the Institute consequent upon the exercise of option by them.  
 
4. It is proposed to amend sub-section (1) of secti on 28 of the aforesaid Act for extending the 
period of exercising option by the erstwhile employ ees of the Institute to two and one-half 
years from the existing one year from 14th   July, 2008 i.e., the date on which the provisions of 
the Act came into force. The proposed amendment wil l enable more time to the employees of 
the erstwhile institution to exercise their option either to remain as the employees of the new 
autonomous Institute or to opt out of the Institute  and continue to remain as Central 
Government employees 
.” 

 7 
 
3. The Committee would like to recall that JIPMER, Puducherry Bill 2007, 
declaring the Institute as an institution of nation al importance, was referred to it for 
detailed examination and report. The main objective  for conferring statutory status to 
the Institute was to empower it with academic auton omy so that it may develop as a 
premier institution of medical education and resear ch on the pattern of AIIMS/ 
PGIMER, Chandigarh. It was envisaged that with appr opriate delegated 
administrative and financial powers, it would grow into a model centre of excellence. 
During the course of its examination of the Bill, t he Committee had received 
representations from different associations/unions of JIPMER and a number of 
political parties also approached the Committee, in dicating grave apprehensions on 
the part of the employees about different provision s of the Bill. The Committee also 
had the opportunity to visit JIPMER, Puducherry fro m 1 st  to 4 th  July 2007 and held 
extensive discussions with all the stakeholders.  
 
 4.  Strong reservations were voiced by the representatives of various unions/ 
associations of JIPMER Hospital and Institute and also some political parties on 
clause 28 of the Bill relating to ‘Transfer of service of existing employees’.  
 
5.    The general view was that terms and condition s of service including 
remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and  other terminal benefits; the 
terms and conditions of absorption or deputation of  employees of various services; 
protection of pay and other interests on promotion in certain cases in the event of 
absorption in the Institute were not properly safeg uarded under the provisions of 
Clause 28 of the Bill.  It was also emphasized that  the time period given for an 
employee to exercise his/her option to remain an em ployee of the Central 
Government or to join the Institute should be exten ded to three years and not six 
months as given in the Bill. Taking note of the fac t that framing of the terms and 
conditions of the Institute soon after being confer red autonomy would take some 

 8 
time, the Committee had recommended that the employ ees may be permitted to 
exercise their option within one year.  
 
6.   Another suggestion received from the representative s of the JIPMER Employees 
union/association of Hospital and Institute was tha t, like some other autonomous 
bodies, the Bill should include a clause that would  bring the Institute under the 
purview of Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT). T hey had also suggested that 
provisions should be made in the Act itself that ab sorbed staff shall be allowed to 
appeal before the CAT against the dismissal or any other order of the Secretary of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. It was clari fied by the Department that 
allowing the employees of JIPMER, after their being  absorbed in the Institute, to 
approach CAT for service matters would not be a matter of difficulty. The Committee 
had, accordingly, recommended that a specific sub-c lause in this regard be 
incorporated in the body of the Bill. On the other issue of retirement benefits, 
categorical assurance was given by the Department t hat the absorbed employees on 
their retirement would be eligible for grant of pen sion from the Government as per 
extant rules in force.  
 
7. The present Bill before the Committee proposes a  small amendment by way of 
extending the period of exercising the option by th e employees of the Institute from 
one year to two and one-half years.  
 
8. With a view to understand the basis for bringing  such an amendment in the 
JIPMER, Puducherry Act, the Committee heard the Sec retary, Department of Health 
and Family Welfare at its meeting held on the 27 th  September, 2010. The Secretary 
dwelt at length on the factors necessitating the fu rther extension of option period to 
the employees of the Institute. The Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical 
Education and Research, Puducherry (JIPMER) , Puducherry Act 2008, declaring the 
Institute to be an institution of national importan ce, came into force w.e.f 14 th  July, 

 9 
2008. With the commencement of the Act, the employe es were given a period of one 
year to exercise their option to become an employee  of the Institute or to continue to 
remain an employee of the Central Government. The s aid time-line expired on 13 th  
July, 2009. Thereafter, the Ministry had received r epresentations from about 1241 
employees belonging to Group ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’ seeki ng more time for deciding 
whether they wanted to be integrated with the Insti tute or continue to remain as 
Central Government employees.  
 
9. Explaining further, the Secretary stated that th e apprehensions of the 
employees were mainly centered on their pensionary benefits and parity of service 
conditions with Central Government employees. It wa s also clarified that though the 
time period could have been extended under the Rule s, the Ministry decided to bring 
about an amendment in the Act itself as the extensi on of time to be granted was to be 
a one-time affair. The proposal was, accordingly, s ent to the Ministry of Law which 
took an inordinately long time, i.e. till March, 20 10, to clear it. Subsequently, the 
Cabinet approval was obtained. Taking into account,  chances of the Bill not being 
brought before Parliament during the Monsoon Sessio n and thus the entire exercise 
ending in futility, it was considered expedient tha t the time period to exercise the 
option by the employees be extended to two and one-half years.  
 
10. On being asked as to what could be the reasons warranting grant of further 
relaxation to the employees by giving them an exten sion of time beyond one year, the 
representatives of the Ministry informed the Commit tee that prior to JIPMER 
becoming an autonomous body, a number of Central Go vernment employees, who 
hailed from various regions of the country, were se rving at the Institute. These 
employees had certain apprehensions and misgivings pertaining to their future status, 
regarding education of their wards, pensionary prov isions post autonomy, ability to 
move to Central Administrative Tribunal for grievan ce redressal etc. Even after the 
JIPMER, Puducherry Act  coming into force in 2008, concerns of employees continued 
to persist which were being raised time and again by some employees unions and also 

 10  
some public representatives, resulting in further d elay in exercising of option by the 
employees.  
 
11.       Replying to a query relating to the group -wise total number of employees at 
the Institute and the break-up of those who have no t exercised their option, the 
Department informed that out of a total of 2140 emp loyees, a large number of 
employees belonging to Group B, C and D were yet to  give their option as per the 
details given below: 
 
Category Existing 
Strength 
Option to be in 
the Institute  
Option to be in 
the 
Government  
No option 
given 
Group A 108 73 17 18 
Group B 303 4 45 254 
Group C 1034 1 11 1022 
Group D 695 -- 3 692 
TOTAL 2140 78 76 1986 
 
Explaining further, the Department informed that ou t of 2140 employees, only 78 had 
indicated their intention to continue with JIPMER, 76 had opted to continue with the 
Central Government while the remaining 1986 employe es had not exercised their 
option so far. It was also stated that most of the employees had made up their mind 
and for those who had not given their option, they would be absorbed in the Institute 
automatically. It was pointed out that since the ex tension of time proposed in the 
amendment is a one-time affair, this chapter would be given a successful conclusion 
by January, 2011 i.e. the time by when the extensio n of two and one-half years would 
end.  
 
12.    Director of JIPMER, who was also present in the meeting, apprised the 
Committee that majority of the faculty members had decided to stay with the Institute 
and about 20 among them wishing to continue as Cent ral Government Health Service 
Employees had been already transferred. The Committ ee was given to understand 

 11  
that the element of indecision mainly involved Grou p ‘C’ and ‘D’ employees. They 
did not want to leave the Institute as they had bee n settled in Puducherry for a 
considerable period of time and by opting for remai ning with Central Government, 
they were liable to be transferred. At the same tim e, benefits as Central Government 
employees were also proving to be very attractive. Lack of clarity of applicability of 
such benefits to the Institute employees had resulted in such a conflicting scenario. He 
cited the case of 40 nurses who had opted to remain  as Central Government 
employees earlier and were now worried that they wo uld be transferred out of 
Puducherry. The amendment would also give an opportunity to those employees who 
had already exercised their option but not transfer red out of the Institute to exercise 
their option afresh. It was pointed out that most o f the nurses who wished to be given 
a chance to revisit their decision were senior nurs es who were presently working at 
the Institute. Not only these nurses would be a sat isfied lot but the Institute would 
also stand to gain from their rich experience if they were allowed to stay back.  
 
13.    On a specific query about the apprehensions of the employees regarding 
pensionary benefits, it was informed that the matter was taken up with the 
Department of Personnel and Training, Pensions and Administrative Reforms to 
ensure grant of pensionary benefits to JIPMER employees under Rule 37 (A) as 
was done in erstwhile Departments of Government of India like the Department of 
Telecommunication when it was converted into BSNL. However, the Department’s 
proposal to amend the pension rule to facilitate the JIPMER employees to get their 
pension from the Consolidated Fund of India was rejected by DOPT on the ground 
that enough safeguards had already been made available to the employees and 
hence it felt that there could not be any justification for considering the proposal 
on the lines of BSNL employees. 
 
14. With regard to the employees’ suggestion regard ing inclusion of Central 
Administrative Tribunal (CAT) as the appellate auth ority for grievance redressal, the 
Department stated that the issue had already been r esolved and a formal notification 

 12  
would be issued by the DoPT. It was clarified by th e Department that all the 
employees of JIPMER would be getting additional fac ilities after the enactment of 
JIPMER Act. The Committee was also given to underst and that pay structure of 
JIPMER doctors would be the same as given to doctor s at AIIMS and PGIMER, 
Chandigarh. Not only this, as decided in the first Standing Finance Committee of the 
Institute, allowances given to JIPMER doctors would  be at par with those given to 
AIIMS and PGIMER doctors. 
 
 15.      Taking into account the entire gamut of i ssues surrounding Section 28 of 
the JIPMER Act, 2008, the Committee has the following observations to make:-  
 
15.1 The Committee stands by its observation that a  period of one year should 
have been sufficient for exercising of option by th e employees as to whether they 
wanted to remain as employees of JIPMER or to conti nue as employees of Central 
Government. The Committee finds that the apprehensi ons of the employees 
regarding the pensionary benefits as well as other conditions of service are 
adequately covered under Regulations 41 and 43 of t he JIPMER, Puducherry 
Regulations, 2008 as notified on the 4 
th  August 2008 in the Gazette of India. With 
regulations also being notified as early as on the 4 th  August 2008, within a very 
short span of 20 days after the enactment of the Ac t, the Committee fails to 
comprehend the reasons for the element of indecisio n persisting for such a long 
time. The Committee observes that if the Ministry h ad been explicit in providing 
this information to the employees at the outset alo ng with Institute authorities 
playing a pro-active role, it would have been a different story today.  
 
15.2 Another area of concern for the Committee is t he inordinate delay in getting 
such a simple amendment proposal cleared from the M inistry of Law. It speaks 
volumes of the laid back manner in which the entire  matter was dealt with by the 
nodal Ministry and is indicative of lack of proper inter-ministerial coordination. 
Not only this, the Committee is constrained to obse rve that with 1986 employees 

 13  
out of a total of 2140 employees of the Institute c ontinuing to remain undecided, 
functioning of the Institute must also be somewhat adversely affected. 
 
15.3 The Committee would also like to mention here that it has been three years 
since the Committee had presented its report on the  JIPMER, Puducherry Bill, 2007 
to the Parliament. The recommendation of the Commit tee relating to incorporation 
of provision in the Act relating to CAT as the appe llate authority should have been 
settled with the Department of Personnel and Traini ng much earlier. During 
evidence at its meeting held on the 27 
th  September 2010, the representatives of the 
Department had informed the Committee that the issu e relating to CAT had been 
cleared. However, the notification regarding the sa me was yet to come out. The 
Committee safely concludes from the above that the issues have been cleared only 
recently.  The Committee is of the view that the no tification regarding the CAT as 
appellate authority for JIPMER employees needs to b e published at the earliest so 
as to bring more clarity in the matter and dispel a ny further doubts of the 
employees.  
 
15.4 The Committee, after analyzing the entire gamu t of the issues surrounding 
the proposed amendment and taking into account the welfare of the employees and 
the public interest at large and also given the acu te shortage of trained skilled and 
experienced healthcare personnel in government hosp itals across the country, 
approves the amendment to extend the time-period fr om “one year” to “two and 
one-half years”, as proposed in the Bill.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 14  
RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
              Taking into account the entire gamut of issues surrounding Section 28 
of the JIPMER Act, 2008, the Committee has the foll owing observations to 
make:-  
 
 The Committee stands by its observation that a per iod of one year should 
have been sufficient for exercising of option by th e employees as to whether they 
wanted to remain as employees of JIPMER or to conti nue as employees of Central 
Government. The Committee finds that the apprehensi ons of the employees 
regarding the pensionary benefits as well as other conditions of service are 
adequately covered under Regulations 41 and 43 of t he JIPMER, Puducherry 
Regulations, 2008 as notified on the 4 
th  August 2008 in the Gazette of India. With 
regulations also being notified as early as on the 4 th  August 2008, within a very 
short span of 20 days after the enactment of the Ac t, the Committee fails to 
comprehend the reasons for the element of indecisio n persisting for such a long 
time. The Committee observes that if the Ministry h ad been explicit in providing 
this information to the employees at the outset alo ng with Institute authorities 
playing a pro-active role, it would have been a different story today.   
               (Para 15.1) 
 
 Another area of concern for the Committee is the i nordinate delay in getting 
such a simple amendment proposal cleared from the M inistry of Law. It speaks 
volumes of the laid back manner in which the entire  matter was dealt with by the 
nodal Ministry and is indicative of lack of proper inter-ministerial coordination. 
Not only this, the Committee is constrained to obse rve that with 1986 employees 
out of a total of 2140 employees of the Institute c ontinuing to remain undecided, 
functioning of the Institute must also be somewhat adversely affected.  
                (Para 15.2) 
 

 15  
 The Committee would also like to mention here that  it has been three years 
since the Committee had presented its report on the  JIPMER, Puducherry Bill, 2007 
to the Parliament. The recommendation of the Commit tee relating to incorporation 
of provision in the Act relating to CAT as the appe llate authority should have been 
settled with the Department of Personnel and Traini ng much earlier. During 
evidence at its meeting held on the 27 th  September 2010, the representatives of the 
Department had informed the Committee that the issu e relating to CAT had been 
cleared. However, the notification regarding the sa me was yet to come out. The 
Committee safely concludes from the above that the issues have been cleared only 
recently.  The Committee is of the view that the no tification regarding the CAT as 
appellate authority for JIPMER employees needs to b e published at the earliest so 
as to bring more clarity in the matter and dispel a ny further doubts of the 
employees.  
               (Para 15.3) 
 
 The Committee, after analyzing the entire gamut of  the issues surrounding 
the proposed amendment and taking into account the welfare of the employees and 
the public interest at large and also given the acu te shortage of trained skilled and 
experienced healthcare personnel in government hosp itals across the country, 
approves the amendment to extend the time-period fr om “one year” to “two and 
one-half years”, as proposed in the Bill.                      
(Para 15.4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 16  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 17  
II 
SECOND MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 12.00 (Noon)  on Monday, the 2 7 th  September, 2010 in 
Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak    -    Chairman  
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
5.  Shri Balbir Punj 
6.  Shri Rasheed Masood 
7.  Shrimati B. Jayashree 
 
LOK SABHA 
8.  Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
9.  Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
10.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
11.  Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
12.  Shri Datta Meghe 
13.  Shri R.K.Singh Patel 
14.  Shri M. K Raghavan 
15.  Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid  
16.  Dr. Anup Kumar Saha  
17.  Shrimati Meena Singh  
 
   WITNESSES  
      
 
   Representatives from Department of Health and Family Welfare  
 
1. Ms.K. Sujatha Rao  Secretary  
2. Shri Keshav Desiraju Addl. Secretary  
3. Debasish Panda  Joint Secretary  
 
Representative from Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and 
Research, (JIPMER). 
 
Dr. K.S.V.K. Subba Rao, Director  
 
 SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati Vandana Garg   Additional Secretary 
Shri R. B. Gupta    Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta        Joint Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh     Assistant Director 
Shri Satis Mesra    Committee Officer 
 

 18  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised 
them of the agenda of the meeting. 
 
 
3. * * * 
 
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary, o ther senior officers of the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare and the Director, JIPM ER on the Jawaharlal Institute of 
Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, (JIPM ER) Puducherry (Amendment)     
Bill-2010 referred to the Committee. The aforesaid Bill proposes to amend Section 28(1) of 
the JIPMER, Puducherry Act, 2008 by extending the p eriod for exercising the option by 
the JIPMER employees either to continue to remain a n employees of the Central Health 
Service or to join the JIPMER from one year to two and one half years.   
 
5. During the course of the evidence, the Members s ought clarifications on a number 
of issues like- the reasons for delay in exercising  the option by the employees under 
Section 28 of the JIPMER Act; scope of pensionary b enefits to the JIPMER employees; 
rules and regulations governing  JIPMER employees; provisions empowering the 
employees to move Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT); and the number of employees 
who were yet to exercise their option etc. The Secr etary and other officers of the Ministry 
replied to the queries raised by Members. They also  assured to furnish a copy each of the 
Rules and Regulations framed under the JIPMER Act, 2008. 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meet ing was kept. 
 
  7. * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
***  Relates to other matters 

 19  
        IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3.00 p.m.   on Friday, the 15 th   October, 2010 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak    -    Chairman  
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
3. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
5. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
6. Shri Rasheed Masood 
 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Ashok Argal 
8. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
9.  Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
10. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
11. Shri N. Kristappa 
12.  Dr. Tarun Mandal 
13.  Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
14.  Shri R.K.Singh Patel 
15.  Shri M. K Raghavan 
16.  Dr. Anup Kumar Saha  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shrimati Vandana Garg   Additional Secretary 
Shri R. B. Gupta    Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta        Joint Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh     Assistant Director 
Shri Satis Mesra    Committee Officer 
 
2. The Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee a nd informed them about the 
agenda of the meeting, i.e. consideration and adoption of draft 47 th  Report on the 
Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.  He invited Members to share their specific suggestions for 
improvements and incorporation in the Draft Report.       * * *  
3. The Committee then considered the draft Report o n the Jawaharlal Institute of 
Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puduc herry (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and 
after a brief discussion adopted the same.  The Committee authorized the Chairman of the 
Committee to present the Report to the Hon’ble Chai rman, Rajya Sabha on a date to be 
finalized in consultation with the office of the Hon’ble Chairman. 
 
4.  * * *  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
***  Relates to other matters 

 20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1
THE JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST-GRADUATE MEDICAL
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH, PUDUCHERRY (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to amend the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research,
Puducherry Act, 2008.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education
and Research, Puducherry (Amendment) Act, 2010.
2. In section 28 of the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and
Research, Puducherry Act, 2008, in sub-section (1),—
(a) for the words “one year”, at both the places where they occur, the words
“two and one-half years” shall be substituted;
Short title.
Amendment
of section 28
of Act 19 of
2008.
Bill No. XLII of  2010
5

2
(b) in the proviso, for the words “Provided that”, the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
“Provided that the employees, who have, or as the case may be, who have
not, exercised their option and not transferred out of the Institute as on the date
of coming into force of the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical
Education and Research, Puducherry (Amendment) Act, 2010, may exercise their
option afresh before the specified period:
Provided further that”.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry
was declared as an institution of national importance by the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-
Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry Act, 2008. The Act was brought into
force on the 14th July, 2008 by the Central Government under sub-section (2) of section 1 of
the Act.
2. Prior to its incorporation as an autonomous body under section 4 of the aforesaid
Act, the Institute was functioning as an institution under the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare. Hence, on the incorporation of the institution, every employee of the Institute prior
to its conversion was given option under sub-section (1) of section 28 of the aforesaid Act
to exercise his or her option within a period of one year from the date of commencement of the
Act either to remain as an employee of the autonomous Institute or to opt out of the Institute
and continue to remain as a Central Government employee. A number of employees of the
institution have already exercised their option in terms of sub-section (1) of section 28 of the
aforesaid Act. However, a total number of about 1241 representations from Group B, C and D
employees have been received in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare requesting for
extension of the period for exercising the option to two years from the existing one year as
provided by the said Act. Majority of the employees working in the Institute have not so far
exercised their option.
3. In order to avoid any discrimination and to provide equal opportunity to all the
employees, it has been decided to extend the benefit of enhanced option period from the
existing one year to two and one-half years including those employees who have already
exercised their option and to allow them to exercise option afresh. However, due to practical
reasons this benefit of extension of time may be limited to only those employees who have
not been transferred out of the Institute consequent upon the exercise of option by them.
4. It is proposed to amend sub-section (1) of section 28 of the aforesaid Act for
extending the period of exercising option by the erstwhile employees of the Institute to two
and one-half years from the existing one year from 14th July, 2008 i.e., the date on which the
provisions of the Act came into force. The proposed amendment will enable more time to the
employees of the erstwhile institution to exercise their option either to remain as the employees
of the new autonomous Institute or to opt out of the Institute and continue to remain as
Central Government employees.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; GHULAM NABI AZAD
The 30th July,  2010
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST-GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION AND
RESEARCH, PUDUCHERRY ACT, 2008
(19 OF 2008)
* * * * *
28. (1) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, every employee holding a
post in the Jawaharlal Institutute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research,
Puducherry, before that date, shall hold the post in the Institute by the same tenure, and
upon the same terms and conditions of service including remuneration, leave, provident
fund, retirement and other terminal benefits as he would have held such post as if this Act
had not been passed and shall continue to do so as an employee of the Institute for a period
of one year from the date of the commencement of this Act, unless he, within the said period
of one year, opts not to be an employee of the Institute or until his tenure, remuneration or
other terms and conditions of service are duly altered by the regulations:
Provided that the officers of the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education
and Research, Puducherry belonging to the Central Health Service, who opts to be an
employee of the Institute then, his appointment, pay, allowances and other terms and
conditions of service shall be such as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
Transfer of
service of
existing
employees.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research,
Puducherry Act, 2008.
————
(Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)
GMGIPMRND—3450RS(S3)—03-08-2010.