Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
 
REPORT NO. 
68
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
 
SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT
Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 48) of the
Department of AYUSH
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th April, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT
Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 48) of the
Department of AYUSH
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  26 th April, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  26 th April, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv)
3. L IST OF A CRONYMS ................................................................................................................ (v)-(vi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—24
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 25—29
6. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 30—37
7. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 39—45

(i)(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
*3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri H. K. Dua
10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
@11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shri Kirti Azad
13. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
14. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
15. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
16. Shrimati Priya Dutt
17. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
18. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
19. Dr. Monazir Hassan
20. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
#31. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9 th January, 2013.
# Nominated as a Member to the Committee w.e.f.  14 th December, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, do hereby present this Sixty-Eighth Report of the Committee on the Demand for Grants
(Demand No.48) of the Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, for the
year 2013-14.
2. The Committee held one sitting, on 5
th April, 2013 for examination of Demands for Grants
of the Department of AYUSH and heard the Secretary (AYUSH) and other Officers thereon.
3. The Committee while making its observations/recommendations has mainly relied upon the
following documents:–
(i) Address by the President of India to both Houses of Parliament assembled together
on 21 st February, 2013;
(ii) Speech of Finance Minister on 28 th February, 2013 while presenting the Union Budget
2013-14;
(iii) I mplementation of Budget Announcements 2012-13;
(iv) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Department of AYUSH for the year 2013-14;
(v) Annual Report of the Department for the year 2012-13;
(vi) Outcome Budget of the Department for the year 2013-14;
(vii) Detailed Explanatory Note on Demands for Grants of the Department of AYUSH for
the year 2013-14;
(viii) Physical and financial targets fixed and achievements made during the Eleventh Plan
period;
(ix) Projection of outlays for the schemes to be undertaken by the Department during the
Twelfth Five Year Plan;
(x) Details of under-utilization of the allocations made under different heads during the last
three years;
(xi) Written replies furnished by the Department to the Questionnaires sent to them by the
Secretariat; and
(xii) Presentation made by the Secretary (AYUSH) and other concerned officers;
(xiii) W ritten clarifications furnished by the Department, on the points/issues raised by the
Members during the deliberations of the Committee.
4. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
23rd April, 2013.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
 BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 23, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Vaisakha 3, 1935 ( Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare
(iv)

(v)
LIST OF ACRONYMS
AIIA – All India Institute of Ayurveda
AFCL – Agricultural Finance Corporation Limited
AYUSH – A yurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy
ASUDTAB – A yurveda Siddha Unani Drugs Technical Board
CDSCO – Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
CSS – Centrally Sponsored Scheme
CEO – Chief Executive Officer
CCRAS – Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences
CPWD – Central Public Works Department
CFC-DTL – Common Facility Centre-Drug Testing Laboratory
DA VP – Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity
DPC – Departmental of Promotion Committee
DHARA – Digital Helpline for Ayurveda Research Abstracts
GMP – Good Manufacturing Practice
H&D – Hospital and Dispensary
HRD – Human Resource Development
IEC – Information, Education and Communication
IMCC – Indian Medicine Central Council
IPD – In-patient Department
ISM&H – Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy
MoU – Memorandum of Understanding
MDNIY – Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga
NCD – Non-Communicable Diseases
NGO – Non-Government Organisation
NIA – National Institute of Ayurveda
NIH – National Institute of Homoeopathy
NEIAH – North-Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy

NEIFM – North-Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine
NIIMH – National Institute of Indian Medical Heritage
NMPB – National Medicinal Plants Board
NRHM – National Rural Health Mission
PH – Physically Handicapped
PIPs – Programme Implementation Plans
SMPBs – State Medical Plants Boards
RRs – Recruitment Rules
R&D – Research and Development
SPV – Special Purpose Vehicle
UCs – Utilisation Certificates
UPSC – Union Public Service Commission
UTs – Union Territories
(vi)

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H) was established
under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in March, 1995. It was renamed as Department
of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) in November, 2003.
The Department under its purview has two Regulatory Councils, five Research Councils, seven
National Institutes, two North Eastern Institutes, All India institute of Ayurveda, two Pharmacopeia
Laboratories, a National Medicinal Plants Board and a public sector undertaking for manufacture of
Ayurveda and Unani medicines. Pharmacopeia Commission, Pharmacopeia Committees and Drugs
Technical Advisory Board for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homeopathy drugs are set up to evolve
technical standards and policy directives and advise the Government in matters of quality control
and regulation of drugs. The Department is responsible for policy formulation, development and
implementation of programmes for the growth, development and propagation of Ayurveda, Yoga and
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH) systems of Health Care. Sowa Rigpa is the
recent addition to the existing family of AYUSH systems.
1.2 The outlay of the Department has increased from Rs.88.00 crore in the Eighth Plan to
Rs.3988.00 crores in the Eleventh Plan. The total allocation for the Department for the Twelfth
Plan is Rs.10044.00 crore.
1.3 The Twelfth Plan recognizes that the strengths of Indian Systems of Medicine and
Homeopathy, if suitably used, can help advance the goals of the Twelfth Plan. AYUSH systems
would be main-streamed using their areas of strengths namely in preventive and promotive health
care, diseases and health conditions relating to women and children, older persons, NCDs, mental
ailments, stress management, palliative care, rehabilitation and health promotion.
1.4 To rationalize the various schemes with the measures of modification, viz. ,
(i) discontinuation of some schemes, (ii) introduction of some schemes and (iii) merger/
consolidation of some major schemes, it has been decided as follows:–
(a) To discontinue the following schemes from 2013-14 and onwards:
(i) Cataloguing, Digitization, etc. of Manuscripts and Development of AYUSH IT
Tools, Applications and Networks.
(ii) Funding of NGOs engaged in local Health traditions/midwifery practices etc.
under AYUSH.
1.5 However, budgetary provision has been made for the two schemes in the financial year
2013-14 for meeting committed liabilities/second and subsequent installment of ongoing projects.
(b) To shift the following new schemes from the scheme head to Sub-Scheme head:
(i) All India Institute of Yoga (under the Scheme: System Strengthening)
(ii) All India Institute of Homoeopathy (under the Scheme: System Strengthening)
(iii) All India Institute of Unani Medicine (under the Scheme: System Strengthening)
(iv) Homoeopathy Medicines Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd (under the Scheme: System
Strengthening)
(v) National Institute of Medicinal Plants (under the Scheme: Educational Institutes)

2
(vi) National Institute of Sowa Rigpa
(vii) Indian Institute of AYUSH Pharmaceutical Sciences (under the scheme:
Educational Institutes)
(viii) Central Council for Research in Sowa Rigpa (Under the scheme: Research and
Development including medicinal plants)
(ix) National Commission for Human Resources in AYUSH (under the scheme: HRD)
(x) AYUSH Gram (under the scheme: Promotion of AYUSH)
(xi) National AYUSH Health Programme (under the scheme: Promotion of AYUSH).
(c) To introduce the following new schemes as recommended/decided by the National
Development Council:
(i) National Institute on Geriatrics (under the scheme: Educational Institutes)
(ii) National Institute on Metabolic and Lifestyle Diseases (under the scheme:
Educational Institutes)
(iii) National Institute for Drug and Tobacco De-addiction (under the scheme:
Educational Institutes).
1.6 After the above exercise, the total on-going main schemes became fourteen (Central Sector
- Eleven and Centrally Sponsored - three) and total schemes and sub-schemes became 60. The list
of schemes are as follows:
(i) System Strengthening
(ii) Educational Institutions
(iii) Research and Development including Medicinal Plants
(iv) HRD (Training Programme/Fellowship/Exposure visit/Upgradation of skills etc.)
(v) Cataloguing, Digitization etc. of Manuscripts and Development of AYUSH IT Tools,
Applications and Networks
(vi) International Co-operation
(vii) Development of AYUSH Industry
(viii) Funding of NGOs engaged in local Health traditions/midwifery practices etc. under
AYUSH
(ix) Pharmacovigilance initiative for ASU drugs
(x) National AYUSH Library and Archives
(xi) Central Drug Controller for AYUSH Centrally Sponsored Schemes
(xii) Promotion of AYUSH
(xiii) National Mission on Medicinal Plants
(xiv) National Mission on AYUSH.
1.7 It has been proposed to start new Centrally Sponsored Scheme “National Mission on
AYUSH” and merging the ongoing centrally sponsored schemes viz. Development of Institution,
Hospital and Dispensaries, Drug Quality Control Public Private Partnership for setting up of

3
specialty clinics/IPDs, and new schemes viz. AYUSH gram and National AYUSH Health Programme.
Since it is new scheme and yet to be approved, a token provision of Rs.10.00 lakh has been
proposed in National Mission on AYUSH and rest of the schemes have been kept under existing
scheme viz. Promotion of AYUSH.
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
2.1 As per the information furnished by the Department of AYUSH, out of the total Health
outlay of Rs.300018/- crores in the Twelfth Plan, the share of AYUSH is Rs.10044 crore i.e.
3.35%. This is an increase of Rs.7050/- crore (235.47%) in the Twelfth Plan over the actual
expenditure of Eleventh Plan expenditure of Rs. 2994 crore for Department of AYUSH. It may be
noted that during the Eleventh Plan, initially an amount Rs.3988.00 crore was allocated for the
Plan schemes of the Department against which the plan allocation (B.E) for the plan period was
Rs.3456.00 crore. The Plan allocation for 2013-14 of the Department is Rs.1069.00 crore. In reply
to a query whether the actual allocation for 2013-14 is as per the projected demand for funds, the
Department in a written reply submitted the following information:–
(Rs. in crore )
Projection made by Actual allocation
the department
Plan 1405.25 1069.00
Non-Plan 217.80 190.00
T
OTAL: 1623.05 1259.00
2.2 The Plan allocation and expenditure during the last five years is as under:–
(Rs. in crore )
Year BE RE Utilization of
funds
2008-2009 534.00 475.00 471.13
2009-2010 734.00 680.00 678.97
2010-2011 800.00 888.00 848.90
2011-2012 900.00 650.00 611.46
2012-2013 990.00 670.00 580.27
2.3 Giving break-up of the funds budgeted for 2012-13 under Central Sector and Centrally
Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and surrendered later, the Secretary during the course of his deposition
before the Committee on the 5
th April, 2013, submitted the following information:–
BE RE BE-RE Actual Surrender
expenditure till w.r.r.
31.3.2013 RE i.e.
(3-6)
12 3 4 5 6
Central 579.23 508.16 71.07 468.44 39.72
Sector (+ 98.11) (7.8%)

4
12 3 4 5 6
CSS 410.77 161.84 248.93 11 1.83 50.01
(+ 80.66) (30.9%)
TOTAL: 990.00 670.00 320.00 580.27 89.73
(+ 178.00) (13.4%)
2.4 On being asked as to what steps have been taken by the Department to handle the
constraints faced in optimal utilization of the approved outlays, the Department in a written
submission stated the following:
“In order to identify the constraints being faced in optimal utilization of approved outlays,
the Department is getting the independent evaluation of its all schemes done. The report of
independent evaluation is awaited. In the meanwhile, the Department, based on its own
experience, has identified the following constraints and taken following remedial measures:–
(a) Most of the State Governments do not have separate institutional structure for
implementing Centrally Sponsored schemes of Department of AYUSH and whatever
structure is existing, is having capacity constraints in terms of human and other resources.
Action Taken
As a short term measure, this Department is providing financial assistance for setting
up Project Management Unit in each State which will facilitate implementation of the
Centrally Sponsored Schemes for Development of AYUSH Hospitals and Dispensaries in the
States.
(b) Pendency of Utilization Certificate is high in most of the States.
Action Taken
(i) HFM had written DO letters twice to the State Chief Ministers urging them to give
them personal attention in submission of pending UCs.
(ii) Secretary-AYUSH has written letter to the Chief Secretaries of the respective States/
UTs seeking their assistance to improve the financial flow from the Department of AYUSH
to their States and to liquidate the pending UCs.
(iii) The Secretary-AYUSH held three review meetings in 2011-12 and three review
meetings during 2012-13. States were repeatedly impressed upon to take effective and
expeditious measures for utilization of Grant-in-aid provided by the Department of AYUSH.
States were asked to take corrective measures.
(iv) Department has already identified the nodal officers in the Department to interact with
the State Governments and resolve the issues with them.
(c) Most of the proposals received from State Governments are not accompanied with
matching commitment from the State Government and the Project Implementation Plans
(PIPs) submitted are deficient.
Action taken
Department has developed standard pro-forma for submitting PIP and officers of this
Department also assist the State Government Authorities for submitting eligible and
acceptable proposals.

5
Comprehensive evaluation is also being undertaken in respect of all the schemes to
amend some of the schemes.”
2.5 The Committee is concerned to note that except for the year 2010-11, the total actual
expenditure has invariably been considerably lower than Budget Estimates, particularly in
2011-12 and 2012-13. For Example, the total actual expenditure for the year 2008-09 was
Rs.471.13 crore against Budget Estimates (BE) of Rs. 534.00 crore; for the year 2009-10,
Rs.678.97 crore as against BE of Rs.734.00 crore; for the year 2011-12, Rs.611.46 crore as
against BE of 900.00 crore; and for the year 2012-13, Rs.580.27 crore as against BE of
Rs.990.00 crore. The Committee is not happy with this recurrent and persistent under
utilization of plan funds allocated for the Department. The Committee is constrained to
observe that such a persistent shortfall in the utilization of plan funds is indicative of fiscal
indiscipline and serious shortcoming in formulating the Budget Estimates. The Committee
in its 55
th Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department had recommended to
take measures for exercising greater fiscal prudence. However, underutilization of the funds
to the tune of Rs.409.73 crore vis-a-vis BE for 2012-13 indicates that the Committee’s advice
was not heeded to. The Committee, therefore, even at the cost of repetition, strongly
recommends that concrete measures be taken to exercise utmost fiscal discipline and
ensure absorption of the allocated funds.
2.6 The Committee notes that the extent of surrendered funds is substantially higher
under Centrally Sponsored Schemes (30.9% with reference to RE) than that under Central
Sector Schemes (7.8% with reference to RE). The Committee also takes note of the
remedial steps for better absorption of funds but is not impressed by the half measures
taken by the Department to overcome the sub-optimal utilization of Plan funds as it is
obvious that these efforts have not yielded the desired results. In view of the fact that the
allocations have persistently remained under-utilized in the past several years, the
Department should have undertaken a comprehensive analysis in this regard and taken
corrective measures accordingly. Now that an evaluation of all the Schemes is being done
by an independent agency, the Committee is sanguine that the corrective measures will be
initiated for ensuring optimal and judicious utilization of the budgeted funds. The
Committee recommends that the evaluation be completed in a time-bound manner. The
Committee desires to be apprised of the outcome of the independent evaluation and action
taken thereon. The Committee would also like the Department to devise ways to evaluate
the impact of its various schemes. The Committee, simultaneously, impresses upon the
Department to be more prudent in their budget formulation and project their fund
requirements in a more realistic manner after timely collection of all the information
pertaining to fund requirements from the State Governments.
2.7 The Committee notes that a provision of Rs.1069.00 crore has been made in B.E
2013-14 on the plan side. The Committee would expect the Department to initiate concrete
measures at least from this year onwards to ensure that the sanctioned funds are
administered in a more diligent manner. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the
steps taken for more efficient deployment and utilization of the funds budgeted for 2013-14.
2.8 The Committee also takes note of the fact that the share of AYUSH in the total
health outlay has been substantially enhanced to Rs.10044.00 crore in the Twelfthth Plan,
which is an increase of 235.47% over the actual expenditure of Eleventh Plan of Rs.2994.00
crore. The Committee is aware that health needs of a vast and diverse country like India
cannot be met by a single healthcare system and AYUSH health care systems have a very
vital role to play in expanding the outreach of health care to the people because of their
inherent advantages in terms of diversity, modest cost, low level of technological input, etc.

6
Indian system of medicines and traditional medicines should be complementary to Modern
system of Medicine. It is in this context that the Committee welcomes the enhanced
allocation of funds for AYUSH in the Twelfth Plan. The Committee also appreciates the
efforts made by the Department in getting enhanced allocation for the year 2013-14 inspite
of the fact that there was considerable underutilization of funds during the previous year
i.e. 2012-13. Persistent underutilization of funds to such extent is a serious concern for the
Committee. The Committee is also apprehensive about the utilization of such enhanced
allocation in 2013-14. Therefore, the Committee would expect the Department to put in
place a dedicated mechanism for stricter expenditure monitoring and financial discipline so
that the scarce resources do not remain locked up and surrendered later.
Pending Utilization Certificates
2.9 The Committee has been monitoring the pendency of Utilization Certificates (UCs) under
various schemes for the last few years. As per the information furnished by the Department, as
on 1.4.2013, the amount involved in pending UCs under Centrally Sponsored Schemes and Central
Sector Schemes is to the tune of Rs.933.14 and 233.78 crore respectively.
2.10 The Committee observes that pendency of UCs and the huge amount involved therein
have implications for further release of funds and thus impinges on the effective
implementation of the projects. Though the Department has drawn up an ambitious plan of
reducing pendency of UCs to nil, the past trends in this regard inspire little confidence. The
Committee, therefore, desires to be informed of the detailed action plan on bringing down
the pendency of UCs to nil and the success achieved so far so that a fair assessment could
be made about the efficacy of the plan.
2.11 On being asked about the specific steps taken to liquidate the pending UCs with the States,
the Department has furnished the following information:–
(i) The Union Health and Family Welfare Minster even mentioned the pendency of UCs,
during the debate on the demands for Grants of Health Ministry in May, 2012.
(ii) DO Letters written by HFM:
HFM had written DO letters twice to the State Chief Ministers urging them to give
them personal attention in submission of pending UCs.
(iii) DO Letters written by the Secretary-AYUSH:
Secretary-AYUSH has written the letter to Chief Secretaries of the respective States/
UTs seeking their assistance to improve the financial flow from the Department of
AYUSH to their States and to liquid the pending UCs.
(iv) State Health Secretaries Meeting convened by the Department of AYUSH:
The Secretary-AYUSH held three review meeting in 2011-12 and three review meeting
during 2012-13. States were repeatedly impressed upon to take effective and
expeditious measures for utilization of Grant-in-aid provided by the Department of
AYUSH. States were asked to take corrective measures. Another meeting is scheduled
on 6.3.2013.
(v) Department has already identified the nodal officers in Department to interact with the
State Governments and resolve the issues with the State Governments. Nodal officers
have visited states to get UCs and sensitize their counterpart about necessity of
submission of UCs.
(vi) Senior officers visited States and emphasized need for submission of UCs.

7
2.12 The Secretary (AYUSH) during the course of his deposition before the Committee informed
that the updated number of pending UCs under Centrally Sponsored Schemes and Central Sector
Schemes is 654 (pending since 2000-01) and 2793 (pending since 2001-02) respectively. He also
inter-alia  submitted that with a view to ensuring better financial performance, the Health and
Family Welfare Minister wrote to the Finance Minister requesting (i) Exemption from UCs for the
two CSS schemes of ‘Promotion of AYUSH’ (H&D, Drugs Quality Control, Dev. of Institutions)
and ‘National Mission on Medicinal Plants’ and (ii) Exemption from the 15% expenditure cap For
H&D component.
2.13 It is a matter of serious concern for the Committee to note that the number of
pending UCs and the amount involved therein is too substantial to be ignored. Of more
serious concern is the fact that UCs dating as far back as to 2000 and 2001 are still
pending. The Committee notes with disapproval that the steps taken by the Department for
liquidation of the pending UCs are of routine nature and have not yielded the desired
results so far. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to expedite evaluation
of the Schemes and formulate appropriate remedial measures accordingly. The Committee
would also expect the Department to play a more proactive role in the capacity building of
the States so that with better absorption capacity the funds could be utilized in a more
efficient manner. The Committee would also like to reiterate its recommendation made in
its 55th Report presented to Rajya Sabha on 26th April, 2012 that the Department should
formulate an action plan in coordination with the State Governments for developing an
effective and efficient coordination mechanism for timely submission of UCs. This would
also speed up execution of all the projects well within the approved cost.
Utilization of Plan Allocation for North Eastern States and Sikkim
2.14 The Committee is aware that 10 per cent of Plan Allocation earmarked for a Department/
Ministry is kept reserved for utilization in the North Eastern States so that the outreach of
development schemes could be ensured to these distantly located States of the country. The table
below indicates the allocation made and expenditure incurred for North Eastern Region under
various schemes of AYUSH during 2012-13:–
Expenditure Details of North Eastern Areas
(Rs.in crore )
Sl. Head BE RE Expenditure
No. 2012-13 2012-13 as on
28.2.13
12 3 4 5
1 National Medicinal Plants Board 7.00 5.69 3.78
2 National Mission on Medicinal 7.00 6.00 3.96
Plants
3 Hospitals and Dispensaries (under 23.00 6.00 0.67
NRHM including AYUSH flexipool)
4 North-Eastern Institute of Folk 12.00 13.27 8.11
Medicine, Passighat
5 North-Eastern Institute of Ayurveda 26.54 26.54 11.10
and Homoeopathy, Shillong

8
12 3 4 5
6 Central Council for Research in 1.00 0.00 0.00
Yoga and Naturopathy
7 Development and upgradation of 5.46 1.00 0.00
AYUSH Institutions/Colleges
8 Grants to Central Council for 5.00 2.00 2.00
Research in Ayurvedic Sciences
9 Expenditure on Information, 1.50 0.85 0.85
Education and Communication
10 Assistance to accredited AYUSH 1.50 0.00 0.00
Centres of Excellence in non-governmental/
Private Sector engaged in AYUSH Education/
Drug Development and Research/Clinical
Research/Folk Medicine etc.
11 Grants to Central Council for 4.00 6.00 4.00
Research in Homoeopathy
12 Grants to Central Council for 5.00 2.00 0.50
Research in Unani Medicine
T
OTAL: 99.00 69.35 34.97
2.15 The Department has also informed the Committee that two National Institutes viz. North
Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy, Shillong and North Eastern Institute of Folk
Medicine, Pasighat are also being established in North Eastern area.
2.16 Besides, given the strength of North East in medicinal plants, the National Medicinal Plants
Board is implementing its scheme with focused attention in North Eastern States. The status of
implementation in 2012-13 with regard to budget utilization is as follows:–
(Rs. in crore )
Sl. Name of the Scheme B.E. for the As per revised Actual
No. year 2012-13 in estimate (R.E.) Expenditure
respect of N.E. for the year during 2012-13
States 2012-13 in (Upto 28
th
respect of N.E. Feb.’13)
States
1 National Board for 7.00 5.69 3.78
Medicinal Plants
(Central Sector
Scheme)
2 National Mission on 7.00 6.00 3.96
Medicinal Plants
(Centrally Sponsored
Scheme)

9
2.17 The Committee was informed that Rs.106.90 crore has been allocated in B.E 2013-14 for
projects/schemes for the benefit of the North Eastern Areas and Sikkim.
2.18 The Committee lends its full support to the activities and budgetary provisions for
the benefit of the North Eastern States and Sikkim. The Committee observes that it is
essential for inclusive growth that the benefits of the growth of our economy reach the
people of the distantly located North Eastern States of the country. The Committee would,
therefore, like the Department to closely monitor the progress of various schemes in the
North Eastern Region and ensure that the ongoing projects there are not hamstrung for
lack of funds or due to under utilization thereof. The Committee would also like to impress
upon the Department to ensure that the projects/schemes sanctioned for the North Eastern
Region are not delayed due to lack of approvals.
III. UPDATION OF CENTRAL REGISTERS OF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY
3.1 The updation of Central Registers of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy has constantly been
engaging the attention of the Committee. On being asked about the updated status of updation of
Central Registers of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy and whether all the States have sent their
updated registers, the Department has furnished the following information (Annexure).
3.2 The Committee is not happy to note that despite its recommendation made in its 55
th
Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department that all such information
should be made available in the public domain in an updated form on the touch of a button,
little progress seems to have been made in this regard, which is evident from the fact that
out of 23 States in respect of which information pertaining to updation of Central Register
of Indian Medicine has been made available, eight States are lagging behind in sending
updated information. As regards the Status of updation of the Central Register of
Homoeopathy, the Committee is surprised to note that in three cases, i.e.; Bihar, Tamil
Nadu and Tripura, it took sixteen or more months to incorporate the information in the
Central Registers. The Committee is aware that there is a provision in the IMCC Act 1970
mandating the State Boards to submit updated registers of practitioners on the 1st April
every year. The Committee would, therefore, like to be intimated of the impediment coming
in the way of updation of Central Registers of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy despite
there being mandatory legal provisions. The matter may be taken up at the Minister level
and frequent review meetings be held.
IV. NATIONAL INSTITUTES
National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA)
4.1 The National Institute of Ayurveda was established on 7/2/1976 as an apex Institute of
Ayurveda in the country to develop high standards of teaching, training and research in all aspects
of Ayurvedic system of Medicine with a scientific approach.
4.2 In reply to a query, it has been informed that there are thirty five vacancies in Group ‘A’
posts. It has also been informed by the Department that 25 posts have been advertised, 7 posts
have fallen vacant recently for which necessary action is to be taken to fill up the posts and 3
posts are to be filled up by DPC shortly.
4.3 The Committee observes that the NIA is inter-alia mandated to develop high
standards of teaching in Ayurvedic System of Medicine and therefore the acute shortage of
the faculty is certain to adversely affect the functioning of this premier Institute. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take immediate measures

10
towards filling up vacancies in faculty posts with priority and urgency. The Committee also
observes that in pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee, the Department in its
Action Taken Note on the 55
th Report of the Committee, had assured to take action to
appoint professionally qualified persons on short-term contract or deputation basis to
overcome the staff crunch in senior faculty positions. The Committee is not aware whether
any forward movement has been made in this regard. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Department to take immediate action towards appointing professionally
qualified persons on short-term contract or deputation against these posts till regular
appointments are made and desires to be kept apprised of the headway made in the matter.
National Institute of Homoeopathy (NIH)
4.4 The National Institute of Homoeopathy (NIH) was established in 1975 as a model Institute
in Homoeopathy. The main objective of the Institute is to develop excellence in Homoeopathic
education and conduct UG and PG courses.
4.5 On being asked about the updated status of expansion of NIH, the Department has inter alia
informed that the administrative approval and expenditure sanction has been obtained for the
construction of Academic-cum-Library Building Phase – II and III and the cost of the Project is
Rs.19.72 crore. It has also been informed that the project is expected to be completed by 2015
and the executing agency is M/s. NPCCL.
4.6 The Committee observes that the delay in completion of projects often results in cost
overrun. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to closely monitor the
progress of construction of Academic-cum-Library Building on a quarterly basis in order to
avoid time overrun and resultant cost escalation.
4.7 In reply to another query, the Department has informed that the original cost of
Construction of Hospital Extension Building was Rs.11.59 crore, but M/s CPWD, the executing
agency, has revised the cost to Rs.13.08 crore. It has been further informed that 90% of civil
works has been completed.
4.8 The Committee observes that the expansion of the Hospital from 100 to 250 beds was
targeted to be achieved during 2010-11. Two years have elapsed since then, but the project
is yet to completed. The time-overrun has led to cost overrun. The Committee has been
advising the Department to streamline its monitoring mechanism so that such slippages in
timely implementing the project and the resultant cost overrun could be minimized. The
Committee is constrained to observe that the delay in completion of the project is indicative
of slack monitoring and bad planning. The Committee, therefore, exhorts the Department
to pay focused attention towards expansion of the Hospital from its existsing bed strength
of 100 to 250 beds. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress of
implementation of the project.
4.9 On being asked about the updated status of vacancies at NIH, the Department has inter alia
informed that out of 75 sanctioned Group A posts, there are 31 vacancies. It has also been stated
that a preliminary screening of applications in respect of 8 posts has been done and interview is
to be held for final selection. The vacancy notice for remaining post has been sent to DAVP for
advertisement.
4.10 The Committee expresses its concern over such a large number of vacant posts in
teaching cadre which is certain to impair the functioning of NIH. The Committee observes
that the main objective of NIH is to develop excellence in homoeopathic education and
conduct UG and PG courses. It is, therefore, imperative for the Department to urgently take
steps to fill up the vacancies in a specific time-frame. The Committee desires to be apprised

11
of the measures taken by the Department and progress made towards filling up all vacant
posts of NIH.
Morarji Desai National Institute of YOGA (MDNIY)
4.11 Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga is an autonomous organization under the
Department of AYUSH.
4.12 As per the information furnished by the Department, total RE allocation (plan) for the
MDNIY during the Eleventh Plan was Rs.23.88 crore against which actual expenditure incurred
was to the tune of Rs.19.14 crore. The Department has informed that the approved Outlay for
MDNIY during the T welfth Plan period is Rs.65.55 crore and the same will be utilized for
continuing schemes and for new components/additional activities, due approval will be taken.
4.13 The Committee observes that one of the main factors contributing to underutilization
of the budgeted funds is delay in necessary approvals. The Committee would, therefore, like
to impress upon the Department to proactively pursue and complete all pre-approval
activities for the new schemes/additional components under the above head so that the
approved outlay for the Twelfth Plan is utilized gainfully and there are no instances of sub-
optimal utilization of the approved outlay.
4.14 In reply to a query regarding the progress made towards evaluating the outcomes of Yoga
Centres established by MDNIY in the premier institutions of the country, the Department has stated
that the progress of the Advanced Centres of Yoga has been evaluated by the Scientific Advisory
Committee of MDNIY comprising of eminent experts from different premier medical institutions
and that the suggestions made by this Committee will be examined.
4.15 The Committee, welcomes the evaluation of the Advanced Centres of Yoga by the
Scientific Advisory Committee and desires to be apprised of its findings and action taken
thereon.
North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy (NEIAH), Shillong
4.16 The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 27
th March, 2008 accorded approval for
establishment of North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy at Shillong to provide health
care to the people of NE Region and Sikkim under Ayurveda and Homoeopathy systems of
medicine. The Institute is to have Ayurvedic and Homoeopathic colleges with the admission
capacity of 50 students each along with a 100 bed Ayurvedic Hospital and a 50 bed Homoeopathic
Hospital comprising Documentation-cum-R&D Centre and Pharmacy with Drug Testing Laboratory.
4.17 As per the information furnished, the total outlay for NEIAH in the Twelfth Plan is
Rs.146.51 crore and the same will be utilized to set up the Institute by completing construction
of building, purchase of equipments and furniture, hospital activity and starting academic session.
Shedding light on the updated status of operationalization of the Institute, the Department has
informed that construction of buildings including Hospital Block, Teaching Block, Library Block,
Administration Block is in progress. The project is being monitored by a Project Management
Committee headed by the Secretary (AYUSH). The revised timeline for completion of civil work
of the project is October, 2013.
4.18 The Committee notes that the proposal for establishment of NEIAH was approved by
the Cabinet on the 27
th March, 2008. More than five years have passed since then, but the
full operationalisation of the project is still a far cry. Though the Department claims that
there is no cost escalation so far, the Committee is convinced that the delay is certain to
entail cost overruns. The Committee gathers from the information furnished that out of
Rs.64.50 crore allocated during the Eleventh Plan, Rs.45.00 crore only could be utilized which

12
is indicative of the inefficient utilization of the budgeted funds. The Committee, therefore,
desires that an action plan be drawn for better deployment of the financial resources during
the Twelfth Plan so that any possibility of financial under-performance could be obviated and
there is no breach of the revised time-line of October, 2013 for the operationalization of
NEIAH.
North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine (NEIFM), Passighat, Arunachal Pradesh
4.19 The North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine (NEIFM) is a National Institute under the
Department of AYUSH. It is being developed as a Centre of Excellence and apex research centre
for all aspects of Folk Medicine knowledge with linkages and collaborations with other research
institutions. The aims and objectives of the NEIFM are to survey, document and validate folk
medicine practices, remedies and therapies prevalent in the North East Region, with a view to
revitalize, promote and harness local health traditions and flora. The Cabinet had accorded approval
to establishment of the NEIFM on 21
st February, 2008.
4.20 The Eleventh Plan outlay for NEIFM was Rs. 41.00 crore, the allocation for BE (2007 to
2012) was Rs. 27.69 crore and for RE (2007 to 2012) Rs. 21.29 crore against which the actual
expenditure incurred during the Eleventh Plan was Rs.10.60 crore. As per the information
furnished by the Department, outlay for NEIFM for Twelfth Plan is Rs. 72.90 crore. The original
time-line for execution of the project was January, 2010 which could not be adhered to due to
various constraints including delay in transfer of 40 acres of land by the State Government.
Subsequently, the project was rescheduled to be completed by June, 2011. The Department
has now informed that the revised time-line for completion of civil work of the project is
October, 2013. It has also been informed that the original cost of the project was Rs. 32.88 crore
and that till now, there is no proposal for escalation of cost estimate.
4.21 The Committee is constrained to note the contradictions in the information furnished
by the Department. On the one hand, the Department claims that there is no proposal for
escalation of the cost estimate of the project, on the other, the approved outlay of Rs. 72.90
crore for the project gives an impression that the enhanced allocation has been made to
meet the cost overrun. The Committee, therefore, like the Department to explain this
apparent contradiction.
4.22 The Committee is also not happy with the tardy progress made towards
operationalisation of the project. A delay of more than three years have already taken
place, which is inordinate by any standard. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department streamline its monitoring mechanism and ensure that the revised time-line for
completion of the project is not extended in any event. The Committee desires to be
apprised of the steps taken to ensure timely implementation of this project.
4.23 In reply to a query regarding the status of creation of posts for NEIFM, the Department
has informed that a proposal for creation of 159 posts has been received from NEIFM, which is
being examined in consultation with Internal Finance Division for processing further to obtain
approval of the Department of Expenditure.
4.24 The Committee observes that this project is intended to validate folk medicine
practices and integrate them into mainstream health care system. However, its
operationalisation in the true sense of the word can not be accomplished until the requisite
faculty and staff are appointed. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department
to proactively process the matter in the Integrated Finance Division and thereafter pursue
it with the Department of Expenditure. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the
progress made in this regard.

13
All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), New Delhi
4.25 Establishment of All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA) was approved on 21.01.2008. The
AIIA is conceived as an apex Institute for Ayurveda. As per information furnished by the
Department, the Institute will offer postgraduate and doctoral courses in various disciplines of
Ayurveda and will focus on fundamental research in Ayurveda, drug development, standardization,
quality control, safety evaluation and clinical research.
4.26 The Department has informed that the Institute was targeted to be accomplished in the
Eleventh Plan period; however, 18 months time was allotted for completion of civil work of AIIA
from November, 2010 and the revised time-line set for completion of civil work was September,
2012. As per the information furnished in the Outcome Budget 2013-14, the construction work
of the Institute’s Hospital Building and Academic Building was in progress as on 31-12-2012. The
Instiute is expected to be operational in 2013-14. In reply to a query, the Department has
informed that the original cost of the project was Rs. 155.00 crore including Rs. 134.00 crore
towards non-recurring expenditure on capital works and Rs.21.00 crore for recurring expenditure
on salary and wages, consumables, medicines etc. Now, the revised cost towards non-recurring
expenditure on capital works including escalation on account of additional components of work
and increase in quantity of items is estimated at Rs.157.20 crores. The Department has further
informed that the provision of Rs.218.50 crore has been proposed for the Institute in Twelfth
Plan.
4.27 In its 55
th Report presented to Rajya Sabha on 26 th April, 2012, the Committee had
expressed its concern over the delay in implementation of this project and the resultant
time and cost overruns and recommended that a rigorous monitoring mechanism be put in
place to ensure execution of the project within the approved cost and designated time-line.
The Committee is constrained to note that despite the Department’s assurance made in past
that the project was on track, this project has witnessed time and cost overruns. The
Committee strongly disapproves of the Department’s failure to deliver the targeted outcome
within the designated time-line. The Committee only hopes that the Institute would be
operational at least during current financial year.
V. CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEME FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AYUSH INSTITUTIONS
5.1 As per the information given in the Annual Report 2012-13 of the Department, the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme for Development of AYUSH Institutions is under implementation for assisting
Government and Government aided colleges to upgrade their infrastructure and facilities with the
objective of bridging the critical gaps observed in compliance of the minimum standards/norms of
Central Council of Indian Medicine and Central Council of Homoeopathy.
5.2 In reply to a query about the reasons for drastic reduction of BE 2012-13 allocation of
Rs. 49.54 crore to Rs. 14.00 crore at the RE stage and no expenditure being incurred upto
28.2.2013 under this head the Department in a written submission has informed that as no
complete proposal was received from any State Government during the financial year 2012-13,
funds could not be released to any institutions. Further, due to pendency of UCs in respect of
funds released earlier, further release of funds could not be considered. The Department has
further submitted that it is taking vigorous steps to bring down the pending of UCs to nil. It
has also been informed that the evaluation of Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of
AYUSH institutions is being conducted by an independent agency and its report is expected by
end of April, 2013.
5.3 In reply to another question, the Department has informed that the approved outlay for
Development AYUSH Institutions in the Twelfth Plan is Rs. 450.00 crore.

14
5.4 The Committee does not understand as to why State Governments do not come
forward to get funds for strengthening the AYUSH colleges. The Department should make
an introspection in this regard and discuss with State Governments.
5.5 The Committee would, recommend to the Department to expedite submission of the
report of the independent agency and find out the exact reasons for gross underutilization
of the budgeted amount under the above head and take corrective action accordingly by way
of making realistic projection of budgetary requirements and optimal utilization thereof.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the findings of the independent agency and
action taken thereon.
5.6 The Committee observes that a substantial outlay of Rs.450.00 crore has been
approved for the above scheme for the Twelfth Plan. The Committee would like the
Department to gear up its monitoring mechanism so as to avoid recurrence of such gross
financial underperformance as witnessed duing the Eleventh Plan.
VI. ASSISTANCE TO ACCREDITED AYUSH CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE IN NON-
GOVERNMENTAL/PRIVATE SECTOR ENGAGED IN AYUSH EDUCATION/DRUG
DEVELOPMENT
6.1 The objective of the above Scheme is to support creative and innovative proposals for
upgrading both functions and facilities of reputed AYUSH institutions to the level of excellence.
6.2 The Department has informed that BE 2012-13 allocation of Rs.15.00 crore (including
1.50 crore for North Eastern Region) was reduced to Rs. 8.80 crore in RE 2012-13 owing to non-
release of funds due to Audit objection and delay in receipt of requests for release of 3
rd installment
and progress of the sanctioned project. It has further been informed that higher allocation of
Rs. 15.00 crore in BE 2013-14 has been made for meeting pending installments of on-going projects.
6.3 In reply to a query, the Committee has been informed that the outlay for Twelfth Plan is
Rs. 97.50 crore.
6.4 The Department has also submitted that experience of implementation of this scheme during
Eleventh Plan indicates that for AYUSH Sector, there are very few eligible institutions in the non-
profit NGO/private sector. The third party evaluation is under process. The scheme will be
appropriately modified to remove the identified constraints, if any.
6.5 As per the information given in the Outcome Budget, the Scheme was for the Eleventh Plan
and fresh proposal could be considered only on approval of continuation of this Scheme.
6.6 The Committee is constrained to observe that this is yet another instance of
unrealistic formulation of Budget Estimate and under utilization thereof. The Committee
disapproves of such unrealistic projection of fund requirements and impresses upon the
Department to ensure that such large variations in the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates
and Actual Expenditure do not recur in future.
6.7 The Committee gathers from the information furnished that the Scheme is being
evaluated by an independent agency and would be modified as per its suggestions. The
Committee welcomes this exercise and desires to be apprised of the follow-up action taken
in this regard.
6.8 The Committee would also like to draw attention of the Department to the fact that
on the one hand, the Department has informed that the outlay for the Scheme for the
Twelfth Plan is 97.50 crore, on the other, the Outcome Budget 2013-14 states that the
Scheme was only for the Eleventh Plan and fresh proposal could be considered only on
approval of continuation of this Scheme. The Committee would, therefore, like the

15
Department to justify as to how such a huge amount of Rs. 97.50 crore is targeted to be
utilized if the continuation of the above Scheme is yet to be approved, though the first year
of the Twelfth plan has already elapsed. When the experience in the Eleventh Plan shows
that there are very few eligible non-profit NGOs/Private Sector organizations in AYUSH,
then Department should better wind up the scheme.
VII. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT INCLUDING MEDICINAL PLANTS
7.1 Under this head, ten sub-schemes namely, (i) Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, (ii) Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (iii) Central Council for Research
in Yoga and Naturopathy (iv) Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy (v) Central Council
for Research in Siddha (created in 2010-11 with bifurcation of CCRAS) (vi) Central Council’s
combined Building Complex (vii) Extramural Research Projects through Research Institutions etc.
(viii) Patent Cell for Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H) Intellectual property
Rights (ix) Survey on usage and Acceptability of ISM&H Systems and (x) National Medicinal
Plants Board, are included. The Department has informed that clinical research, drug
standardization, pharmacology research and literary research are being funded/proposed to be
funded with the allocated budget. For research work beyond 2013-14, the programme would be
finalized on the basis of on-going evaluation and emerging projects. As regards extramural
projects, it has been informed that 05 new projects have been approved by Project Approval
Committee and it is expected to sanction approximately 20 new projects every year during the
Twelfth Plan. As regards the National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB), the Department has
informed that during the Twelfth Plan, approaches to implementation of NMPB would lay stress
on all such components which help in sustained supply of quality medicinal plant products and
conservation of important species.
7.2 The Committee notes that the outlay for the above head for the Tweffth Plan is
substantially higher than the Eleventh Plan allocations. A large number of important
activities are included under this head. The Committee is of the view that scientific
validation of classical formulations of Indian Systems of Medicine for their safety and
efficacy is of vital importance for promotion of these systems of medicine. The Committee,
therefore, desires that the Department should regularly monitor the utilization of allocated
funds under this head to ensure that the funds are utilized judiciously and the on-going
research activities are strengthened.
7.3 The Committee would also like to reiterate its recommendation made in its 55
th Report
presented to Rajya Sabha on 26 th April, 2012 that the Department should establish a national registry
of all AYUSH research studies and get the health outcomes accruing from the research projects of
the Research Councils evaluated by an independent agency. The Committee desires to be apprised
of the developments in this regard.
National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB)
7.4 The increasing global interest in natural remedies has increased the demand for medicinal
plants. The resource base for AYUSH is largely plants which are largely sourced from the wild
areas. This has led to the emergence of a number of issues like sustainability, conservation,
cultivation, quality assurance, protection of Traditional Knowledge and related issues of access and
benefit sharing etc. To coordinate all these matters, Government of India established the National
Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB) under the Department of AYUSH in 2000. NMPB is the apex
national body which co-ordinates all matters relating to medicinal plants in the country and provides
financial support to programmes relating to conservation, cultivation and the all-round development
of the medicinal plants sector.

16
7.5 The National Medicinal Plants Board is also implementing a Centrally Sponsored Scheme of
National Mission on Medicinal Plants since 2008-09. This Scheme is primarily aimed at supporting
market driven medicinal plants cultivation on private land with backward linkages for establishment
of nurseries, for supply of quality planting material and forward linkages for post-harvest
management, marketing, infrastructure, certification, etc.
7.6 On being asked about the updated status of pending UCs under NMPB and the amount
involved therein, the Department has informed that as on 1
st March, 2013, the number of pending
UCs and the amount involved therein is as under:–
Sl. Year Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, Development
No. and Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plants
Number Amount (Rs. in lakhs)
1 2001-02 5 20.28
2 2002-03 33 93.74
3 2003-04 200 215.23
4 2004-05 581 665.64
5 2005-06 698 1008.66
6 2006-07 68 675.52
7 2007-08 103 715.52
8 2008-09 80 1042.31
9 2009-10 115 1952.40
10 2010-11 170 3266.00
T
OTAL: 2053 9655.30
7.7 In reply to a query, the Department has informed that 8 States Medicinal Plants Boards
(SMPBs) namely, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan
and West Bengal have full-time Chief Executive Officers and full fledged SMPBs. The NMPB has
been pursuing with the States for full fledged SMPBs. The NMPB is also considering increasing
support for full-fledged SMPBs.
7.8 The Committee is of the view that full-fledged SMPBs with full-time chief Executive
Officer will certainly lead to better implementation of the Schemes and programmes of
NMPB and more efficient deployment of financial resources. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Department to expedite its decision on increasing support for full
fledged SMPBs.
7.9 The Committee notes with concern that a substantial amount of central funds for the
previous years continues to remain unaccounted for under both the schemes of NMPB which
is indicative of non-adherence to the basic financial norms. The Committee feels that the
delay in timely submission of UCs would adversely affect execution of the projects under
this head. The Committee would, therefore, recommend to the Department to draw up a
concrete action plan for quicker liquidation of pending UCs within a designated time-line.
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the measures taken and results achieved in
this regard.

17
7.10 The Committee has also been given to understand that an evaluation of the Schemes
of NMPB is going on and in the light of the suggestions made, the NMPB will be revised.
The Committee welcomes the ongoing evaluation of NMPB and desires to be kept apprised
of the suggestions made and action taken thereon.
7.11 The Committee has been constantly taking cognizance of the issue of shortage of manpower
in the NMPB. On being enquired about the updated status of vacancies in the NMPB, the
Department has furnished the following information:–
There are 14 no. of sanctioned posts. Out of which at present 6 posts are filled up. The
status of remaining 8 vacant posts is as under:
1. Director (Technical) cum Deputy CEO: This post has been included under Central
Staffing Scheme of Ministry of Environment and Forests vide their letter no. 12016/01/
2010-IFS-1 dated 10/2/2012. The Ministry of Environment and Forests have already
been requested to provide the list of eligible officers for selection on deputation.
2. Deputy Director (Medicinal Plants): The names of two candidates have already been
sent to UPSC for selection of the candidate on deputation at their end.
3. Research Officer (Medicinal Plants/Agronomy): Out of two no. of sanctioned
posts, one post has already been filled up on 29/11/2011 and the second post
reserved for physically handicapped had been found infructuous by the UPSC. The
matter has been referred to Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment for
exemption from (PH) reservation to General. The reply is still awaited in spite of
repeated reminders. The matter is being pursued with the Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment.
4. Documentation and IT Assistant: The post was advertised two times in 2009 and
2010 for deputation but no eligible candidate was found. The proposal for amendment
in RRs to rationalize them was sent for approval to DoP&T. The matter is being
pursued with them.
5. Senior Accountant: The post have already been advertised (5) times but none of the
candidate applied for the post on deputation. In view of the fact, the proposal for
amendment in RRs have already been sent to DoP&T and is being pursued with them.
6. Section Officer: The post has been encadred in CSS by DoP&T on 20/1/2011. But
the posting of the Section Officer is being pursued.
7. Senior Research Assistant: The post has already been advertised two times in 2009
and 2010 but no candidate was found eligible. Now, on fresh revival, the post has been
re-advertised for deputation against which seven applications have been received so far.
The last date of receiving the application is 15/03/2013, after which the case will be
processed.
8. Stenographer Grade ‘D’: The post is vacant since October, 2012 due to transfer on
promotion. The matter is being pursued.
7.12 The Committee notes that in pursuance of its recommendation, some progress has
been made towards filling up of the posts. The Committee would like to impress upon the
Department to vigorously pursue the matter and ensure that the remaining vacancies are
filled up within the shortest possible time. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
efforts made and results achieved in this regard.

18
VIII. QUALITY CONTROL OF AYURVEDA, SIDDHA, UNANI AND HOMOEOPATHIC
(ASU&H) DRUGS
8.1 The AYUSH system of medicine is governed by Drug and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules
1945. Enforcement provisions of Chapter IV A of the Act is responsibility of State Governments.
Establishment of State Drug Testing Laboratories is also a statutory responsibility of States under
the Act. To provide financial assistance to States for strengthening enforcement mechanism, the
Drug Quality Control was started in the Eleventh Plan.
8.2 As per the information given in the Outcome Budget 2013-14, standardization of quality
control of ASU&H drugs as per the global trends is the prime concern of the Department of AYUSH.
8.3 In reply to a question, the Department has submitted that the following steps have been
taken to strengthen the regulatory mechanisms of ASU&H drugs:–
“(A) In order to improve the regulatory and Quality Control situation of ASU&H drugs in
the country, the Department of AYSUH set up Pharmacopoeia Commission of Indian
Medicine in 2010 to oversee the development of pharmacopoeial standards of drugs
and implemented a Centrally Sponsored Scheme since Ninth Plan to strengthen the
infrastructure and functional capacity of Drug Testing Laboratories and Pharmacies
and enforcement mechanism in the States. 29 State Drug Testing Laboratories, 46
State Pharmacies and 30 State Licensing Authorities have been supported through the
Centrally Sponsored Scheme and subsidy provided to private drug manufacturing
units for improving in-house Quality Control Laboratories as per GMP requirements.
(B) Besides, following regulatory measures under Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 have
been taken and Executive Orders issued to step up quality control of ASU&H drugs:–
(i) Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) for ASU&H drugs notified followed by
GMP supplementary guidelines for manufacturing of Mineral and Herbo-mineral
formulations.
(ii) Standards to be complied in the manufacture of ASU&H drugs notified.
(iii) Regulatory provision for recognition of laboratories for testing ASU drugs and
raw materials has been made under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules. Joint
inspection by the representatives of Central Government and State Licensing
Authorities initiated for recognition of Drug Testing Laboratories under the
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules.
(iv) Qualifications of the State Licensing Authorities for ASU drugs notified.
(v) Standard requirement of space and scientific manpower was prescribed for
approval to be granted for carrying out testing of ASU drugs.
(vi) To improve the shelf life and quality of ASU drugs, use of excipients was
permitted in their manufacture with specific conditions and permissible limits.
(vii) Quality and safety assurance of drugs has been promoted by prescribing
permissible limits of heavy metals, aflatoxins, pesticide residue and microbial
load and issue of orders for providing reports of batch to batch testing in the
public sector procurement of ASU medicines.
(viii) Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine and Homoeopathic
Pharmacopoiea Laboratory have been notified as appellate laboratories for the
purpose of testing of ASU&H drugs.

19
(ix) Development of pharmacopoeial standards of complex multiingredient ASU
formulations has been given high priority.
(x) Ban imposed on the misleading use of prefix and suffix with the names of
classical ASU medicines and the draft Rules notified.
(xi) V oluntary quality certification scheme for AYUSH products started in
collaboration with Quality Council of India.
(xii) Shelf life/date of expiry for ASU medicines was notified under Drugs and
Cosmetics Rule 161 (B) for public safety.
(xiii) Guidelines for issue of manufacturing license to various types of Patent and
Proprietary ASU drugs notified to provide clarity about the requirement of
documents in support of efficacy and safety of ASU drugs.
(xiv) Six technical officers of the Department of AYUSH have been appointed under
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 160 E and 160 F for discharging duties of
inspection of institutions carrying out testing of ASU drugs.
(xv) Drugs and Cosmetics Rule 161 pertaining to labeling provisions has been
amended for mandatory mention of botanical names and parts of plants used
in the Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani formulations.
(xvi) Actions have been initiated on the recommendations of Ayurveda Siddha Unani
Drugs Technical Advisory Board (ASUDTAB) for regulating retail sale of ASU
drugs containing toxic raw material, development of Good Clinical Practice
Guidelines for clinical trials on ASU drugs and development of model laboratory
practices for testing of ASU drugs.
8.4 The roadmap for strengthening the quality control of ASU&H drugs in Twefth Plan aims
at enhancing the domain and scope of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme with addition of more
components and revision of funding pattern and establishment of a separate Central Drug Controller
for AYUSH.”
8.5 The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Department for strengthening
of the regulatory mechanism of ASU&H drugs. However, the Committee is aware that
quality control and standardization of ASU&H drugs, which are mainly herbal/herbo-mineral
preparations, is very complex and different from synthetic molecules of the allopathic
system which are produced under controlled laboratory conditions. However, given the
current scenario where regulation of ASU&H drugs leaves much to be desired, the
Committee feels that strengthening and streamlining of regulatory mechanism of ASU&H
drugs needs to be speeded up. The Committee desires that the Department should accord
high priority to the task of laying down standards of quality control of ASU&H drugs by
using modern techniques.
8.6 The Department has informed that an outlay of Rs. 80.00 crore has been approved in the
Twelfth Plan for the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Quality Control of ASU&H drugs. It is
intended to revise the scheme based on its evaluation report and suggestions from stakeholders and
add new components. The given allocation is envisaged to be spent for focused outcomes in terms
of effective quality control of ASU&H drugs including strengthening of regulatory infrastructure,
mechanism and capacity in the States; improving drug manufacturing, storage and testing facilities
in public sector; implementation of regulatory capacity building initiatives; and development of
regulatory and quality control materials.

20
8.7 In reply to a question, the Department has informed that One State Drug Testing
Laboratory (DLT) and one State Ayurvedic Pharmacy have been assisted with grant-in-aid of
Rs.21.31 lakhs and Rs.43.46 lakhs respectively. Two GMP compliant private drugs manufacturing
units availed subsidy in 2012-13. The proposals of three more State DTLs and one Pharmacy
for balance grant-in-aid have been approved by the Project Screening Committee and are in
pipeline for release of funds. With the available funds and existing funding pattern of the scheme,
it is intended to support 5 DTLs, 5 Pharmacies, 5 Licensing Authorities and 6 manufacturing
units in 2013-14. However, revision of the scheme with inclusion of new components may revise
these targets.
8.8 The Committee observes that there is a separate chapter-IV A in the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act 1940 which regulates the manufacture and sale of ASU drugs. Since the
enforcement of provisions of Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules made thereunder is under
the purview of State Drug Licensing and Drug Control Authorities, the State drugs
regulatory framework has a crucial role to play in ensuring safety and quality of ASU&H
drugs. It is in this context that strengthening of State Drug Testing Laboratories which are
facing infrastructure constraints, and shortage of manpower, assumes added significance.
The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to quickly revise the Quality
Control Scheme and its funding pattern for greater efficacy of the Scheme.
Central Drug Controller for AYUSH
8.9 The Committee has been informed that a Central Regulatory Authority for ASU&H drugs is
contemplated to be set up. The Department in a written submission has informed that the matter
of establishing Central Drug Controller for AYUSH has been constantly pursued with the
Department of Expenditure for creation of posts. Certain specific clarifications and justification for
the required posts have been provided in February, 2013. Allocation of Rs. 102 crore in Twelfth
Plan and Rs. 7.60 crore in the annual plan 2013-14 has been budgeted to undertake the
establishment of infrastructure and manpower for the Central AYUSH Drug Controller’s office.
Proposal is also being moved for acquiring additional space to accommodate the AYUSH Drug
Controller’s office.
8.10 On being asked as to why it is not desirable to let CDSCO regulate ASU drugs also, the
Department has informed that CDSCO has been basically dealing with quality control of allopathic
drugs and accordingly, the whole paraphernalia there does not have the wherewithal to effectively
regulate ASU&H drugs. The basic reason is that ASU&H drugs are distinct from allopathic drugs
in terms of philosophy, principles, concepts, standards, quality aspects, applications, numbers and
count of manufacturing units and testing requirements and they need to have different regulations.
In-spite of common Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, the regulatory issues of ASU&H drugs are
not being taken care of by the Central Drugs Controller Office due to non-availability of requisite
expertise and huge workload of matters related to allopathic drugs. The idea of having a common
Central Drugs Authority with Additional Drug Controller of AYUSH had not been earlier agreed to.
However, the office of the Drug Controller General (India) was strengthened by sanctioning 175
posts for modern medicine and was renamed as Central Drugs Standards Control Organisation
(CDSCO), but no posts were sanctioned for the Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy.
It was thereafter only that in accordance with the recommendations of a high powered Committee
and ASU Drugs Consultative Committee and considering the specific regulatory requirements of
ASU&H drugs, setting up a separate Central Drugs Controller of AYUSH was found to be a
necessary requirement.
8.11 An early action may be taken to establish and appoint AYUSH Drug Controller.

21
IX. CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AYUSH INDUSTRY CLUSTERS
9.1 The Scheme was introduced in the Eleventh Five year Plan with the objective for creating
Common Facility Centre (CFC) for standardization, quality assurance and control, productivity,
marketing, infrastructure and capacity building through a cluster based approach in the form of
Special Purpose V ehicle (SPV) registered company to manufacture quality drugs of Ayurveda,
Siddha and Unani.
9.2 As per the Scheme, at least 15 enterprises within radius of 50 Km. holding GMP certificate
of AYUSH Industries and each of them having minimum annual turnover of Rs. 20.00 lakhs are
eligible under the Scheme. The Government provides one time assistance as grant-in-aid upto 60%
of the project cost subject to maximum Rs. 10.00 crore. The remaining 40% amount would be
arranged by the SPV members. One testing laboratory is mandatory for each SPV/Clusters.
9.3 The Department has informed that the approved outlay for the Scheme for the Twelfth Plan
is Rs. 121.75 crore. The Eleventh Plan outlay for the scheme was Rs. 500.00 crore out of which
only Rs. 50.49 crore could actually be spent.
9.4 The Department has also informed that during the Twelfth Plan, efforts would be made to
establish at least one industry cluster in each State. It has also been informed that the Scheme,
if required, would be modified appropriately after getting the feedback of the third party evaluation
which is in progress.
9.5 The Committee notes that 9 AYUSH Industry Clusters were set up during 2012-13.
It is a matter of concern that not a single new AYUSH Industry Cluster has been set up
since then which is indicative of the tardy progress in the matter. In its 55
th Report, the
Committee had suggested that there should be at least one AYUSH industry cluster in each
State. Though the Department has assured to move in this direction there is little action
on the ground. The Committee, therefore, exhorts the Department to quickly finalize re-
designing of the Scheme and ensure that concrete progress is made towards setting up of
at least one AYUSH Industry cluster in each State which is also necessary for supply of
quality drugs at affordable prices.
X.. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
10.1 The Committee has been informed that with an increase in lifestyle related disorders, people
all over the world are looking at alternative systems of medicine for answers. Given this global
resurgence of interest in holistic systems of medicine, the Department of AYUSH has been making
efforts for promotion and propagation of Indian Systems of Medicine abroad. In the context of
issues highlighted in the past by journals like JAMA and Lancet and the subsequent ban of certain
ASU&H drugs in some of the countries, the Department has also taken initiative to sensitize the
world community about strengths and efficacy of Indian Systems of Medicine.
10.2 The approved outlay for International Cooperation for the Twelfth plan is Rs. 40.00 crore.
In reply to a query about promotion of research projects of AYUSH with international R&D
institutions, the Department has furnished the following information:–
(a) Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS), an autonomous body
under Department of AYUSH has taken up a collaborative research project on
“Complex Ayurvedic Treatment in Osteoarthritis of the Knee Against Standard
Care” - A Multi-center, Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial based on Traditional
Ayurveda Diagnosis with Institute for Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health
Economics, Charite University Medical Centre, Berlin, Germany.

22
• MOU between CCRAS and Charite University Medical Centre, Germany was
signed on 27.02.2010.
• Rs.280 lakhs has been released to Charite University Medical Centre, Germany as
financial support to carry out this study at Germany, which is continuing.
Status: On going .
(b) The Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences has taken up a project with
Swiss Ayurveda Medical Academy, Geneva and A VTAR, Center for Ayurveda Research,
Coimbatore with a objective to compile and conduct systematic analysis of published
Ayurvedic research works for establishment of Ayurveda and its validity in Switzerland.
• MOU between CCRAS, Swiss Ayurvedic Medical Academy and A VTAR was
signed on 24.09.2009 for carrying out the clinical research studies in Ayurveda to
create a Digital Helpline for Ayurveda Research Abstracts (DHARA), web based
Ayurveda Research Database – Completed.
Status of MoUs signed with developed countries:
(i) As on date, the Department of AYUSH has signed Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) for Country to Country Cooperation in Traditional Medicine with China,
Malaysia, Trinidad & Tobago. However, the MoU signed with China has expired.
(ii) A letter of intent for entering into Memorandum of Understanding for Country to
Country Cooperation in Traditional Medicine with Mexico has been signed.
The MoU for setting up Academic Chair has been signed with University of Cape
Town in South Africa for Unani and Durban University of Technology in South Africa
for Ayurveda and with University of West Indies in Trinidad and Tobago for Ayurveda.
A letter of Intent for setting up Chair in Homeopathy has also been signed with
Mexico.
10.3 The Committee notes that no MOUs have been signed or are in the process of being
signed with the developed countries like U.K, Germany, U.S.A, Canada etc. The Committee
observes that signing of MoUs for promotion of research projects of AYUSH with the
countries, which have well-developed and credible regulatory mechanisms, will go a long way
in establishing the therapeutic credential of AYUSH medicine globally. This needs to be taken
further ahead and India should become frontrunner in alternative systems of medicine.
XI. INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION (IEC)
11.1 The Committee has been informed that in keeping with its mandate of propagating AYUSH
systems amongst the masses, the Department of AYUSH is promoting and popularizing strengths
of AYUSH systems by using outdoor and electronic media and organization of Arogya fairs and
supporting seminars and workshops on AYUSH system under Central Sector Scheme of
Information, Education and Communication.
11.2 The Schemes aims at achieving the following objectives:–
(i) Creation of awareness among the members of the community about the efficacy of the
AYUSH Systems, their cost-effectiveness and the availability of herbs used for
prevention and treatment of common ailments at their door steps through various
channels including the production of audio-visual educational material to achieve the
objective of Health for all;

23
(ii) Dissemination of proven results of R&D work in AYUSH systems at National and
International forums; and
(iii) Providing a forum where horizontal and vertical interaction among stakeholders of
AYUSH systems can take place through Conferences, Seminars and fairs at Regional,
National and International levels and encourage stakeholders to participate in them.
11.3 In reply to a query, the Department has informed that the Scheme – IEC is being evaluated
by Agricultural Finance Corporation Ltd. (AFCL) and an inception report submitted by them has
been examined and they have further been asked to submit the evaluation report urgently. As soon
as the same is received the IEC Scheme will be taken up for modification accordingly.
11.4 The Committee welcomes the evaluation of IEC and desires to be apprised of the
final findings of AFCL and the action taken thereon.
11.5 The Committee in its 55
th Report, had commented upon the misleading advertisements
concerning AYUSH over TV and radio and in the print media and advised the Ministry to bring such
instances to the notice of Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for necessary remedial action.
11.6 On being asked as to what specific action has been taken by the Department to take up
the matter of objectionable advertisements concerning AYUSH with Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting and their response in the matter, the Department has furnished the following
information:–
“As recommended by the Hon’ble Parliamentary Committee, the matter of checking
objectionable advertisements on AYUSH drugs has been taken up with Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting and Directorate of Audio-visual Publicity (DAVP) with a
request to take action as appropriate for stopping improper advertisements on AYUSH in
electronic and print media. DA VP has informed that it does not have regulatory power
over private advertisement. Press Council of India has also informed that as per the Press
Council Act, 1978 the Council enjoys statutory authority for the print media and it is
sensitive on the issue of objectionable advertisements and have norms of Journalistic
Conduct-2010. However, these guidelines carry only ethical backing as there are no
enforcement powers with the Press Council of India. The matter is being pursued with
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. The Department of AYUSH has also written to
all State Drug Licensing Authorities/Drug Controllers of AYUSH to bring instances of
misleading advertisements concerning AYUSH drugs in TV, Radio and print media to the
notice of Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for remedial action and to take
corrective measures in preventing inappropriate advertisements in electronic and print
media including newspapers.”
11.7 The Committee observes that no tangible progress has been made towards curtailing
misleading advertisements concerning AYUSH, over the electronic media and in the print
media. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should pursue the
matter with the authorities concerned with renewed vigour as the issue is too important for
maintaining credibility of AYUSH systems to be left unattended. The Committee desires to
be apprised of the final outcome in the matter.
XII. MISCELLANEOUS
12.1 The Committee observes that 20 yoga therapy Centres were targeted to be set up in
AYUSH/Allopathy hospitals during the Eleventh Plan, but only 6 such centres could be set
up during the Plan period. The Committee expresses its displeasure over this sorry state of
affairs and strongly recommends that such yoga therapy centres be set in all AYUSH/

24
Allopathy hospitals all over the country during the current Plan period. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
12.2 The Committee also observes that during the Eleventh Plan, 150 tours for
documentation of reported cases of prevention/ treatment of vector-borne/infectious diseases
by Siddha Drugs were targeted; however, only 31 tours could be conducted. The Committee
is of the view that there is an urgent need for improvement in documentation of the
reported episodes of prevention/ treatment of vector-borne/infectious diseases by Siddha
drugs and recommends that the Department should make all out efforts to complete
documentation of all the reported cases of prevention/ treatment/cure of vector-borne/
infectious diseases not only by Siddha drugs but also by Ayurvedic and other traditional
drugs.

25
ANNEXURE
LATEST POSITION OF STATE/CENTRAL REGISTERS OF INDIAN MEDICINES
AS ON 05.03.2013
Sl. Name of the Status of Remarks
No. State/Board/ Publication
Council
12 3 4
1. Maharashtra Up to Dec., 2007 * Balance up to March, 2012 not yet
received
2. Chhattisgarh Up to March, 2010 Up to March, 2012 under publication
3. Gujarat Up to March, 2010 Up to March, 2012 under publication
4. Madhya Pradesh Up to March, 2008 Up to March, 2010 under publication
Up to March, 2012 under Scrutiny
5. West Bengal Up to January, 2009 Up to Jan., 2012 under publication
(Paschim Banga
Ayurved Up to March, 2012 under Scrutiny
Parishad,
Kolkata)
6. Punjab Up to March, 2009 Up to March, 2010 under publication
Up to March, 2012 under Scrutiny
7. Rajasthan Up to March, 2010 Up to March, 2010 under publication
Up to March, 2011 under Scrutiny
*Balance up to March, 2012 not yet
received
8. Andhra Pradesh Up to Dec., 2007 Up to March, 2012 under Scrutiny
9. Delhi Up to July, 2010 Up to July, 2012 under Scrutiny
10. Goa Up to March, 2011 Up to March, 2012 under Scrutiny
11. Haryana Up to March, 2010 Up to March, 2012 under Scrutiny
12. Himachal Pradesh Up to March, 2005 Up to March, 2012 under Scrutiny
13. J & K Up to March, 2010 Up to March, 2012 under Scrutiny
14. Karnataka Up to March, 2009 Up to March, 2011 under Scrutiny
*Balance up to March, 2012 not yet
received
25

26
12 3 4
15. Kerala Up to March, 2010 Up to March, 2011 under Scrutiny
*Balance up to March, 2012 not yet
received
16. Uttar Pradesh Up to March, 2010 Up to March, 2012 under Scrutiny
17. Uttarakhand Up to March, 2008 Up to March, 2011 under Scrutiny
*Balance up to March, 2012 not yet
received
18. Tamil Nadu Up to December, 2009 * Balance up to March, 2012 not yet
Siddha Council received
19. Tamil Nadu Up to December, 2006 * Balance up to March, 2012 not yet
Board of Indian received
Medicine
20. Assam Up to August, 2006 **Records pertaining to various periods
in between are yet to be furnished by
the State board.
21. Orissa Up to 13 Dec., 2010 * Balance up to March 2012 not yet
received
22. State Council of Up to February, 1992 * Balance up to March, 2012 not yet
Unani Medicine, received
Kolkata
23. Bihar Up to March, 2011 * Balance up to March, 2012 not yet
received

27
CENTRAL COUNCIL OF HOMOEOPATHY
PRESENT POSITION OF CENTRAL REGISTER OF HOMOEOPATHY
State Status of State Date of receipt Remarks
Registers of Notified
Central Register
12 3 4
Andhra (received on In process Some entries of clarifications received,
Pradesh 08.08.12) are being taken in CRH.
Assam Upto 21.07.11 3.3.2012. Upto 21.7.11 it has been taken in
(received on Central Register published on 3.3.12.
12.9.11)
No further data on State Register
received.
Bihar Part-(II) Received on 1.09.2012 13888 Names of Bihar Part-II have been
13.05.11 published in Central Register on 1.9.2012.
Part-(I) Not received Part-I of Bihar Register is not yet
received.
Chhattisgarh 1.4.10 to In process Data entries in English/Hindi both have
25.10.11 been completed for taking in CRH.
(received on
07.12.11)
Delhi Received on In process Data Entries in English and Hindi both
30.8.11 from 1.4.10 to 31.3.11 in Central
(from 1.4.10 to Register of Homoeopathy have been
31.3.11) completed.
Gujarat Received on In process Data entries in English/Hindi both in
25.5.11 respect State Register of period
reflected from 1.4.10 to March, 2011 in
Central Register of Homoeopathy have
been completed.
Haryana Received on In process Data entries in English/Hindi both in
12.9.11 respect State Register of period
reflected from 1.4.10 to March, 2011
for Central Register of Homoeopathy
have been completed.
Himachal Received on — Published in the Central Register on
Pradesh 11.5.10 16.4.11, and no further State Register
received. Letter sent to Himachal
Council on 7.8.12 and reminder sent on
26.02.2013.
Karnataka Received on — To be initiated shortly.
19.3.12

28
12 3 4
Kerala Received on — To be initiated shortly.
22.6.12
Madhya Received on In process Data entries in English/Hindi both for
Pradesh 13.8.2012. taking into Central Register of
Homoeopathy have been completed.
Maharashtra Received on Yet not taken. The matter is being pursued with State
23.12.2010 C ouncil.
Meghalaya Received on — To be initiated shortly for taking in
12.10.2012 Central Register.
Orissa Received on Not yet taken State Council has furnished incomplete
04.05.2011 in Central information. CCH is pursuing the State
Register. Board for balance information
Punjab Received on In process. Data entries in English/Hindi both State
08.07.2011 Register received upto June, 2011, for
taking Central Register of Homoeopathy
have been completed.
Rajasthan Received on Not yet taken To be initiated shortly.
22.5.12 in Central
Register.
Tamil Nadu Received on Published in State Register entries received upto
16.12.09 Central 31.3.09 have been published in Central
Register on Register.
16.4.11.
No further State Register received. The
matter is being pursued with State
agencies.
U.T. Upto March, — To be initiated shortly for taking in
Chandigarh 2012 received Central Register.
on 13.8.12.
Uttar Pradesh Received on In process State Register received upto March,
27.08.12 2006 is initiated for scrutiny for taking
in next CRH.
West Bengal Received on Under Data entries in English Version has
(Part-I) 23.01.2012 process for been started for inclusion in Central
taking in Register.
CRH.
Arunachal Received on In process Data entries in English/Hindi both in
Pradesh 15.5.12 respect State Register of period reflected
from 17.10.11 to 3.5.12 for Central
Register of Homoeopathy have been
completed.

29
12 3 4
Tripura Received on Published in Taken into Central Register published on
30.4.2007 Central 15.11.2008.
Register on
15.11.2008. No further State Register received. The
matter is being pursued with State
Agencies.
Goa Received on In process Data entries in English/Hindi both in
1.8.12 respect State Register of period reflected
from 26.8.11 to 29.3.12 for Central
Register of Homoeopathy have been
completed.
Nagaland Received on Not taken in Discripencies have been referred to
31.05.2010 Central State Agency.
Register.

30
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee is concerned to note that except for the year 2010-11, the total actual
expenditure has invariably been considerably lower than Budget Estimates, particularly in
2011-12 and 2012-13. For Example, the total actual expenditure for the year 2008-09 was
Rs. 471.13 crore against Budget Estimates (BE) of Rs. 534.00 crore; for the year 2009-10,
Rs. 678.97 crore as against BE of Rs. 734.00 crore; for the year 2011-12, Rs. 611.46 crore
as against BE of 900.00 crore; and for the year 2012-13, Rs. 580.27 crore as against BE of
Rs. 990.00 crore. The Committee is not happy with this recurrent and persistent under
utilization of plan funds allocated for the Department. The Committee is constrained to
observe that such a persistent shortfall in the utilization of plan funds is indicative of fiscal
indiscipline and serious shortcoming in formulating the Budget Estimates. The Committee
in its 55
th Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department had recommended to
take measures for exercising greater fiscal prudence. However, underutilization of the funds
to the tune of Rs. 409.73 crore vis-a-vis  BE for 2012-13 indicates that the Committee’s
advice was not heeded to. The Committee, therefore, even at the cost of repetition, strongly
recommends that concrete measures be taken to exercise utmost fiscal discipline and
ensure absorption of the allocated funds. (Para 2.5)
The Committee notes that the extent of surrendered funds is substantially higher
under Centrally Sponsored Schemes (30.9% with reference to RE) than that under Central
Sector Schemes (7.8% with reference to RE). The Committee also takes note of the
remedial steps for better absorption of funds but is not impressed by the half measures
taken by the Department to overcome the sub-optimal utilization of Plan funds as it is
obvious that these efforts have not yielded the desired results. In view of the fact that the
allocations have persistently remained under-utilized in the past several years, the
Department should have undertaken a comprehensive analysis in this regard and taken
corrective measures accordingly. Now that an evaluation of all the Schemes is being done
by an independent agency, the Committee is sanguine that the corrective measures will be
initiated for ensuring optimal and judicious utilization of the budgeted funds. The
Committee recommends that the evaluation be completed in a time-bound manner. The
Committee desires to be apprised of the outcome of the independent evaluation and action
taken thereon. The Committee would also like the Department to devise ways to evaluate
the impact of its various schemes. The Committee, simultaneously, impresses upon the
Department to be more prudent in their budget formulation and project their fund
requirements in a more realistic manner after timely collection of all the information
pertaining to fund requirements from the State Governments. (Para 2.6)
The Committee notes that a provision of Rs. 1069.00 crore has been made in B.E
2013-14 on the plan side. The Committee would expect the Department to initiate concrete
measures at least from this year onwards to ensure that the sanctioned funds are
administered in a more diligent manner. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the
steps taken for more efficient deployment and utilization of the funds budgeted for 2013-14.
(Para 2.7)
The Committee also takes note of the fact that the share of AYUSH in the total
health outlay has been substantially enhanced to Rs. 10044.00 crore in the Twelfth Plan,
30

31
which is an increase of 235.47% over the actual expenditure of Eleventh Plan of Rs. 2994.00
crore. The Committee is aware that health needs of a vast and diverse country like India
cannot be met by a single healthcare system and AYUSH health care systems have a very
vital role to play in expanding the outreach of health care to the people because of their
inherent advantages in terms of diversity, modest cost, low level of technological input, etc.
Indian system of medicines and  traditional medicines should be complementary to Modern
system of Medicine. It is in this context that the Committee welcomes the enhanced
allocation of funds for AYUSH in the Twelfth Plan. The Committee also appreciates the
efforts made by the Department in getting enhanced allocation for the year 2013-14 inspite
of the fact that there was considerable underutilization of funds during the previous year
i.e. 2012-13. Persistent underutilization of funds to such extent is a serious concern for the
Committee. The Committee is also apprehensive about the utilization of such enhanced
allocation in 2013-14. Therefore, the Committee would expect the Department to put in
place a dedicated mechanism for stricter expenditure monitoring and financial discipline so
that the scarce resources do not remain locked up and surrendered later. (Para 2.8)
Pending Utilization Certificates
The Committee observes that pendency of UCs and the huge amount involved therein
have implications for further release of funds and thus impinges on the effective
implementation of the projects. Though the Department has drawn up an ambitious plan of
reducing pendency of UCs to nil, the past trends in this regard inspire little confidence. The
Committee, therefore, desires to be informed of the detailed action plan on bringing down
the pendency of UCs to nil and the success achieved so far so that a fair assessment could
be made about the efficacy of the plan. (Para 2.10)
It is a matter of serious concern for the Committee to note that the number of
pending UCs and the amount involved therein is too substantial to be ignored. Of more
serious concern is the fact that UCs dating as far back as to 2000 and 2001 are still
pending. The Committee notes with disapproval that the steps taken by the Department for
liquidation of the pending UCs are of routine nature and have not yielded the desired
results so far. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to expedite evaluation
of the schemes and formulate appropriate remedial measures accordingly. The Committee
would also expect the Department to play a more proactive role in the capacity building of
the States so that with better absorption capacity the funds could be utilized in a more
efficient manner. The Committee would also like to reiterate its recommendation made in
its 55
th Report presented to Rajya Sabha on 26 th April, 2012 that the Department should
formulate an action plan in coordination with the State Governments for developing an
effective and efficient coordination mechanism for timely submission of UCs. This would
also speed up execution of all the projects well within the approved cost. (Para 2.13)
Utilization of Plan Allocation for North-Eastern States and Sikkim
The Committee lends its full support to the activities and budgetary provisions for
the benefit of the North-Eastern States and Sikkim. The Committee observes that it is
essential for inclusive growth that the benefits of the growth of our economy reach the
people of the distantly located North-Eastern States of the country. The Committee would,
therefore, like the Department to closely monitor the progress of various schemes in the
North-Eastern Region and ensure that the ongoing projects there are not hamstrung for
lack of funds or due to underutilization thereof. The Committee would also like to impress
upon the Department to ensure that the projects/schemes sanctioned for the North-Eastern
Region are not delayed due to lack of approvals. (Para 2.18)

32
III. Updation of Central Registers of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy
The Committee is not happy to note that despite its recommendation made in its 55 th
Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department that all such information
should be made available in the public domain in an updated form on the touch of a button,
little progress seems to have been made in this regard, which is evident from the fact that
out of 23 States in respect of which information pertaining to updation of Central Register
of Indian Medicine has been made available, eight States are lagging behind in sending
updated information. As regards the Status of updation of the Central Register of
Homoeopathy, the Committee is surprised to note that in three cases, i.e. Bihar, Tamil
Nadu and Tripura, it took sixteen or more months to incorporate the information in the
Central Registers. The Committee is aware that there is a provision in the IMCC Act 1970
mandating the State Boards to submit updated registers of practitioners on the 1
st April
every year. The Committee would, therefore, like to be intimated of the impediment coming
in the way of updation of Central Registers of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy despite
there being mandatory legal provisions. The matter may be taken up at the Minister level
and frequent review meetings be held. (Para 3.2)
IV. National Institutes
National Institute of Ayurveda (NlA)
The Committee observes that the NIA is inter-alia mandated to develop high
standards of teaching in Ayurvedic System of Medicine and therefore the acute shortage of
the faculty is certain to adversely affect the functioning of this premier Institute. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take immediate measures
towards filling up vacancies in faculty posts with priority and urgency. The Committee also
observes that in pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee, the Department in its
Action Taken Note on the 55
th Report of the Committee, had assured to take action to
appoint professionally qualified persons on short-term contract or deputation basis to
overcome the staff crunch in senior faculty positions. The Committee is not aware whether
any forward movement has been made in this regard. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Department to take immediate action towards appointing professionally
qualified persons on short-term contract or deputation against these posts till regular
appointments are made and desires to be kept apprised of the headway made in the matter.
(Para 4.3)
National Institute of Homoeopathy (NIH)
The Committee observes that the delay in completion of projects often results in cost
overrun. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to closely monitor the
progress of construction of Academic-cum-Library Building on a quarterly basis in order to
avoid time overrun and resultant cost escalation. (Para 4.6)
The Committee observes that the expansion of the Hospital from 100 to 250 beds was
targeted to be achieved during 2010-11. Two years have elapsed since then, but the project
is yet to completed. The time-overrun has led to cost overrun. The Committee has been
advising the Department to streamline its monitoring mechanism so that such slippages in
timely implementing the project and the resultant cost overrun could be minimized. The
Committee is constrained to observe that the delay in completion of the project is indicative
of slack monitoring and bad planning. The Committee, therefore, exhorts the Department
to pay focused attention towards expansion of the Hospital from its existsing bed strength

33
of 100 to 250 beds. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress of
implementation of the project. (Para 4.8)
The Committee expresses its concern over such a large number of vacant posts in
teaching cadre which is certain to impair the functioning of NIH. The Committee observes
that the main objective of NIH is to develop excellence in homoeopathic education and
conduct UG and PG courses. It is, therefore, imperative for the Department to urgently take
steps to fill up the vacancies in a specific time-frame. The Committee desires to be apprised
of the measures taken by the Department and progress made towards filling up all vacant
posts of NIH. (Para 4.10)
Morarji Desai National Institute of YOGA (MDNIY)
The Committee observes that one of the main factors contributing to underutilization
of the budgeted funds is delay in necessary approvals. The Committee would, therefore, like
to impress upon the Department to proactively pursue and complete all pre-approval
activities for the new schemes/additional components under the above head so that the
approved outlay for the Twelfth Plan is utilized gainfully and there are no instances of sub-
optimal utilization of the approved outlay. (Para 4.13)
The Committee, welcomes the evaluation of the Advanced Centres of Yoga by the
Scientific Advisory Committee and desires to be apprised of its findings and action taken
thereon. (Para 4.15)
North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homeopathy (NEIAH), Shillong
The Committee notes that the proposal for establishment of NEIAH was approved by
the Cabinet on the 27
th March, 2008. More than five years have passed since then, but the
full operationalisation of the project is still a far cry. Though the Department claims that
there is no cost escalation so far, the Committee is convinced that the delay is certain to
entail cost overruns. The Committee gathers from the information furnished that out of
Rs. 64.50 crore allocated during the Eleventh Plan, Rs. 45.00 crore only could be utilized
which is indicative of the inefficient utilization of the budgeted funds. The Committee,
therefore, desires that an action plan be drawn for better deployment of the financial
resources during the Twelfth Plan so that any possibility of financial under-performance
could be obviated and there is no breach of the revised time-line of October, 2013 for the
operationalization of NEIAH. (Para 4.18)
North-Eastern Institute for Folk Medicine (NEIFM), Pasighat, Arunachal Pradesh
The Committee is constrained to note the contradictions in the information furnished
by the Department. On the one hand, the Department claims that there is no proposal for
escalation of the cost estimate of the project, on the other, the approved outlay of Rs. 72.90
crore for the project gives an impression that the enhanced allocation has been made to
meet the cost overrun. The Committee, therefore, like the Department to explain this
apparent contradiction. (Para 4.21)
The Committee is also not happy with the tardy progress made towards
operationalisation of the project. A delay of more than three years have already taken
place, which is inordinate by any standard. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department streamline its monitoring mechanism and ensure that the revised time-line for
completion of the project is not extended in any event. The Committee desires to be
apprised of the steps taken to ensure timely implementation of this project. (Para 4.22)

34
The Committee observes that this project is intended to validate folk medicine
practices and integrate them into mainstream health care system. However, its
operationalisation in the true sense of the word can not be accomplished until the requisite
faculty and staff are appointed. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department
to proactively process the matter in the Integrated Finance Division and thereafter pursue
it with the Department of Expenditure. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the
progress made in this regard. (Para 4.24)
All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), New Delhi
In its 55
th Report presented to Rajya Sabha on 26 th April, 2012, the Committee had
expressed its concern over the delay in implementation of this project and the resultant
time and cost overruns and recommended that a rigorous monitoring mechanism be put in
place to ensure execution of the project within the approved cost and designated time-line.
The Committee is constrained to note that despite the Department’s assurance made in past
that the project was on track, this project has witnessed time and cost overruns. The
Committee strongly disapproves of the Department’s failure to deliver the targeted outcome
within the designated time-line. The Committee only hopes that the Institute would be
operational at least during current financial year. (Para 4.27)
V . Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of AYUSH Institutions
The Committee does not understand as to why State Governments do not come
forward to get funds for strengthening the AYUSH colleges. The Department should make
an introspection in this regard and discuss with State Governments. (Para 5.4)
The Committee would recommend to the Department to expedite submission of the
report of the independent agency and find out the exact reasons for gross underutilization
of the budgeted amount under the above head and take corrective action accordingly by way
of making realistic projection of budgetary requirements and optimal utilization thereof.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the findings of the independent agency and
action taken thereon. (Para 5.5)
The Committee observes that a substantial outlay of Rs. 450.00 crore has been
approved for the above scheme for the Twelfth Plan. The Committee would like the
Department to gear up its monitoring mechanism so as to avoid recurrence of such gross
financial underperformance as witnessed duing the Eleventh Plan. (Para 5.6)
VI. Assistance to Accredited AYUSH Centres of Excellence in Non-Governmental/Private
Sector Engaged in AYUSH Education/Drug Development
The Committee is constrained to observe that this is yet another instance of
unrealistic formulation of Budget Estimate and under utilization thereof. The Committee
disapproves of such unrealistic projection of fund requirements and impresses upon the
Department to ensure that such large variations in the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates
and Actual Expenditure do not recur in future. (Para 6.6)
The Committee gathers from the information furnished that the Scheme is being
evaluated by an independent agency and would be modified as per its suggestions. The
Committee welcomes this exercise and desires to be apprised of the follow-up action taken
in this regard. (Para 6.7)
The Committee would also like to draw attention of the Department to the fact that
on the one hand, the Department has informed that the outlay for the Scheme for the

35
Twelfth Plan is Rs. 97.50 crore, on the other, the Outcome Budget 2013-14 States that the
Scheme was only for the Eleventh Plan and fresh proposal could be considered only on
approval of continuation of this Scheme. The Committee would, therefore, like the
Department to justify as to how such a huge amount of Rs. 97.50 crore is targeted to be
utilized if the continuation of the above Scheme is yet to be approved, though the first year
of the Twelfth Plan has already elapsed. When the experience in the Eleventh Plan shows
that there are very few eligible non-profit NGOs/Private Sector organizations in AYUSH,
then Department should better wind up the scheme. (Para 6.8)
VII. Research and Development including Medicinal Plants
The Committee notes that the outlay for the above head for the Twelfth Plan is
substantially higher than the Eleventh Plan allocations. A large number of important
activities are included under this head. The Committee is of the view that scientific
validation of classical formulations of Indian Systems of Medicine for their safety and
efficacy is of vital importance for promotion of these systems of medicine. The Committee,
therefore, desires that the Department should regularly monitor the utilization of allocated
funds under this head to ensure that the funds are utilized judiciously and the on-going
research activities are strengthened. (Para 7.2)
The Committee would also like to reiterate its recommendation made in its 55
th
Report presented to Rajya Sabha on 26 th April, 2012 that the Department should establish
a national registry of all AYUSH research studies and get the health outcomes accruing
from the research projects of the Research Councils evaluated by an independent agency.
The Committee desires to be apprised of the developments in this regard. (Para 7.3)
National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB)
The Committee is of the view that full-fledged SMPBs with full-time chief Executive
Officer will certainly lead to better implementation of the Schemes and programmes of
NMPB and more efficient deployment of financial resources. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Department to expedite its decision on increasing support for full
fledged SMPBs. (Para 7.8)
The Committee notes with concern that a substantial amount of Central funds for
the previous years continues to remain unaccounted for under both the schemes of NMPB
which is indicative of non-adherence to the basic financial norms. The Committee feels that
the delay in timely submission of UCs would adversely affect execution of the projects under
this head. The Committee would, therefore, recommend the Department to draw up a
concrete action plan for quicker liquidation of pending UCs within a designated time-line.
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the measures taken and results achieved in
this regard. (Para 7.9)
The Committee has also been given to understand that an evaluation of the Schemes
of NMPB is going on and in the light of the suggestions made, the NMPB will be revised.
The Committee welcomes the ongoing evaluation of NMPB and desires to be kept apprised
of the suggestions made and action taken thereon. (Para 7.10)
The Committee notes that in pursuance of its recommendation, some progress has
been made towards filling up of the posts. The Committee would like to impress upon the
Department to vigorously pursue the matter and ensure that the remaining vacancies are
filled up within the shortest possible time. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
efforts made and results achieved in this regard. (Para 7.12)

36
VIII. Quality Control of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic (ASU&H) Drugs
The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Department for strengthening
of the regulatory mechanism of ASU&H drugs. However, the Committee is aware that
quality control and standardization of ASU&H drugs, which are mainly herbal/herbo-mineral
preparations, is very complex and different from synthetic molecules of the allopathic
system which are produced under controlled laboratory conditions. However, given the
current scenario where regulation of ASU&H drugs leaves much to be desired, the
Committee feels that strengthening and streamlining of regulatory mechanism of ASU&H
drugs needs to be speeded up. The Committee desires that the Department should accord
high priority to the task of laying down standards of quality control of ASU&H drugs by
using modern techniques. (Para 8.5)
The Committee observes that there is a separate chapter-IV A in the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act, 1940 which regulates the manufacture and sale of ASU drugs. Since the
enforcement of provisions of Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules made thereunder is under
the purview of State Drug Licensing and Drug Control Authorities, the state drugs
regulatory framework has a crucial role to play in ensuring safety and quality of ASU&H
drugs. It is in this context that strengthening of State Drug Testing Laboratories which are
facing infrastructure constraints, and shortage of manpower, assumes added significance.
The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to quickly revise the Quality
Control Scheme and its funding pattern for greater efficacy of the Scheme. (Para 8.8)
Central Drug Controller for AYUSH
An early action may be taken to establish and appoint an AYUSH Drug Controller.
(Para 8.11)
IX. Central Sector Schemes for Development of AYUSH Industry Clusters
The Committee notes that 9 AYUSH Industry Clusters were set up during 2012-13.
It is a matter of concern that not a single new AYUSH Industry Cluster has been set up
since then which is indicative of the tardy progress in the matter. In its 55
th Report, the
Committee had suggested that there should be at least one AYUSH industry cluster in each
State. Though the Department has assured to move in this direction there is little action
on the ground. The Committee, therefore, exhorts the Department to quickly finalize
re-designing of the Scheme and ensure that concrete progress is made towards setting up
of at least one AYUSH Industry cluster in each State which is also necessary for supply of
quality drugs at affordable prices. (Para 9.5)
X. International Cooperation
The Committee notes that no MoUs have been signed or are in the process of being
signed with the developed countries like U.K, Germany, U.S.A, Canada etc. The Committee
observes that signing of MoUs for promotion of research projects of AYUSH with the
countries, which have well-developed and credible regulatory mechanisms, will go a long way
in establishing the therapeutic credential of AYUSH medicine globally. This needs to be
taken further ahead and India should become frontrunner in alternative systems of
medicine. (Para 10.3)
XI. Information, Education and Communication (IEC)
The Committee welcomes the evaluation of IEC and desires to be apprised of the
final findings of AFCL and the action taken thereon. (Para 11.4)

37
The Committee observes that no tangible progress has been made towards curtailing
misleading advertisements concerning AYUSH, over the electronic media and in the print
media. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should pursue the
matter with the authorities concerned with renewed vigour as the issue is too important for
maintaining credibility of AYUSH systems to be left unattended. The Committee desires to
be apprised of the final outcome in the matter. (Para 11.7)
XII. Miscellaneous
The Committee observes that 20 yoga therapy Centres were targeted to be set up in
AYUSH/Allopathy hospitals during the Eleventh Plan, but only 6 such centres could be set
up during the Plan period. The Committee expresses its displeasure over this sorry state of
affairs and strongly recommends that such yoga therapy centres be set in all AYUSH/
Allopathy hospitals all over the country during the current Plan period. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 12.1)
The Committee also observes that during the Eleventh Plan, 150 tours for
documentation of reported cases of prevention/treatment of vector-borne/infectious diseases
by Siddha Drugs were targeted; however, only 31 tours could be conducted. The Committee
is of the view that there is an urgent need for improvement in documentation of the
reported episodes of prevention/treatment of vector-born infectious diseases by Siddha drugs
and recommends that the Department should make all out efforts to complete
documentation of all the reported cases of prevention/treatment/cure of vector-borne/
infectious diseases not only by Siddha drugs but also by Ayurvedic and other traditional
drugs. (Para 12.2)

MINUTES

IX
NINTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Friday, the 5 th April, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Rasheed Masood
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
7. Shri D. Raja
8. Shri H. K. Dua
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Kirti Azad
10. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
11. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
12. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
13. Dr. Monazir Hassan
14. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
15. Shri Mahabal Mishra
16. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
17. Shri Harin Pathak
18. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
19. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
20. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
21. Shri P. T. Thomas
22. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
41

42
***
***
Department of AYUSH
1. Shri Anil Kumar, Secretary
2. Shri S. K. Srivastava, Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor
3. Shri R. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Bala Prasad, Joint Secretary
5. Shri A. K. Ganeriwala, Joint Secretary
6. Dr. Rais-ur-Rahman, Adviser (Unani)
7. Dr. Shakuntla, Chief Controller of Accounts
8. Dr. Ramesh Babu, Director General, CCRAS
9. Dr. Shakir Jamil, Director General, CCRUM
10. Dr. R. K. Mahchanda, Director General, CCRH
11. Dr. I. Basava Raddi, Director I/c, CCRYN and Director MDNIY
12. Dr. Rajiv Sharma, Director, PLIM
13. Dr. M. Ayyappan, Chairman and Managing Director, HLL Lifecare Ltd.
14. Shri Gyanesh Pandey, Chairman and Managing Direcotr, HSCC India Ltd.
15. Shri R. S. Sinha, Director
16. Shri Raj Kumar, Director
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and briefed them about
the agenda of the meeting i.e., examination of Demands for Grants (2013-14) of *    *    * the
Secretary, Department of AYUSH in the afternoon session.
II. ***
III. ***
(The Committee then adjourned at 2.00 
P.M. for lunch to meet again at 2.30 P.M.)
IV. Oral Evidence of the Secretary, Department of AYUSH
5. The Committee then heard the Secretary of the Department of AYUSH on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Department. The Secretary made a power point presentation on the
Demands of Grants (2013-14) inter alia highlighting (i) outlay, allocation and expenditure in Eighth,
Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh Five Year Plans; (ii) details of Central Sector schemes in the Eleventh
Plan and Expenditure in 2012-13 and proposals for 2013-14; (iii) increasing share of Centrally
Sponsored Schemes in Eleventh Plan; (iv) steps taken for liquidation of Utilisation Certificates with
States; (v) proposals made to Ministry of Finance for release of funds and clarifications/approval
of Ministry of Finance, thereon; (vi) expenditure details from 2010-11 to 2013-14 and reasons for
surrender; share of Centrally Sponsored Schemes in percentage terms; (vii) details of non-plan
expenditure in the Eleventh and Twelfth Plan; (viii) Initiatives of the last two years; (ix) new
proposals for Twelfth Plan; (x) key issues facing AYUSH, etc. The Members raised some queries
relating to low utilization of plan funds for 2012-13; slow progress of yoga therapy centres in
AYUSH/Allopath hospitals; capacity building of AYUSH practitioners in Rural Health centres, etc.
*** Relates to other matters.

43
Besides, members also raised a number of issues like steps taken to fill the sanctioned posts; need
to allocate more funds to naturopathy; low utilization of budgeted funds during the year 2012-13;
reasons for slow progress in setting up of Yoga therapy centres in AYUSH/Allopathy hospitals in
the Eleventh Plan; specific efforts made by the Department for optimal utilization of allocated funds
for its various components during 2012-13; details of specific allocation, if any, made for
promotion of AYUSH in the country; strategy made by Department for setting up of AYUSH
hospitals in 2013-14; steps taken by the Department to carry out capacity building of AYUSH
practitioners in Rural Health centres in 2013-14. Central Drug Controller for AYUSH etc. The
Secretary and other representatives of the Department replied to some of the queries raised by the
Members and assured to furnish detailed written replies to the queries, which remained
unanswered.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.

44
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 23 rd April, 2013 in Room No. ‘67’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Kirti Azad
6. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
7. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
10. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
11. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e., consideration and adoption of *  *  * and draft 67
th, 68 th, 69 th and
70th Reports on Demands for Grants (2013-14) pertaining to Departments of Health and Family
Welfare, AYUSH, Health Research and AIDS Control, respectively. He invited Members to share
their specific suggestions for improvements and incorporation in the Draft Reports.
II. Adoption of the Draft Reports
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the five draft Reports mentioned above. A
few changes were suggested by Members for incorporation in the Reports. After some discussion,
the Committee adopted all the five Reports with some modifications. The Committee, thereafter,
44
*** Relates to other matter.

45
decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok
Sabha on Friday, the 26 th April, 2013. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence,
Shri D. Raja and Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Sanjay
Jaiswal, and in his absence, Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok
Sabha.
III. S tudy visit
4. * * *
5. The Committee adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.