   
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
January, 2020/Magha, 1941 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
117 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
On 
THE ALLIED AND HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONS BILL, 2018 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  31st January, 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st January, 2020) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail :  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
  

 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
January, 2020/Magha, 1941 (SAKA) 
 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
On 
THE ALLIED AND HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONS BILL, 2018 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  31st January, 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st January, 2020) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
(i)  - (ii) 
2.  PREFACE 
 
(iii) - (iv) 
3.  ACRONYMS 
 
1- 2  
4.  REPORT 
    Chapter I       -   Introduction 
    Chapter- II    -   Views of the Ministry 
    Chapter - III  -   Views of the Stakeholders 
    Chapter - IV  -   Clause by Clause Consideration 
    Chapter - V   -   General Recommendations  
 
3 - 10 
11 - 24 
25 - 48 
49 - 152 
153 - 157 
 
5.  RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS AT A 
GLANCE 
158 - 209 
6.  MINUTES 
 
210 - 234 
7.  ANNEXURE 
    (I)   Bill 
    (II)  List of witnesses 
 
 
235 
236-239 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   -   Chairman  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 
2.  Dr. R. Lakshmanan  
3.  Dr. Vikas Mahatme 
4.  Shri Jairam Ramesh  
5.  Dr. Santanu Sen 
6.  Shri Ashok  Siddharth 
7.  Shri K. Somaprasad 
8.  Dr. C. P. Thakur 
9.  Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA  
 
11.  Shri Thangso Baite 
12.  Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan    
13.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
14.  Shri C. P. Joshi  
15.  Dr. K. Kamaraj 
 16.  Shri Arjunlal Meena 
17.  Shri Anoop Mishra 
18.  Advocate Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee 
19.  Dr. Mahendra Nath Pandey 
20.  Shri Chirag Paswan 
21.  Shri C. R. Patil 
22.  Shri M.K. Raghavan 
23.  Shri Janak Ram 
24.  Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
25.  Shri Gyan Singh 
26.  Shri Bharat Singh 
27.  Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
28.  Shrimati Rita Tarai 
29.  Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
*30.  Shri Manohar Utawal 
31.  Shri Akshay Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu    Secretary 
Shri J. Sundriyal  Joint Secretary  
Shri Rakesh Naithani   Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                      Additional Director 
Smt. Harshita Shankar      Under Secretary 
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma  Assistant Committee Officer 
Ms. Monika Garbyal   Assistant Committee Officer 
Shri Parth Gupta   Assistant Research Officer 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- 
*ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f 21st December, 2018 
(i)  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2019-20) 
 
1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   -   Chairman 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.K. Antony 
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween  
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Chaudhary Birender Singh 
8. Shri K. Somaprasad  
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Vacant 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
14. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
15. Shrimati Malothu Kavitha 
16. Shri P. K. Kunhalikutty 
17. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
18. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
19. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
20. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
21. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
22. Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
27. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary  
2. Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.S.P. Singh, Director 
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director 
5. Smt. Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary 
6. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma , Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Ms. Monika Garbyal, Assistant Committee Officer 
8. Shri Parth Gupta, Assistant Research Officer 
  
(ii)
                                                           
 Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle, Member resigned from the membership of the Lok Sabha w.e.f 14 th 
September, 2019. 

PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this One Hundred Seventeenth Report of the Committee on the Allied and 
Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018. 
2. In  pursuance of Rule 270 of the Ru les  of Procedure and Conduct of  Business in the 
Council of States relating  to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing  Committees, the 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred* the Allied and Healthcare Professions  Bill, 2019  on 2nd 
January, 2019 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 31st December, 2018 for examination  and 
report  by  1st April, 2019 (Annexure-I).  The previous Committee commenced the examination 
of the said Bill and two meetings were held dated 24 th January and 15th March, 2019.  However, 
the previous Committee could not further examine the Bill and present its Report due to 
preoccupation of the Members of the previous Committee in the General Elections for the 17 th 
Lok Sabha and subsequent dissolution of the Committ ee.  Accordingly, it was decided that the 
said Bill would be examined by the re -constituted Committee. After the reconstitution of the 
Committee, examination of the Bill was started.  However, due to extensive examination of the 
Bill, extension of time was  sought from Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha who granted extension 
till the first day of the first week of the first part of the Budget Session, 2020 for presentation of 
Report on the Bill.   
3. The Committee also issued a Press Release inviting memoranda/vi ews from individuals 
and other stakeholders. In response thereto, a number of memoranda from different 
organistation/association and individuals were received.  
_____________________________________________________________________________________________  
* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.58476, dated 14 th  January, 2019. 
 
(iii) 
  

4. The Committee relied on the following documents in finalizing its Report:- 
(i) The Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018; 
(ii) Background Note on the Bill received from the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare; 
(iii) Presentation, clarifications and Oral evidence of Secretary, Department of Health 
and Family Welfare; 
(iv) Memoranda received on the Bill from various 
institutes/bodies/associations/organizations/experts and replies of the Department 
on the memoranda selected by the Committee for examination; 
(v) Oral evidence and written submissions by various stake holders/experts on the 
Bill;  
(vi) Replies received from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  to the  
questions/queries raised by Members during the meetings on the Bill; and 
(vii) A Report titled 'Paramedics to Allied Health professions: Landscaping the 
Journey and Way Forward', Public Health Foundation of India. 
5.  The Committee held 7 sittings during the course of examination of the Bill, i.e., on 24th 
January, 2019, 15 th March, 2019, 10 th October, 2019, 11 th October, 2019, 10 th December, 2019, 
6th January, 2020 and 17 th January, 2020 . The list of witnesses heard by the Committee is at 
Annexure-II. 
6.  On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions 
made by those who deposed before the Committee and also those who gave their valuable 
suggestions to the Committee through their written submissions.  
7.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
8. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same on 17th, January, 2020. 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
17th January, 2020 
..., Magha, 1941 (Saka)                                                            
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
Chairman,  
Department-related Parliamentary   
Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare, Rajya Sabha 
 
 (iv)

1 
 
ACRONYMS 
AAPA All Assam physiotherapy Association 
AERB Atomic Energy Regulatory  Board 
AHP Allied Health Professionals 
AHPCI Allied Healthcare Professions Council of India 
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education  
AIMLTA All India Medical Laboratory Technologists Association 
AISHE All India Survey Report on Higher Education 
ASCO Association of Schools & Colleges of Optometry 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy 
BOMS Bachelor of Ophthalmic Medical Science 
CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education 
CCIM Central Council of Indian Medicine  
CET Common Entrance Test 
CHBI Central Bureau of Health Intelligence 
CPR Cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
CSSD Central Sterile Supply Department 
CT Computed Tomography 
DCI Dental Council of India 
DGHS Director General Health Services 
ECG Electrocardiogram 
ECHO Technologist or Echocardiogram 
FIDHA Federation of Indian Dental Hygienists Association 
FIDHA Federation of Indian Dental Hygienists Association 
FRCP Foundation of Rajdhani Clinical Physiotherapists 
FSSAI Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
HCPC Health and Care Professions Council 
HIM Health Information Management  
HMIS Health Management Information System 
HPCI Healthcare Professions Council of India 
IAAP Indian Academy for Applied Psychology 
IACP Indian Association for Clinical Psychology 
IAPA Indian Association of Physician Assistants 
IDA Indian Dietetic Association 
ILO International Labour Organization 
INC Indian Nursing Council 
IOA Indian Optometric Association 
IOF Indian Optometry Federation 
ISCO International Standard Classification of Occupations 
ISRT Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists 
JFMTI Joint Forum of Medical Technologist of India 
JFMTI Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of India 
MCI Medical Council of India 
MOHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MoS&T Ministry of Science & Technology 
MP Member of Parliament 
MQT Minimum Qualifying Test 
MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
MSDE Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 

2 
 
NBAHS National Board for Allied Health Sciences 
NCHRH National Commission for Human Resources for Health 
NEET National Eligibility cum Entrance Test 
NEXT National Exit Test 
NHCPC National Health & Care Professions' Commission 
NMC National Medical Commission 
NOA National Ophthalmic Association 
NPCB National Programme for Control of Blindness 
NSQF National Skills Qualifications Framework 
NTET National Teachers Eligibility Test 
OA Ophthalmic Assistants 
OCI Optometry Council of India 
OO Ophthalmic Officer 
OT Occupational Therapy  
PCI Pharmacy Council of India 
PHFI Public Health Foundation of India 
PMR Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 
PT Physiotherapy 
QCI Quality Council of India 
RCI Rehabilitation Council of India 
SIR Society of Indian Radiographers 
TRAI Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
UGC University Grants Commission 
UHC Universal Health Coverage 
UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund 
WCO World council of Optometry 
WCPT World Confederation of Physical Therapy 
WHO World Health Organization 
 
 
 
  

3 
 
CHAPTER- I 
INTRODUCTION 
Mission Statement of the Bill 
1.1 The Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 provides for regulation and 
maintenance of standards of education and services by Allied and Healthcare Professionals and 
the maintenance of a Central Register of Allied and Healthcare Professionals and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Bill, further, provides for the recognition of more 
than 53 professions in the allied and healthcare sector such as Physiotherapists, Occupational 
Therapists, Optometrists, Nutritionists, Medical Laboratory Professions, Radioth erapy 
Technology Professionals etc. who lack a comprehensive regulatory mechanism, therefore, 
makes provision for constitution of and allied and healthcare council of India for regulation and 
maintainance and standards for education and services.  The Bill  intends to strike a working 
equilibrium and balance between medical professionals and allied and healthcare professionals, 
latter being unidentified, unregulated and under -utilised. The Bill aims to endow equal status to 
the allied and healthcare professi onals and strengthen the health workforce for availing the 
emerging employment opportunities in the domestic as well as the global market and for testing 
task shifting model and improving and increasing access to quality health services through 
qualified and competent set of allied and healthcare professionals. 
Necessity of the Bill 
1.2 Historically, India has leaned towards a ‘doctor -centered’ healthcare delivery, with very 
little attention paid to specialization in allied health sciences. The medical profession in India has 
NMC and council for Nurses, Pharmacist and Dentist. These councils sets standard and ensure 
quality of education and service provided by them. However, no council in the country has been 
formed for the Allied and Healthcare Professional s that would establish a robust regulatory 
framework which will play the role of a standard setter and regulator for Allied Healthcare and 
Professionals. However, with the advancement in science and technology these health -care 
professionals have now becom e the part and parcel of modern medical establishment whose 
quality and competency often play a major role in making the system sensitive and efficient. 
Perceived appreciation and optimal utilization of the whole range of skills possessed by allied 
and hea lthcare professionals is the key to health -sector reforms in India, especially given the 
shortage of doctors and nurses in semi -urban and rural areas of the country.  Moreover, the 
Government intends to bridge demand and supply gaps to ensure sustained avai lability of allied 
health professionals for future generations that constitutes a cornerstone in India’s plans for 
healthcare reforms. Investing in Allied Health Professionals has never been vital to reforms in 
public health sector. 
1.2.1 The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill stipulates that as per estimation of the 
World Health Organization, by the year 2030, the global economy is projected to create around 
forty million new health sector jobs mostly in the middle and high income countries and d espite 
the anticipated growth in jobs there shall be projected shortage of fifteen million health workers 
to achieve the sustainable development goals in low and lower middle income countries. The 
United Nation’s Commission on Health Employment and Economi c Growth with a focus on 
building resilient health systems stresses upon strengthening the health workers and urges to 
ensure effective health employment. 
 

4 
 
1.2.2 The SOR of Bill mentions that considering the age as a factor, India is one of the 
youngest countries of the world. By the year 2020, with sixty -four percent of the population in 
the working age group, India is set to experience a dynamic transition as the population burden 
of the past turns into a demographic dividend. The rising global demand a nd need for health 
workers, over the next decade, presents significant challenges nationally as well as offers the 
opportunity to generate employment not only to meet the domestic demands but also to cater the 
global market. 
1.2.3 Till date, the SOR highli ghts Health workforce in Indian healthcare system has been 
defined with focus limited to few cadres such as doctors, nurses and frontline workers, wherein, 
several other healthcare professionals have remained unidentified, unregulated and underutilized. 
The persistent demand for a regulatory framework to ensure appropriate regulation and 
standardization of such professions has been seen for several decades. In the last six years, over 
fifty allied and healthcare professions have been identified whose potent ial may be utilized in 
improving the access to care and all those professions are globally regulated professions. 
Detailed mapping has been undertaken to identify such professions based on the International 
Labour Organization's International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-08). 
1.2.4 With the advancement in the health sector, changing preferences of consumer and 
provider, it is now warranted to create a fresh vision of healthcare delivery with a patient centric 
approach and focus on moving to a multi -disciplinary team -based care. There is a need to 
implement new ways of using health workers, strengthening the workforce by testing task 
shifting models and improving and increasing access to quality services through qualified and 
competent set of allied and healthcare professionals.  
Objectives of the Bill  
1.3 The Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 seeks to provide for the following:—  
(i)  constitution of an Allied and Healthcare Council of India for regulation and 
maintenance of standards for education and services by Allied and Healthcare 
Professionals;  
(ii)  ensuring a framework for coordinated and integrated development of policies and 
standards for governance of allied and healthcare education and services; 
(iii)  regulating the professional conduct, code of ethics and etiquette to be observed by 
allied and healthcare professionals; 
(iv)  a platform to create and maintain an allied and healthcare workforce register;  
(v)  the development of minimum standards of education, courses, curricula, facilities, 
assessment, examination, training, etc.; 
(vi)  the allied and healthcare qualifications including name of the course, entry criteria, 
duration, among other particulars; 
(vii)  a uniform entry examination with common counselling for admission into allied 
and healthcare institutions at diploma, undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral 
levels; 
(viii)  a uniform exit or licensing examination; 
(ix)  strategic framework for rational deployment of skilled manpower, performance 
management systems, task shifting and associated career development pathways 
for allied and healthcare professionals; and 
(x)  constitution of corresponding State Allied and Healthcare Councils to enforce and 
implement the standards established by the Central Council. 

5 
 
Background of the Bill 
1.4 The background note on the Bill, as furnished by the Ministry traces back s everal 
Committees starting from Bhore Committee (1948), followed by Mu daliar Committee (1961), 
Chadha Committee (1963), Shrivastav Committee (1975), Medical Education and Review 
Committee led by Shri Mehta (1983), Mukherjee Committee (1995), Planning Commission Task 
Force on Planning for HRH (2007), among others have stresse d on the importance of quality 
human resources for health. The Bajaj Committee specifically indicated the need for organized 
Allied and Healthcare professionals with the right skills and training, which validated the fact 
that why we need a statutory body. Though the demand has continued in the last 60 years, formal 
efforts were made in last two decades. The first of such efforts to establish a regulatory body in 
India started over two decades ago when a bill for Physiotherapists and Occupational Therapists  
was drafted in early 1990’s.  
1.5 The Committee has been apprised of the efforts made by the Government in the past to 
accord statutory status to allied and healthcare professionals which are enumerated below: 
 
The Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007 
1.5.2 The first of the formal efforts for establishing a regulatory body started in 2004, when a 
bill started taking shape for Physiotherapist and Occupational Therapist. Subsequently with 
constant deliberations and modifications, a Par amedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill 
2007 was introduced in the Lok Sabha which was then referred to Parliamentary Standing 
Committee for examination. The Standing Committee analyzed the subject in its 31st Report.  
However, the bill lapsed with dissolution of 14th Lok Sabha in 2009.  
Thirty-First Report of the Departmental related parliamentary Committee on Health and 
Family Welfare on the Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007 
1.5.3 The Committee made the following recommendations:- 
(i) The committee was of the view that title of an Act needs to reflect the basic 
objective behind its enactment and should use a common term in the title of the Bill. 
On the basis of the structural components of the Council presented und er then 2007 
Bill, it was suggested that title of the Bill be changed to “The Allied Health 
Professions Central Councils Act, 2007.” Considering this would not only cover all 
the disciplines then being brought under the act (which were Physiotherapy, 
Occupational Therapy, Medical Laboratory Technology and Radiology Technology) 
but also allow for the inclusion of other disciplines in the future.  
(ii) The word “technician” be replaced by “technologist” and the term “Paramedical” be 
deleted; 
(iii) The term ‘medically directed’ in case of Physiotherapy and/or Occupational Therapy 
may be removed;  
(iv) Since there is no Council and no register/database, the first term (2 years) to have a 
nominated body and from the next term to have an elected body; 
(v) Include provisions to ensure uniform standards of education across States and the 
establishment of State-level councils for the maintenance of such standards; 
(vi) Indicate the quorum required for the meetings of the Central Councils 
 
  

6 
 
The National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011 
1.5.4 Another proposal for constitution of Allied Health (Paramedical) Council was included in 
the NCHRH Bill, 2011 which was introduced in Rajya Sabha in December, 2011. The Standing 
Committee rejected the bill in th e stated form due to strong opposition by Medical Council of 
India, Dental Council of India as well as Indian Nursing Council and the Committee gave 
recommendations to revise the bill. Consequently, this Ministry has moved away from a unitary 
structure (NCHRH) for all health professionals (both regulated and unregulated) and the present 
bill aims for confined to regulating cadres not covered by other Councils in existence. 
 
The Journey "From Paramedics to Allied Health services: Landscaping and Way Ahead" 
1.6 With recognition of the problem being faced by the allied and healthcare professionals, 
the Ministry commissioned a report, with a mandate to understand the current status, 
identification and state of affairs of various unregulated professionals in the  healthcare system. 
The report was the first attempt of the Ministry to understand the human resources for health 
system in the absence of any verifiable, coordinated or consolidated repository regarding 
information of the professionals in the system. Alth ough the report did not focus on any 
particular profession but drew attention of the Ministry on the overall situation and problems 
resulting in access, quality of care and affordability out of such a situation. After more than 300 
experts were consulted a nd inputs were received from wide variety of stakeholders, a broad 
common definition was arrived upon to indicate the breadth and scope of their work.   
"Allied and healthcare professionals, thus, include those individuals who were 
involved with the delive ry of health or healthcare related services, with 
qualification and competence in therapeutic, diagnostic, curative, preventive and/or 
rehabilitative interventions. They could work in interdisciplinary health teams in 
varied healthcare setting that include  doctors, nurses and public health 
professionals to promote, protect, treat and/or manage a person’s physical, mental, 
social, emotional, environmental health and holistic well -being.” Further the 
breadth and scope of the practices were also identified and highlighted as follows -  
i. Work through the age span of human development from neonate to old age;  
ii. Work with individuals with complex and challenging problems resulting from 
multisystem illnesses;  
iii. Work towards health promotion and injury prevention, and the assessment, 
management and evaluation of interventions;  
iv. Work in a broad range of settings including the patient’s home and acute, 
primary and critical care settings; and  
v. Have an understanding o f the healthcare issues associated with diverse cultures 
within society."  
1.6.1 The Report also recommended setting up a National Board for Allied Health Sciences 
(NBAHS) -An interim arrangement for the setting up of a National Board for Allied Health 
Sciences was recommended, which could eventually merge into an overarching council. 
National Board for Allied Health Sciences (NBAHS) 
1.7 Considering the mushrooming of Institutions and increasing number of students 
graduating every year in such courses witho ut a regulatory structure in place, the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare proposed a standard setting body - National Board for Allied Health 
Sciences (NBAHS) as a registered society in March, 2014. Although the proposal could not be 
materialized during the course of consultation, the NITI AAYOG endorsed the need for setting 
up of overarching body at Centre for allied health professionals which will be the nodal authority 

7 
 
for standardizing of curricula of education and practice of large number of allied health 
professionals and strive for the growth and development of allied health profession. 
 
Nomenclature for Allied and Health professionals around the world 
1.8 The report "From Paramedics to Allied Health services: A study of the Allied Health 
Ecosystem and a roadmap for human resource capacity augmentation" developed by Public 
Health Foundation of India highlighted that since the nomenclature for different categories of 
allied health professionals varies in different countries, there is a considerable l ack of clarity as 
to what constitutes a paramedical, paraprofessional or allied health service. The term used for a 
person engaged in diagnosis and consultation regarding management and intervention of speech 
disorders differs in different countries. Austr alia uses the term ‘speech pathologist’ whereas the 
United States calls him or her a ‘speech language pathologist’ and in the United Kingdom, he or 
she is known simply as a ‘speech and language therapist’.  AHPs are woven into the fabric of 
public health i n India. The allied and healthcare professionals are in the vanguard of creating a 
service based on people ‘being healthy’ rather than a service based on ‘fixing ill-health’. There is 
ample international evidence suggesting that empowered AHPs can be the l eaders of change, 
playing critical role in improving the reach of health services in underserved areas. With a vast 
variety of allied health professions already present and with newer categories coming on board 
each day, India too, faces a similar challeng e as different states have been using different 
definitions to describe this ever-growing field. 
 
National Task Force, 2014 
1.9 In the absence of a Council, efforts were made by the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare to standardise the norms for education for such professions, wherein in 2014 National 
Taskforces for eight (8) different professional categories comprising of eminent professionals 
and academicians from respective fields, were constituted including major professional groups 
such as Ph ysiotherapy, Occupational Therapists, Optometry, Medical Laboratory Science, 
Radiology and Imaging Technology, Radiotherapy among others. The Taskforces were 
mandated to draft the common minimum curriculum, indicative career pathways, roles and 
responsibilities at different levels as well as skills and competencies of qualified professionals in 
respective fields. As a result, eight model curriculum handbooks (ranging from Diploma to 
Masters) were formally released by the Ministry and uploaded on the Ministr y website in 2016 
for public dissemination, following several consultations including public comments which were 
appropriately incorporated by the experts. Thereby, the standardization is being considered and 
duly acted upon by the Ministry. 
1.9.1 Many adv anced professionals as well professional associations such as that of 
Physiotherapy, Occupational therapy, Physician Assistant, Optometry, Laboratory Sciences, to 
name a few, continuously seek for a Health Professional’s Council.  Considering the higher 
education programmes ranging from bachelors to PhDs level being offered across the country 
with no futuristic approach.  
 
Proposal of an overarching Council  
1.10 With the increasing need for regulating all the unregulated healthcare professionals, a 
proposal of an overarching Council was put forth by the Ministry and ‘Allied and Healthcare 
Professional's Central Council Bill, 2015 bill was drafted. The Government had considered the 
recommendations provided by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on the Param edical and 
Physiotherapy Council Bill of 2007 and a detailed analysis was undertaken before drafting the 

8 
 
Bill. Comments were also received from major groups such as Physiotherapy, Optometry, 
Occupational Therapy etc. with a demand for independent Council, professional independence, 
change in the composition of the Council, defining the professions, separate directorate for 
different professions among others. Comments were also received from the States Governments.  
1.10.1 The comments received by the stakeh olders were intensely deliberated and accordingly 
changes were made in the proposed structure. In 2016, the Bill underwent several iterations and 
was presented to FM on 2 nd Jan 2017. The draft proposal, as approved by FM, was then sent for 
inter-ministerial consultation on 8 th Feb, 2017. Changes reflecting inclusion of financial details, 
preamble, etc. as highlighted by Ministry of Law and Justice were incorporated and a 
corrigendum to this effect was sent to all the Ministries/Departments on 17 th Feb 2017.Several 
comments and suggestions were received on the Bill, which was then redrafted by Ministry of 
Law and Justice (Department of Legislative) in close consultation and co llaboration with 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and was jointly signed by JS (ME) on 29 th May 2018, 
after due approvals. During the clause by clause consideration of the Bill, the Special Secretary, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare apprised the  Committee that the Bill had almost 
undergone several rounds of amendments and the present the Allied and Healthcare Professions 
Bill, 2018 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 31 st December, 2018 referred to the DRSC on 
Health and Family Welfare on 2nd January, 2019.     
 
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE ALLIED AND HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONS BILL, 
2018 
1.11 The following are the main features of the Bill:- 
Purpose 
1.11.1 To establish an Allied and Healthcare Council at Centre and corresponding State Allied 
and Healthcare Councils, to provide for regulation and maintenance of standards for education 
and services by Allied and Healthcare Professionals. At present the Bill covers 53 professional 
profiles clubbed under 15 major professional categories.  
 
Definitions specific to training durations and in accordance with global standards 
1.11.2 Specific definitions for Allied Health Professionals and Healthcare Professionals have 
been provided. All the professional categories have been coded according to the ILO 
documentation of the International Standards for Classification of Occupations (ISCO) -08 so as 
to allow for global recognition and mobility.   
1.11.3 Differentiation in training duration has been highlighted as part of the definition such that 
allied healthcare professionals have a minimum of 2000 hrs of training and healthcare 
professionals have a minimum of 3600 hrs. Also included is a provision for certification of 
skilled workers who have undergone formal training of less than 2000 hours. 
 
Structure, constitution, composition and functions of the Central Council 
1.11.4 The Council is en visioned to be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, and corresponding powers. The Council shall comprise 46 members, of which 13 
shall be ex-officio representing diverse and related roles and functions and remaining 33 shall be 
non-ex-officio members who mainly represent the 15 professional categories. The terms of 
office, conditions of service and resignation and removal of members or cessation of 
membership, meetings of the Council and procedure to handle vacancies, have each be en 
detailed. The main functions of the Central Council include the following: 

9 
 
i. Framing policies and standards for the governance of allied and healthcare education 
and professional services; 
ii. Regulation of professional conduct, code of ethics and etiquette f or such 
professionals; 
iii. Creation and maintenance of an up-to-date Central Register; 
iv. Provision of minimum standards of education, courses, curricula, assessment among 
others;  
v. Prescribe the allied and healthcare qualifications including name of courses, entr y 
criteria, duration, among other particulars; 
vi. Provide for a uniform entry examination with common counseling for admission into 
such  institutions for diploma, undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral level;  
vii. Provide for a uniform exit or licensing examination; 
viii. h)Provide strategic framework for rational deployment of skilled manpower, 
performance management systems, task shifting and associated career development 
pathways for allied and healthcare professionals; and 
ix. Perform such other functions as may be e ntrusted by the Central Government or as 
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the Act.  
 
Interim Council 
1.11.5 As per the provision of the Bill, the Central Government will constitute an interim 
Council to facilitate the establishment and to ensure timely discharge of functions till the Council 
is established. The Interim Council will be chaired by the Additional Secretary level officer of 
the Department of Health and Family Welfare and will have member representatives from other 
Ministries and Departments such as AYUSH, Human Resource Development, Defence, Social 
Justice and Empowerment, Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, NITI Aayog, DGHS, as 
well as regulatory bodies including AERB, PCI, MCI, DCI, INC, RCI. 
 
Constitution and composition of State Allied and Healthcare Council 
1.11.6 The State Councils are also envisioned to mirror the Central Council, to be body 
corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal, and corresponding powers, 
comprising 7 ex -officio and 21 non -ex officio me mbers and Chairperson to be elected from 
amongst the non -ex officio members. The main responsibility of the State Councils will be the 
execution of the regulation and standards by enforcing the professional conduct, code of ethics 
and etiquette and taking disciplinary action, ensuring minimum standards, ensuring uniform 
entry examination with common counseling for admissions and uniform exit or licensing 
examination, inspecting institutions and registering professionals in the State, and ensuring 
compliance of all the directives issued by the Central Council or additional functions entrusted 
by the State Government. The term of office, meetings of State Councils, appointment of officers 
and other employees, conditions of removal and resignations etc. have all been detailed. 
 
Professional Advisory Bodies of the Council at Centre and States 
1.11.7 The Councils at Centre and respective States and UTs shall undertake its functions listed 
above through the constitution of professional advisory bodies to examine specific issues relating 
to specific recognized categories and function as an independent recommending authority. The 
Chairperson of each of the professional bodies will represent the specific category in the Central 
Council as well as in the respective State Councils.  
 

10 
 
Central and State Allied and Healthcare Professionals Register 
1.11.8 The Central register will contain the names of all the recognized professionals such that 
the information is in a standardized format relating to any of their respective recognized 
categories, in the manner as may be specified by regulations. Similarly, the State Councils will 
maintain a State register in standardized format for their respective States, containing all the 
relevant information of the registering candidates and on receipt of the report on registration in 
the State Register, the name of the registrant will be automatically reflected in the Central 
Register. Other clauses also specify the details on privileges for enrolment, rights of persons who 
are enrolled, process of registration, issuance of certificate of registration, registration of 
additional qualifications, removal from and restoration of name from the register, registration 
renewal fee, among others. 
 
Recognition of Allied and Healthcare Institutions and reciprocity 
1.11.9 The State Council will also regulate the establishment of any Allied and Healthcare 
Institution or opening of new or higher course of study or training as well as admitting new batch 
of students in any course of study or training. Th e State Council will also have power to attain 
information from time to time from allied and healthcare institutions regarding course of study, 
duration of course, assessment and examinations and other eligibility conditions for individual 
qualifications in any allied and healthcare course as well as can constantly verify the standards of 
any institution and even withdraw recognition in case of non -conformance. In addition the 
Council will also have the power to make regulation for recognizing corresponding  qualification 
(reciprocity) granted by the institutions outside India. 
 
Offences and Penalties 
1.11.10 The Bill also restricts the professionals from mal -practicing, misrepresentation 
and even misuse of titles and ensures penalties for such offences. Pena lty in terms of fine/ 
imprisonment has also been allocated for person or institution from contravening any of the 
provisions or any rule or regulation made therein.  
 
Other Powers 
1.11.11 As the Bill empowers the professionals by ensuring technical authori ty of the 
respective professions into the hands of the eminent representatives, and administrative 
representatives for overall policy alignment, it also embodies the power of the Central 
Government to issue directions to the Council for the fulfillment of the envisaged objectives and 
functions. The Bill also empowers the Central and State Government to make rules, Council to 
make regulations. The proposed Act will also have an overriding effect on any other existing law 
for any of the covered professions. Further the Bill empowers the Central Government to remove 
any difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation by order which 
in this regards shall be made within first three years after the commencement of the Act.    
1.11.12 The Bill also has provision that every rule made by the Central Government and 
the regulations made by the Council shall be laid before each House of Parliament as per the laid 
down procedure. This clause empowers the Central Government to add to or am end Schedule, 
after due consultation with the Council.  
 
  

11 
 
   CHAPTER - II 
  
VIEWS OF MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY  
2.1 The Committee started deliberations on the said Bill by hearing the views of the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. The 
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, during the course of oral evidence 
before the Committee in the me eting held on 15th March, 2019  informed the Committee that 
apart from doctors, dentists, nurses and pharmacists, there are many other profes sionals working 
in the health sector of the country. The Ministry, at present, has identified 53 professional 
profiles clubbed under 15 major professional categories who contribute to the medical 
profession. He stated that no curriculum has been prescribed  for these 53 professionals and their 
education has not been structured, regulated or professionalized. The Ministry has no 
knowledge/information about the strength/number as well as qualifications of the various allied 
and healthcare professionals serving in the country.  
2.1.1 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare during presentation pointed out that 
according to the World Health Organization, in the next few years, 1.5 crore such professionals 
will be required all over the world. That would create ve ry good employment opportunities for 
young people in the field of allied health, not only in the country but also in the entire world. 
Lack of standardization, mutual recognition of degrees with other countries due to absence of the 
council acted as detera nt factor. There is institution framework to certify that whether they have 
obtained a degree or diploma from a recognized institution. It has, therefore, become a stumbling 
bloc for the job opportunities in the country. There is, thus, a due need of stand ardization of 
syllabus, their curriculum, their teachers, the Institutions. After considering these things, it was 
envisaged that such a council should be constituted and a bill should be  introduced, to set 
standards for all the categories that have been left out so far, without any firm regulation.  
2.1.2 During the course of the presentation before the Committee, the Additional Secretary, 
further, apprised the Committee that the Ministry has been drafting this bill since 1994 and this is 
the 58 th draft of the Bill that has been referred to the Committee. He stated that when this Bill 
was presented before the Committee in the form of the National Commission for Human 
Resources for Health Bill, 2011 (NCHRH), the Committee commented to include the workers of 
AYUSH within the purview of the Bill. The Ministry made the efforts by conducting a meeting 
wherein the Secretary of AYUSH and the Principal Secretary of Prime Minister was present. In 
that discussion, the Ministry reached to the consensus that CCIM, an in tegrated Council for 
Indian System of Medicine, should include Allied Health Workers of AYUSH as the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare do not have much information/knowledge about the 
practitioners/doctors present in Ayurveda and Unani and other Indian  System of Medicines. The 
Ministry, then, decided that CCIM will look after Allied Health Professionals of Indian system of 
Medicine and therefore, AYUSH is not included in the Bill.  
2.1.3 The Additional Secretary also informed the Committee that almost a ll segments allied 
and healthcare profession viz. physiotherapists, optometrists etc. demanded a separate Council 
for the ensured growth and development of all segments of allied and healthcare profession. 
However, the Ministry is of the view that four councils have already been created and this will be 
a fifth Council. It is, therefore, not very practical to have a very large number of Councils. 
Ultimately, if a separate council and independent is created for any particular segment, other 
segments will demand the same and it will lead to a snowballing of demands. The Ministry has, 
therefore, decided to have a single council for all the allied and health care professionals. Other 
professionals, that have not been included in the Bill, can be added to this la ter on as and when 
required.  

12 
 
2.1.4 He, further, stated that the Ministry wanted to have a rules for skilled workers in the 
allied health care that has never been taken up in the Medical Council Act, the Dental Act, the 
Nurses Act or the Pharmacist Act. Ho wever, in case of allied and healthcare services, skilled 
workers do have an important role to play. The Ministry has, therefore, decided to categorize and 
standardize that if one has studied more than 2,000 hours in diploma and 3,600 hours in degree 
courses, they will be recognized as qualified workers. And, if it is below 2,000 hours, it will be 
skilling courses that Ministry intends to transfer to the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship and they would be running and certifying those course s in future. So, this Bill, 
for the first time, has a provision for skilling and less than 2,000-hour courses.  
2.1.5 The Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry of Health anf  Family Welfare 
itself and not MSDE must regulate and monitor less than two hours course for semi -skilled 
healthcare.   
2.1.6 Shri Sudhansh Pant, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare made a 
presentation before the Committee on 15 th March, 2019 and highlighting the background and 
necessity of the Bill. He apprised the Committee of the individuals who are considered as allied 
and healthcare professionals and also highlighted the importance of the Bill from the point of 
both professional/educational concern and employment generation. While explaining the salient 
features of the Bill, the joint Secretary highlighted the proposed institutional structure under the 
Bill, the composition and functions of the Central Council, the composition and fun ctions of the 
State Council. The State Councils will have similar structure and composition as the Central 
Council and will be responsible for implementation of regulatory framework. He also informed 
the Committee about the scenario of the allied and healt hcare professions around the world as 
reflected in the following table: 
 
ORAL EVIDENCE OF MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
2.2 Shrimati Sunita Sanghi, Senior Advisor, Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship submitted before th e Committee that it is understood that the intent of this 
particular Bill is not to cover less than 2000 hours of formal skill training given the fact that there 


13 
 
is a huge requirement of the allied healthcare professionals. Clause 37 can be redrafted in the Bill 
to pave way for ecosystem people so that they also get an opportunity to get mobility in the 
ecosystem. It was explained that people who are coming with less than 2000 hours of skill 
training are going to be called as ‘Aid and Assistant’ and because  they are not recognized by this 
proposed Council, they will not have any career progression pathway.  So, the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare have agreed with Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship to 
redraft Clause 37 to include skill t raining of less than 2000 hours in the Act and the training 
would be provided and recognized, the recognition will be granted by the body duly notified by 
the Ministry of Skill Development. 
2.2.1 The re-constituted Committee again heard the views of the Se cretary, Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare on 10 th October, 2019. The Ministry highlighted the background and 
necessity of the Bill and also explained the salient features of the proposed Bill. The Ministry 
informed the Committee that they have propose d to form professional sub -Committees for 
different categories of professions included in the Bill and initially four professional sub -
Committees have been proposed i.e. Medical Lab Science, Physiotherapy, Radiology & 
Radiotherapy and ophthalmic science. H owever, the institutional structure of these professional 
sub-Committees is still in the working stage.       
Comparison between Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007 and 
Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 
2.3 The Ministry of health and Family welfare has also submitted to the Committee in 
writing a brief comparison of Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007 and 
Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 as reflected in the following table:  
Characteristics Physiotherapy and Paramedical 
Central Councils Bill,  2007  
Allied and Healthcare 
Professions Bill, 2018  
Purpose  To establish three Central Councils for 
four selected professional cadres.  
 
 
To establish an Allied and 
Healthcare Council at 
Centre and corresponding 
State Allied and Healthcare 
Councils, to provide for 
regulation and maintenance 
of standards for education 
and services by Allied and 
Healthcare Professionals. 
Professions covered  Paramedical Council Bill is essentially 
proposes regulating the professions of 
Physiotherapy, Lab Technology, 
Radiology Technology and Radiation 
Therapy (there is also a mention of 
Occupational Therapy in the bill but not 
as an independent Council) only. 
It also does not include a provision for 
addition of new spec ialties as and when 
they emerge. 
At present the Bill covers 53 
professional profiles clubbed 
under 15 major professional 
categories.  
(Over and beyond the 
professions covered in the 
2007 Bill) 
Profession covered under 
the Bill have been defined 
and conside red in 
accordance with the Global 
standards (ILO - ISCO 
Coding) and considering 

14 
 
Characteristics Physiotherapy and Paramedical 
Central Councils Bill,  2007  
Allied and Healthcare 
Professions Bill, 2018  
these are evolving 
professions, provision for 
amending the Schedule 
(adding new specialties) has 
been made in the Bill. 
Role  The regulatory mandate and power to 
enforce regulation with the Central 
Councils of the respective professions 
proposed under the Bill.  
Such as inspection and recognition of the 
institution directly by the Central 
Councils. 
The Central council is 
mandated with more 
supervisory, standard setting 
and policy development role 
for regulation of professions 
covered under the Bill and 
the enforcement of the 
regulation will be through 
State Councils 
Such as inspection and 
recognition of the institution 
will be don e by State 
Councils for their respective 
States and the rules 
pertaining to the same will 
be developed by Central 
Council. 
Structure  The Paramedical Council bill proposes 
the constitution of three central councils: 
the Physiotherapy Central Council, the 
Paramedical (Laboratory) council and the 
Paramedical (Radiology Technology) 
council, each of which shall have their 
independent Governing bodies with 
associated Committee structures etc. at 
the Central level. 
Allied and Healthcare 
Professions Bill proposes  
one overarching Council for 
all the professions, with a 
provision for professional 
advisory bodies for different 
professions/ thematic areas 
as needed.  

15 
 
Characteristics Physiotherapy and Paramedical 
Central Councils Bill,  2007  
Allied and Healthcare 
Professions Bill, 2018  
Composition  The Paramedical Council bill includes 
representatives from the Ministry of 
Health or DGHS dealing with 
physiotherapy, medical lab technology or 
radiology (1), Ministry of Finance (1), 
Ministry of Science and Technology (1), 
Armed forces medical College or 
representative from Defence (1), four 
members to represent the CBSE, AICTE, 
UGC and M CI each (4), four members 
from teachers of recognized institutions 
teaching each of the four main specialty 
areas (4), three members representing 
states (3), four members from among 
practitioners of each of the four 
professions (4), four members who 
represent organizations dealing with the 
four areas of physiotherapy, radiology, 
radiotherapy and medical lab technology. 
The A&HP Council will 
comprise 47 members, of 
which 14 shall be ex -officio 
representing diverse and 
related roles and functions 
and remainin g 33 shall be 
non-ex-officio members 
who mainly represent the 15 
professional categories. 
 
The 13 ex officio members 
will represent different 
Ministries/ Department to 
make this body more 
collaborative and cohesive.  
 
Chair to be elected amongst 
the non-ex officio members. 
Nomenclature  Use of term ‘Paramedic’ which is a 
misnomer. 
Use of globally recognized 
term ‘Allied and Healthcare 
Professions’ 
 
Status of existing statutory Allied Health (paramedical) Councils in the states and 
challenges being faced:- 
2.4 The Committee has been informed that only a few States like Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, Nagaland, Rajasthan and Delhi, have statutory mechanism for 
regulation of allied and healthcare related professions. There are several dis crepancies in the 
State regulatory bodies, the regulation is as per the provisions of the Act and is limited in nature.   
i. Delhi has a notified body only for regulation of Physiotherapy (PT) and 
Occupational Therapy (OT) courses which has more than 850 prov isional and 
around 548 registered PT and OT professionals under it. 
ii. MP Paramedical Council, regulates several  Allied Health Courses, such that as per 
the recent  document pertaining to recognized paramedical institutions the Council 
regulates 34 courses across 54 colleges (regulated and unregulated) within MP -  
Level  of courses  No. of seats  No. of courses  
Certificate  1790 11 
Diploma  3132 10 
Degree 2150 6 
Post Graduate  130 7 
Total*  7202 34 
 

16 
 
2.4.1 It was clarified that the difference in the number of courses and seats (from the original 
document) is due to exclusion of Yoga, Naturopathy, and Pharmacy related courses. It is also 
observed that different nomenclature is being used for similar profiles such as Ophthalmic 
Assistant and Paramedical  Ophthalmic Assistant (both are diploma courses), Perfusion 
technician and Perfusion Cardiac surgery technician (both are diploma courses),among others. 
i. Similarly, other State councils also do not cover the entire bunch of professions in 
the allied and hea lthcare domain, like for example Kerala Paramedical Council 
covers only around 20 -25 courses including Certificate, Diploma, Bachelors’ and 
Masters level courses run by Universities or under Directorate of Medical 
Education. 
ii. State Councils like Himachal Pr adesh and Telangana do not have functional 
websites.  
iii. Functional authority given to the Council is also a factor limiting regulatory role of 
a Board or a Council, for example the Telangana State Paramedical Board is one of 
the 18 services under the State M edical Health and Family Welfare Department, 
however, not much activity has happened under it given that due importance and 
attention is not given to such courses. 
iv. Limited information is available online with respect to the registered candidates, 
regulated Institutions, standards among others.  
v. Further, there are several organizations registered under Society’s Act or Trusts 
which have named themselves as ‘Council’ example Para Medical Council (Pb.) 
Mohali, Indira Gandhi Paramedical Council, etc. and contin ue to use the 
unauthorized nomenclature and misleading the professionals and  students in 
absence of a Central regulator.  
vi. Similarly, in several other States for example in UP, separate bodies are being 
entrusted with the course recognition. UP State Medic al Faculty claims to regulate 
the paramedical courses and close to 20 courses are being regulated ranging from 1 -
2 years of Diploma and Certificate programs. Though, it is critical to note that there 
are several Institutions within UP delivering Bachelor and Master l evel program 
which has not covered by the said body.  
2.4.2 Thus, it is evident that most the State Councils for allied and healthcare related 
professions do not have a robust structure. Only a small fraction of the huge gamut of 
professions and profession als in the allied and healthcare domain are actually protected by a 
regulatory body.  
 Comments of the Ministry 
 
2.5 The Committee Secretariat prepared detailed questionnaire on the various issues and 
clause specific queries upon which the Ministry of Heal th and Family Welfare furnished written 
submission for the consideration of the Committee. The comments/response of the Ministry of 
Health and Family welfare on various issues/questions related to the Bill raised by the Members 
of the Committee are given below:- 
 
2.5.1 As regards the query about the major challenges being faced in the regulation of AHC 
Professionals in present times, the Ministry submitted that allied and healthcare professions 
comprise more than 53 identified categories of professionals wh o are qualified and are providing 
their services, but have no regulatory mechanism in the country. As a result, they face multiple 
challenges including absence of standardization for course curricula, duration of courses, 
recognition of their work as a par t of multidisciplinary teams, compensation for their services 
etc. Efforts are being made since last few decades for establishment of a statutory body to 
regulate such professions that made limited progress due to several opposing forces in the 

17 
 
system. Given the focus and commitment of the current Government on healthcare delivery and 
provision of services particularly with Ayushman Bharat and the creation of health and wellness 
centers, amidst the revamping and restructuring of the Medical professionals an d this Bill, this is 
the opportune time to leverage the momentum and create health policies for strengthening the 
health system. 
 
2.5.2 The Committee was, further, informed that the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 
2018 will directly benefit estimat ed 8 -9 Lakh existing Allied and Healthcare -related 
professionals in the country. This estimate on numbers has been made based on the information 
provided by various professional associations for their respective field. However, since this Bill 
is directed to strengthen the healthcare delivery system at large, it may be said that the entire 
population of the country and the health sector as a whole will be benefitted by this Bill. 
 
2.5.3 The Ministry also informed the Committee that the Ministry is are not i n the possession 
of any credible data regarding key statistics and qualitative information about allied health 
courses and the type of applicants for each course, the number of students who are selected, 
enrolled and ultimately graduate, and the number of drop-outs each year. The Ministry had 
commissioned a report on the state of allied and healthcare education and institutions in 2011; 
several efforts in this area began after the submission of the report. In fact, the need for 
regulatory reform in this are a was a major recommendation that is currently being implemented. 
Also, currently, there are no institutions under the central and state Government that offer only 
allied and healthcare courses since several of these courses are run in almost all of the recognized 
Medical Colleges 
 
2.5.3 In response to a further query regarding the evaluation of need -availability gap in the 
education/ training capacity in the country for various specialties, the Ministry submitted that the 
work on this Bill is the result of  a previous report of 2012 that indicated the need for reform in 
health sector. No further study has been conducted since. Regarding the deployment of 
workforce in difficult/ rural areas, they suggested that the new medical colleges, which are being 
upgraded from district hospitals to teaching hospitals, start allied and healthcare courses in the 
future and after taking training in the vicinity of their native places, there will be a higher 
probability of the professionals to retain their jobs. The governme nt has State institutes of Health 
and Family welfare which are functional in many States. These institutes would be strengthened 
to conduct allied and healthcare/ skill development courses in the health sector. 
 
2.5.4 The Committee desired to know the basis for selecting the list of Allied Health Care 
Professionals in the Bill. The Ministry informed that the International Standard Classification of 
Occupations (ISCO) was the basis of selecting the list of Allied and Hea lthcare Professionals, 
after detailed consultation with each of the major groups of stakeholders, all concerned 
Ministries and based on the types of stakeholders from whom responses were obtained as part of 
the public consultation. The International Standa rd Classification of Occupations (ISCO) of the 
International Labour Organization (lLO) is a system for classifying professionals based on their 
skill specialization required to meet their scope of work. World Health Organization (WHO) 
acknowledges the ISCO  2008 revision in its classification of health workers which is accepted 
globally. 
 
2.5.5 The Ministry also informed that they have received representations from one or two 
professional groups demanding their inclusion in the present Bill after its introdu ction in the 
Rajya Sabha. Wherever possible or feasible, this has definitely been considered. In certain cases, 
if a particular group is currently under an existing statutory body, it may not be feasible to move 
them under the ambit of this Bill without th e necessary justification. Clause 66(1) of the Bill 

18 
 
gives the power of amendment of the Schedule to the Central Government 'after consultation 
with the Council, by a notification'. 
 
2.5.6 The Committee desired to know from the Ministry to differentiate bet ween allied and 
healthcare professions, beside the definition given in the Bill, the Ministry submitted that as per 
the definition of WHO, ISCO Classification of health workers, Health Professionals, for the 
purpose of this Act, are defined as: 
 
2.5.7 Health professionals study, advise on or provide preventive, curative, rehabilitative and 
promotional health services based on an extensive body of theoretical and factual knowledge in 
diagnosis and treatment of disease and other health problems. They may cond uct research on 
human disorders and illnesses and ways of treating them, and supervise other workers. The 
knowledge and skills required are usually obtained as the result of study at a higher educational 
institution in a health-related field for a period o f 3-6 years leading to the award of a first degree 
or higher qualification. Similarly, Health Associate Professionals, Allied Health professionals for 
the purpose of this Act, are defined as: 
 
2.5.8 Health Associate Professionals perform technical and prac tical tasks to support diagnosis 
and treatment of illness, disease, injuries and impairments, and to support implementation of 
health care, treatment and referral plans usually established by medical, nursing and other health 
professionals. Appropriate for mal qualifications are often an essential requirement for entry to 
these occupations; in some cases relevant work experience and prolonged on -the-job training 
may substitute for the formal education. 
 
2.5.9 These definitions have been established after loo king at qualifications, scope of practice 
and expected clinical competencies of several hundreds of types of healthcare workers and 
professionals' world over, under the ISCO system of classification. The numerical codes given to 
each of these professionals  also indicates the grouping under which they may be placed. The 
Ministry also stated that Career progression in the profession is not only possible, in fact, it is 
expected that there will be aspiration for the youth to move up the ladder depending upon 
additional qualification and competence gained as well as professional skills. 
 
2.5.10 About the lacunae in the existing grievances redressal mechanism for settling disputes 
arising during the practice in the proposed legislation, the Ministry submitted tha t grievance 
redressal is viewed to be an important role played by both the Central and the State Councils as 
applicable. The rules for the same will be drafted as part of due process. The issue of 
malpractice/negligence committed by the professionals, the scope of practice as related to each 
professional group will be determined by the professional advisory bodies in line with the 
respective educational qualifications in turn determined by the course curriculum etc. Issue of 
negligence and related malpractice will thus depend upon the extent of rights and responsibilities 
approved by the Council for each category and further for each type of professional. 
 
2.5.11 Regarding the mechanism to ensure that the proposed legislation would not be used by 
the big and  powerful healthcare providers for eliminating small players under the garb of 
enforcing quality, the Ministry stated that intent of the Bill is to prevent exploitation and put in 
place standards for the professionals who have not got the rights which is e vident in the means 
and methods of this Bill. Once recognized they will be entitled for commensurate wages and 
perks, not being met presently. However, exploitation is not solely under the control of this Bill, 
and is a larger systemic' issue which needs separate measures to be corrected. 
 
2.5.12 With regard to Committees query regarding high quality delivery be ensured in tier II and 
tier III cities and towns, where even doctors are in short supply, the Ministry submitted that a lot 

19 
 
of the common disorders , for example, related with physical, occupational, eye health and 
primary screenings can be dealt by allied and healthcare professionals within their scope of 
work. High quality healthcare delivery can be ensured through trained allied and healthcare 
professionals who can provide care for ailments related with their profession and refer the cases 
for higher investigation/ care when required. 
 
2.5.13 The Committee was also informed that the proposed Bill caters to the allied and 
healthcare professionals of modern medicine excluding allied professions of AYUSH. The issue 
of allied professionals under AYUSH was debated and discussed at length and after detailed 
examination, it was agreed mutually between both Ministries that it would be better for AYUSH 
allied professionals to belong under a separate regulatory structure more in line with the Indian 
Systems of Medicine. This work is currently underway as part of the Ayush Ministry. 
 
2.5.14 On a specific query regarding calculation of training in years or hours, the Ministry has 
informed that the hours of training were specified as there have been consistent efforts in other 
Government schemes such as Skill development to go by hour -based train ing. However, the 
department agrees with the suggestion of the Committee as these are professional courses, 
thereby, it can be more feasible to mention years (full time and minimum hours). Appropriate 
changes may be incorporated upon receipt of the final report of the Standing Committee. 
 
2.5.15 With regard to Committee's query on making standards that are achievable and doable 
(particularly for rural India), the Ministry  stated that they agreed with the suggestion and will 
ensure the same upon constitutio n of the Interim Council. The Interim Council will have the 
mandate to set standards, in accordance with and considering the access and availability of 
professionals/ faculty/ institutions etc. As that the extent, distribution and availability of allied 
and healthcare professionals is not clearly known and unless such details are available, standard 
setting will be an incomplete process. Manpower planning is envisioned to be one of the core 
functions of the council and thus one of the foremost tasks of the interim council will be to 
undertake extensive mapping of the existing professionals after enactment of the Act. Standards 
will then be set accordingly, with the overall aim to improve access and align with the larger goal 
of Universal Health coverage. 
 
2.5.16 With regard to inclusion of the palliative care in the Bill, the Ministry submitted that the 
process of inclusion of the palliative care may be considered for allied health streams where in 
the specialization is palliative care such as palliative care givers, palliative technicians etc. 
However, this is more common in nursing and in case of palliative care nursing graduates, those 
will be registered and remain under the Indian Nursing Council (INC). For allied palliative 
caregivers, inclusion may be con sidered under Primary, Community and other Miscellaneous 
Care Professional in the Schedule of the Bill, upon receipt of the final recommendations of the 
Standing Committee. 
 
2.5.17 The Committee desired to know how the regulations that can be ensured with the 
malpractice/corruption, the Ministry stated that the Bill provides for a platform, where in —  
 
 The term of the non -official members is only two years and can be reappointed only for 
maximum three terms. Also, an ex -officio member will be a member of t he council by 
virtue of his position in the parent body and shall cease to be member on cessation of the 
services.  
 The chairperson will be elected from amongst the professional representations, that will 
give them the autonomy and yet the presence of ex -officio members will ensure a 
balanced mix of representatives.  
 

20 
 
2.5.18 Further, it is understood that the inspection process in other established professions has 
remained a stringent process, and will subjugate the purpose of the Bill, if applied in the similar 
pattern for the allied and healthcare professions.  
 The Department agrees with the concepts and ideas of the Committee and thus norms will 
be devised and specified in the regulations based on the minimal requirements for each 
profession, giving enough space for development and growth. Norms can be relaxed in 
the rural and hard to reach in those areas.  
 In addition, instead of the word "Inspection" in clause 27, under functions of State 
Council, we may restrict nomenclature to "assessments" and "accreditation" (rewarded 
for quality standards) and recognition.  
 As also sug gested by the Committee, advanced technology (use of biometric, cameras 
etc.) can be used to ensure steady monitoring of the institutions. Student's skills may be 
mapped to measure outcome of the institutions and monitoring frameworks can be 
developed.  
 Unannounced/surprise physical oversight will still be necessary from time to time, in 
order to ensure consistent adherence to quality standards;  
 Similarly, accreditation globally is considered voluntary and therefore not a punitive 
processes but rather a reward for enhancing the quality of processes in the system. 
 
2.5.19 With regard to inclusion of more doctors in the council, the Ministry stated that the 
regulations related to the Doctors in under the purview of NMC and thus not applicable for the 
current Council composition. This Bill is for development of the allied and healthcare 
professionals and increasing the medical doctor representation will lead to a skewed mix towards 
doctors that is antithetical to the purpose of this Bill. 
 
2.5.20 The Committee desired that contravening provision under penalty clause needs to be 
clarified. The Ministry stated that the chapter VII of the Bill specifies the clauses pertaining to 
offences and penalties- 
  
 Clause 52- provides that in case of misrepresentation, profes sional will be fined, which 
may extend up to Rs 50,000 in the first conviction and on subsequent conviction with 
imprisonment (up to 6 months) or increased fine (up to 1 lakh rupees) or with both.  
 Clause 53 - provides that in case of misuse of titles, pers on will be fined, which may 
extend up to one (1) lakh rupees in the first conviction and on subsequent conviction with 
imprisonment (up to 1 year) or increased fine (up to 2 lakh rupees) or with both. 
 Clause 54- provides that in case of failure to return c ertificate of registration, candidate 
will be fined, which may extend upto Rs 50,000 and on continuing offence the fine may 
extend to five thousand rupees per day after the first day  
 The bill also provides for penalty in case of contravention of any provi sion of the Act or 
any rules or regulations, with imprisonment (1 year to 3 years) or fine (1 lakh to 5 lakh 
rupees) or both.  
 
2.5.21 The penalty clauses are in line with the other regulatory frameworks such as the recently 
enacted National Medical Commis sion Act, 2019, and is important for inclusion, as a check for 
negligence of practice/ or overstepping scope of practice in order to ensure patient safety and 
avoid clinical harm. This will also ensure increased accountability within the system, which is 
currently only subjected to Doctors in the healthcare system. 
 
2.5.22 Pertaining to the existing professionals and how they will be grandfathered into the 
proposed system (sunset clause), the Ministry clarified that Clause 35 of the Bill provides for 
recognition of persons offering services prior to the commencement of the Act and ensures that 

21 
 
within a time frame of two years such professionals will be registered as per the process which 
will be specified in regulations. It is understood that given the heter ogeneous quality of 
education, measures will have to be devised to undertake basic assessment (certification) of 
professional knowledge and skills in mission mode, to enable registrations. This will be in line 
with the licensing examinations followed in several developed and developing countries for such 
professionals. If professionals are unable to meet the standards, they will be directed to special 
bridge courses etc. Provisions accordingly will have to be drafted as part of the regulations by 
the individual professional bodies. 
 
2.5.23 Regarding the need for inclusion of Charitable Institutions in the composition of the 
Council, the Ministry submitted that several institutions such as Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, 
Ramakrishna Math, Christian Medical Colleg e Vellore, Sankara Nethralaya, Madras Medical 
Mission, Aga Khan Foundation, Aravind eye care, etc. have been undertaking exemplary 
initiatives in health care service delivery and training. The inclusion of representation from such 
bodies will also ensure p olicy alignment with respect to social accountability in health care 
system and development goals. 
 
2.5.24 The Committee desired to know the need for having a representation in the Council from 
the Department of Legal Affairs and Atomic Energy Regulatory B oard. In response to that the 
Ministry responded that the representation of Department of Legal Affairs was suggested by the 
Ministry of Law and Justice during the drafting of this Bill.  The Representation of the Atomic 
Energy Regulatory  Board (AERB)  ha s been included sbecause the Medical Imaging and 
Radiology professions which involve radiation as part of their job fall under the purview of 
AERB as a regulator in accordance with a previous statute. 
 
2.5.25 The Committee pointed out that when the Government is not in possession of any 
authentic estimates of each profession, in that case, how it proposes for fair and equitable 
representation of any profession in the Council. In this context, the Ministry was informed that 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been in direct consultation with the professionals 
throughout the drafting of this Bill for at least the last 6 -7 years. The estimated number of 
professionals, based on which their representation in the Council has been proposed, is as 
suggested by their professional associations themselves. 
 
2.5.26 In addition to membership estimates as provided by several large professional 
associations having nation-wide membership, data from the major Government database sources 
such as Health Manag ement Informatio n System (HMIS) , Rural Health Statistics, National 
Health Profile and Central Bureau of Health Intelligence (CHBI) have also been extrapolated to 
get a rough estimate of the size of each group.  It is estimated that the largest groups curren tly 
would belong to Laboratory Technicians, Radiology and other technologists, Physiotherapy and 
Occupational Therapy and Optometrists and Ophthalmic assistants. These are therefore the four 
groups named specifically in clause 3(3)m. 
 
2.5.27 The Committee wanted to know the justification for having their Members in the Central 
Council, not below the rank of DS as biennial rotation in alphabetical order from AERD, DCI, 
INC MCI (now NMC), PCI and RCI. The Ministry submitted that existing regulatory bodies 
have been given representation in the present Bill to maintain cross linkages amongst all 
statutory bodies and related streams of healthcare. Further, given that the other regulatory bodies 
have been in existence for several decades and that allied and health care professionals span the 
whole continuum of healthcare from preventive to diagnostic, curative, therapeutic and 
rehabilitative services, the perspective of other professional bodies will be useful in ensuring a 
multi- disciplinary care approach ultimately aimed at benefiting the patient.  
 

22 
 
2.5.28 The Committee pointed out that the most of the Associations suggested tenure of the 
members be at least 3 years instead of 2 years. The same members may be nominated for 2 terms 
of 3 years in continuous manner i nstead of the tenure of 2 years for 3 consecutive tenures. In 
response to that the Ministry stated that the term has been kept of 2 years duration to facilitate 
smooth rotation of representation. Howe \/er, since the members can be re -nominated for a 
maximum of three terms, making the maximum eligible tenure of six years as suggested by 
associations, this does not make any difference and is recommended to be kept as such.  
 
2.5.29 The Committee pointed out that under clause 10 and clause 27 the terms 'Standa rds' must 
have direct reference of ’machines and materials' along with the term 'deliver of service’ to make 
the provision direct and more speaking and to ensure holistic regulation. The Ministry replied 
that the clause provides the power to the Central an d State councils to take steps ’as it may think 
fit’ for ensuring development of education and standards for services which encompasses the 
machine and materials by default. However, if it is desired that the clause be specifically 
modified for the purpose and the terms included, this may also be done. 
 
2.5.30 The Committee raised the issue that since the aptitude and skill requirement for each 
recognized profession differ to a great extent, therefore, it would not be appropriate to have 
Common Entrance Tes ts (CET) as mentioned Clause - 10(f} and clause 27(c). The Ministry 
mentioned that as on date, all students sit for the common medical entrance test also, and later 
adopt the field which they choose. Similarly, the entrance exam proposed in the Bill is to t est the 
present aptitude and knowledge of any student before he/she enters in the field of his/her choice. 
It is envisioned that the subjects may be offered based on the score of students. Separate entrance 
examination at the Central level for so many prof essions will translate into a herculean task and 
management disaster. Thus, it is desirable that separate entrance examination is not required. 
Separate exit exams however will be conducted specific to each professional course and 
curriculum. 
 
2.5.31 The C ommittee mentioned the proposal of stakeholders of the allied and healthcare 
professions to add one physiotherapist as member in NMC and INC to maintain reciprocal 
representation as provided in Clause 20(3) (b). The Ministry answered that inclusion of 
reciprocal representation in existing statutory bodies would require Parliamentary process for 
amendment in their Act which will be an independent exercise. The National Medical 
Commission is just being constituted and has provisions for lay members as well as  others from 
related scientific areas. Any healthcare professional meeting the requirements may apply for the 
same. However, amendments are usually proposed to the other regulatory bodies from time to 
time and this can be raised as an issue for considerati on at such time. Further, it will not be 
possible to name one category of professionals to be represented in other statutory bodies given 
that this is an overarching Council with 15 categories and more than 50 types of professionals. 
 
2.5.32 The Committee wanted the Ministry to define and differentiate amongst ophthalmic 
Assistants, optometrist and as to which category is more inclusive including the scope and span 
of ophthalmic science.  The Ministry stated that Ophthalmic Sciences cover all professionals 
who study and provide services pertaining to care of eyes and sight. Optometry is a degree 
course of four years’ duration while Ophthalmic Assistant is a Diploma course of two years 
duration. They have distinct scope of work and practice and it cannot be s aid that one is more 
inclusive than the other. 
 
2.5.33 The Committee further pointed out that under Clause 7(1) many association of 
stakeholders suggested that meeting of the Council must be held at least at the interval of every 
three months. The provision may be mentioned in the Bill, itself. The Ministry replied that as per 

23 
 
the existing provisions, the time, place and quorum for the meetings may be defined  by the 
Central  Government  in the Rules  where  such specifications normally included. 
 
2.5.34 The Committee mentioned that many associations suggested for rephrasing clause 10(c) 
as create and maintain an up to date Central register 'with details of diploma and degree of 
academic qualification and institutions, prior learning skill and experience of Allied and 
Healthcare Professionals covered under the Bill, and the same should not be left to be detailed in 
Rules and Regulations. In response to that  the Ministry stated that the Register of professionals 
maintained by statutory bodies entails the deta ils of individual professionals in the manner as 
suggested by associations. If clause 10(c) has to be enhanced to include the details as suggested, 
that may also be considered and recommended to the drafting team at Ministry of Law and 
Justice. 
 
2.5.35 The Committee further suggested that the definition of ’optometry' may be enlarged to 
envelop optometrists diagnose, treat and manage eye disease and prescribe glasses. The Ministry 
pointed out that the note given with Ophthalmic Sciences Professionals catego ry is not only 
about Optometrists, but mentions about Ophthalmic Assistants also. However, the Central 
Government can amend the Schedule ‘after consultation with the Council, by a notification'.  
  
2.5.36 The Committee wanted the Ministry to differentiate ISCO code 3256, 2240 or 2267 in the 
context of Ophthalmic Assistants and its implication on Healthcare system. The Committee is 
also desired to know the main concern of the ophthalmic association in this regard and the global 
practice in this regard. The M inistry responded that the ISCO 3256 covers professionals like 
Medical Assistants who work in direct supervision of medical doctors and support them in 
limited ways like checking vital stats of a patient, maintaining medical records etc. ISCO 2240 
covers Paramedics who are basically emergency care workers who usually provide rescue and 
evacuation type of services in case of medical emergency, while the ISCO 2267 covers 
Optometrists and Ophthalmic Opticians who provide services for disorders of the eye and v isual 
system. These are three different fields of care with little overlap in their job roles. There should 
be no concern regarding the three ISCO codes with reference to eye care services. The Ministry 
has not received any concern from eye care related as sociations in this regard. The ISCO codtng 
is recognised globally. 
 
2.5.37 The Committee wanted to know about the criteria for allocating ISCO code to such 
Allied and Healthcare Professionals and its implication on that professions and practice and how 
a s pecific Allied and Healthcare professional has been classified under a specific recognized 
category in Section 2(k) as stated in the Schedule of the Bill. The Ministry clarified that the 
International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) of the In ternational Labour 
Organisation (ILO) is a system for classifying professionals based on their skill specialisation 
required to meet their scope of work. World Health Organisation (WHO) acknowledges the 
ISCO 2008 revision in its classification of health workers which is accepted globally. Health care 
related occupations/ professions have been classified based on the duration of study, theoretical 
and practical knowledge and complexity/ responsibility linked with their job roles. Professionals 
have been categorized in the Schedule of the Bill as per their job roles under an ISCO code. 
 
2.5.38 The Committee sought to know that separate exit and licensing examination for each 
profession as the qualification training and consideration of each profession is unique and differ 
from other professions. The Ministry stated that separate licensing exams for individual 
professions shall be considered. The exit or licensing exam mentioned under 10(g) and 27(d) of 
the functions of Central and State Councils provide for the same. 
 

24 
 
2.5.39 The Committee pointed out that the definition of Physiotherapy includes 'functional 
dysfunctions' which overlaps the domain of OT and wanted the Ministry to clarify on the 
suggestion of removal of the term 'functional dysfunctional' to avoid confusion and overlap. The 
Ministry clarified that definitions of professions for the purpose of this Bill have been adapted 
from internationally available and acceptable sources. However, as already mentioned, the 
Schedule may be amended in consultation with concerned professional associations, if found 
appropriate. 
 
2.5.40 The Committee d esired to know the reasons for not having representation of recognized 
professions in the interim council under clause 19. In response to that the Interim Council would 
carry out the functions until a regular Council is established. Since the identificatio n/ nomination 
of Council members etc. will take time, the Interim Council will start its functioning within 60 
days from Notification of this Act. 
 
2.5.41 The Committee also wanted to know whether the allied and healthcare qualification will 
also include c ertificate, diploma or any degree provided by any NGO or University by off 
campus or distance learning mode and if so, how the person without practical experience can 
practice any profession under clause 2 (d).  The Ministry replied that it is not envisage d at 
present, however, the specific details about the issuance of diplomas and degrees will be 
established subsequently by the Council along with the professional advisory Boards. 
 
2.5.42 The Committee desired to know whether the existing councils of recognized categories in 
different States will exists after the promulgation of the Bill. The Ministry stated that the clause 
60 of the Bill provides that the proposed legislation shall have overriding effect on any other 
existing law or any instrument for any of the covered professions as per the Schedule. 
    
  

25 
 
CHAPTER - III  
 
Views of Organizations/ Associations/ Institutions/ Experts 
 
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 11 th October, 2019 heard the views 
Organizations/Institutions/Associations/Experts on the various provisions of the Allied and 
Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018. The previous Committee had issued a Press Release inviting 
memoranda and suggestions from a wide cross-section of stakeholders on the Bill. In response to 
the Press Release, the Committee received a number of memoranda on the Allied and Healthcare 
Professions Bill, 2018. The views of Experts/Organizations/Associations that submitted their 
written views in response to the press release and organizations that presented their oral evidence 
before the Committee are enumerated below:  
Indian Medical Association 
 
3.1 IMA submitted that although the regulation and registration of allied healthcare 
professionals is necessary, many provisions of the proposed bill, especially those allowing 
independent practice by some allied health care professionals are highly detrimental to the public 
health at large and will subvert the current team based approach adopted by t he modern medical 
profession. The Supreme Court of India in (1) Poonam Verma v/s Aswin Pattel and others 
reported in 1996 (4) SCC 332, (2) Dr. Muktiar Chand and others v/s State of Punjab and others 
reported in AIR 1999 (SC) 468 , (3) Medical Council of In dia and another v/s State of Rajasthan 
reported in AIR 1996 (S.C) 2073, has clearly held that, only a person holding a registration with 
the Medical Council of India or its state Medical Council is entitled to practice Modern System 
of Medicine.  
 
3.1.2 Allied Health Professionals (Paramedics) in the Country are attempting back door entry 
to the Medical Profession, by over riding the existing position of law on the practice of Modern 
Medicine in India. If the practice of Modern Medicine is allowed for All ied Health Professionals 
(Paramedics), the entire structure and standards of Medical Profession in India will be uprooted. 
From the Allied Health Professionals (Paramedics), many allied health professional through their 
association, by somehow or other to secure the legal rights of the Medical Professionals 
collectively started violating the laws of the land, by prefixing the word “Dr.” before their names 
to mislead the public that they are Medical Professionals.  
  
(i) The paramedics should not prefix "Dr" to their name and if they violate this they 
should be punished accordingly. 
(ii) The High Court of Madras on Writ petition No: 30259 of 2008 dated 23.02.2010 
rightly observed that Physiotherapy does not constitute an independent system of 
medicine but is actually an outreach of the allopathic medicine'. The Government 
of Tamil Nadu has made legislation to this effect.   
(iii) The allied health professionals including physiotherapists are not allowed to treat 
patients independently anywhere in the world.  
(iv) The right to pra ctice modern medicine is confined to those who have recognized 
medical qualifications described in 3rd schedule of Indian Medical Council Act. 
The Medical Council of India has made it clear on several occasions that allied 
health professions including 'Phy siotherapy' are "para medical services" and 
remains "medically directed services", i.e.executed under medical supervision.   
(v) In Sri. Sarjo Prasad and others v/s State of Bihar reported in 2003 (51) BLJR 686. 
The High Court of Patna, after clearly interpret ing the judgment of the Supreme 
Court in Dr. Muktiar Chand and others v/s State of Punjab and others, has held that 
unless and until the qualification of physiotherapy are recognized by the medical 

26 
 
council of India as medical qualification, physiotherapist s will not have any right 
to practice modern medicine and treat patients. The Supreme Court of India in SLP 
No. 19889/2003 in Sarjo Prasad and others v/s State of Bihar dismissed the SLP 
against the judgment of the High Court of Patna in the aforesaid case . Thus the 
Supreme Court has held that the judgment of the High Court of Patna in Sri. Sarjo 
Prasad and others v/s State of Bihar stands good on merit and does not require 
interference. 
 
3.1.3 Many allied health professionals over the years are practicing modern medicine 
independently by calling themselves as doctors. Some allied health professionals are now 
attempting to be medical practitioners, by overcoming the existing provisions of law. The 
physiotherapists are collectively inducing various State Gove rnments of the country to enact 
laws over riding the provisions of the Indian Medical Council Act. The framing of such 
legislations by the state governments as dictated by the Association of physiotherapists is illegal 
as held by the Supreme Court in Dr. P reeti Srivastava V/S State of Madhya Pradesh reported in 
AIR – 1999 (SC) 2894. 
 
3.1.4 The Government of India , Ministry of Health and Family Welfare bearing No R/ 
14015/25/96, wherein the Government of India has clearly held that only the existing system of 
medicine can be treated as system of medicine and no other type of therapies can be treated as 
system medicine and the state and union territories should not grand any degree or diploma in the 
stream of medicine which have not been recommended for recog nition and the term ‘Dr’ can be 
used only by the practitioners of recognized system of medicine.  
 
3.1.5 To meet the requirement of physical medicine and rehabilitation field in India, the 
Government of India have started master and diploma courses in Phys ical Medicine & 
Rehabilitation in National institutes and Govt. Medical Colleges. Subsequently, permission has 
been accorded for these courses in private medical colleges also. These practitioners called the 
Physiatrists are actually the team 4 leaders in Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation. Similarly, all 
the allied professionals who come under the purview of the Act work under the supervision of 
respective medical fields. Unsupervised work is dangerous to the health of the public.  
 
School of Allied Health Science, Manipal, Karnataka 
 
3.2 The Institute informed the Committee that Department of Health Information 
Management, School of Allied Health Science, Manipal Academy of Higher Education India 
offers M.Sc. Health Information Management, B.Sc. Health Inf ormation Management, and M. 
Sc.  Health Informatics Program since the year 2000, 2001 and 2014 respectively. 
3.2.1 The Institute highlighted the NITI Aayog -National Health Stake -Strategy and Approach 
document published in July, 2018 that clearly state the need for national electronic registries for 
management of health data, coverage and claim platform, federated personal health records 
framework, national health analytics platform, digital health id and health data dictionary. The 
Institute stated that these initiatives aim to build a digital health infrastructure in India Healthcare 
ecosystem for the successful implementation of various government health initiatives such as; 
Universal Health Coverage (UHC), Digital Health Mission, Ayushman Bharat -National Health 
Protection Mission etc. This would also create a demand for Health Information Management 
(HIM) and Health Informatics (HI) Professionals in these job roles.  These kinds of jobs need 
highly skilled and technically competent HIM and HI professionals across India. This would be a 
right opportunity for policy and decision makers to leverage on various strategies to create 
adequate skilled and competent HIM and HI workforce to meet the demand supply in the 
evolving healthcare market.  However, the lack of clarity in job roles in HIM and HI domains 

27 
 
preventing many students to come forward and take up these programs as their career choice and 
due to which qualified professionals migrate to other countries for better prospective causing lo t 
of brain drain in India.   
3.2.2 The Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 could be the right platform to address 
these requirements and facilitate various education and training institute to start such training 
programs which would meet the existing and future demand supply gap ident ified by many 
surveys.  This would motivate healthcare industry both public and private sector to harness the 
skills and competency of such professionals to strengthen healthcare delivery system and thus 
create these kind of job positions.  
All India Allied and Healthcare Professional Association 
3.3 The Association submitted the following suggestions to the Committee: 
(i) All the existing Allied & Health care Institutes should be given five years time to 
arrange additional resources infrastructure as there is huge inflation now a day. 
(ii) All the existing Allied Health Professional qualified from Non -Government 
Organization should be given registration in first register. 
(iii)  Mandatory eligibility for 10+2 PCB should be waived for Serial No.2 Candidates. 
(iv) All the existi ng Allied Health Professionals from various deemed & private 
Universities or from any Private Institutes should be given same equal weight age & 
relief with respect to registration in first register. Indian Medical Association awarded 
allied health certifi cates should have same weightage as of diploma or certificate of 
private institutes without nepotism.  
(v) There should not be any bias on the basis of distance, regular, choice based credit 
transfer, Industry Integrated Programs. 
(vi) The President of Allied & Health Care Professional Council should not be any MBBS 
but from representatives of Allied & Health Care Professional itself. 
(vii) There should be latent period of 3 to 5 years to switch over to State or Central 
Council. 
(viii) All Private Universities should not interfere in designing certificate & diploma degree 
course from Central or State authorities otherwise there will be corruption & 
bureaucracy. 
(ix) Central or State Allied & Health Care Professional Council should not interfere  in the 
flexibility & growth of education al Programmes conducted by Distance Education 
Bureau.  
(x) Punitive provisions & other suggestions & objections should be taken from vast cross 
section of population NGOs & genius individuals in this field. 
 
MMM College of Health Sciences 
 
3.4 Allied health professionals support diagnosis, recovery, and quality of life.  They provide 
direct patient care in virtually every specially; deliver scientific support in clinical laboratories; 
offer numerous rehabilitation services; manage and provide data critical to s eamless patient care 
and diagnosis; operate sophisticated diagnostic equipment; provide critical care support in 
intensive care units; and more. These essential health care partners have demonstrated improved 
health conditions wherever they are.  They are fully integrated members of every health care 
team, in outpatient and inpatient settings, in primary, acute, and chronic care. 
 
3.4.1 India’s rural areas have a distinct lack of allied health services, the adequate health care 
representatives will result in appropriate patient care that can increase mobility and 

28 
 
independence.  As the country’s demand for these professionals is the need o f the hour, they will 
be the first to recognize the problems of the patients and serve as safety nets.  Their sense of 
patient care accountability will add tremendous value to the India’s healthcare team. 
 
3.4.2 Therefore, a valid four year program with pr escribed hours of theory and practical 
learning will enhance the students to face the challenges in the areas of patient care.  The Allied 
Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 hope to bring a proper frame work for maintenance of 
standards of allied health edu cation.  This will also enable every allied health professional to 
register under a council to be publicly recognized for his/her professional excellence, to increase 
his/her confidence and skill and to maintain high standards of ethical credentials in the  working 
field and finally to recognize their degrees in India and abroad 
 
The Indian Association of Physiotherapists (Regd.) 
3.5 The Association submitted that as the course contents of Health Care Professionals are 4 
years and more and not less than 4800 hours, the definition of healthcare numbers of study hours 
mentioned is less. Therefore, the hours should be enhanced to 5000 hou rs as curriculum of 
Physiotherapy is vast and is more than 3500 hours. 
 
3.5.1 The Association, further, submitted that the representation of Physiotherapist should be 
increased from 2 to 6 representatives as Physiotherapists are more in numbers and in prev ious 
introduced bill in Lok Sabha in year 2007 , Paramedical and Physiotherapy bill were given 
separate representation. The Association, further submitted that there was a provision to appoint 
four members by the Central Government, respectively, from among st the practitioners in 
physiotherapy. The Association has demanded to include f our members to be appointed by the 
Central Government to represent such organizations \ Institutes which can represent the interest 
of physiotherapy. 
 
3.5.2 The Association sub mitted that the purpose of mentioning of ISCO code should be 
elaborated mentioning that which professionals are recognized as allied and which as healthcare 
as per international standards.  The Association also submitted that the Professional advisory 
body should be named sub - council and its recommendations should be mandatory and binding. 
The sub council should not only address the specific issues but all the professional issues related 
to its profession as the council’s objective is to regulate and standa rdized the profession. The 
Association submitted that if the experts belonging to specific profession are involved in 
decision making, each sub- sections specific issues and concerns can be addressed specifically in 
the interest of large number of professional, thus the council becomes more effective. 
 
3.5.3 The Association further submitted that the entry examination and counseling for 
Physiotherapists should not be merged with other Professionals as Physiotherapy is highly 
skilled Profession and requires minimum eligibility criteria of 10+2 Physics, Chemistry, Biology 
with minimum 50 Percentage. The Exit and Licensing examination should be separate as course 
curriculum, qualification and level of professional skill is much higher than other mentioned 
Professionals. 
 
Physiotherapy Forum and United Physiotherapy Association of India 
3.6 The Associations submitted that Physiotherapy is a globally recognized health profession 
which is catering the needs of society and has a important role from prevention to palliative care. 
Physiotherapy professions have progressed by leaps and bounds in last seven decades. In India, 
the Physiotherapy education was started during 1950s. Today there are more than 430 colleges in 
India imparti ng undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral courses in Physiotherapy. 

29 
 
Approximately, 114500 students pursue Physiotherapy education in India every year. there are 
more than 290000 registered Physiotherapy practitioners with State Councils of Delhi, 
Maharashtra, Gujrat, Chhattisgarh and Indian Association of Physiotherapists , United 
Physiotherapy Association of India providing their services to the Indian community.  
3.6.1 They also stated that each physiotherapist's treats approximately 15 patients per day . The 
growing scope of Physiotherapy practice in various arenas is helping the public in the country to 
overcome their suffering thereby reducing the disease burden and disability in India. 
Simultaneously, it is reducing the economic burden on families, society as well as Government.   
3.6.2 There is a need for a regulatory body at the national level in order to standardize the 
Physiotherapy education, practice and services offered to the people. 
Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association, Maharashtra State Council for Occupational 
Therapy & Physiotherapy, Mumbai, Lokmanya Medical College of Physiotherapy, All 
Assam physiotherapy Association (AAPA) 
3.7 They submitted that the “Allied & Health care council bill 2018” aimed to formulate 
umbrella council to regu late 53 professions. It is a good move by the Government for technical 
professions but surely not for Physiotherapy. Physiotherapy does not belong to this group of 
profession & has own identity in health care across the world. World Health Organization 
(WHO) has classified physiotherapists in professional group (ISCO Code 2264) and paramedical 
professionals have been classified in a separate entity (ISCO code 2240).  
3.7.1 The representation apprised the Committee that Physiotherapy is a branch of modern 
medical science which deals with the orthopedic, neurological, cardio respiratory, women’s & 
community health, pediatrics, geriatrics, sports, traumatic, paralytic conditions and physically 
challenged population. In Indi a, the Physiotherapy education was started in immediate post -
independence period and at present large number of registered physiotherapy practitioners of 
State councils of Delhi, Maharashtra, Gujarat Chhattisgarh & members of Indian Association of 
Physiotherapists are providing their services to the Indian community through central, state 
government; public, corporate, private & charitable trust running hospitals & clinics. They 
believe that there is need of a regulatory body at the national level in order to standardize the 
physiotherapy education, practice & services offered to the Indian community. 
3.7.2 The growing scope of Physiotherapy practice in various arenas is helping the public of 
the country to overcome their sufferings. Hence its responsibility  of all to give best legislation to 
cover Physiotherapist’s growing scope, rights & autonomy in Indian context. The AHPC Bill, 
2009 gave representation to physiotherapy profession as a category of profession amongst 53 un -
identical professions.   
3.7.3 It was expected that the  Central Physiotherapy council should be formed on the basis of 
existing physiotherapy councils and requested to withdraw the Physiotherapy profession from 
AHPC Bill, 2018 and introduce physiotherapy commission of India Bill. 
Kerala Association for Physiotherapists Co-ordination 
3.8 The Association submitted that MOHFW while formulating the bill has completely 
ignored various Governments and other reports like report of Estimate Committee, Establishment 
of Council for Health and Para Me dical Workers, 1992 etc. recommending independent status, 
recognition for physiotherapist thereby arbitrarily clubbing physiotherapy with other health 
categories in the Allied and Health care professions council Bill (AHPC) 2018. 
3.8.1 The Bill disregards the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare made in its Thirty first report on 'The Paramedical & Physiotherapy 

30 
 
Central Council Bill 2007’ and the 60 th report on 'The National Commission for Human 
Resource Healt h Bill 2011’. They asserted that the 31 st report recommended separate central 
council for Physiotherapy. 
3.8.2 According to them,  the 11th Five Year Report of the Planning Commission of India also 
recommended for separate council for physiotherapy. The pr ofession of Physiotherapy falls 
under major category of professions on the basis of empirical data along with various disciplines 
of Medical science as per “All India Survey Report on Higher Education” (AISHE). 
3.8.3 The policy making body in the MoHFW is the Director General Health Services (DGHS). 
Members qualified in Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation (PMR) has occupied senior positions 
in DGHS. They have acted more as spokepersons of the PMR community while doing their duty 
in DGHS. The physiotherapis ts should be recognized as distinct and separate profession. 
Unfortunately, the senior persons from DGHS played a partisan and biased role in undermining 
Physiotherapy. They added that there is an institutional bias against physiotherapists since year 
1997 onward which is being perpetrated.  
3.8.4 It was submitted that, for the first time, Physiotherapy establishment have been put under 
a physician (Professional form section 2(h) of clinical establishment (registration and regulation) 
Act 2010 and treated a s subordinate to the said doctor. Secondly, physiotherapy system of 
treatment is recognized the world over as an independent system of treatment and is defined as 
an “allied & health care establishment”. Thirdly, the physiotherapists are now, for the first  time, 
permitted to do the work of a physiotherapist only on a prescription/referral from a licensed 
medical doctor. This was never the case earlier and apart from being totally unnecessary as a 
precondition for Physiotherapy treatment, is likely to double  the cost of treatment. In the past as 
well doctors would refer patients for physiotherapy but it was never made a condition of practice 
that physiotherapists can only practice on a license from a doctor. Fourthly, the work of a 
physiotherapist is to be reviewed by a medical doctor. 
3.8.5 It was pleaded that arbitrary clubbing of physiotherapy with other health care and 
imposing restriction upon right of Physiotherapy and disallowing establishment of physiotherapy 
is not in public interest, detrimental for the development of physiotherapy in India and against 
the principle of natural Justice. 
 
Coimbatore Physiotherapy Doctors Association and many other Association 
 
3.9 According to the memoranda, the Physiotherapy profession is not matching with those 
indicative lists of 58 allied health care professions, by means of its curriculum, scope and the 
way it serving the people. The reasons for Objections are: 
 
(i) Other than physiotherapy & occupational therapy profession, remaining 56 professions in 
this indicative list of Allied and health care professions are not independent profession. 
Whereas in Physiotherapy scope of practice /function/ work as Independent practitioner 
and / or being part of the member of multidisciplinary medical team. When 
Physiotherapy profession is clubbed with other professions, the scope of Physiotherapy 
practice will be doomed.  
(ii)  Physiotherapy & occupational therapy profession  has more than 5000 hours of course 
study work,  whereas, other professions in that list study less than 3000 hours. 
Physiotherapists undergoing 4320 hours of regular class work of theory/practical/clinical, 
in addition to 960 hours of internship that is 5280 hours of course work altogether. That 
means the curriculum is unique and should deal with separate co uncil like Nursing 
council of India, Pharmacy council of India and Dental council of India. 

31 
 
(iii) Most of the professions in the indicative list of allied &health care professions do not 
have internship in their course curriculum whereas physiotherapy profession  has an 
internship of 6 months. This internship training is meant to train Physiotherapists to 
handle patients, independently.  
(iv) Government should not consider that there are already separate councils for 
Physiotherapy profession existing in various states in India and most of the developed 
countries have separate board or council for regulating Physiotherapy profession in 
respective countries. 
 
All India Occupational Therapists Association  
 
3.10 The Association raised their concern over clubbing of Occupat ional Therapy Profession 
with heterogeneous group of about 70 -80 professions that does not at all match with 
qualification, work and responsibilities with that of occupational therapy profession. They stated 
that the dilution of significance and valuable c ontribution of profession of occupational therapy 
in the entire Bill is not acceptable. The definition of occupational therapy is incomplete and does 
not portray scope of the profession in respect to Indian context. The bill is Contrary to basic 
premise th at a council should be by the profession, of the profession and for the profession. 
AIOTA, therefore, strongly objected to inclusion of other categories listed under Occupational 
Therapy under schedule 6. 
Indian Optometric Association (IOA), Indian Optomet ry Federation (IOF) Optometry 
Council of India (OCI), Association of Schools & Colleges of Optometry (ASCO, India) 
3.11 The Organizations/Associations have strongly supported the statement of objects and 
reasons of the AHP Bill 2018 i.e. “to generate emplo yment not only to meet the domestic 
demands but also to cater to the global market”. They have submitted the following points:- 
3.11.1 Incorporate in the Bill the global definition for optometry and the global cadre designated 
as optometry as given by World council of Optometry (WCO) which states that: 
 
“Optometry is a  healthcare profession that is  autonomous, educated, 
and regulated (licensed/registered), and optometrists are  the primary healthcare 
practitioners of the eye and visual system who provide comprehensive eye and vision care, 
which includes refraction and, dispensing, detection/diagnosis and management of disease 
in the eye, and the rehabilitation of conditions of the visual system.” 
3.11.2 Vision Impairment and Blindness status in India  
International Association for Preventable Blindness (IAPB), has reported that in 
the year 2015, India has the following blindness and visually impaired statistics:-  
Variable Blind Visually Impaired - 
Moderate 
Visually Impaired - 
Mild 
Prevalence 0.93% 4.63% 3.67% 
Population 
effected 
8.80 million 47.70 Million 39.70 Million 
 

32 
 
3.11.3 More than 80% of these are preventable  with timely detection and referral . The major 
causes of preventable blindness  identified were Cataract, Uncorrected refractive error, glaucoma 
and diabetic retinopathy.  India currently has the  highest number of blind  people in 
the world and the second highest number with avoidable vision impairment due to uncorrected 
refractive error.  
3.11.4 India has approximately 15,000 ophthalmologists for its 1 billion -plus population, 
resulting in a  ratio of 1  ophthalmologist for every 90,000 people. The challenge is inequitable 
distribution of eye surgeons: 1:20,000 in urban area to 1 in 2,50,000 in rural areas.  
3.11.5 Optometry cadre was developed in  India in the year 1958, to take load 
off ophthalmology especially in rural areas, where they would prescribe glasses,  treat common 
eye ailments independently and refer to eye hospitals for major medical / surgical intervention.  
3.11.6 One optometrist per 10,000 people is used  throughout the world. India needs 
approximately 115,000 optometrists. India currently  graduates 3500 optometrist per year  (4-year 
trained optometrists) and an estimated 40,000 2 -year trained eye  care personnel. All the present 
diploma holders should be registered as  Optometrists and brought to the 4 -year trained 
optometry level through continuing education programs or an exit licensing  exam. A critical 
motivation for this upgrading is the independent standing of the profession. 
3.11.7 The profession of optometry relies on the quality of undergraduate and postgraduate 
teaching provided. It is estimated that the country will need at least 100 schools of optometry 
over the  next decades to meet the demand for upgra ding and training new fully qualified 
new optometrists. Ensuring that quality education is delivered in all undergraduate 
optometry programs would require the development of a minimum of 1,000 higher degree 
qualified optometric educators to produce some 5, 000 optometry graduates per 
year and even upgrade the training of the current  40,000 two -year trained optometrists.  They 
stated that it is not cost-effective to have medically trained eye surgeons to do non -surgical work 
like refraction, squint management,  contact lenses etc. when optometrists (like eye physicians) 
are already available for better outreach in rural India also. 
Optometry in Primary Care: it's Synergy with Ophthalmologists and  Other Medical 
Personnel 
3.11.8 With primary care rights provided,  Optometrist will be the first point of contact for eye 
care. Optometry will provide cost -effective and accessible care working within their scope of 
practice and competence, referring to ophthalmologists or other health care professionals as 
appropriate.  
Improper position of optometry under AHP Bill  
3.11.9 Globally, Optometry has been given a separate Act viz. “Optometry practice Act 2007” 
in Australia, the Opticians Act 1989, UK and Europe, Optometrist and Opticians Act, Singapore 
and so on and so forth. They have, therefore, requested for a separate Optometry act for the 
country to look after 87.40 million vi sually impaired and 8.80 million needing Cataract surgery 
and have suggested placing optometrists under "Health Professionals". 
Government Optometrist Association, Uttar Pradesh  
3.11.10 The following are the suggestions of the association 
(i) The Associat ion submitted to replace the term "Ophthal mic Sciences" with 
"Optometry' as per WHO.  

33 
 
(ii) The Allied & Healthcare Professional bill, 2018 all professionals are divided in 
two groups i.e. Healthcare Professions and Allied Healthcare Professions. They 
have suggested to form a third categories of Medical and Healthcare Professions 
and stated that Optometrist should be removed from the Healthcare Profession 
and should be included in this third category because an Optometrist diagnose, 
treat, and manage eye disease and prescribe glasses as mentioned by the definition 
given by WHO.  
(iii) They also submit that the syllabus of diploma in Optometry which includes in 
detail not only Eye anatomy, Physiology, Disease of the Eye, Optics & 
Mechanical optics but also Human Anatomy, Physiology basic of Pharmacology, 
Pathology and Cardiopulmonary res uscitation (CPR), Monitoring of temperature, 
Pulse, blood pressure, Oxygen therapy & Nebulisation etc.   
 
Punjab Ophthalmic Officers Association  
3.11.11 The Association submitted to register Ophthalmic Assistant/Ophthalmic officer 
cadre under Code 2240 instead of 3256 due to the following reasons:- 
(i) In India, Ophthalmic Assistant was created by National Programme for control of 
blindness (NPCB) in 1978 under the guidelines of World Health Organization 
(WHO). As per WHO "An Ophthalmic Assistant is a medical worker who has 
received definite training in ophthalmology and who arranges a special time at which 
they see eye patients. 
(ii) This cadre was created to fight with ever increasing blindness in developing countries 
due to shortage of ophthalmic manpower. For th is purpose, a special short -term 
diploma course was designed to prepare Ophthalmic Assistants. The main aim of 
course was to train persons to treat the patients for eye ailments so that they should 
able to handle most of the eye diseases in rural areas.  
(iii) Ophthalmic Assistants were supposed to treat the patients for eye ailments. 
(iv) Ophthalmic Officers are supposed to provide treatment to eye patients at certain level, 
independently.  International Labour Organization (ILO) has classified the manpower 
as per developing countries thus placing Ophthalmic Assistant in code 3256. 
(v) In India where Ophthalmic Assistants are trained at tertiary level hospital, provides 
treatments to eye patients at community Health centers. Most of the States have re -
designated this cadr e as ophthalmic officer and allowed them to perform their duties 
independently, hence, it will be unjustifiable to register this cadre under code 3256.  
3.11.12 Keeping in view the above situation, the Association has requested to register 
ophthalmic officers under code 2240 as Paramedical Practitioners.  
National Ophthalmic Association, Bihar 
 
3.11.13 The following are the suggestions of the association 
 
(i) The Ophthalmic Assistant in the Ophthalmic Science Professional Group of the 
Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill has been included in Code -3257, which 
does not fully include the Ophthalmic Assistant's duty as prescribed by the 
Government of India.  
(ii) In India, the main work of the Ophthalmic Assistant is to test vision along with 
prescribe glasses on the level of primary health centers whereas the work for 

34 
 
Optometrist is to assist in the other countries. In this situation, inclusion of the 
Ophthalmic Assistant in the ISCO Code 3256 is totally wrong.  
(iii) Ophthalmic Assistants should be included in the ISCO code 2240 so that OAs 
must be included in the duty table as prescribed by the government of India.  
(iv) Ophthalmic Assistant alongwith Ophthalmic Officer to be i ncluded in Two years 
diploma in Optometric in Optometrist and Two years diploma in Ophthalmic 
Science.  
(v) The Bachelor of Ophthalmology by Patlipurtra University, Bihar from 2008 and 
the Bachelor of Ophthalmic Medical Science (BOMS) programme is operated by 
a Deshbhagat University (UGC recognized) Punjab from 2016 from which 
thousands of OA/OO have obtained the degree but they are not included in 
Ophthalmic Science Professional Group and these two to be included in 
Ophthalmic Science professional group.  
(vi) Apart from chairman, there should be two members from Optometrist (one 
member with diploma holder and one member with graduation) in Ophthalmic 
Science Professional Advisory Board and Two Members from OA (one member 
with diploma holder and one member with graduation). 
(vii) The meeting of the council to be held in every three months. 
(viii) The chairman to be selected on the rotational basis from the Ophthalmic Science 
and Optometry but to be selected from the OAs/OOs posted in National 
blindness control program for the first two years. 
All India Ophthalmic Physician Association 
3.11.14 The Association has sought for inclusion of Ophthalmic physicians under the 
international code of 2211 (general physician).  
3.11.15 As Ophthalmic officers re -designated from OA with two years diploma of OA 
with basic qualification of pre -medical /+2 with medical subjects. National Ophthalmic 
Association (NOA) has been demanding from government to start a degree course for the 
upgradation of cadre in Bihar 4 years degree course was started  with 6 months internships with 
the name of Bachelor of Ophthalmology (B. Ophth.) in Punjab also, a 4 years degree course with 
6 months internship was started with the name of bachelor of Ophthalmic Medical Science 
(BOMS). This course has been started by a  Deshbhagat University (UGC recognized) Punjab.  
The syllabus of both degrees is same. For the up gradation of OA/OO with diploma in OA, there 
is a provision for the lateral entry (through bridge course) to allow them to join this curse and 
enhance their p rofessional qualification, their knowledge and skill in handling eye ailments in 
more effective way. 
3.11.16 There is a urgent need to produce graduates with degree in Ophthalmology (as 
ophthalmic physicians) and appointed as "Ophthalmic Officer".   
All India Association of Anesthesia & Operation Theatre Technologists (R), Joint Forum of 
Medical Technologist of India (JFMTI) 
 
3.11.17 Joint Forum of Medical Technologist of India (JFMTI) a common national 
registered organization of Indian Allied Health Profes sionals’ Associations representing 7 major 
allied health professions i.e. Medical Laboratory Sciences, Medical, Medical Radiology 
Technology, Operation Theatre & Anesthesia Technology, Radiatio thereapy Technology as our 
permanent members professions of JF MTI and two as associate members i.e. Cardiovascular 
Technology, Neurology Technology etc. working in hospitals/health institutions/dispensaries of 
Central Government , State Government , autonomous health institutions local and private health 
establishments in India. 

35 
 
 
3.11.18 JFMTI stated that health system can only be improved with a holistic approach 
and collective efforts of all streams of health sector.  It was suggested that qualified professionals 
must get due recognition and status in their jobs, people should get quality service for diagnosis 
and treatment and three, the fraudulent educational institutions in the health profession must be 
weeded out. Establishing a foolproof comprehensive system for overhauling of allied health 
education and services needs serious visionary approach on the part of the policy makers.  Model 
of accreditation for health education, services, and professionals’ competence has to be analyzed 
considering needs in line with prevailing international system  Proposed regulat ory framework is 
too much centralized which should also require representation from all left out stakeholders who 
should be incorporated in a democratic manner. 
 
3.11.19 The short title of the Bill should be The Allied Healthcare Professions Council 
Bill or it can be Healthcare Professions Council Bill but it should not be mentioned with two 
classifications of allied and Healthcare, therefore, the name of Council should be Al lied 
Healthcare Professions Council of India (AHPCI) or Healthcare Professions Council of India 
(HPCI). Representation of different streams in the Central Council should be proportionate to 
their numbers. There should be clarity in Bill over funding and ma nagement of funds for various 
streams. 
 
All India Medical Laboratory Technologists Association  
 
3.11.20 All India Medical Laboratory Technologists Association (AIMLTA) supported 
the proposed legislation and made following suggestions regarding the registr ation of members 
in the Council. 
 
(i) There should be a separate council for Medical Laboratory Technologists of India. 
There should  be a single Medical Lab Technologists Council for all Diploma 
(DMLT), undergraduate, graduate, post graduate and Doctorate deg ree holder like 
that of Doctors and Nurses. 
(ii) Council must be headed by the professional itself of the same facility as per M.C.I. 
and Nursing Council of India.  As the jurisdiction of the Council will be at all India 
level comprising of all states and Union  Territories of the country, the members of  
the Council must be elected only from the national level association  and 
democratic pattern must be followed while constituting our Council and the same 
may also be followed  for State Council. 
(iii) As the council is for the Lab Professionals of entire India, only a national/state level 
professional association (like All India Medical Lab Technologists Association) 
must be taken into confidence while framing clauses/laws/bylaws to protect the 
various interests of the profession. 
(iv) All pre -qualified in service/in practice and retired Lab Technologists must be 
treated eligible to get registration in the council and the post -qualified individuals 
must be considered only with required qualification as per the Council’s norm s.  
This was accepted and adopted earlier when M.C.I. was constituted.  All 
L.M.P./D.M.P.s were duly registered. 
(v) “Right to practice the profession”  To practice as profession must be protected by 
this newly constituting council in case of Medical Lab Techno logists also. At 
present, technologically accredited era, most of the Pathological 
Investigation/Analysis is performed on most sophisticated Computerized Analyzers. 
In almost all Patho -Diagnostic Centres (Govt./Corporate Sector) this computer 
generated date is derived by a well trained Lab Technologists of the organization 
and forward to the Clinician.  Clinician finalize the diagnosis considering various  

36 
 
important factors such as – Clinical Complaints, Radiological Reports, ECG/Trade 
Meal finding & Scanning etc. 
(vi) Para-Medic must be replaced by “Allied Health Professional and Paramedical be 
replaced by Allied Health profession and the word Technician be replaced by 
Technologists, hence, nomenclature “Technologists” may be used in place of 
technician. 
 
Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists 
3.11.21 ISRT gave suggestions on following: 
(A) Name of the Regulator  
The memorandum submitted stipulates that, the name of the overarching statutory 
regulatory body may be National Health &  Care Professions' Commission (NHCPC), 
under the following grounds:  
(i) The present title of Bill has already triggered fresh controversy on the 
terminology allied & health care, as there is no bifurcation as allied and healthcare 
within the group of professionals, anywhere in the world. 
(ii) The overarching regulatory body for sixteen broad categories in United Kingdom 
is one of the oldest and powerful regulator in the world with its unique 
functioning through regulatory control over health, psychological and social care 
professionals. In early days, the regulator was known as Health Professions 
Council (HPC) and later, they have modified the title as Health & Care 
Professions Council to include all health - related professionals other than medical 
doctors, nurses, dentists and pharmacists. 
(iii) The terminology of health & care professions than allied & health care will leave 
the doors opened for many streams including social care professions under the 
regulatory ambit of Commission in future. The same method is adopted by HCPC, 
UK.  
(iv) The system of professional regulation in health care education has not been 
geared up to the international standards and it has resulted in the mushrooming of 
substandard institutions in medical education. They added that in professio nal 
practice also, adherence to code of ethics, professional code of conduct and 
etiquette are relatively meager and ultimately failed in the creation of a patient 
centric and patient friendly atmosphere in hospitals and other health care 
institutions. 
(v) The Society informed the Committee that several Committees in the past, right 
from Shrivastava Committee Report in 1975, Bajaj Report in 1989, and Reports 
of National Knowledge Commission in 2007, Second Administrative Reforms 
Commission headed by Shri. Veeer appa Moily in 2008 and Prof. Yeshpal 
Committee Report in 2009 have vehemently pointed out and highlighted the 
pathetic situation of professional regulation in Indian health care delivery system. 
The working group of planning commission in 2009 had proposed  to establish a 
Human Resources Commission in Health as an over -arching body. Therefore, the 
need for radical reforms in the regulatory frame work of the medical and allied 
professions has been an agenda before many Governments for several years. 
(vi) The NCHRH Bill, 2011 was intended for the structural reforms but has not been 
materialized due to the objections from various corners and recommendations 
made by the DRSC in 2012 to withdraw the Bill and to bring forward a fresh Bill. 

37 
 
(vii) The Department Related Parliam entary Standing Committee on Health & Family 
Welfare in its 92nd report had recommended to implement the Prof. Renjith Roy 
Choudary report and to make radical reforms with transparency, accountability 
and integrity in the professional regulation.  
(viii) The similar to the National Medical Commission Act, 2019, regulatory frame 
work has been adopted for Indian System of Medicine and Homeopathy Systems 
and bills named as The National Commission for Homeopathy Bill -2019 and The 
National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill -2019 for the structural 
reforms are under way.  
(ix) It is therefore very much essential to switch over to a National Commission than a 
mere council to achieve the effective regulatory control over professional 
education and professional practi ce of all unregulated streams, which are coming 
under the regulatory ambit of the statutory regulatory body envisaged to be 
constituted under the present Allied & Health Care professions Bill-2018.   
(x) All existing statutory Councils are also in the verge of  dissolving or switching 
over to the National Commission in the line of NMC Act -2019 as it is 
recommended by a Committee headed by the Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog 
constituted on 28th March 2016. The terms of references of the Committee were 
to examine all options for radical reforms in medical education and suggest a way 
forward.  
(xi) The very same switching over process will definitely be inevitable to the Allied & 
Health Care sector in near future itself. If the Bill is enacted in the present form 
may cause dup lication and repeated exercise in legislative process leaving 
unnecessary financial burden to public exchequer and total wastage of time and 
energy of both Executive and Legislature.  
 
(B) Constitution of Regulatory body 
 
i. It has been submitted that there s hall be one National Commission and Seven 
Professional Advisory Councils, Four Autonomous Boards with in the regulatory body 
envisaged to be constituted under the National Health & Care Professions' 
Commission Act- 2018 in the line of NMC Act- 2019. 
 
ii. The following persons may be included as the Part time members of Commission:- 
 
(a) Twenty One members to be nominated by the Seven Professional Advisory 
Councils with proper representation to all professionals, who are in the opinion of 
concerned Advisory Council s, competent enough to address the related 
professional issues of respective professions/ categories in Commission, for a 
term of Two years. 
(b) Three Members to be appointed from amongst persons of ability, integrity and 
standing, who have special knowledge a nd professional experience in such areas 
including management, law, public administration, medical ethics, health 
research, public health, consumer or patient rights advocacy, science and 
technology and humanities for a period of two years. 
 
(C) Constitution of Professional Advisory Councils  
 
i. They proposed the constitution of seven Professional Advisory Councils to be appointed  
by the Central Government namely:  
 
a. Professional Advisory Council for Life Science & Medical Lab Sciences.  

38 
 
b. Professional Advisory  Council for Hospital Information Management, Emergency 
Care & Physician Associates.  
c. Professional Advisory Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy.  
d. Professional Advisory Council for Behavioral Health, Social Care & Nutrition. 5. 
Professional A dvisory Council for Ophthalmic Sciences, Neuro Sciences & 
Pulmonary Technology. .  
e. Professional Advisory Council for Medical Radiation Technology & Cardio Vascular 
Technology. 
f. Professional Advisory Council for Surgical Anesthesia & Renal Technology. 
 
ii. The existing provisions in the present Bill to constitute as many professional Advisory 
Bodies (Clause 11) to examine specific issues relating to one or more recognized 
categories or professionals and recommend or advise the council, may be switched over a s 
the Professional Advisory Councils in the line of the provisions in NMC Act – 2019 to 
constitute Medical Advisory Council. The existing fifteen categories may be limited to 
seven by merging identical categories/ Professionals and Seven Professional Advis ory 
Councils may be constituted to discharge the functions of Professional Advisory Bodies 
apart from the distinct responsibilities like acting as platform for the states to put forward 
their views and concerns before the National Regulator/ Commission. In  short, the 
professional Advisory Councils will act as the primary platform through which the state 
and UTs may put forth their views and concern before the commission to help in shaping 
the overall agenda, policy and action regarding the educational research and training, apart 
from the role assigned in the present form of Bill.  
 
(D) Composition of Professional Advisory Councils 
 
  They submitted that following professional Advisory Councils may be constituted:  
 
(i) Each Council shall have an Ex - officio Cha irman, who will be the 
chairman of National Commission.  
(ii) Each Council shall have a Vice -chair Person to be elected from amongst 
the members of the Council. 
(iii) Each Council shall have a member to represents every state and UT, 
whose name shall be appeared in t he concerned professional register 
maintained under state council, to be nominated by the state Governments 
or Union Territory.  
(iv) Each council shall have a member to represent every state council, whose 
name shall be appeared in the concerned professional r egister maintained 
in the state council, to be nominated by the state council. 
(v) Every member of the Commission shall be the ex - officio members of the 
council.  
(vi) The chair man, UGC shall be a Member of each Council.  
(vii) The Director, NAAC shall be a Member of Commission.  
(viii) Four members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst 
persons holding the post of Director in the IIT, IISc and IIM and Indian 
Institute of Public Health & Hygiene, Kolkata. 
 
(E) Constitution of Autonomous Boards  
 
i. The Society submitted that the Central Government shall, by Notification constitute 
the following Autonomous Boards under the overall supervision of the Commission to 
perform the functions assigned to such Boards under this Act namely:  

39 
 
 
(i) The Under Graduate Health & Care Education Board  
(ii) The Post Graduate Health & Care Education Board 
(iii) The Health & Care Assessment & Rating Board  
(iv) The Health & Care Ethics & Registration Board 
 
ii. Allied & Health Care Professions Bill - 2019 has not given much importance to the 
regulation of professional practice of allied & health care professionals. Enforcement 
of professional conduct, code of ethics and etiquette are coming under the 
responsibilities of concerned State Councils, which are responsible for  many other 
functions like conduct of common entry and exit exams and inspection of educational 
institutions to ensure the minimum standards etc. In the absence of a separate body 
with distinct responsibility for enforcing the ethical norms on professional practice and 
effective adherence to professional code of conduct and etiquette, the regulatory 
control over professional practice of allied & health care professionals cannot be 
achieved. It is highlighted that unlike other professional regulatory bodies in health 
sector, the body envisaged to be constituted will have elevated role and more 
responsibilities with high task in this regard as more number of human resources and 
work force in health care delivery system is coming under this proposed regulator. It is 
therefore essential to constitute an Autonomous Board for Health & Care Ethics & 
Registration within the Commission.  
iii. In the absence of an autonomous board for Post - Graduate Education and Research, 
the historically neglected and sidelined professio ns in allied & health care stream 
cannot develop and the endless opportunities of Research & Developmental studies in 
this area will remain unexplored. Hence, a separate Autonomous Board for Post 
Graduate Education & Research with experts from various cate gories is inevitable 
within the commission. 
iv. In the SOR of Bill, it is stated that our nation has to produce Human Resources in 
Health Care not only to meet Indian requirements, but also to cater the global markets 
with proper expertise in the light of chan ging global scenario. Most of the Allied & 
Health Care Courses in India are Undergraduate Programs. In the absence of an 
Autonomous Board for Undergraduate Education in the line of NMC Act - 2019, the 
effective co ordination, standardization and academic su pervision may not be 
achieved. The same board i s essential for proper faculty i mprovement programs and 
also for setting up of an integrated and dynamic learning environment that is more 
skill based and relevant for clinical practice at the primary level. It is therefore 
imperative for Ministry of Health to constitute a separate Auton omous Board for 
Under Graduate Health & Care Education with experts from various categories as 
constituted in National Medical Commission.  
v. The way of assessment and consenting process for starting up of Educational 
institutions and Accreditation of existing Allied & Health care Educational Institutions 
proposed in the present Bill is purely in a conventional way and not at par with the 
changing concepts of regulatory mechanism over professional education in Health care 
delivery system. The clause 37 of present Bill is not competent enough to make 
transparent and coordinated regulations. The distinct functions and responsibilities on 
Evaluation/Assessments and Rating may be de-linked from the council envisaged to be 
constituted and a separate regulatory Board in the line of NMC Act - 2019 may be 
constituted to ensure the transparent and effective regulatory assessments and 
evaluation. It is therefore suggested to constitute an autonomous Board for Assessment 
& Rating of Health & Care Education named as Health & Care Assessment & Rating 
Board. 
 

40 
 
(F) Composition of Autonomous Boards  
It is submitted that, the composition of Autonomous Boards may be as follows: 
(i) The Under Graduate Health & Care Education Board shall consist of a 
President and Two full time members and 15 Part time members to represent 
15 major categories scheduled in the present form of Allied & Health Care 
Professions Bill – 2018, to be appointed by Central Government as per the 
recommendations of Search Committee constituted for this purpose.  
(ii) The Post Graduate Health & Care Education Board shall consist of a President 
and Two full time members and 15 Part time members to represent 15  major 
categories scheduled in the present form of Allied & Health Care Professions 
Bill- 2018, to be appointed by Central Government as per the 
recommendations of search committee in this regard.  
(iii) The Health & Care Assessment & Rating Board shall consist of a President 
and Two full time members with 15 part time members to represent 15 major 
categories scheduled in the present form of Allied & Health Care Professions 
Bill- 2018, to be appointed by Central Government as per the 
recommendations of search committee in this regard.  
(iv) The Health & Care Ethics & Registration Board shall consist of a President 
and Two whole time members and seven Part time members to represent seven 
major categories, to be appointed by Central Government as per the 
recommendations of Search Committee constituted for this purpose. 
(G) Society of Indian Radiographers (SIR) 
3.11.22 SIR has welcomed the formation of the Council for allied healthcare professionals 
and appreciated Union Government for taking initiation to regulate and standardize the education 
and services by allied healthcare professionals. The Society has requested to  establish a 
unique/separate/independent/distinctive council exclusively for Radiographers due to following 
reasons:  
(i) Number of technologists working in India is huge and demand of trained 
technologists is high. 
(ii) The Profession including academics/training standards is still not regulated as there is 
no regulatory body and courses range from   some months to four years. 
(iii) MOHFW recommended 4 years course but Ministry of Skill Development and its 
subsidiaries is biased to reduce standards of education and train ing by granting 
permission to short term training courses and training shops with no education 
standards, faculty and facility that clearly underlines that lack of coordination 
between the two. 
(iv) All these Technologists should be registered with Atomic Energ y Regulatory Board 
(AERB).  
(v) There is great exodus of these professionals due to unsatisfactory working, salary, 
promotion avenues and career ladder in India. Further, these professionals are 
responsible for protecting public from biggest source of man -made radiation. Under 
qualified professionals working in clinics are actually bombarding the sick with 
radiation. 
(H) Association of Self Employed Owners (Paramedical) of Private Pathology 
Laboratories of Gujrat (ASEOPPLO-G) Gujarat 
3.11.23 The Association expressed apprehension from member of Indian Medical 
Association (Pathologist) as they are demanding monopoly rights in profession of 

41 
 
Clinical/Pathology laboratory even though such profession and its practice is not under the 
preview of IMA  (except IMA member).  They submitted that even after the formation of the 
Allied and Healthcare Professionals Council, if they do not get independent right to practice as 
well entitled to sign or authenticate the technical result of the laboratory investi gations, this will 
result in monopoly of the profession into the handful of group. This will disturb nationwide 
qualitative allied health services and remains only royalty oriented profession.  
 
(I) Indian Association of Clinical Psychologists 
3.11.24 The Association submitted that considering the nature of work, Clinical 
Psychologists are mainly discharging their duties in clinical setup of mental health care facilities 
and in general hospital setting, and research and teaching setting focusing on huma n resource 
development in various settings including medical and nonmedical institutions. There is a need 
to have Independent council for regulation of profession as important as Psychology and Clinical 
Psychology should also be part of that council.  
3.11.25 For the promotion, standardization and regulation of psychology, an independent, 
statutory national psychology council should be established. It is important that Discipline of 
psychology to be regulated under the Psychology Council of India. Clinical Psychologists are 
currently under the Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI) Act, 1992. This needs further emphasis 
that Psychology is a core subject. It cannot be considered allied subject and it forms part of core 
discipline for above mentioned reasons. T he Psychology Council of India should be considered 
as Core and independent professional body and not as Allied Health Professionals because they 
undergo 7 to 10 years of academic & vigorous clinical training focusing on comprehensive 
healthcare. They, fur ther, highlighted that psychology has a major role in Continuum of care 
model of W.H.O. for which there is an urgent need for creation of Independent Council  
3.11.26 Behavioral health: This category of behavioral health sciences is not a preferred 
term to  mental health. For the promotion, standardization and regulation of psychology, an 
independent, statutory National Psychology Council should be established.  
(J) The National Academy of Psychology (NAOP) India 
 
3.11.27 The following are the suggestions of the association:- 
 
NAOP stated that t he AHP bill has systematic provisions for health and allied 
health care professions such as physiotherapy etc. however, it suffers from avoidable 
misalignments and redundancy vis-a-vis other psychology and wellness -related 
legislation and policies such as the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017, the Persons with 
Disability Act, 2016 as mentioned below: 
  
(i) In the AHP Bill, there is considerable confusion now over how psychologists 
are recognized and regulated. Together the Acts and AHP Bill present a 
fragmented regulatory scenario, where the extremely relevant role of 
psychologists is viewed and regulated differently through different legal, policy 
and administrative instruments. It is, therefore, ironic to note that there is a huge 
demand for psychological service but there is confusion regarding policy and 
regulation. 
(ii) The proposed AHP Bill includes the category of "Behavioral Health Sciences 
Professional". This category includes not just Clinical  Psychologists (except 
those covered under RCI), but also all Psychologists (ISCO 2634). In addition, 
it includes Behavioral Analysts (ISCO - 2635), health counselors, health 

42 
 
educators and other specific counselors like HIV, family planning and mental 
health support educators (ISCO - 3259). NAOP is of the view that the Bill needs 
to clarify whether these professionals are general practitioners or technically 
qualified counselors with levels of education, training, certification and 
professional benchmarking  through professional assessments and evaluations. 
Such clarity will preclude the possibility of quackery, fraud and future legal 
grievances and dispute litigation under the laws. 
(iii) The Central AHCI will consist of 48 members but no member is envisioned 
from the community of professional psychologists.  
(iv) In the current Bill, healthcare is described predominantly in the context of 
diagnosis and treatment but not in the context of prevention, wellness, and 
health promotion throughout the lifespan. Further, it is  not clear, whether and 
how, the proposed Bill is aligned with the policy formulation of re -imagining 
PHCs as wellness centers. 
(K) Professional Psychology Associations in India 
3.11.28 The community of psychologists represented by prominent Psychology 
associations like National Academy of Psychology (India), Indian Association for Clinical 
Psychology (IACP), Indian Academy for Applied Psychology (IAAP), different state and 
national level organizations, and individual psychologists recommended the following: 
 
(i) Imperative recognition of professional psychologists, including clinical and 
rehabilitation psychologists, as a separate category of professionals, be made in 
Allied and Health Care prof essions Bill and they should not be bunched or combined 
with general practitioners in allied health care. 
(ii) Re-evaluation of the need for clinical and rehabilitation psychologists to be regulated 
by the RCI be done given that the AHP Bill proposes that all p sychologists register as 
AHPs and they would be subject to legislations set out in the AHP.  We suggest that 
all professional psychologists be regulated by a separate Council, called the Indian 
Council of Psychology. 
(iii) Given the importance and relevance for psychology, a strong focus and policy push to 
form a professional psychology council is necessary. 
(iv) Indian Council of Psychology will address the current disparities and redundancies 
inherent in using different regulatory mechanism and bridge gaps in the current policy 
frameworks.   
(v) Indian Council of Psychology, be mandated to regulate the practice of psychological 
through professional benchmarking in India. 
3.11.29 The proposed The Allied and Healthcare Professions bill is a welcome 
development, however, he althcare will not be successful without the involvement of 
Psychologists through Indian Council of Psychology. The move to create an Indian Council of 
Psychology would strengthen the education and training of Psychologists in the country and 
create human resource that will be required for this purpose. 
(L) Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai 
 
3.11.30 The Memoranda suggested  the Committee to remove the Behavioral Health 
Science category from the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 and initiate  the process 
of establishment of Indian Council of Psychology for regulation, licensing and standardization of 
psychology education and practice in India. They have also submitted their concerns and 
recommendations for the bill that are as follows: 

43 
 
 
(i) The inclusion of “behavioral Health Sciences Professionals” in the AHPB is neither 
justified nor comprehensive enough to cover Psychology as a discipline.  
(ii) The RCI has led to the neglect of clinical psychologists and to the exclusion of wide 
range of practitioners from the field of psychology.  
(iii) AHPB excludes clinical psychologists who are otherwise included in the Rehabilitation 
Council of India (RCI) Act, 1992. Although the RCI has regulated the practice of 
clinical psychologists, it does not cover the enti re gamut of services offered by clinical 
psychologists. 
(iv) RCI is under the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Government of India. 
The Allied and Healthcare Council of India (AHCI), envisaged in the Bill, would be 
under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. This means that the profession of 
psychology will be governed by two different ministries, therefore will create serious 
policy confusion both for the professionals and service users. 
(v) As per Clause 3 of the Bill, the Council would consist o f various representatives of the 
Government, but no one from a mental health/psychology field. 
(vi) There is a lack of clarity about how different categories of behavioral health science 
professionals will be asked to take the same entrance and exit exams as pr ovided by the 
Clause 10 (f & G) of the Bill. A psychologist and a family counselor or an HIV 
counselor or a health educator cannot take the same licensing examination. 
(vii) The clubbing of diverse professionals under the category ‘behavioral health science 
profession’ is not justified.  
 
3.11.31 Given these issues and concerns, they have, therefore, made the following 
recommendations to the Parliamentary Standing Committee: 
 
(i) The ‘Behavioral Health Sciences profession’ category should be removed. 
(ii) Almost all count ries have a separate Psychology Board to regulate the different 
professionals and practice in the vast field of Psychology. The creation of an 
independent statutory body as “Indian Council of Psychology” therefore seems aligned 
with the recommendations of the Mental Health Care Act 2017 to meet the demand for 
more number of professionals in mental health care by 2027.  
(iii) For the promotion, standardization and regulation of psychology, an independent, 
statutory Indian Council of Psychology should be established.  
(iv) Future discussions on formation of the proposed Indian Council of Psychology should 
have adequate representation and participation of academicians and professionals from 
regional and zonal levels across the country  
(v) The removal of Clinical Psychologist s from the Rehabilitation Council of India and 
include them in the proposed Indian Council of Psychology. 
 
(M) Federation of Indian Dental Hygienists Association (FIDHA) 
3.11.32 There is no representation of Dental Hygienist profession in the council. The 
Association has, therefore, requested to include at least three representatives from dental 
hygienist profession.  
(N) Indian Dietetic Association (IDA) 
3.11.33 IDA submitted memorandum that stipulates India as currently plagued with the 
burden of malnutrition, over nutrition and micronutrient deficiencies. The role of 
Dietitians/Nutritionists can go a long way in prevention as well as treatment of such problems, 
thus, reducing the economic burden of the country. The Association submitted that Allied and 
Healthcare diet/nutrition professionals should be segregated based on qualifications and work 

44 
 
profile. All diet/ nutrition professionals should not be clubbed unde r allied category. They have 
proposed the following segregation-  
(i) Allied category include those with 2000 hours of study i.e. graduates in home 
science/ nutrition and dietetics, graduates + diploma holders, post -graduation done 
by distance learning, certificate courses and food service managers in institutions 
including hospitals. 
(ii) Healthcare professionals those with 3500 hours of study i.e. 3-4 years Graduation in 
home-science / nutrition and dietetics + 2 years of Masters in Food and nutrition / 
dietetics and PhD in food and nutrition / dietetics , teaching and research in teaching 
hospitals 
(iii) The presence of representatives from their profession in Advisory boards/ 
Committees / panels of the council will ensure the standards of teaching and 
practice. While nutrition is on the main agenda of the country but Dieticians and 
nutritionists have not been given any representation in various committees of the 
AHP bill. The association proposed that at least 2 seats to be given to Indian 
Dietetic Association to represent and express their profession in detail once the 
council is formed. 
 
(O) Indian Society of extra corporeal Technology 
3.11.34   The society submitted that extracorporeal technology plays an important role in Cardiac 
surgery. This is the only allie d health area directly link with the life of a patient and this 
profession have a great esteem in the healthcare in the healthcare  system of advanced countries 
but unfortunately this profession is not properly recognized or considered in India.  The 
memorandum stated that registration for all qualified practicing Perfusionists in India under a 
regulatory council or body is one of their long standing demands. By giving registration under a 
central regulatory body, Government can ensure the quality of health care being provided and 
assess the exact number of qualified professionals in this sector to take stock of the ratio between 
demand and supply.  It is necessary to ensure certain amount of standard and quality as 
Perfusionists are taking independ ent and vital decisions during the course of their professional 
deliberation. ISECT has, therefore, suggested to keep the nomenclature as "Clinical Perfusionist" 
all over the country.  
(P) All India Association of Medical Social Work Professionals, Chandigarh 
3.11.35 The Association stated that the Bill under consideration is undoubtedly a novel as 
well as path breaking endeavor by the Central Government, but it is sheer discrimination or more 
appropriately ignominious attitude towards Clinical Social Work by excluding it in its definition 
Section.  Social work profession is committed for maximizing the wellbeing of individuals and 
society, and clinicians have to give enough emphasis on socio -cultural environmental aspects of 
illness and ailments.  The role of clinical social worker is to create an interface between the 
clinical setting/teams and mainstream society. The association has, therefore, raised 
apprehensions over exclusion of clinical social workers from the Bill. World Health 
Organization (WHO), UN ICEF etc, talk about the important roles of clinical social workers, 
however, in the country clinical social workers are not treated an equitably with other 
professions. Medical Social Workers and Psychiatric Social Workers working in hospital are also 
healthcare professionals but they are not included in the Bill. 
(Q) Society of Emergency Paramedics in India 
3.11.36 Accident and trauma care technology has more than 3500 hours of course study 
work and have 3 year + 1 -year full internship programme from Dr. MGR Medical University, 

45 
 
Chennai and various Deemed university in India have 4 -year programme. Most of the developed 
countries having separate board (or) council for regulating accident and trauma care technology 
profession in respective countries. The association suggested to provide suitable legal 
frameworks to the profession for better health care delivery as  well as  for the growth and 
advancement of the profession in order to serve people better. 
 
(R) Indian Sterilization Healthcare Association (ISHA) 
3.11.37 The Association has suggested for inclusion of Central Sterile Supply Department 
(CSSD) Technician in the lis t of Allied and Healthcare Professionals Bill, 2018. They submitted 
that Central Sterile Supply Department (CSSD) is an essential Department of any hospital which 
is responsible for receiving, cleaning, disinfection, inspection, packaging, sterilization, 
monitoring, sterile storage and supply of instruments, implants and medical consumables to 
Operation Theatre and other wards Departments of hospitals. The department  known as Heart of 
the Hospital,  so CSSD technicians is included in the list, this profession will also get 
standardized and regularized, therefore, CSSD Technicians be included in the Indicative list of 
Allied and Healthcare Professionals Bill, 2018.  
 
(S) Christian Medical Association of India (CMAI) 
3.11.38 The CMAI appreciated the initiative and efforts made by the Government to 
introduce the Allied and Healthcare Professionals Bill, 2018.  The Association has submitted the 
following suggestions regarding the AHP Bill, 2018: 
(i) The title of  the Bill should be changed to Allied Healthcare Professions' Bill. 2018. 
This will bring more clarity in differentiating the nursing and medical healthcare 
professions vis-a-vis allied health professionals. 
(ii) The Bill has to specify the recognized qualifica tions eligible for the national registry, 
as there is no central council so far to record who all fall under "recognized allied and 
healthcare qualification'' (Chapter 3: 30). 
(iii) The Council should have a mechanism to monitor and review the curriculum and make 
sure it's the standard across the country. For paramedical courses, the hands on 
training or internship should be mandatory (Chapter 3: I 0). 
(iv) The autonomy of the Council should be stressed and ensured in order for effective 
implementation at all levels - National and State. 
(v) Since allied healthcare training has been conducted by various prominent professional 
institutions and organizations, there should be greater involvement and representation 
of them at all the decision making and implementing bodies at the national and state 
levels. 
(vi) A quorum must be specified for meetings of each structure for unbiased decision 
making.  
(vii) Since health is a state subject, it is felt that the structure at the State level be more 
defined for consistency.  
(viii) There should be a st andardized curriculum at the national level in order to ensure 
consistency of the quality of the training programme. There should be a standardized 
skill assessment as exit examination as this field requires a skill set that is obtained 
through intensive well-structured hands-on training. 
(ix) There should be a grievance redressal mechanism independent of the council to ensure 
transparency. 

46 
 
(x) The process of centralized registration of the training institutions considering the 
different rules with relation to employment across and outside of the country. 
(xi) Offences and non -compliances have to be defined and differentiated in graded order 
for an effective implementation of rules and regulations with appropriate penalties. 
(xii) There has to be a system to validate the techni cal capacity and ensure consistent 
quality through regulatory examination and other various evaluations 
(xiii) There is a need to recognize institutions to train the trainers to maintain quality of 
allied healthcare education. These institutions can be considered  as Centers of 
Excellence. Centers like Christian Medical College (CMC)  
 Vellore and CMAI who have had a presence and experience in this area for over 50 
years must be recognized. 
(xiv) Career pathways have to be chartered for individuals with clear accreditatio n 
processes. 
(xv) Lateral entry pathways are also crucial for individuals who are already in the system to 
follow for registration and accreditation. 
(xvi) Code of Ethics and Standards has to be set at the centre and the State can roll it out 
while the centre gives good support. 
 
(T) Quality Council of India (QCI) 
 
3.11.39 The Secretary General of QCI submitted the following:-  
(i) The role of a regulator must be delineated from the role of the government.  In 
healthcare sector also, which has progressed extremely well needs to be governed 
by professionals with equal representation from Industry and government.  The 
regulator must be independent and must only follow the overall policy of the 
government. 
(ii) The central council little leaner council because there are lot of p eople inside 
specially joint Secretary of various ministries.  The council must be a professional 
based on organization, therefore, the Government’s role in regulating the 
processionals should be reduced and the government must only plan, monitor and 
make policies. An independent and professional organization should be 
introduced in order to mandate and implement this particular Act.  
(iii) There is also concern that the term of appointment of the Chairman is only two 
years. Two years is too small a time for a go vernment to plan and execute 
something.  Therefore, it should be for a minimum of five years.  
(iv) India has begun to follow this model and set up regulators like FSSAI, PNGRS, 
TRAI etc.  Accordingly, the proposed Council should be restructured. 
(v) The Chairman (at the level of Secretary) should be a full time post (from any field 
with adequate administrative experience and knowledge of the sector) with a full 
time Member (Technical) on lines of TRAI/PNGRB.  Chairman must head the 
Council and the Executive Council /GB.  The Council should have provision for 
different Boards looking after different sectors within the Allied Healthcare sector 
and the competencies must be adopted from NSQF.  Moreover, all curriculum and 
job roles must be homogenized with the NSQF as well as NOS. 
(vi) The Council should have equal distribution between private sector participation, 
professional bodies and government.  QCI should necessarily be part of the 
Council to play its role in regulating this profession, or improving the quality of 
this particular organization or profession.  Therefore, for any allied healthcare 

47 
 
professional who might eventually find a market elsewhere around the world, it is 
important that the certification mechanism that NABL, NABCB and NABH, that 
is, boards do and whic h is accepted across 180 countries around the world, is 
given credence. Further, the role of SSCs and the NOS as well as the NSQF must 
also be integrated in the Bill. 
(vii) The Bill must make provision of 3 rd party assessment/inspection etc. and the 
Council must not get involved in any such activity to avoid conflict of interest.  It 
must take decisions based on results of such assessments/inspections.  It should 
not have their own assessors/inspectors etc.  Third party bodies must be 
accredited to check and verify adherence to regulations. 
(viii) In order to recognize excellence practiced voluntarily, the Bill should make a 
provision for recognizing any voluntary certifications/ accreditations to higher 
standards.  Once accredited, the institutions must be free from any  regulatory 
requirements and such institutions must be generously funded to further excel.  
Similarly, organizations/training centers once accredited, must also be allowed 
training of professionals without the requirement to go through formal process of 
approval, such as Accredited hospitals involved in teaching/training. 
(ix) The Bill must not prescribe courses, mode of delivery of courses or input criteria 
of selection.  This must be based on NOS so that there is homogeneity across the 
sector.  All modes of de livery must be encouraged, such as face to face, digital 
learning, blended learning, mobile learning, skills gained through prior 
learning/work etc.  however, the outcome must be certified, irrespective of 
institution, the student may have graduated from o r the mode he/she must 
demonstrate skills and knowledge before he/she is allowed to proactive the 
profession.  This may be done through any process of “person Certification” 
based on ISO17024 or through certifications through CBs.  Once certified, only 
then he/she should be registered as a professional in the live national Registry. 
(x) All certificate programs, diploma, post diploma, degree, postgraduate degree, 
doctoral program etc. by whatever name called must be a part of the bill. 
(xi) The outcome must also be in line with the National Qualification Framework and 
the certification programs being conducted through training centers under the 
Sector Skills Council must be certified and then only entered in the live national 
registry. 
(xii) The bill must ensure that unless certified through the process and unless registered 
successfully, no professional can be gainfully employed in the healthcare sector, 
whether public or private. 
(xiii) The Quality Council of India would be happy to provide details about any of the 
above, if des ired.  We also would like to be a part of the Council, so that the 
accreditation activities we are doing under NABH and requirements of calibration 
and testing laboratories under NABL as well as certification/inspection bodies 
under NABCB and NABET are pro perly synergized in the functioning of the 
Council. 
 
(U) Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI) 
3.11.40 The representative of PHFI submitted the following:- 
(i) This is excellent and long overdue legislation that addresses a major gap in 
India’s health workforce.  It provides an appropriate regulatory framework 

48 
 
for developing skilled human resources who can act as competent non -
physician healthcare providers capab le of health service delivery in different 
settings of care. 
(ii) There is abundant global and national evidence that supports the role and 
attests the value of Allied healthcare Professionals. Re -assignment of roles 
and responsibilities previously restricted to doctors, to non-doctors who have 
the requisite skill sets, is a rational choice that optimizes all available 
resources in the health system. 
(iii) The list of Allied Health Professional categories included in the bill should 
not be viewed as exhaustive.  Categ ories such as Vision Technicians and 
Dental Hygienists must be included. 
(iv) Recognizing the rapid pace at which innovations in healthcare delivery are 
emerging, the Council should retain the flexibility to periodically review and 
recognize new categories and courses. 
(v) Health system Approach - In order to achieve primary healthcare led 
universal health coverage by 2030.  The creation AHPs in different 
categories of AHP workforce must be driven through a health system 
approach. 
(vi) Establishment of Public Health Cadre  in States provides an opportunity for 
career growth of highly qualified allied health professionals through 
integration in health systems in public health management, faculty creation 
(education) and research for AHPs. 
(vii) Competency Driven Education and Accr editation – The education should be 
skill based and Competency driven.  It should not rely on Qualifications 
alone.  Competences must be Valued. 
(viii) Focus on Skills, Scale, Salary and Social Status of Allied Health 
Professionals. 
(ix) Flexibility to Innovate – States should retain the flexibility to innovate and 
the National council should be a platform for exchange of best practices and 
enabler for replication and scale up. 
(x) Promote Technology and Teamwork – future of healthcare will be based on 
multi skilling and multidisciplinary team approach for best and cost effective 
outcomes. 
 
  

49 
 
CHAPTER 4 
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION OF THE BILL 
4.1 During the course of the examination of the Bill, the Committee received a number of 
memoranda in response to its Press Release.  The memoranda were forwarded to the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare for its response. The Committee’s observations and 
recommendations contained in the Report reflect an extensive scrutiny of submissions and all the 
viewpoints put forth before it by  various organizations/experts/State Governments. Upon 
scrutiny of the replies received from the Ministry, the Committee is of the view that certain 
provisions of the Bill need to be recast to serve the intended purpose of the Bill better. The 
Committee in its meeting held on 6th January, 2019 took up clause-by-clause consideration of the 
Bill. Various amendments to the Bill have been suggested by the Committee on clauses of the 
Bill which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
CLAUSE 2 
4.2 Clause 2(a) deals with the definition of (c) "allied and healthcare institution" 
 Clause 2(a) reads as under: 
(a) “allied and healthcare institution” means an educational or research institution 
which grants diploma or undergraduate, postgraduate or doctoral degree or any other 
post degree certification in any allied and healthcare professional under this Act; 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
4.2.1 A stakeholder submitted that the definition should be “Allied Health Institution”  instead 
of “Allied and Health Care Institution”  
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
 
4.2.2 The suggestion is not agreeable as the Bill pertains to both, Allied and Healthcare 
professionals as defined using a normative number of hours of study as well as the ISCO method 
of classification.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.2.3 The Committee is in agreement with the views of the Ministry and recommends for 
retaining the conjuncting word, "and" in terminology/definition of "Allied and Healthcare 
Institution" as the Bill pertains to both the Allied as well as the Healthcare professionals. 
 
4.2.4 Clause 2(b) deals with the definition of (b) “allied and healthcare professional” 
 Clause 2(b) reads as under: 
 
(b) “allied and healthcare professional” means any allied health professional or 
healthcare professional under this Act; 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
4.2.5 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 

50 
 
(i) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) suggested changing the  
definitions of allied and healthcare professionals, allied health professionals and 
healthcare professionals as per MoHFW studies and reports. 
 
(ii) One stakeholder suggested substitution of “Allied Health Care Profession”  in place of 
“Allied Health Care Professional”.  Definitions may include professions mentioned in 
the Schedule and others which are notified later. 
 
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE 
4.2.6 The Ministry submitted that the Bill pertains to both Allied and Healthcare professionals 
as defined using a normative number of hours of study as well as the ISCO method of 
classification. The Ministry, further, submitted that the present Bill incorporates professionals 
which have qualifications varying from Diploma to Post graduate and PhD levels as well. It may 
not be justified to define such varying levels in a common nomenclature.  
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.2.7 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that professionals with varied 
qualifications should not be given a common nomenclature. Equating a professional who 
has devoted a substantial  amount of his/her life in research and academics with an 
apprentice in the same field will discourage individuals from pursuing higher education. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends retaining the nomenclature, “ allied and healthcare 
professional” 
 
4.2.8 Clause 2(c) deals with the definition of (c) “allied and healthcare qualification”  
 Clause 2(c) reads as under: 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(c) “allied health professional” includes an associate, technician or technologist who is 
trained to perform any technical and practical task to support diagnosis and treatment of 
illness, disease, injury or impairment, and to support implementation of any healthcare 
treatment and referral plan, recommended by a medical, nursing or any other healthcare 
professional, and, who has obtained any qualification of diploma or degree under this 
Act, the duration of which shall not be less than two thousand hours; 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.2.9 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
(i) Indian Medical Association (Headquarter and Kerala Chapter) submitted that clause 
2(c) mentions the purview of performing the work of Allied Healthcare Professionals 
as per the duration of training which is irrational and unscientific. 
(ii) Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of India (JFMTI) suggested the following 
change in the definition of Allied Health Professionals: 
 
Allied Health Professionals include individuals involved in the delivery of 
Health or related services with expertise in Diagnostic, Therapeutic, 

51 
 
Curative, Preventive and Rehabilitative interventions or Social Care, who 
have obtained the tertiary level of Professional Education & Training of 
Diploma or Degree as minimum qualifications with the duration of such 
hours as determined by the Regulations under this Act. They work in 
interdisciplinary health teams including Medical Doctors, Nurses and Public 
Health officials to promote treat or manage a person’s physical, mental, 
social, emotional and environmental health and holistic wellbeing.  
 
The Association further submitted that the definition of allied & health care, 
allied health and health care professionals may be merged into one.  
 
(iii) One stakeholder submitted that clause 2(c) may be synchronized with Clause 2(g) 
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE 
4.2.10 The Ministry submitted that the number of hours specified is the minimum duration 
required and the group may thus have professionals with longer course duration. The Ministry 
further submitted that the number of years was changed to number of hours duratio n so as to be 
compatible with skills related to training and also global University standards that are usually 
based on credit hours. The Ministry also submitted that synchronization of clause 2(c) with 
clause 2(g) has already been considered. 
 
4.2.11 The Ministry also submitted that one calendar year usually makes around 1000 -1200 
hours of studies, which means that all Diploma courses, usually of two years duration in the 
country, comprise of at least 2000 hours. Courses less than two thousand hours of dur ation (i.e. 
two years of study and practical exposure combined) do not qualify as Diploma and are 
identified as ‘skill certification courses’ for the purpose of this Bill . This was also a specific 
request made by the Ministry of Skill Development in order  to align the courses with their 
National Skill Qualification Framework. The Ministry also deposed that it may enhance the 
clause to specify minimum number of years as well as number of hours. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.2.12 The Committee understands the objective of the Bill containing the credit hours 
criteria for allied and healthcare professionals. However, the Committee feels a sketchy 
adoption of the credit  hour system without specifying the time duration may give rise t o 
ambiguity and apprehensions in the minds of stakeholders. The Committee, although, 
welcomes the introduction of a credit hour system but the way each University/institute 
calculates the credits should also be uniform throughout the country. The Committee  
further recommends that duration of course study of Allied Health Professionals must be 
expressed in duration of calendar years with specific number of semesters to bring focus 
and clarity.  The number of hours for each profession should also be decided o n the 
number of lecture hours and the number of hours devoted in clinical practice. The 
Committee also notes that the clause does not specify the time duration in which the 
number of hours have to be completed. Absence of a time limit will give rise to non -
uniformity. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the definition should specify the 
number of hours as well as the number of years in which the diploma/degree has to be 
obtained.  
 
4.2.13 The Committee also  recommends that minimum and maximum time  duration 
should also be specified in the Bill. The Committee strongly recommends that the diploma 

52 
 
or degree for "Allied Health Professional" should strictly be obtained as a result of a study 
at a higher educational institution for a duration which shall not be less than two thousand 
hours spread over a period of 2-3 years.  
 
4.2.14 Accordingly, after the amendments, the clause 2(c) will read as under: 
 
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 
(c) “allied health professional” includes an associate, technician or technologist 
who is trained to perform any technical and practical task to support diagnosis and 
treatment of illness, disease, injury or impairment, and to support implementation of 
any healthcare treatment and referral plan, reco mmended by a medical, nursing or 
any other healthcare professional, and, who has obtained any qualification of 
diploma or degree under this Act, the duration of which shall not be less than two 
thousand hours spread over a period of two -three years divided  into specific 
semesters; 
 
4.2.15 Clause 2(d) deals with the definition of (d) “allied and healthcare qualification” 
Clause 2(d) reads as under: 
(d) “allied and healthcare qualification” means any qualification possessed by an allied 
and healthcare professional under this Act; 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.2.16 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
(i) Indian Optometric Association submitted that the provision of the Bill should not be 
extended to certificate, diploma or degree provided by any NGO or University by off 
Campus or distance learning mode.  
(ii) One stakeholder submitted that “as notified from tim e to time” may be added before 
“under this Act”  
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE 
4.2.17 The Ministry submitted that the above suggestions of the stakeholders are agreeable.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.2.18 The Committee is of the view that any institute that conducts allied courses should 
be affiliated to a State/Central University. To avoid mushrooming of sub standard colleges 
and institutes, it is important that the degree granted by only accredited college/institutes 
are recognised as allied and healthcare qualification. 
 
4.2.19 The Committee while deliberating with the Ministry in its meetings arrived at a 
conclusion that non -governmental organizations should not be given the freedom to 
conduct allied courses as such courses will only lead to non -standardisation and promote 
more ambiguity. The Committee is also of the view that considering the diverse professions 
that the proposed Act is set to regulate and the number of unregistered NGOs in the 
country, monitoring the courses conducted by NGOs will not only  be a daunting task but 
also spoil the quality of education in the allied and healthcare Profession. The Committee, 

53 
 
therefore, strongly recommends that to discourage the proliferation of spurious degrees, 
only accredited colleges/institutes should be allowed to run degree or diploma courses. 
 
4.2.20 The Committee also notes that the allied and healthcare professionals are tasked 
with very crucial role in the health care system and their importance can be observed by 
the vital functions that they are bound t o perform. The Committee is of the view that to 
make the degree attained in allied field more reliable, granting of degree in allied and 
healthcare profession through distance learning mode must be completely prohibited. At 
present in the absence of a robu st monitoring mechanism, qualitative assessment of the 
degree attained through distance mode is not possible. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that only those degrees  granted by accredited colleges/institutes through 
regular mode should be termed as allied and healthcare qualification.  
 
4.2.21 The Committee, therefore, recommends the following changes in clause 2(d). Clause 
2(d) will be read as under:   
 
“allied and healthcare qualification” means a diploma or degree possessed by an allied 
and healthcare professional which is granted only by a accredited college/institute 
through regular learning mode under this Act; 
 
4.2.22 Clause 2(g) deals with the definition of (g) “healthcare professional”  
 Clause 2(g) reads as under: 
“healthcare professional” includes a scientist, therapist or other professional who 
studies, advises, researches, supervises or provides preventive, curative, rehabilitative, 
therapeutic or pro motional health services and who has obtained any qualification of 
degree under this Act, the duration of which shall not be less than three thousand six 
hundred hours; 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.2.23 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause 2(g):- 
(i) Indian Medical Association (Headquarter and Kerala Chapter) suggested removal of 
Healthcare professionals and scope of ‘Allied healthcare professionals’ should be 
limited to ‘medically supervised’ modalities. The Association further submitted that 
the intr oduction of the term Healthcare Professionals is irrational, unscientific and 
hazardous to public.  
 
(ii) Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association suggested adding names of the healthcare 
professional- Physiotherapy  
 
(iii) All India Association of Medical Social Work Pr ofessionals suggested modification in 
the definition of healthcare professional in the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 
2018  
 
(iv) All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) submitted that the list of 
professions under Healthcare should be c learly specified and annexed as schedule. It 
also submitted that the duration of OT should be minimum course duration of 5000 
hours as it is of 4 years and 6 months (internship) duration. 
 

54 
 
(v) Indian Association of Physiotherapists submitted that the number of  hours mentioned 
as 3500 hours to be enhanced to 5000 hours (as the course content of healthcare 
professionals are of four years and more and not less than 4800 hours)  
 
(vi) Physiotherapy Forum, United Physiotherapy Associations of India and other 
stakeholders submitted that this Clause should be reframed. The Association further 
submitted that Healthcare professionals provide health services related to dentistry, 
pharmacy, environmental health and hygiene, occupational health and safety, 
physiotherapy, nutrition and vision. (As per the ISCO definition, duration mentioned 
in the original clause is arbitrary, irrational and without any objective study)  
 
(vii) Indian Society of Extra Corporeal Technology suggested inclusion of Clinical 
Perfusionist in healthcare professional category. 
 
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
 
4.2.24 The Ministry submitted that professional categories have been stated in the Schedule so 
the preliminary clause does not specify any profession. The ISCO coding has already being 
specified against each of the professions in the Schedule. However, given the Indian scenario, 
the professions have been clubbed in like categories so as to enable an organized techno -
administrative approach. The Ministry, further, submitted that Clause 66 also enables the Central 
Government after consultation with the Council by a notification to add or otherwise amend the 
Schedule for inclusion of any profession in any specific recognised category in future.  
 
4.2.25 The Ministry also submitted that as all the professions have been listed as per the ISCO -
08 coding and WHO health wo rkers classification, healthcare professionals have been 
accordingly defined in the stated documents and are globally accepted. The number of hours 
specified is the minimum duration required and the group may thus have professionals with 
longer course dura tion. The WHO classification of health worker specifies under Health 
professionals that knowledge and skills required are usually obtained as the result of study at a 
higher educational institution in a health -related field for a period of 3 –6 years leadin g to the 
award of a first degree or higher qualification. The 3600 -hour duration, as the minimum duration 
has been indicated to incorporate this criterion. The duration thus provided is in line with the 
global norms. The Ministry further submitted that the number of years was changed to number of 
hours duration so as to be compatible with skills related training and also global University 
standards that are usually based on credit hours.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.2.26 The Committee understands the apprehension of some professionals that claim to 
have more than 3600 hours of course duration. As per the submissions of the 
Physiotherapists and Occupational Therapists, the time duration for completion of these 
courses is more than four years excluding t he internship duration. However, the 
Committee also notes that 3600 is the minimum requirement and in the healthcare 
professional category, there can be professions that have course content spanning more 
than 3600 hours. The Committee strongly recommends t hat the time duration should also 
be rationalized in the calendar year and divided into semesters for the healthcare 
professionals as well. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the degree for 
"Healthcare Professional" should strictly be obtained as a result of a study at a higher 
educational institution for a duration which shall not be less than 3600 hours spread over a 
period of 3-5 years divided into specific semesters.   

55 
 
 
4.2.27 Accordingly, after the amendments, Clause 2(g) will reads as under: 
“healthcare professional” includes a scientist, therapist or other professional who 
studies, advises, researches, supervises or provides preventive, curative, rehabilitative, 
therapeutic or promotional health services and who has obtained any qualification o f 
degree under this Act, the duration of which shall not be less than three thousand six 
hundred hours spread over a period of 3-5 years divided into specific semesters.; 
 
4.2.28 Clause 2(k) deals with the definition of “recognised categories”  
 Clause 2(k) reads as under: 
“recognised categories” means any category of the allied and healthcare professionals 
specified in the Schedule; 
SUGGESTIONS 
4.2.29 One stakeholder suggested addition of category “Massage Therapist” in the Schedule. 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE 
 
4.2.30 With regards to inclusion of massage therapy, the Ministry submitted that  Massage 
therapy does not currently fall under the ambit of practice of modern medicine. If found 
appropriate, Massage Therapy may be included in the new Bill that is at pres ent under 
consideration of the AYUSH Ministry. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.2.31 The Committee observes that at present there is no standardization of education 
and practice of allied courses in AYUSH. The Committee while examining the National 
Commission on Indian System of Medicine Bill 2019 had made the same observation and 
recommended the following in its Report No. 115 on The National Commission for Indian 
System of Medicine Bill 2019:- 
 
"The Committee is also of the view that there is a need for standardization of education 
and practice of Paramedical Courses like nursing, therapists training etc in Ayurveda, 
Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
development and regulation of paramedical courses in different  disciplines of Indian 
System of Medicine should also be mentioned as one of the functions of the National 
Commission of Indian System of Medicine so that these courses are recognized and a 
uniform curriculum can be developed." 
 
4.2.32 The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation and advises the Ministry 
of AYUSH to regulate massage therapy in AYUSH.  
 
SUGGESTIONS 
 
4.2.33 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders for adding two new clauses 2(q) 
and 2(r) in the Bill and some general suggestions on the clause:- 
(i) Government Optometrist Association, Uttar Pradesh and Indian Optometry 
Federation submitted that a sub clause (q) should be added to clause 2. 

56 
 
  
Clause 2(q) will read as: 
 
(q) Bill will apply to all Allied Health and Health care professionals only. Scope 
of the Bill will not extend to certificate, diploma or degree provided by Skill 
Ministry or any NGO or University by off campus or on distance learning mode in 
Allied health or Health care Professions 
 
(ii) One stakeholder submitted that definition of Physiotherapy and Physiotherapy 
Professional should be added in the clause 2(q) and clause 2(r) respectively and 
the new clauses may be read as follows:  
 
"Physiotherapy means a branch of modern medical science which includes 
examination, assessment, interpretation, physical diagnosis, planning and 
execution of treatment and advice to any person for the purpose of preventing, 
correcting, alleviating, and limiting dysfunction, acute and chronic bodily 
malfunction including life saving measures via chest physiotherapy in the 
intensive care units, curing physical disorder or disability, promoting physical 
fitness, facilitating healing and pain relief and treatment of physical and 
psychosomatic disorders through modulating physiological and physical response 
using physical agents, activities and devices including exercise, mobilization, 
manipulations, therapeutic ultrasound, electrical and thermal agents and 
electrotherapy for diagnosis, treatment and prevention. " 
 
"Physiotherapy professional means a person who practices Physiotherapy by 
undertaking comprehensive examination and appropriate investigation, provides 
treatment and advice to any person preparatory to or for purpose of or in 
connection with movement or func tional dysfunction, malfunction, disorder, 
disability, healing and pain from trauma and disease using physical modalities 
including exercise, mobilizations, manipulations, electrical and thermal agents 
and other electrotherapeutics for prevention, screenin g, diagnosis, treatment, 
health promotion, and fitness. The Physiotherapist can practice independently or 
as a part of a multi -disciplinary team and has a minimum qualification of a 
baccalaureate degree."  
 
 
(iii) Gujarat Government Physiotherapist Association and Lokmanya Medical College 
of Physiotherapy, Mumbai submitted that the definition of Physiotherapists must 
be included in this Chapter.  
 
(iv) All Assam Physiotherapy Association (AAPA) also suggested to Define 
'Physiotherapy' and 'Physiotherapist' in Chapter I and Remove Physiotherapy 
from Schedule and include it in the Chapter 1, Preliminary Clause 2 – definition 
of Physiotherapy in clause ‘q’ and  Physiotherapist clause ‘r’ (Definitions 
provided)  
 
(v) Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association and Physiotherapy Forum also submitted 
that the Definition of Physiotherapy should be included in the section as clause 2 
(q). 
 

57 
 
(vi) Rajasthani Physiotherapy Asso ciation and Physiotherapy Forum  submitted that 
the Definition of Physiotherapy Professionals to be included in the section as 
clause 2 (r) 
  
(vii) Public Health Foundation of India submitted that the term ‘task shifting’ is used 
in clause 10 (h), in line 3 7. This is, however, not defined in clause 2. The 
Association has submitted that “TASK SHIFTING” may be defined as: 
 
“the process whereby specific tasks are moved, where appropriate, to health 
workers with shorter qualifications and shorter trainings” 
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
 
4.2.34 On the suggestion of adding a new clause 2(q) that the Bill will apply to all Allied Health 
and Health care professionals, the Ministry submitted that the provision already exists by virtue 
of the definition of the allied and h ealthcare professions. On inclusion of definition of 
Physiotherapy and Physiotherapist the Ministry submitted that definition of professional 
categories have been stated in the Schedule. Preliminary clause does not define any particular 
profession. Therefore it is not recommended. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.2.35 The Committee is of the view that there is no need to add a clause stating the scope 
of the Bill. The Committee has already recommended that degree granted only by 
accredited colleges/institut ions through regular mode would be recognised as allied and 
healthcare qualification. 
 
4.2.36 The Committee notes that stakeholders have submitted that the definition of the 
professions as well as the professional should be included in the Bill. However, t he 
Committee observes that the schedule under Section 2(k) clearly defines each recognised 
category and mentions the ISCO code before each profession. During the course of clause 
by clause consideration, the Ministry submitted that the ISCO document alread y includes 
the definition of each profession. The Committee, therefore, concludes that the inclusion of 
definition of each profession in the Bill is unwarranted as the ISCO Code of each 
profession is already listed in the Schedule of the Bill.   
 
4.2.37 The Committee observes that in order to have proper "Patient care" and safety in 
the existing scenario of shortage of doctors and nurses, there is urgent need for task -
shifting to qualified allied and healthcare professionals.  
 
4.2.38 The Committee, therefore, is in agreement with the view of Public Health 
Foundation of India and recommends that " Task Shifting" may be defined under Clause 2 
as per the intention of Statement of Reasons and Objective of the Bill and globally accepted 
standard. 
 
4.2.39 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 3 
4.3 Clause 3.—This clause provides for the constitution and composition of the Allied and 
Healthcare Council to be known as the “Allied and Healthcare Council of India”.  

58 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.3.1 The following are the general suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause: 
(i) Lokmanya Medical College of Physiotherapy, Mumbai, Physiotherapist Association 
of Uttrakhand and All Assam Physiotherapy Association (AAPA) submitted that the 
tenure of the members to be increased to 5 years or at least 3 years 
(ii) Lokmanya Medical College of Physiotherapy, Mumbai, Rajasthani Physiotherapy 
Association, All Assam Physiotherapy Association (AAPA) and one stakeholder 
submitted that the Council shall consist of a Chairperson, to be elected from amongst 
the members specified in clause (l), (m) and (n). Along with members specified in 
clause (l), (m) and (n) the following members will be voting members of the council. 
 
(iii) Arindam Ghosh submitted that the Council should hav e equal representation of each 
profession in the governing body  
 
(iv) Society of Indian Radiographers (SIR) suggested for inclusion/appointment only of 
the concerned professional experts and representatives from the concerned 
organization as non-ex-officio members.  
 
(v) Bharatiya Counselling Psychology submitted that the present Council does not have 
adequate representation of Psychologists,  it will not be just to regularise and be 
licensing authority for all psychology fields. The Association further recommended 
reconstitution of committee with maximum representation of Psychologists. It also 
submitted that separate provision for Psychologis ts in various fields may also be 
made and independent national level committee must be established to standardise 
and license Psychologists  
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
4.3.2 On a request to increase the tenure of the members, the Ministry submitted that the 
provision already exists. The term of a member is extendable to 6 years as the same member may 
be nominated for three terms of two years each consecutively, as per clause 4(2). Provision of 
multiple short tenure for longer duration has been made to ensure tha t the Council will have 
provision to change the member if found to be ineffective or engaged in malpractice. This will 
regulate the quality of practice within the Council body.  
 
4.3.3 The Ministry also submitted that the provision regards to voting by the  members already 
exists in clause 7(3). Regarding equal representation of each profession in the governing body, 
the Ministry submitted that  currently, the Government does not have any authentic estimates of 
professions, other than what is being reported b y Associations or similar bodies. The 
representation of any profession on the Council is thus normative, to make it fair and equitable, 
wherein if the professional group has close to one (1) lakh practicing professional, they will have 
one member to represent on the council. The zonal distribution has not be considered at this time 
but it may considered for Professional Advisory Bodies. In response to the suggestion of Society 
of Indian Radiographers (SIR), the Ministry submitted that the provision already exists. This has 
been addressed as part of the Council composition.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.3.4 The Committee observes that presently, there are 53 professions that the Bill aims to 
regulate and in subsequent paragraphs, the Committee has recomm ended change in the 

59 
 
nomenclature of "Allied and Healthcare Council of India" as the National Commission for 
Allied and Healthcare Profession and the inclusion of more professions in the Bill. The 
proposed Commission shall have representation of two members  from some recognised 
category and representation of one from the rest of recognised categories. The Committee 
also observes that all the recognised categories except Physiotherapy; Physician Associate 
or Physician Assistant; Renal Technology; and Primary Community and other 
Miscellaneous Care Professionals have  more than one profession under its ambit. The 
Committee, in view of the diverse set of professionals that this Bill is intended to serve, 
strongly believes that each profession from each recognised  category must find its voice in 
the proposed Commission. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the representation 
from each recognised category should also be rotated among each profession after 
completion of tenure of two years. The Committee als o observes that two persons will be 
nominated from each of the six zones representing the State Council and increasing the 
tenure of members would further delay the representation of States in the proposed 
Commission.  
 
4.3.5 The Committee during the clause by clause consideration examined the proposal of 
increasing the tenure of the members of the proposed Commission but considering the 
number of professions and representation from the States, the Committee concluded that 
the tenure of the members, in  the Commission is reasonable and there is no need to make 
amendments in the provision stipulating the tenure of the members. The Committee also 
recommends that only in extraordinary circumstances when the member has proved to be 
an exceptional asset to th e Commission, should his/her tenure be extended but not beyond 
six years. 
 
 
4.3.6 Clause 3(3) (c) reads as under: 
(3) The Council shall consist of a Chairperson, to be elected from amongst the members 
specified in clauses (l), (m) and (n), and the following members, namely:— 
(c) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of AYUSH – member ex 
officio; 
SUGGESTIONS 
4.3.7 The Indian Medical Association (Headquarter and Kerala Chapter) has suggested the 
removal of the JS AYUSH from the Council as this Bill comes under modern medicine. 
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
 
4.3.8 In response to a suggestion to remove JS AYUSH from the Council, the Ministry 
submitted that this may be considered if the committee recommends.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.3.9 The Committee notes that there are allied professions in AYUSH as well which are 
not regulated by any central agency. The Committee in its Report No 115 th had 
recommended for regulation of AYUSH allied professionals under the National 
Commission for Indian Sys tem of Medicine (NCISM). The Committee reiterates its 
recommendation made in the 115th Report on NCISM Bill 2019 and recommends removal 
of JS AYUSH from the membership of the proposed Commission. The Committee also 

60 
 
recommends the Ministry of AYUSH to exped ite the regulation of the allied courses in 
AYUSH. 
 
4.3.10 The Committee in its various meetings observed that the composition of the 
proposed Commission includes unnecessary representation from the bureaucrats which is 
not justified. The Committee, therefore, is of the strong view that the proposed National 
Commission on Allied and Healthcare Professions should act as a platform for all the 
professionals to voice their opinion and advocates increasing their representation in the 
Commission. The Committee, therefore, recommends removal of officers from unrelated 
departments and Ministry in the Commission, viz, Joint Secretaries from AYUSH, Defence 
and representative from NITI AYOG.  The Ministry, during the course of clause by clause 
consideration of the Bill, has already agreed to the proposal.  
 
4.3.11 Clause 3(3)(j) reads as under: 
(3) The Council shall consist of a Chairperson, to be elected from amongst the 
members specified in clauses (l), (m) and (n), and the following members, 
namely:— 
(j) Three persons representing out of the following, on biennial rotation basis in 
the alphabetical order, not below the rank of Deputy Secretary, member ex 
officio—  
(i) Atomic Energy Regulatory Board;  
(ii) Dental Council of India;  
(iii) Indian Nursing Council;  
(iv) Medical Council of India;  
(v) Pharmacy Council of India; and  
(vi) Rehabilitation Council of India; 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.3.12 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
(i) Indian Medical Association (Headquarter and Kerala Chapter) suggested 
Modification of the clause to ensure members to be nominated by MCI and RCI for 
representation and tenure to be continuous and not on biennial rotation. 
 
(ii) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) suggested to rectif y 
improper representation in Council and to ensure representatives of UGC, AERB, 
ICMR, MoS&T, National Council of Clinical Establishments.   
(iii) Stakeholders from different Physiotherapy Associations have submitted that a s the 
members of other councils are represented in the bill, members of Allied and 
Healthcare Bill from Clause 2(m) primarily Physiotherapists should also be also 
nominated to other councils mentioned in clause 3(j) . The Associations further 
submitted the following changes in the clause:  
a. two persons out of the following, on biennial rotation basis in alphabetical 
order, not below the rank of Deputy Secretary, member ex officio - AERB, 
MCI, INC, RCI  
b. The Associations also suggested removal of DCI, PCI and adding 
Physiotherapist as ex-officio member by amending INC, MCI, RCI for equal 
opportunities and natural justice. 

61 
 
 
(iv) Physiotherapist Association of Uttarakhand submitted that this clause should be 
deleted. This Association as well as All India Occupational Therapists Association 
submitted that if the m embers from existing regulatory bodies representing in the 
Council should be removed as the rights of the professionals cannot be protected if 
there is inclusion of other professions.  
(v) One stakeholder suggested the r emoval of AERB, DCI, INC, MCI, P CI and RCI 
which has no justification and overcrowding will hamper core professional value.  
 
(vi) Public Health Foundation of India in its Report "From Paramedics to Allied Health 
Professionals: Landscaping the Journey and Way Forward"  submitted the need for 
de-medicalisation and removal of medical dominance for ensured development of 
allied and Healthcare Profession in order to create equated team spirit for proper 
patient safety and care.  
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
 
4.3.13 In response to the suggestion of the Indian Medical Association (Headquarter and Kerala 
Chapter), Ministry submitted that the provision already exists for nomination from the stated 
bodies, however, the tenure shall be retained to ensure appropriate repres entation from all the 
existing statutory bodies. In response to the concerns of stakeholders regarding members from 
INC, MCI, RCI in the Council, the Ministry submitted that the Members from MCI, INC, DCI 
have been included in this Bill to ensure multidisc iplinary clinical care inputs as per global 
standards, by a larger group of stakeholders.  The inclusion of allied and healthcare professionals 
in existing regulators will be a more complex exercise given the vast diversity in type and scope 
of practice of  such professions which are currently still in the process of being organised and 
defined, by virtue of this Bill. Such a reciprocal inclusion may be more appropriate at a later 
stage of the Council, when fully formed and functional.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.3.14 The Committee understands the concerns of the stakeholders and strongly believes 
that the need of the hour is to raise the status of the allied healthcare professions and bring 
forth the profession out of medical dominance by standardisati on of its education and 
practice. The Committee takes note of the relevant portion of SOR of the Bill that reads as 
under: 
 
"Health workforce in Indian healthcare system has been defined with focus limited 
to few cadres such as doctors, nurses and frontline workers, wherein, several other 
healthcare professionals have remained unidentified, unregulated and 
underutilised. The pe rsistent demand for a regulatory framework to ensure 
appropriate regulation and standardisation of such professions have been seen for 
several decades. In the last six years, over fifty allied and healthcare professions 
have been identified whose potential  may be utilised in improving the access to care 
and all those professions are globally regulated professions." 
 
4.3.15 The Committee, therefore, is in agreement with the recommendations of Public 
Health Foundation of India for the need of de -medicalisation and bring forth the allied and 
Healthcare Profession to the forefront of patient care and safety.The Ministry, however, 
submitted to the Committee that it wishes to ensure multidisciplinary initiatives among 
medical and allied healthcare professionals th rough their membership in the proposed 
Commission. However, the Committee notes that the Ministry  has kept ICMR Indian 

62 
 
Council of Medical Research out of the Commission that is the apex research body in the 
country. The Committee is of the view that rather than representation for existing  
Councils, representation from ICMR is vital for facilitating multidisciplinary progra mmes 
especially in the research field.  
 
4.3.16 The Committee also believes that a provision for joint sessions among the different 
Commissions and Councils would be a better way to encourage learning from other 
professions. The joint meetings can act as a  forum and platform for exchange of ideas and 
adoption of best practices from different professions. The Committee has, therefore, 
recommended for a provision for joint sitting among the Commission in the subsequent 
paragraphs.  
 
4.3.17 The Ministry during  clause by clause consideration deposed before the Committee 
that doctors, nurses, Pharmacists and the allied healthcare professionals are an integral 
part of the healthcare system and doctors have a major role to play.  The Committee, while 
examining the representation from other Councils in the proposed Commission noted that 
Institutes of National Importance have already been included in the Bill and the 
representation from the other Councils may be avoided.  The Committee, therefore, agrees 
with the view s of the stakeholders that representation from the Dental Council of India, 
Indian Nursing Council, and Pharmacy Council of India is unwarranted and should be 
removed. However, the Committee recommends retaining the representation from 
National Medical Commission.  
 
4.3.18 The Committee also notes that the Medical Imaging and Radiology Professions falls 
under the purview of Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB), therefore AERB 
representation is acceptable. The Committee also notes that Rehabilitation Council of India 
(RCI) is the nodal agency for prescribing minimum standards of education and training of 
various categories of professionals/ personnel dealing with people with disabilities. 
Rehabilitation professionals such as audiologists and speech therapist s are regulated under 
the Rehabilitation Act of India. Therefore, the Committee recommends retaining the 
membership from RCI. The Committee recommends that one member representing 
AERB, NMC and RCI on biennial rotation not below the rank of Deputy Secretar y must 
be an ex-officio member of the proposed Commission.   
 
4.3.19 The Committee also notes the concerns of the Physiotherapists regarding their 
representation in the other Councils. However, the Committee has recommended for the 
removal of DCI, INC, NMC, PCI from the proposed National Commission for Allied and 
Healthcare Profession. Therefore, any representation of the allied and healthcare 
professions in other councils is unnecessary. The Committee, in the subsequent 
paragraphs, has also recommended for a National A llied and Healthcare Professional 
Advisory Council that will include representation from UGC. The Committee through its 
recommendations in the composition of the proposed Commission has tried to include 
representation from all the related f ields and it believes that this Commission will fairly 
address the concerns of all the stakeholders, therefore representation from any other 
Councils or Ministry is not required.  
 
4.3.20 The Committee, therefore recommends that the clause 3(3)(j) may be a mended as 
follows:  
 
(j) One person representing out of the following, on biennial rotation basis in the alphabetical 
order, not below the rank of Deputy Secretary, member ex officio— 
  

63 
 
(i) Atomic Energy Regulatory Board;  
(ii) National Medical Commission; and  
(iii) Rehabilitation Council of India; 
 
 
4.3.21 Clause 3(3)(k) reads as under: 
(3) The Council shall consist of a Chairperson, to be elected from amongst the members 
specified in clauses (l), (m) and (n), and the following members, namely:— 
(k) Two persons not below the rank of Director or Medical Superintendent representing 
the following, on biennial rotation basis— (i) All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi; (ii) All India Institute of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Mumbai; (iii)  
Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry; and 
(iv) North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical Sciences, 
Shillong—member ex officio; 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.3.22 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
(i) United Physiotherapy Association of India, Indian Association of Physiotherapists, 
Physiotherapy Forum, and Pawan Rohilla suggested inclusion of one person from 
physiotherapy professionals (not below Assistant Professor rank ) from (i) Pt. 
Deendayal Upadhyaya National Institute for Persons with Physical Disabilities, Delhi 
; (ii) National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research, Cuttack; and (iii) 
National Institute of Orthopedically Handicapped, Kolkata  
(ii) Nishita Meshram also submitted that it should be made mandatory that Physiotherapy 
professionals should be nominated from the institutes mentioned in the Clause. She 
further suggested inclusion of Physiotherapy professionals not below the rank of 
Assistant Professor from the following institutes: Pt. DDUNIPwPD, New Delhi , 
NIRTAR, Cuttack, Odisha NIOH, Kolkata, WB , MYAS_Department of Sports 
Sciences and Medicine, Gurunanak Dev University, Amritsar, Punjab  
(iii) All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) sugges ted to include 
Occupational Therapy professionals not below rank of Senior. Occupational 
therapist/head/in-charge of OT services from the institutions mentioned in 3 (k). It 
also suggested to include OT professionals not below rank of Assistant Professor 
from - Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya National Institute for Persons with Physical 
Disabilities, Delhi ; National Institute for Locomotor Disabilities, Kolkata, 
SVNIRTAR, Cuttack, and PGIMER Chandigarh. 
 
(iv) One stakeholder  suggested including national institutes running concerned courses 
like Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya National Institute for person with Physical Disabilities, 
New Delhi and State level institute/ college of repute like Nagpur Medical College, 
Patna Medical College and Hospital etc.  
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE 
 
4.3.23 The Ministry submitted that the lists of existing institutions in the clause are either 
institutes of national importance (INI) or administratively governed by Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare. These  institutes ensure representation of all the categories given the member 
must be either medical superintendent or Director level. No specific professional category may 

64 
 
be given preference as this is an ex -officio membership and the suggestion will alter th e 
composition in favor of one group which is not justified.  The Ministry further submitted that the 
rank and eligibility for membership will be defined specifically in the rules and members 
nominated to the Council accordingly, for all professional categories.  However, the Ministry 
accepted the suggestion that the  representation of additional institutions pertaining to related 
professionals may be considered, in consultation with the respective nodal Ministries, where 
applicable  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.3.24 The Committee agrees with the concerns of the Ministry that the composition of the 
proposed Commission should be such that all the professionals are fairly represented and 
one group does not dominate the Commission. However, the Committee is of the view th at 
Institutions of National Importance or National Institutes with wide experience in running 
qualitative allied and healthcare courses in the country should also be given representation 
in the Commission. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to include persons 
at the level of Director/Deputy Director from Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya National Institute 
for Persons with Physical Disabilities, Delhi; National Institute of Rehabilitation Training 
and Research, Cuttack; National Institute of Orthopedically Handicapped, Kolkata and All 
India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore, Karnataka in the proposed Commission. 
The Committee also advises the Ministry to explore addition of representation from other 
allied institutes that are imparting rich qualit y education to the related allied professionals 
so that the proposed Commission may benefit from the wide experiences of the Institutes 
and guide the other institutes in achieving the same benchmark . Representation from such 
institutions will not only fac ilitate better policy making but also provide the Commission 
with a closer outlook of the ground realties and problems that are plaguing the allied 
healthcare professional sector. 
 4.3.25   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the clause may be read as under: 
a. Three persons not below the rank of Director/Deputy Director/Medical Superintendent 
representing the following, on biennial rotation basis— 
 
(i) All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi; 
(ii) All India Institute of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Mumbai; 
(iii) Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, 
Puducherry; and 
(iv) North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical 
Sciences, Shillong; 
(v) Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya National Institute for Persons wit h Physical 
Disabilities, Delhi 
(vi) National Institute for Persons with Physical Disabilities, Delhi 
(vii) National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research, Cuttack;  
(viii) National Institute of orthopedically handicapped, Kolkata; and 
(ix) All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore 
 
4.3.26 Clause 3(3)(l) reads as under: 
(l) Two persons from each of the six zones representing the State Councils on biennial 
rotation in the alphabetical order as per the zonal distribution having such qualifications 

65 
 
and experience as may be prescribed by the Central Government to be nominated by the 
concerned State Government—member; 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
4.3.27 Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT)  suggested ensuring 
representation of all State Councils in Central Council.  
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
 
4.3.28 The Ministry submitted that the provision already exists.  Clause 3 (3) (l) specifies the 
rotatory representation of the State Council.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.3.29 The Committee is in agreement of the Ministry that clause 3(3)(a) specifies the 
rotatory representation of the State Councils which is on the lines of the provision of NMC 
Act 2019. However to allay the apprehension of not being adeq uate representation of all 
State Councils in the National Commission, the Committee has recommended for the 
constitution of National Allied and Healthcare Professions Advisory Council, wherein 
adequate representation of States and Allied and healthcare Pro fessionals would be 
ensured for aiding and advising the National Commission on Allied and Healthcare 
Professions. The Committee has recommended the composition and the functions of the 
National Allied and Healthcare Professions Advisory Council in the subs equent 
paragraphs. 
4.3.30 Clause 3(3)(m) reads as under: 
(m) Two persons each representing the recognised categories, namely, Medical 
Laboratory Sciences, Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic Technology, 
Ophthalmic Sciences and Physiotherapy; and one  person each representing the rest of 
the recognised categories listed in the Schedule, to be nominated by the Central 
Government having such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government–member; and 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.3.31 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
(i) Indian Optometric Association and Government Optometrist Association, Uttar 
Pradesh submitted that Ophthalmic Science may be replaced by Optometry in clause 
3(3)(m) 
 
(ii) Indian Medical Association submitted that representation of 2 persons each has been 
given to some categories like medical lab technologies, medical radiology etc and one 
person each representing other categories. There should be equal representation from 
all categories of Allied Healthcare Professionals. 
(iii) Government Optometrist Association, Uttar Pradesh and the Indian Optometry 
Federation submitted that the Council shall consist of a chairperson to be elected from 
members specified in clause (m) among 5 professions of rec ognised categories 
holding 2 seats each on rotation basis having 2 year term.  
 

66 
 
(iv) Federation of Indian Dental Hygienists Association (FIDHA) suggested including 
three (3) representation of Dental Hygienist in the Allied and Healthcare Professions 
Bill, as-  
 
● Dental Hygienist have been marginalized within the existing framework of DCI, 
and have no representation in the Council  
 
● All the existing Council have representation on the AHP Council as per 3 (j) and 
other unregulated professionals have representation as per 3 (m). Dental 
Hygienist have not been mentioned/ represented anywhere.  
 
(v) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) suggested ensuring 
democratic way of representation through election than mere nomination to avoid 
favouritism and nepotism; ensure minimum five representatives to major categories 
like Radiological Technology and Medical Lab Technology. 
 
(vi) All India Association of Medical Social Work Professionals and Indian Dietetic 
Association Indian Association of Physician Assistants (IAPA) suggested adding two 
representatives each from their respective categories in the Council.  
 
(vii) Physiotherapist As sociation of Uttarakhand suggested that the representation of 2 
persons from Physiotherapy should be increased to 5 as in healthcare professional 
category it has more practicing professionals. Registrar should be also from 
Physiotherapy background. Indian Association of Physiotherapists suggested that the 
representation of 2 persons from Physiotherapy should be increased to 6. They further 
submitted that in the previous 2007 Bill, there was provision of four members to be 
appointed by Central Government. 
 
(viii) United Physiotherapy Associations of India and Physiotherapy Forum suggested 
adding Dentist and Pharmacist (As per ISCO and as per Article 14 of the constitution – 
similar application of the same laws to all persons who are similarly situated)  
 
(ix) Indian Medi cal Association (Headquarter and Kerala Chapter) submitted that there 
should be equal representation from each of the recognised categories.  
 
(x) All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) suggested that the 
composition of the Council must include  OTs in the clause, with minimum 6 or equal 
number of representation as of other professions.  At least 4 or as in other professions, 
members from institutions/organisations of report representing OT may be nominated 
by the Central Government apart from those mentioned above.  
 
(xi) The representatives of Pt.DDUNIPwPD, New Delhi submitted that the Occupational 
Therapist should also be represented by at least 2 representatives in the Council. 
 
(xii) Pawan Rohilla suggested adding representation from the Dentists and Pharmacists.  
 
(xiii) Indian Optometric Association, Government Optometrist Association, Uttar Pradesh 
and Indian Optometry Federation submitted that Ophthalmic Sciences may be replaced 
by Optometry. Government Optometrist Association, Uttar Pradesh also submitted that 
different definitions have been provided along with detailed curriculum of the diploma 
programs in the UP State. Indian Optometry Federation further suggested considering 
two seats for Optometry professionals in the Council  

67 
 
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
4.3.32 The Ministry responded to the concerns of the stakeholders as under:  
 
(i)  The Ministry submitted that FIDHA's suggestions are not acceptable as the 
Association has mis -interpreted the Council structure and the proposed Council is 
meant for the regulation of the professionals in the Schedule. The Bill excludes and 
does not intend s to regulate any professions which is being regulated by existing 
statutory bodies. Thus Dental Hygienist cannot be included in 3(m). The members 
representing from existing Councils including DCI, will be ex-officio members.  
 
(ii)  In response to Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT)'s concern 
the Ministry submitted that the process of election or nomination of the non -ex officio 
members will be as per the Rules prescribed by the Central Government to be drafted 
by the Interim Council.  
 
(iii)  On queries regarding inclusion of representatives from different professions in the 
Council, the Ministry submitted that currently, the Government does not have any 
authentic estimates of professions, other than what is being reported by Associati ons 
or similar bodies.  The representation of any profession on the Council is thus 
normative, to make it fair and equitable, wherein if the professional group has close to 
one (1) lakh practicing professional, they will have one member to represent on the  
council. Less than the same, each remaining category will have one member 
representing on the Council.  
 
(iv)  During the course of clause by clause consideration of the Bill, the Ministry agreed to 
the proposal of increasing the representation of Occupation Therapists to two in the 
proposed Commission. 
 
(v)  The Ministry further submitted that the professional associati on of Physiotherapy 
claims to have 1.5 lakh professionals in the system. Based on all estimates, the 
profession has been allocated two (2) membership positions.  
 
(vi)  On suggestion that Ophthalmic Sciences may be replaced by Optometry, the Ministry 
submitted that this is not agreeable as the category of Ophthalmic Sciences is 
envisioned to include both Optometrist and Ophthalmic Assistants in the system, 
however any other more inclusive nomenclature if available and recommended by the 
Committee may be considered.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS: 
4.3.33 The Committee has been given to understand that Medical Laboratory Sciences, 
Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic Technology, Ophthalmic Sciences and 
Physiotherapy have been given representation of two  members each, considering the 
number of professionals in these categories. The Committee feels that this representation of 
2 is adequate and need not be increased to 6 as suggested by some stakeholders.  
4.3.34 The Committee also notes the observations ma de by the Department -related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee in its 31 st Report on the Paramedical and 
Physiotherapy Central Council Bill, 2007 with respect to Occupational Therapy that 
differentiates the profession of Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy as two 
independent professions with entirely different course of study , mode of treatment and 

68 
 
approach in treatment and rehabilitation of patients, wherein the Occupational Therapists 
are responsible for detailed assessment, planning and implementation of treatment 
regimen.  
 
4.3.35 In view of the above observations, the Com mittee notes that the Occupational 
Therapy and Physiotherapy are two different independent professions that are at equal 
footing, The Commi ttee observes that the Ministry, during the course of clause by clause 
consideration of the Bill, h as already agreed to the proposal of enhancing the number of 
Occupational Therapists in the proposed Commission to two. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends increasing the representation of Occupational Therapists to 2 at par with the 
Physiotherapists and keeping in view the vital role of OTs in patient care and safety.  
4.3.36 The Committee also recommends the Ministry to prepare a database of the number 
of professionals in each category and revise the representation of each category once the 
verified and correct estimates of the number of professionals in each category are obtained.   
4.3.37 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry and observes that the category 
of Ophthalmic Science Professionals includes both Optometrist and Ophthalmic Assistants. 
Therefore, the nomenclature of Ophthalmic Sciences Professional may be retained. 
4.3.38 The Committee does not agree with the view of the stakeholder and believes that 
mandating selection of chairperson only from the five professional category holding two 
seats is not justified as that is against democratic creed.The Committee, however, 
recommends that the chairperson of the Commission s hould be an allied and healthcare 
professional of outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity and integrity and 
possess a postgraduate degree in any profession of recognised category of allied and 
healthcare sciences from any University. He/She should also have an experience of not less 
than twenty years in the field of allied and health care professions, out of which at least ten 
years should be as a leader in the area of allied and healthcare education. T his eligibility 
criterion will ensure that only an individual with wide expertise in allied and healthcare 
science is selected as the chairperson of the Commission irrespective of the professional 
category he/she belongs to. 
4.3.39 The Committee is of the view that a well regulated structure is already present for 
Dentistry and its allied services under the Dental Council of India. The Committee has 
already recommended removal of ex -officio membership of Dental Council of India from 
the Commission. The Comm ittee emphasizes that this Bill aims to regulate those allied 
healthcare professionals which remain unregulated and non -standardized. However, the 
Committee also takes note of the concerns of Dental Hygienists and feels that awareness 
and knowledge about this profession is very less and limited only to the metropolitan cities. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry that it may consider to include 
representation from the Dental Hygienists in the Dental Council of India and devise a 
mechanism for mainstreaming of the professionals.  
4.3.40 The Committee is of the view that on the line of NMC, NCISM and NCH Bill, the 
selection of chairperson and the members of the proposed Commission should be on the 
recommendation of a Search Committee. This mechani sm will ensure fair selection of the 
members and avoid favoritism and nepotism. The composition of the Search Committee is 
stated in the subsequent paragraphs.  
4.3.41 The Committee also notes that many recognized categories under Schedule 2 
comprise of mu ltiple professions. Clause 3(3)(m) provides for two persons each 
representing the recognised categories, namely, Medical Laboratory Sciences, Medical 

69 
 
Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic Technology, Ophthalmic Sciences and Physiotherapy; 
and one person each representing the rest of the recognised categories listed in the 
Schedule, to be nominated by the Central Government. Therefore, at a single instance, 
representation from all the professions of a particular recognized category in the proposed 
Commission is practically not possible as there is a provision of either two or one person 
representing the categories. This will lead to many professions getting unrepresented in the 
proposed Commission. The Committee, therefore strongly recommends that the 
membership should be rotated among the different professions in a recognized category so 
that every profession gets an opportunity to be part of the Commission.  
4.3.42 Clause 3(3)(n) reads as under: 
(n) Two persons, representing charitable institutions engaged in education or services in 
connection with any recognised category, to be nominated by the Central Government 
having such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government–member. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.3.43 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
(i) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) submitted that the status 
of charitable institutions nominated in the Council may be clearly mentioned to 
avoid improper representation.  
(ii) Indian Medical Associa tion (Headquarter and Kerala Chapter) submitted that the  
inclusion of representatives from charitable institutions is arbitrary and unwarranted.  
(iii) The Indian Association of Physiotherapists and one of the stakeholder  suggested 
removing the clause as this does not serve any purpose  
(iv) United Physiotherapy Associations of India, Physiotherapy Forum and other 
stakholders suggested the following amendment in the clause: 
 
a. Two persons, eligible to be member of the council, representing charitable 
institutions engaged in education or services in connection with any recognised 
category, to be nominated by the Central Government having such qualifications 
and experience as may be prescribed by the Central Government–member  
 
(v) All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) suggested that National 
Institutes or Other Government institutions of repute can be included instead of 
charitable organization.  (as this clause does not solve the representation purpose and 
can lead to unnecessary misuse of authority)  
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
 
4.3.44 The Ministry further submitted that the purpose of this clause is to ensure representation 
of allied and healthcare professions from existing charitable bodies, which cater to large number 
of patients. The Ministry also submitted that the provision regardi ng status of Charitable 
Institutions nominated in the Council already exists in the Bill and the details will be specified in 
the Rules.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.3.45 The Committee notes that in the allied health system, many institutes are also owned 
by charitable organizations along with the public  and private sector. Therefore, the 

70 
 
Committee is also of the view that removing this clause is not feasible as representat ion of 
allied and healthcare professions from existing charitable bodies is also important. The 
Committee, however, feels that the individuals nominated from such charitable 
organizations must fulfil the required eligibility criteria as prescribed by the C entral 
Government. The Committee also recommends that the nominated person should have the 
prescribed expertise in allied and healthcare professions. The Committee also recommends 
the Ministry to set the eligibility criteria for such charitable institutes so that only 
professionals from qualified institutes of repute are nominated to the proposed 
Commission and not from spurious NGO. 
 
4.3.46 The Committee therefore, recommends that the clause may be amended as follows:-  
 
“(n) Two persons, eligible to be members of the council representing charitable 
institutions engaged in education or services in connection with any recognised 
category, to be nominated by the Central Government having such qualifications and 
experience as may be prescribed by the Central Government–member” 
 
4.3.47 With respect to clause 3(3) stakeholders have made the following suggestions: 
 
(i) Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of India (JFMTI) has requested to remove 
unnecessary inclusion of ex -officio members from various Departments and other 
professional bodies mentioned in 3 (3) (e), (d), (f), (j) and individuals and to increase 
the repre sentation of allied health categories. The Association further submitted that 
representation of different streams of AHPs in the Central Council should be 
proportionate to their numbers in the profession. JFMTI has also requested to include 
the representat ion of National Professional Associations/ Federations/ Organizations. 
Representation should also be there in Central Council from Central Government 
Hospitals like Safdarjung, RML, LHMC etc. and should also be applicable for State 
Councils.  
 
(ii) Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association submitted to specify elected and nominated 
members in this clause to be 60:40 ratio, 60% being elected members and 40% 
nominated members. 
 
(iii) Lokmanya Medical College of Physiotherapy, Mumbai, All Assam Physiotherapy 
Association (AAPA) and Nishita Meshram requested to include elected membership in 
the composition in the ratio of 60:40 which will be Government nominated. (60% shall 
be elected members and 40% government nominated members). They, further 
requested to increase representation of Physiotherapists in the Council such that-  
 
● 1 to be elected from each zone,  
● 1 to be nominated by Central Government from each zone,  
● 1 to be nominated by Central Government from Government institutes under 
Health Ministry,  
● 1 to be nominated by Central Government from Government institutes under 
Social Justice and Welfare Ministry and  
● 1 to be nominated by Central Government from Government institutes under 
Sports Ministry.  
 
(iv) United Physiotherapy Associations of India an d Physiotherapy Forum submitted that 
the clause should be reframed as  
 

71 
 
The Council shall consist of a chairperson, to be elected from amongst the 
members specified in clauses (l) and (m) (Council should be chaired by 
professionals elected to protect interest of the concerned professionals)  
 
(v) Physiotherapist Association of Uttarakhand submitted that selection of members should 
be nomination as well election based.  Chairperson, Vice -chair, Secretary, General 
Secretary as well as the Treasurer should be elected.  (All the members are nominated 
members, which is undemocratic. Other existing councils also have elected members in 
the Council)  
 
(vi) Indian Medical Association (Headquarter and Kerala Chapter) submitted that 
Chairperson should be a medical specialist of appropriate qualification and having 
experience related to the allied health field. 
 
(vii) One stakeholder submitted that having the Chairperson of the Council elected by only 
nominated members may not ensure independent functioning of the Council. Add “in 
the categories of Health Administration, Hospital Administ ration, Health Economics 
and Community Health Management” in Clause 3(3)(l)  
 
(viii) Another stakeholder submitted that the Council shall consist of Chairperson, to be 
elected from among the members specified in clauses 3(l) and (m) only.  
 
(ix) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists requested insertion of additional 
clause to ensure post of Vice-Chairman  
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
 
4.3.48 The Ministry responded to the concerns of the stakeholders as under: 
 
(i) The Ministry submitted that currently, the Government does not have any authentic 
estimates of professions, other than what is being reported by associations or similar 
bodies. The representation of any profession on the Council is thus normative. 
 
(ii) Ex-officio members are include d to ensure alignment of the policies with other 
Departments. Members from regulators such MCI, INC, DCI have been included in 
this Bill to ensure multidisciplinary clinical care inputs as per global standards, by a 
larger group of stakeholders. The inclus ion of allied and healthcare professionals in 
existing regulators will be a more complex exercise given the vast diversity in type 
and scope of practice.  
 
(iii) The Ministry also submitted that the Council structure is envisaged to have over 70 
percent no n-ex officio members at Centre and 75 percent at the State Council 
representing allied and healthcare professionals. The process of election or 
nomination of the non -ex officio members will be as per the Rules prescribed by the 
Central Government to be dra fted by the Interim Council. The stated concern is 
already being addressed.  
 
(iv) The Ministry also submitted that members in (l), (m) and (n) will be all non-ex officio 
members representing the allied and healthcare categories, and the chair will be 
elected amongst them. The provision regarding the selection of members already 
exists and the Chairperson is an elected member. The Ministry further submitted that 
the Council pertains to Allied and Healthcare Professionals; it is only appropriate that 

72 
 
a membe r of one of the related specialties from within the fraternity assume 
chairmanship of the Council  
 
(v) Regarding addition of “in the categories of Health Administration, Hospital 
Administration, Health Economics and Community Health Management”  in Clause 
3(3)(l), the Ministry was of the view that the Bill currently only states healthcare or 
allied health professionals as per WHO classification of health workers; support 
workers and management professionals have been kept out of the purview of this Bill, 
given their non-clinical roles.  However, as per clause 66, this is subject to change in 
future. All new categories or professionals that are added to the schedule will 
automatically be eligible for registration in the Council, and associated membership 
positions, including the Chairperson.  
 
(vi) The Ministry with regards to insertion of additional clause to ensure post of Vice -
Chairman submitted that the provision already exists. The concern raised will be dealt 
as per Clause 7(2).  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.3.49 The Committee would like to emphasize again that the basis of representation in the 
Commission must be empirical facts and figures instead of normative conclusion. The 
Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to create a database of the number of Allied 
Health Professionals in the country on a priority basis. The Committee there fore directs 
the Ministry to devise a mechanism through which not only the number but also the 
qualification (degree/specialization/training taken etc) of the professionals are easily 
accessed and verified by the required agencies. The Ministry should also  make optimum 
use of technological advancement and create online software for registration of the Allied 
Health Professionals. This database should be regularly updated so that an authentic 
record of the number and qualifications of professionals is easily  available. This will not 
only help in tracking the actual number of practicing professionals but also reflect the core 
competency and quality of the professionals.  
4.3.50 The Committee  is in agreement with the suggestion of the stakeholders that the 
representation of different streams of Allied and Health Professionals in the proposed 
Commission should be proportionate to their numbers in the Profession as well as the 
functioning necessity of healthcare team. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
the Ministry to expedite the collection of correct estimates of the Allied Health 
Professionals in the country which is also reflected in the proposed Commission so that the 
Professionals are given fair and equitable representation and democratic functioning of the 
regulatory body is ensured.   
4.3.51 Consequent to the recommendations made by the Committee with respect to the 
title of the Bill and the composition of the National Commissio n on Allied and Healthcare 
Professions, Clause 3 after amendments will read as follows: 
 
Clause 3 provides for Constitution and composition of Commission. 
 
(1)  The Central Government shall constitute a Commission, to be known as the 
National Commission of  Allied and Healthcare Professions, to exercise the 
powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this 
Act. 
 

73 
 
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with  power to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by 
the same name sue or be sued. 
 
(3) The Chairperson shall be a person of outstanding ability, proven 
administrative capacity and integrity, possessing a postgraduate degree in any 
profession of recognised category of allied health sciences from any University 
and having experience of not less than twenty years in the field of allied health 
sciences, out of which at least ten years shall be as a leader in  the area of 
allied education.  
 
(4)  The Commission shall consist of the following persons to be appointed by the 
Central Government, namely:—  
(a)  a Chairperson;  
(b)  twenty-two ex officio Members; and 
(c)  thirty-four part-time Members. 
 
(5)  The following persons shall be the ex officio Members of the Commission, 
namely:- 
 
a.  Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Legal 
Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice—member ex officio; 
b. Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare in charge of Allied Health Sciences and Education –
member ex officio; 
c. Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship–member ex officio; 
d. Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment–member ex officio; 
e. One person representing the Directorate General of Health Services not 
below the rank of Deputy Director General–member ex officio; 
f. One person representing the Indian Council of Medical Research not 
below the rank of Deputy Director General–member ex officio 
g. One person representing out of the following, on biennial rotation basis in 
the alphabetical order, not below the rank of Deputy Secretary, — 
(i) Atomic Energy Regulatory Board; 
(ii) National Medical Commission; and 
(iii)Rehabilitation Council of India; 
h. Three persons not below the rank of Director/Deputy Director/ Medical 
Superintendent representing the following, on biennial rotation basis— 
 
(i) All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi; 
(ii) All India Institute of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
Mumbai; 
(iii) Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and 
Research, Puducherry; and 
(iv) North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and 
Medical Sciences, Shillong; 
(v) Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya National Institute for Persons with 
Physical Disabilities, Delhi 

74 
 
(vi) National Institute for Persons with Physical Disabilities, Delhi 
(vii) National Institute of Rehabilitation Trai ning and Research, 
Cuttack; 
(viii) National Institute of orthopedically handicapped, Kolkata; 
and 
(ix) All India Institute of Speech and Hearing. Mysore, Karnataka. 
 
i. the President of the Under -Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education 
Board; 
j. the President of the Post-Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education 
Board; 
k. the President of the Allied and Healthcare Assessment and Rating Board; 
l. the President of the Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and 
Registration Board; 
m. the Presidents of the Eight Councils; 
 
(6) The following persons shall be appointed as part -time Members of the 
Commission, namely:— 
 
(a) Two persons from each of the six zones representing the State Councils on 
biennial rotation in the alphabetical order as per the zonal distribution 
having such quali fications and experience as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government to be nominated by the concerned State Government; 
 
(b) Two persons each representing the recognised categories, namely, Medical 
Laboratory Sciences, Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic 
Technology, Ophthalmic Sciences, Physiotherapy and Occupational 
Therapy; and one person each representing the rest of the recognised 
categories listed in the Schedule, to be nominated by the Search Committee 
having such qualifications and exper ience as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 
 
(c)  Two persons, eligible to be members of the council representing charitable 
institutions engaged in education or services in connection with any 
recognised category, to be nominated by the Central Government having 
such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government–member” 
 
4.3.52 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
INSERTION OF NEW CLAUSE ON CONSTIUTION OF EIGHT COUNCILS 
4.4.1 The Committee notes that in the 31 st Report on the Paramedical and Physiotherapy 
Central Council Bill, 2007 , the Committee had recommended for constitution of (a) The 
Physiotherapy Central Council, (b) The Occupational Therapy Central Council, (c) The 
Medical Laboratory  Technology Central Council, and (d) The Radiology Technology 
Central Council. The Committee while examining the Allied and Healthcare Professions 
Bill 2018 also came across the suggestions submitted by almost all the 53 Allied and 
Healthcare professions s eeking their separate Council for each profession, thereby, 
meaning 53 Councils in the Allied and healthcare sector which is not feasible as the same 
would provide plethora of structural framework. The Committee examined the suggestions 
and arrived at a co nclusion that a separate Council for each profession would provide 

75 
 
multiple institutional framework for the Allied and Healthcare Professions and therefore, 
the Committee disapproved the proposal for constitution of separate 53 Councils as the 
numbers of professions is likely to increase in future as provided in clause 66 of the Bill.  
4.4.2 The Committee also recommends that the National Commission for Allied and 
Healthcare Profession can act as a central coordinating body and facilitate overall 
supervision in the general interest of promotion and development of each and every 
profession. The Committee is of the view that the Commission can delegate its powers and 
functions pertaining to that specific category of profession to these independent Councils 
falling under the ambit of the proposed Commission.  
4.4.3 The Committee understands that Clause 3 will provide for the constitution and 
composition of the National Commission on Allied and Healthcare Professions instead of a 
Council. The Committee, after exa mining all the views of the professionals, is of the view 
that considering the diverse allied health professions in the country, there is certainly a 
need to constitute different councils for these professions so that none of the profession 
remains neglect ed and the whole allied healthcare sector progresses. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends constitution of eight Councils by merging various categories of 
profession.  
4.4.4 The Committee is of the view that the Councils may comprise of allied and 
healthcare professionals from Institutes of National Repute granting degree/diploma in 
that particular profession. The Council of Physiotherapists may consists of physiotherapy 
professionals from the following National Institutes, namely, Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya 
National Institute for Persons with Physical Disabilities, Delhi; National Institute of 
Rehabilitation Training and Research, Cuttack; and National Institute of orthopedically 
handicapped, Kolkata etc.  The Committee is of the view that the Physiotherapist having 
minimum 10 years of experience in the field of Physiotherapy and holding Master of 
Physiotherapy or equivalent must be the minimum qualification.  
4.4.5 The Council of Occupational therapy may consist of nominated members from 
recognized institutions of National repute at the level of Director/Deputy Director/HOD, 
namely, Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya National Institute for Persons with Physical Disabilities, 
New Delhi; National Institute of Locomotor Disabilities, Kolkata; Swami Vivekananda 
National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research, Cuttack. The members may 
also be nominated from the existing councils of Occupational Therapy and Physiotherapy 
from different States. Members may also be nominated from existing National level 
associations in Occupational Therapy. 
4.4.6 The Council for Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic Technology 
Professional must include representation from all the professions under this category, 
namely, Medical Physicists; Nuclear Medicine Technologists; Radiology and Imaging 
Technologist (Diagnostic Medical Radiographer, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), 
Computed Tomography (CT); Mammographer, Diagnostic Medical Sonographers); 
Radiotherapy Technologist; Dosimetrist; and Electrocardiogram (ECG) Technologis t or 
Echocardiogram (ECHO) Technologist.  On similar lines, the Committee recommends that 
the Ministry must ensure that each Council must comprise of the members pertaining to 
the related profession only. The Committee further recommends that the Chairpers on of 
the Council should be a person from the allied and healthcare sector and should be 
appointed from amongst the members of the Council. 
 
4.4.7 The concerns of the stakeholders regarding Ophthalmic Science Professionals will 
be addressed by the Council for Ophthalmic Sciences. The Committee recommends that  

76 
 
the Council for Ophthalmic Sciences should have equal representation from Optometry as 
well as Ophthalmic Assistants. Diploma holders as well as Graduates from both the 
Professions should be given repr esentation in the Council. The Committee also notes that 
optometrist and ophthalmic assistants have different scope of work and practice 
accordingly.  
 
4.4.8 The Committee recommends the Ministry to explore the composition of the other 
Councils on the same lines for other Councils.  
4.4.9 The Committee, however, recommends that these eight councils will work under the 
overarching National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professions and would be 
responsible for developing a comprehensive regulatory fram ework for the allied and 
healthcare professions. The Committee also recommends that the Secretariat for the 
National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Profession must also provide Secretariat 
Assistance to the eight Councils that will be established und er the National Commission for 
Allied and Healthcare Profession Bill-2018.   
 
4.4.10 The Committee also observes that two persons each representing the recognised 
categories, Medical Laboratory Sciences, Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic 
Technology, Ophthalmic Sciences and Physiotherapy are proposed to be the part of the 
Council. The Committee considering their number recommends a council under the 
Commission for each of these categories. The Committee recommends that Sr. No 2 
Trauma and Burn Care Professional, Sr. No 13 Cardio -vascular, Neuroscience and 
Pulmonary Technology Professional, Sr. No 14 Renal Technology Professional and Sr. No. 
15 Surgical and Anaesthesia -related Technology may be grouped under a common 
nomenclature of "Medical Technologists" and may be regulated under a common Council.  
The Committee also recommends the constitution of a separate Council for Occupational 
Therapy Professionals. Sr. No. 1 Life Science Professionals, Sr. No. 4 Nutrition Science 
Professional and Sr. No. 7 Behavioural Health Sciences Professionals may be grouped 
under one common council. Like wise, Sr. No. 11 Health & Information Management 
Professionals, Sr. No. 12 Physician Associate or Physician Assistant and Sr. No 8 Primary, 
Community and other Miscellaneous Care Professional may be grouped under one council. 
The same is illustrated through the following table: 
 
 
Sr. 
No. 
COUNCIL NAME Sr. No. in 
the 
Schedule 
CATEGORIES 
INCLUDED 
1 Council for Physiotherapy 
Professionals 
3 Physiotherapy Professional. 
2 Council for Medical Radiology, 
Imaging and Therapeutic 
Technology Professional 
9 Medical Radiology, 
Imaging and Therapeutic 
Technology Professional. 
3 Council for Medical Laboratory 
Science Professionals 
10 Medical Laboratory 
Sciences Professional 
4 Council for Ophthalmic Sciences 5 Ophthalmic Sciences 
Professional 
5 Council for Occupational Therapy 
Professionals 
6 Occupational Therapy 
Professional 
6 Council for Medical Technologists 2 
 
Trauma and Burn Care 
Professional; 

77 
 
13 
 
14 
 
 
 
15 
Cardio-vascular, 
Neuroscience and 
Pulmonary Technology 
Professional; 
Renal Technology 
Professional; and 
Surgical and Anaesthesia-
related Technology 
Professional. 
7 Council for Life, Nutrition and 
Behavioural Health Science 
Professionals 
1 
4 
7 
Life Science Professional; 
Nutrition Science 
Professional; and  
Behavioural Health 
Sciences Professional. 
8 Council for Health & Information 
Management, Physician Associate, 
Primary, Community and other 
Miscellaneous professional 
11 
 
12 
 
8 
Health and Information 
Management Professional; 
Physician Associate or 
Physician Assistant; and  
Primary, Community and 
other Miscellaneous Care 
Professional. 
 
4.4.11 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for insertion of a clause that 
provides for constitution of the following eight Councils under the National Commission on 
Allied and Healthcare Professions:  
 
i. Council for Physiotherapy Professionals; 
ii. Council for Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic Technology 
Professional; 
iii. Council for Medical Laboratory Science Professionals; 
iv. Council for Ophthalmic Sciences; 
v. Council for Occupational Therapy Professionals; 
vi. Council for Medical Technologists; 
vii. Council for Life, Nutrition and Behavioural Health Science Professionals;  
viii. Council for Health & Information Management, Physician 
Associate/Assistant, Primary, Community and other Miscellaneous 
professional. 
 
4.4.12 The Committee, therefore, recommends for insertion of a separate Chapter 
containing clauses relating to the constitution, composition and functions of eight Councils 
as organs of National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professions and also for 
overall regulation and development of various allied and healthcare professions under the 
recognized categories mentioned in the Schedule. The Committee again emphasizes that the 
National Commission for Allied and He althcare Professions should delegate its functions 
pertaining to the specific professions of different categories to the respective Councils. This 
will ensure decentralization of the power and Functions entrusted to the Commission and 
ensure development of the profession.  
 
 
 

78 
 
INSERTION OF NEW CLAUSE ON SEARCH COMMITTEE 
 
4.5.1 The Committee also recommends for constitution of a Search Committee for 
appointment of Chairperson, part -time members of the Commission and members of the 
Regulatory /development Boards to give the required credibility and uphold the 
importance of manner of appointment of the said officials by scrutiny of their 
qualifications and experience by a Search Committee. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that after clause 3, a new claus e that will provide for Search Committee for 
appointment of Chairperson and Members may be added which will read as follows: 
 
(1)  The Central Government shall appoint the Chairperson, Members referred to 
in clause  (a), clause (b), clause (c) of sub -section (6) of section 3 and the 
Secretary referred to in section 9 on the recommendation of a Search 
Committee consisting of— 
 
(a)  the Cabinet Secretary—Chairperson; 
(b)  four experts, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of 
not less than twent y-five years in the field of allied and healthcare 
education, public health education and health research, to be 
nominated by the Central Government— Members; 
(c)  one person, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of 
not less than twenty -five years in the field of management or law or 
economics or science and technology, to be nominated by the Central 
Government— Member; and 
(d)  the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, to be the Convenor—Member. 
 
(2)  The Central Government shall, within one month from the date of occurrence 
of any vacancy, including by reason of death, resignation or removal of the 
Chairperson or a Member, or within three months before the end of tenure of 
the Chairperson or Member, make a reference to the Search Committee for 
filling up of the vacancy. 
(3)  The Search Committee shall recommend a panel of at least three names for 
every vacancy referred to it. 
(4)  The Search Committee shall, before recommending any person for 
appointment as the Chairperson or a Member of the Commission, satisfy itself 
that such person does not have any financial or other interest which is likely 
to affect prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson or Member. 
(5)  No appointment of the Chairperson or Member shall be invalid merely by 
reason of any vacancy or absence of a Member in the Search Committee. 
(6)  Subject to the provisions of sub -sections (2) to (5), the Search Committee may 
regulate its own procedure 
 
CLAUSE 4 
4.6 Clause 4 deals with the Term of office and conditions of service of members. 
4.6.1 Clause 4(i) reads as under: 

79 
 
4. (1) The members nominated under clauses (l), (m) and (n) of sub -section (3) of section 
3 shall hold office for a term not exceeding two  years, as the Central Government may 
notify in this behalf, from the date on which they enter upon their office. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
4.6.2 With respect to clause 4 stakeholders have made the following suggestions: 
 
(i) The Indian Association of Physiotherapists and  one stakeholder submitted that the 
members nominated from clause 3 subsection, l and m holding office term should be 
increased to 4 years from 2 years. 
(ii) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists submitted that the term of elected 
members may be ensured as five years at par with Indian democratic values  
(iii) Lokmanya Medical College of Physiotherapy, Mumbai, All Assam Physiotherapy 
Association (AAPA),  Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association and Nishita Meshram 
submitted that the tenure of the President (Ch airman) should be increased to 5 years 
or at least 3 years  
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.6.3 On a suggestion regarding increase in tenure of the Chairman, the Ministry submitted that 
the provision regarding this already exists. The term of a member is extendable to 6 years as the 
same member may be nominated for three terms of two years each conse cutively, as per clause 
4(2). By virtue of this the Chairman can also have a tenure upto 6 years. There is no President 
position currently envisioned in the Bill.  
 
4.6.4 The Ministry further submitted that the provision of multiple short tenure for longer  
duration has been made to ensure that the Council will have provision to change the member if 
found to be ineffective or engaged in malpractice. This will regulate the quality of practice 
within the Council body. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.6.5 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry in regard to the tenure of the 
Chairman and believes the provision in the Bill regarding the term of a member is 
adequate. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that only in extraordinary 
circumstances when the member has proved to be an exceptional asset to the Commission, 
should his/her tenure be extended but not beyond six years. 
4.6.6 The clause is adopted without any change. 
 
CLAUSE 7 
4.7 Clause 7 deals with Meetings of Council. 
4.7.1 Clause 7(1) and 7(2) reads as under: 
7. (1) The Council shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum of 
such meetings) in the manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 

80 
 
(2) The Chairperson or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of the Council, 
any other member chosen by the members present from amongst themselves at the 
meeting shall preside over the meeting. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.7.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
(i) Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association submitted that the minutes of proceedings shall 
be recorded in a book to be kept for the purpose and names of members of the 
Council present there at shall be entered in the minute book; and shall be signed in 
confirmation by the presiding authority in the same or next meeting. A copy of the 
minutes of proceeding shall be forwarded to the Central Government within ten days 
from the date of confirmation  
 
(ii) Indian Optometric Association, Government Optometrist Association Uttar Pradesh, 
National Ophthalmic Association, Ophthal India (State unit of NOA),  Indian 
Optometry Federation, Bihar State Samajwadi Party  submitted that after "The 
Council shall meet"  the following may be added "every three months frequency" 
 
(iii) Opthal India also submitted that the meetings of the Council should be held after an 
interval of three months. 
 
(iv) One stakeholder submitted that the quorum should be fixed as 1/3rd of total members.  
 
(v) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) submitted that word Vice -
Chairperson may be inserted in the Clause 7(2) 
 
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.7.3 The Ministry submitted that the provision regarding the recording of the minutes of 
proceedings and frequency of the meetings already exists and the details of manner and conduct 
of meetings and other related issues will be specified in the Rules.  The Min istry further 
submitted that the provision regarding quorum already exists. This will be as specified in the 
rules, and as addressed in clause 7(1). With respect to insertion of word Vice -Chairperson in 
Clause 7(2) the Ministry submitted that the provision for alternate chairperson to preside over the 
meeting in the absence of the Chairman already exists and the concern raised will be dealt as per 
Clause 7(2). 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
4.7.4 The Committee recommends the Ministry to specify the provisions regarding the 
minutes of proceedings and the details of manner and conduct of meetings in the Rules and 
Regulations. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to make explicit provision 
regarding the quorum and the frequency of meetings under the Section. The Committee 
strongly believes that the Commission should meet frequently, at least once every quarter. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Clause 7 may be amended as follows:  
 
7. (1) The Commission shall meet at least once every quarter at such time and place as 
may be appointed by the Chairperson. 
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Commission and if, for any 
reason, the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeti ng of the Commission, any Member 

81 
 
being the President of the Regulatory Boards, nominated by the Chairperson shall 
preside at the meeting.  
(3) Unless the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Commission is otherwise 
provided by regulations, one -half of the total number of Members of the Commission 
including the Chairperson shall constitute the quorum and all decisions of the 
Commission shall be taken by a majority of the members, present and voting and in the 
event of equality of votes, the Chairp erson or in his absence, the President of the 
Regulatory  Board nominated under sub-section (2), shall have the casting vote. 
(4) The general superintendence, direction and control of the administration of the 
Commission shall vest in the Chairperson.  
(5) No act done by the Commission shall be questioned on the ground of the existence 
of a vacancy in, or a defect in the constitution of, the Commission.  
(6) A person who is aggrieved by any decision of the Commission may prefer an appeal 
to the Central Gove rnment against such decision within thirty days of the 
communication of such decision. 
 
4.7.5 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 8 
4.8 Clause 8 deals with Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Council. 
4.8.1 Clause 8 reads as under: 
No act or proceeding of the Council shall be invalidated merely by reason of — (a) any 
vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Council; or (b) any defect in the 
appointment of a person acting as a member of the Council ; or (c) any irregularity in the 
procedure of the Council not affecting the merits of the case. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.8.2 All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) submitted that  no action or 
proceedings that affect a given profession will be taken by the Council before hearing the 
comments from the member who represents specific profession.  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.8.3 The Ministry in response to AIOTA's views submitted that the suggestion has been 
considered. Professional Advisory Bodies are envisioned to provide the final word regarding the 
technical, professional and ethical conduct for the particular profession and professionals. 
Proceedings or action affecting any profession will naturally follow inputs from the related 
members.  
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.8.4 The Committee observes that each recognised category has been represented in the 
proposed Commission but under each category, there are many professions. Therefore, at 
any instance, all the professions of every recognised category will not be represented i n the 
Commission. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry that in such instances 
when there is no representation from that particular profession in the Commission, the 
Ministry must give the professionals an opportunity to be heard when any decis ion 
affecting that profession is made.  

82 
 
4.8.5 The Ministry, in its reply, stated that inputs from Professional Advisory Bodies will 
be taken in such instances but the Committee also notes that as per the present structure of 
the Bill, the Professional Advi sory Body will be formed to examine specific issues and all 
the Professions will not have a Professional Advisory Body. However, the Committee in the 
subsequent paragraphs has recommended for the constitution of eight Councils by merging 
the 15 categories which will give the desired representation to the Professions in the 
proposed Commission. However, considering the number and diverse set of professionals, 
such instances can arise when few professions may not be represented in the Commission. 
Therefore, t he Council structure proposed by the Committee becomes more important 
wherein the Council President can put forth the apprehensions of all the professions under 
it before the Commission. Nevertheless, the Commission must also hear the concerned 
professionals when any important policy that aims to bring a substantial change in that 
profession is being implemented.  
4.8.6 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 9 
4.9 Clause 9 deals with Officers and other employees of Council. 
4.9.1 Clause 9(1) reads as under: 
9. (1) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the 
Council may appoint a Chief Executive Officer and other officers and employees as it 
may think necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under the Act. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.9.2 Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of India (JFMTI), United Physiotherapy 
Associations of India, Physiotherapy Forum, Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists 
and a stakeholder have suggested t hat CEO should be replaced with Registrar/ Secretary of the 
Council and clause 9(1) should be read as under: 
"Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the 
Council may appoint a Secretary or Registrar and other officers  and employees as it may 
think necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under the Act"  
 
DEPARTMENT's RESPONSE: 
 
4.9.3 The Ministry pleaded that the Council structure is envisioned to be one of a body 
corporate, i.e. headed by a Chief Execu tive Officer and other staff. This would ensure a more 
agile structure where performance and outcomes may be better managed, going away from the 
traditional academic structure that has been followed in all the existing regulators in Health. 
However, the Ministry during the course of clause by clause consideration of the Bill acceded to 
the suggestion of having a Secretariat to be headed by a Secretary. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.9.4 The Committee observes that the Government has made provision for a Secretariat 
to be headed by a Secretary in the NMC Act, NCISM Bill and NCH Bill.  The Committee 
also takes note of the submission of the Ministry during the course of clause by clause 

83 
 
consideration that acceded to the suggestion of a stakeholder for a provision in the Bill for 
a Secretariat and other employees to assist the Commission.  
4.9.5 The Committee is of the view that since in the other legislations, i.e. NMC Act 2019, 
the NCISM Bill 2019 and the NCH bill 2019 meant for structural reforms in the health 
sector, the Secretariat is to be headed by the Secretary, therefore, changing the 
nomenclature in the present Bill does not sound logical. 
 
4.9.6 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for constituting a Secretariat 
which shall be headed by a Secretary to be appointed by the Central Government on the 
lines of the provisions pertaining to Search Committee for appointment of Chairperson and 
members of the National Medical Commis sion Act. The Committee views that constitution 
of a Secretariat to be headed by a Secretary would ensure efficient performance of the 
National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professions functions, in line with Section 
8 of NMC Act. 
 
4.9.7 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 10 
4.10 Clause 10 deals with Functions of Council. 
4.10.1 Clause 10 (c) reads as under: 
It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such steps as it may think fit for ensuring 
coordinated and integrated development of education and maintenance of the standards 
of delivery of services under this Act and for the purposes of performing its functions, the 
Council may— 
(c) create and maintain an up to date Central Register; 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.10.2 Indian Optometric Association, Government Optometrist Association, Uttar Pradesh and 
Indian Optometry Federation submitted that Clause should be rephrased as follows: 
 
 "Create and maintain an up to date Central Register with details of diploma and degree 
of academic qualification and institutions, prior learning, skill and experiences of Allied 
and Healthcare Professionals covered under this Bill"  
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
4.10.3 With respect to the rephrasing of the clause, the Ministry submitted that this provision 
has been considered. Specific language will be included as part of the regulations.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.10.4 The Committee agrees with the view of the stakeholders and believes that the 
Central Register should contain details of academic qualification, the training undertaken, 
skills and experiences of the Allied Healthcare Professionals. The Committee also desir es 
that the same should be updated periodically so that any extra skills or degree acquired is 
also reflected in the database. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 

84 
 
create a dynamic online database that reflects the active allied professiona ls in the country. 
Clause 10 (c) will read as under: 
 "Create and maintain an up to date Central Register with details of diploma and 
degree of academic qualification and institutions, training undertaken, skill and 
experiences of Allied and Healthcare Professionals covered under this Bill"  
4.10.5 Clause 10 (d) reads as under: 
It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such steps as it may think fit for ensuring 
coordinated and integrated development of education and maintenance of the standards 
of delivery of services under this Act and for the purposes of performing its functions, the 
Council may— 
(d) provide minimum standards of education, courses, curricula, physical and 
instructional facilities, staff pattern, staff qualifications, quality instr uctions, assessment, 
examination, training, research, continuing professional education, maximum tuition fee 
payable in respect of various recognised categories, proportionate distribution of seats 
and promote innovations in recognised categories; 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.10.6 One stakeholder submitted that instead of minimum it should be appropriate/ basic. Clear 
clarification should be there regarding Student: Teacher ratio and Patient: Therapist ratio as per 
international standards. 
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
4.10.7 With respect to the suggestion of the stakeholder, the Ministry submitted that the 
provision already exists. Standard setting and regulation is the main purpose for which the 
Council is being established. Technical inputs on minimum or maximum standards to  be adopted 
is envisioned to be set by the professional advisory bodies and adopted by the Council for 
implementation.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
4.10.8 The Committee is of the view that maintaining high quality and high standards in 
allied and healthcare education has to be one of the main functions of the Commission. 
This sub clause further makes the proposed Commission responsible for assessment, 
examination, training, research and other aspects of the sector which is a step in the right 
direction. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the clause may be amended as 
follows: 
(d) provide basic standards of education, courses, curricula, physical and instructional 
facilities, staff pattern, staff qualifications, quality instructions, assessment , 
examination, training, research, continuing professional education, maximum tuition 
fee payable in respect of various recognised categories, proportionate distribution of 
seats and promote innovations in recognised categories; 
4.10.9 The Committee also desires that constant efforts have to be made by the Ministry so 
that the Student: Teacher and Patient: Therapists Ratio is as per the international norms. 
However, in the absence of any conclusive data on the number of Allied and Healthcare 
Professionals, determining this accurate ratio may not be possible at present. The 

85 
 
Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Ministry should first create a dynamic database 
that reflects the active allied and healthcare professionals in the country. 
4.10.10 Clause 10 (f) reads as under: 
It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such steps as it may think fit for ensuring 
coordinated and integrated development of education and maintenance of the standards 
of delivery of services under this Act and for the purposes of  performing its functions, the 
Council may— 
(f) provide for or cause to be provided for uniform entry examination with common 
counseling for admission into the allied and healthcare institutions at the diploma, 
undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral level in the manner as may be specified by the 
regulations; 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.10.11 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
(i) The Indian Association of Physiotherapists submitted that the entry examination and 
counseling for Physiother apists should not be merged with other professionals as 
Physiotherapy is highly skilled Profession and requires minimum eligibility criteria of 
10+2 Physics, Chemistry, Biology with minimum 50 Percentage. 
(ii) All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) also submitted that  there 
should be separate entry examinations and counselling for healthcare professionals of 
OT and PTs alone and separate each for other healthcare and allied professionals.  
 
(iii) Pawan Rohilla submitted that there is a need to foll ow uniform entry examination and 
admission procedures as specified by the concerned sub-councils. 
 
(iv) United Physiotherapy Associations of India and Physiotherapy Forum submitted have 
made the following changes in the clause: 
 
(f) provide for or cause to be provided for uniform entry examination with common 
counseling for admission into the allied and healthcare institutions at the diploma, 
undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral level in the manner as may be specified by the 
concerned sub-council;  
 
4.10.12 Further, the Associations submitted that the  aptitude and skill requirement for 
each recognised profession differs. Model curriculum for physiotherapy recommended for 
abolition of diploma.  
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
 
4.10.13 The Ministry submitted that the Bill takes care of 53 professions under 15 broad 
categories (which can change as and when required as addition or merger may lead to change in 
numbers), and thus it is not feasible to conduct separate entry examination and c ounseling for all 
such professions. Considering the minimum entry requirement for all the professions is same, 
common entrance tests (CET) may be conducted for entry level courses. This has been done even 
for medical and dental courses. The Ministry further submitted that it may be even more efficient 
to expand   and to have counseling for allied and healthcare courses for candidates, after the first 
set of students who qualify for MBBS. Detailed deliberation may be conducted with technical 
experts each representing the professions, to formulate the process under regulations.  

86 
 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.10.14 The Committee notes that the Council proposed under the Bill is tasked with 
the responsibility of conducting a uniform entry examination with common counseling for 
admission into the allied and healthcare professionals.  The Committee understands the 
apprehensions of the stakeholders considering the different aptitude and skill requirement 
of each profession at diploma, undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral level. The 
Committee also notes the response of the Ministry regarding the 53 professions that the Bill 
is set to regulate and agrees that conducting separate entry examination and counselling 
for all such professions is not feasible. Now -a-days when we are moving towards one 
common entrance exam (NEET) for admission into different MBBS, dental and AYU SH 
courses, demanding separate exams for each Allied and Healthcare Profession is not 
prudent.  
4.10.15 The Committee also notes that at present there is no uniform exam structure 
for admission into undergraduate allied professional courses. Some institute s admit 
students through NEET score; some conduct their own exams; whereas some institutes 
declare a set intermediate percentage as the cut off for admissions. In such a scenario 
where there is no common criteria for admissions and exams, there is bound to  be a wide 
gap in the quality of students who graduate from different institutes each year. The 
Committee, therefore, agrees with the view of the Ministry that a common entrance tests 
must be conducted for entry level courses in the Allied and Healthcare Sector.  
4.10.16 The Ministry, in its response has suggested expansion of NEET for admission 
and counseling in allied and healthcare courses for candidates, after the first set of students 
who qualify for MBBS. The Committee, however, also notes that there are certain 
professions in the allied and healthcare that do not necessarily require 
Biology/Physics/Chemistry as a compulsory subject in Intermediate. The Committee, 
thereafter, is of the view that enrollment in such courses through NEET is not feasible. At 
the same time, the Committee feels that conducting a common entrance exam is essential 
but this exam may not necessarily be the NEET exam. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends conducting a common entrance tests (CET) for entry level courses in the 
Allied and Healthcare Profession. The Committee is of the view that this exam should be 
conducted by the Commission that will be constituted under the proposed legislation . The 
clause providing for the Common Entrance Test will be specified in the subs equent 
paragraphs.  
4.10.17 Clause 10 (g) reads as under: 
It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such steps as it may think fit for ensuring 
coordinated and integrated development of education and maintenance of the standards 
of delivery of services under this Act and for the purposes of performing its functions, the 
Council may— 
(g) provide for a uniform exit or licensing examination for the allied and healthcare 
professionals in the manner as may be specified by the regulations; 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.10.18 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 

87 
 
(i) The Indian Association of Physiotherapists submitted that the Exit and Licensing 
examination should be separate as course curriculum, qualification and level of 
professional skill is much higher than other mentioned Professionals. 
(ii) United Physiotherapy Associations of India and Physiotherapy Forum suggested to 
follow the procedures prescribed by concerned sub -council for exit or licentiate exam 
(the aptitude and skills varies as per NSQF and model curriculum)  
 
(iii) Pawan Rohilla submitted to follow uniform exit or licensing examination procedures 
as specified by the concerned sub-councils  
 
(iv) All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) submitted that separate exit 
and licensing examinations for each profession as the qualification, training and 
curriculum of each profession is unique and different from others. 
 
(v) One stakeholder submitted that Exit and Licensing examination should be separate as 
course curriculum, qualification and level of professional skill is much higher  
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
4.10.19 With regards to separation of the exit and licensing examination, the Ministry 
submitted that the licensing standards will differ by profession and thus there will be separate 
exams. The details will be specified in the regulations as provisioned in the cl ause, in 
consultation with the professional advisory body.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.10.20 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that the Commission 
will have to conduct a separate exit and licensing examinations for each profession. Th e 
Committee acknowledges the fact that each profession follows a specified curriculum and 
deals with different technical skill, therefore conducting a uniform single licensing exit 
exam for all the professions is not quite possible. The Committee, therefor e, recommends 
the Ministry to conduct separate exit exams for each profession to assess the quality of 
students graduating from the allied institutes/colleges.  
4.10.21 The Committee also notes that at present, there is no uniform exam structure 
for admission to undergraduate as well as postgraduate health professional courses.  The 
Committee has already recommended insertion of a clause on Common Entrance Exam for 
admission into undergraduate allied healthcare courses.  
4.10.22 The Committee observes that conducting a common final undergraduate 
exam that can act as an exit licensing exam as well as Post Graduate National Entrance 
Exam, on the lines of NMC, NCISM and NCH Bill would be the most optimum way to 
bring about standardization and reduce the multiplicity of exams. However, the Committee 
also notes the present status of the allied health sector in the country and observes that 
before rolling/commencing out such a common exam, the curriculum as well as the 
standards of all the colleges have to be asses sed and harmonized. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Commission, only after due ground assessment and 
standardisation of curriculum/syllabus may devise a common exam structure for each 
profession that will act as the final year exam, licensing  exam and Post graduate entrance 
exam. 

88 
 
4.10.23 The Committee also notes that presently States and Universities conduct 
their own entrance examinations for admission into Postgraduate courses. The Committee 
understands that since the professions are different from each other, conducting one PG 
NET for admission into all the allied and healthcare courses admission is not possible. The 
Committee, therefore strongly recommends that each p rofession should conduct its own 
final year exam which will also act as the licensing exam. The clause that provides for the 
National Exit Test will be specified in the subsequent paragraphs.  
SUGGESTIONS 
 Suggestions to add sub-clause (j) in clause 10: 
4.10.24 United Physiotherapy Associations of India, Physiotherapy Forum and one 
stakeholder suggested adding clause 10(j) to ensure holistic regulations that will read as under: 
 
provide minimum standards framework for machineries, materials and services 
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
 
4.10.25 The Ministry submitted that while examining the issue, the reference to 
“machines and materials” was not directly made since it is assumed to be a part of the “delivery 
of services”.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.10.26 The Committee is of the view that consequent to the recommendations of the 
Committee with respect to the constitution of the Commission, Councils and 
Regulatory/development Boards, the functions of the proposed Commission have to be 
revisited. The Committee, t herefore, recommends adding the following functions of the 
proposed Commission in clause 10: 
It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such steps as it may think fit for ensuring 
coordinated and integrated development of education and maintenance of the 
standards of delivery of services under this Act and for the purposes of performing its 
functions, the Council may— 
(j) provide minimum standards framework for machineries, materials and services 
(k) lay down policies for maintaining a high quality and high standards in allied 
education and make necessary regulations in this behalf; 
(l) lay down policies for regulating allied institutions, researches and professionals 
and make necessary regulations in this behalf; 
(m) assess the requirements in allied healthcare, including human resources for 
health and healthcare infrastructure and develop a road map for meeting such 
requirements; 
(n) promote, co -ordinate and frame guidelines and lay down policies by maki ng 
necessary regulations for the proper functioning of the Commission, the Councils, the 
Regulatory Boards and the State Allied Councils; 
(o)  ensure co-ordination among the Regulatory Boards; 

89 
 
(p)  take such measures, as may be necessary, to ensure complia nce by the State 
Allied Councils of the guidelines framed and regulations made under this Act for their 
effective functioning under this Act; 
(q)  exercise appellate jurisdiction with respect to the decisions of the Regulatory 
Boards; 
(r)  lay down policies and codes to ensure observance of professional ethics in allied 
and healthcare profession and to promote ethical conduct during the provision of care 
by allied and healthcare professionals; 
4.10.27 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
 
INSERTION OF NEW CLAUSE ON NATIONAL EXAMINATIONS 
4.11.1 The Committee notes that the proposed National Commission for Allied and 
Healthcare Profession will also conduct the National Level examinations for all allied and 
Healthcare Professionals. Considering the need for addition of separate provisions of 
Common Entrance Exam, National Exit Test, National Teachers Eligibility Test and 
Minimum Qualifying Test, the Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to 
incorporate a new Chapter in the Bill on  the lines of NMC Act, NCISM and NCH Bill, 
under the head National Examinations, incorporating the provisions of following exams: 
(i) Common Entrance Test (CET); 
(ii) National Exit Test (NEXT); 
(iii) National Teachers Eligibility Test (NTET); and  
(iv) Minimum Qualifying Test (MQT).  
 
COMMON ENTRANCE TEST (CET) 
 
4.11.2 The Committee again highlights the need to conduct an entrance exam for 
admission into the allied and healthcare professional courses. The Committee recommends 
that the proposed Commission after exhaustive research and deliberations should devise a 
suitable format of the Common Entrance Test (CET) for entry level courses in the Allied 
and Healthcare Profession.  
 
4.11.3 The Committee therefore, strongly recommends adding a clause on Common 
Entrance Test, in the Bill that will read as follows: 
 
(1)  There shall be a uniform Common Entrance Test for admission to the 
undergraduate courses in each of the professions of the recognized categories 
in all the allied healthcare institutions governed under this Act: 
(2)  The Commission shall conduct the Common Entra nce Test in English and in 
such other languages, through such designated authority and in such manner, 
as may be specified by regulations. 
(3)  The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of conducting 
common counseling by the designated authori ty for admission to all the allied 
institutions governed under this Act:  
 

90 
 
Provided that the common counseling shall be conducted by the designated authority 
of–– 
 
(i)   the Central Government, for All India seats; and 
(ii) the State Government, for the remaining seats at the State level. 
 
NATIONAL EXIT TEST (NEXT) 
4.11.4 The Committee reiterates that the proposed Commission only after due assessment 
may devise a common exam called National Exit Test (NEXT) for each profession that will 
act as the final year exam, licensing exam and Post graduate entrance exam.   Accordingly, 
the Committee recommends for insertion of a clause on National Exit Test under the 
Chapter National Examinations that will provide for a National Exit Test which will read 
as follows: 
(1)  A final year undergraduate examination, to be known as the National Exit Test, 
shall be held for granting licence to practice as independent professionals and 
for enrolment in the State Register or National Register, as the case may be. 
(2)  The Commission shall conduct the National Exit Test for Allied Professionals 
in English and in such other languages, through such designated authority and 
in such manner as may be specified by regulations. 
(3)  The National Exit Test sha ll become operational on such date, within three 
years from the date of commencement of this Act, as may be appointed by the 
Central Government, by notification.  
(4)  The National Exit Test shall be the basis for admission to the postgraduate 
broad-speciality allied education in institutions which are governed under the 
provisions of this Act or under any other law for the time being in force and 
shall be done in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
 
NATIONAL TEACHERS ELIGIBILITY TEST (NTET) 
 
4.11.5 The Committee also recommends that the Commission should also conduct a 
National Teachers Eligibility Test for Allied and Healthcare Professionals as it can be the 
best way to tap qualified persons into the teaching profession. The Committee is aware  of 
the fact that one of the major challenges in promotion of Allied and Healthcare education is 
the inadequate faculty and non -standardisation of different professions. The Committee is 
of the view that such a merit based examination will certainly improv e the education being 
imparted to students studying Allied and healthcare Professionals as well as improve the 
quality of health care services. The Committee therefore recommends adding a clause on 
National Teachers' Eligibility Test under the Chapter National Examinations that will read 
as under: 
 
A National Teachers’ Eligibility Test shall be conducted separately for the 
postgraduates of each profession of Allied and Healthcare Profession  who desire to 
take up teaching profession in that discipline. 
MINIMUM QUALIFYING TEST (MQT) 
4.11.6 The Committee also recommends the Ministry to add a Minimum Qualifying Test 
(MQT) under this Chapter that will test the competency of professionals who are already 

91 
 
practising. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should ensure that only qualified 
professionals are registered under the provisions of the Act as mentioned in the clause 35. 
4.11.7 The Committee understands that Minimum Qualifying Test (MQT) would give 
recognition to persons offering his/her se rvices in any of the recognised categories on and 
before the commencement of this Act within two years from such commencement and thus 
enabling him to get registered under the provisions of the Act.   
 
CLAUSE 11 
4.12 Clause 11 deals with Professional advisory bodies of Council. 
4.12.1 Clause 11 (1) reads as under: 
11. (1) The Council shall constitute as many professional advisory bodies as may be 
necessary to examine specific issues relating to one or more recognised categories and 
recommend or advise the Council thereon and also undertake any other activity as may 
be authorised by the Council. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.12.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
(i) The Indian Association of Physiotherapists submitted that the Professional advisory 
body should be named sub - council and its recommendations should be mandatory 
and binding. The sub council should not only address the specific issues but all the 
professional issues related to its profession. As the council’s object ive is to regulate 
and standardized the profession. If expert who belongs to specific profession involved 
in decision making each sub - sections specific issues and concerns can be addressed 
specifically in the interest of large number of professional, thus  the council becomes 
more effective. 
 
(ii) Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association  submitted that the following changes be made 
in the Clause: 
 
The Council shall constitute as many professional advisory bodies as may be 
necessary to examine all issues relating to one or more recognised categories and 
formulate rules, lay down regulations, recommend or advise the Council thereon 
and also undertake any other activity related to that profession including advice 
to government on matters related to human resources need of concerned 
profession.  
(iii) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) suggested renaming 
Professional Advisory Body as Professional Advisory Board. 
 
(iv) Indian Association of Physiotherapists submitted that Professional Advisory Body to 
be named as Sub Council, with recommendations of the said body to be mandatory 
and binding. This will enable decision making for the profession by  the respective 
professionals. 
 
(v) Indian Optometric Association, Government Optometrist Association, Uttar Pradesh 
and Indian Optometry Federation submitted that the Professional Advisory Body must 
specify - comprising of 7 Optometry professionals.  

92 
 
 
(vi) All Assam Physiotherapy Association (AAPA), Lokmanya Medical College of 
Physiotherapy, Mumbai and a stakeholder submitted that the clause may be reframed 
as follows: 
 
The Council shall constitute as many professional advisory bodies as may be 
necessary to exam ine specific issues relating to one or more recognised 
categories, and formulate rules, lay down regulations, recommend or advise 
the Council thereon and also undertake any other activity related to that 
profession including advice to government related to human resources need of 
concerned profession.  
 
(vii) United Physiotherapy Associations of India and Physiotherapy Forum submitted that 
the Council shall constitute sub -councils for each recognised profession to 
recommend or advise the Council thereon and also undertake any other activity as 
may be authorised by the Council. Its recommendations will be binding on matters in 
respect to its professional identity and practice. 
 
(viii) Another stakeholder  submitted that the Sub -councils for each recognised profession 
shall be established to recommend or advise the council thereon and also undertake 
any other activity as may be authorized by the Council, its recommendations will be 
binding on matters in respect to its professional identity and practice  
 
(ix) Ophthal India submitted that in the Opthalmic Science Professional Advisory Body, 
two Opthalmic Assistants (one diploma holder and one graduate) and two 
Optometrists (one diploma holder and one graduate) should also be included other 
than the President.   
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
 
4.12.3 The Ministry submitted that the idea of empowering the Council to establish professional 
advisory bodies is aimed at independent decision making by the professional bodies for their 
respective professions. With regards to naming the Professional Advisory Body as Sub Council 
and making its recommendations binding, the Ministry submitted that the term “professional 
advisory body” was agreed upon after several inputs and legal insights as brought forth by 
Department of Law and Justice. The mandate of the PABs will be to give 
advice/recommendation on the specific issues to the Council. However, the Rules will be drafted 
by the Interim Council and regulations may be drafted in consultation with the professional 
advisory committees. The term, “formulate rules,” may therefore not be considered. Also, “lay 
down regulations” may be modified as “draft regulations for adoption”.  
 
4.12.4 With regards to renaming the Professional Advisory Body as Professional Advisory 
Board, the Ministry submitted that this may be considered if the Committee so recommends.  
With regards to the suggestion that the Professional Advisory Body must specify - comprising of 
7 Optometry professionals, the Ministry submitted that the provision already exists. The Ministry 
further submitted that the details will be specified in the Rules. This will be examined in greater 
detail as part of the formulation of the Rules in which the details of the professional advisory 
bodies will be specified. The numb er of members in each professional advisory body has been 
left unspecified at this time, to provide flexibility to the professions in fulfilling all technical 
obligations. 
 
 

93 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.12.5 The Committee finds the provision of constitution of as many professional advisory 
bodies as may be necessary to examine specific issues vague and ambiguous as several 
specific issues may lead to proliferation of plethora of advisory bodies. The Committee 
therefore finds a rational in constitution of a Central Advisory Council, namely, National 
Allied and Healthcare Advisory Council to recommend or advise the commission on several 
issues and finalizing the advice/suggestion of the specific Council for Professionals on 
specific issue that may be referred to any of the eight Councils.  
 
4.12.6 The Committee is also of the view that considering the diverse range of allied 
healthcare professionals, representation from each of these professional categories is very 
important. The Committee, however, cannot overlook the importance of the role of States 
in the proposed Commission. The Committee strongly believes that States have to play a 
very crucial part in successful implementation of the Act and their representation as well as 
participation is as important as the professionals. The Committee notes that the country at 
present is categorised into six zones and two persons from each of the six zones 
representing the State Councils on biennial rotation will become members of the pr oposed 
Commission. The Committee very well understands the apprehension of the stakeholder 
where a particular State in the alphabetical order as per the zonal distribution will have to 
wait for many years to be part of the Commission.  
4.12.7 The Committee therefore, recommends the constitution of an Allied Advisory 
Council on the lines of the Medical Advisory Council in the National Medical Commission 
Act, the Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine in the National Commission for 
Indian Sy stem of Medicine Bill, 2019 and the Advisory Council for Homeopathy in the 
National Commission for Homeopathy Bill, 2019. The Committee is of the view that the 
States have been grossly ignored in the Bill whereas the onus of implementing the Act falls 
on t he shoulders of the State. When Centre is aiming at bringing a fundamental shift in 
how the allied healthcare professionals are perceived by the society, it becomes imperative 
to make State equal partners in this mission.  
4.12.8 The Committee, therefore, recommends for constitution and composition of 
National Allied and Healthcare Professional Advisory Council.  The new clause may read 
as follows: 
(1) The Central Government shall constitute an advisory body to be known as the 
National Allied and Healthcare Professionals Advisory Council.  
(2) The Council shall consist of a Chairperson and the following members, namely:—  
(a)  the Chairperson of the National Commission of Allied and Healthcare 
Professions shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the Advisory Council;  
(b)  every member of the Commission shall be the ex officio members of the 
Council;  
(c)  one member to represent each State, who is the Vice -Chancellor of a health 
University in that State, to be nominated by that State Government;  
(d)  one member to represent each Union territory, who is the Vice -Chancellor of 
a health University in that Union territory, to be nominated by the Ministry 
of Home Affairs in the Government of India;  

94 
 
(e)  one  member to represent each State and each Union territory from amongst 
elected members of the State Allied Council, to be nominated by that State 
Allied Council;  
(f)   the Chairman, University Grants Commission;  
(g)  the Director, National Assessment and Accreditation Council;  
(h) four members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst 
persons holding the post of Director in the Indian Institutes of Technology, 
Indian Institutes of Management and the Indian Institute of Science:  
Provided that if there is no health University in any State or Union territory, the 
Vice-Chancellor of a University within that State or Union territory having the largest 
number of allied colleges/institutes affiliated to it shall be nominated by the State 
Government or by the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Government of India:  
Provided further that if there is no University in any Union territory, the Ministry 
of Home Affairs shall nominate a member who possesses such allied healthcare 
qualification and experience as may be prescribed. 
4.12.9 The Committee recommends that whenever specific issues arise, it may be referred 
to that profession specific Council under which the profession falls.  
4.12.10 The Committee thus recommends that there is no need for constituting the 
various Professional Advisory Bodies. The National Allied and Healthcare Professional 
Advisory Council will examine general issues related to professions of recognised 
categories. The Committee ag ain recommends that the National Allied and Healthcare 
Professional Advisory Council can refer the specific issues to one of the eight Councils , 
under which the subject matter falls, which shall be responsible to the Advisory Council for 
the disposal of the issues raised. The National Allied and Healthcare Professional Advisory 
Council will act as coordinating and harmonising the general interest of each and every 
profession of al lied and healthcare profession besides providing a platform for States and 
Union territories.  
4.12.11 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 14 
4.13 Clause 14 deals with the Rights of persons who are enrolled on Central Register. 
4.13.1 Clause 14(c) reads as under: 
14. No person, other than a registered allied and healthcare professional, shall— 
(c) be entitled to sign or authenticate any certificate required by any law to be signed or 
authenticated by a duly qualified allied and healthcare professional. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.13.2 Association of Self -Employed O wners of Private Pathology Laboratories of Gujarat 
(ASEOPPLO-G) suggested to incorporate right to practice independently as well as entitlement 
to sign or authenticate the results of lab investigations. 
 
 

95 
 
MINISTRY’S RESPONSE: 
 
4.13.3 The Ministry submitted that the provision regarding the right to practice independently as 
well as entitlement to sign or authenticate the result of lab investigation already exists. The 
Professional Advisory Committee constituted under the Council may rev iew the case and devise 
a limited set of tests which may be authorized to the Laboratory professional based on minimum 
desired qualification and experience- to be specified by the committee.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.13.4 The Committee is of the v iew that only the National Allied and Healthcare 
Professional Advisory Council or the spe cific Council out of the eight proposed Councils 
may review the specific cases and recommend the same to the Commission which will be 
the apex body in deciding the rights of various professionals.  
 
4.13.5 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted.  
 
INSERTION OF NEW CLAUSE ON REGULATORY/DEVELOPMENT BOARDS  
 
4.14 The Committee also feels the need to create Boards for regulating the professional 
ethics of the allied and healthcare professionals. The Committee has recommended for 
constitution of four different Boards that will facilitate overall growth and developmen t 
and regulation of the allied Healthcare Sector. The Committee also recommends for adding 
a Chapter on Boards in the Bill that will provide for constitution of the Boards, 
composition of the Boards and the powers and Functions of the Boards under the Bill. 
 
4.14.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends adding a new clause under the new Chapter 
of Boards which will read as under: 
 
(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute the following Boards, 
under the overall supervision of the Commission, to perform the functions assigned to 
such Boards under this Act, namely:—  
 
(a) the Under-graduate Allied & Healthcare Profession Board  ;  
(b) the Post-graduate Allied & Healthcare Profession Board;  
(c) Allied and Healthcare Profession Assessment and Rating Board; and  
(d) Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration Board.  
 
(2) Each Board referred to in sub -section (1) shall be an regulatory body which shall 
carry out its functions under this Act subject to the regulations made by the 
Commission. 
 
 4.14.2 The Committee also recommends that the Regulatory /Development Boards should 
include members from the different professions of the recognised categories. The new 
clause providing for the composition of the Regulatory /development Boards will read as 
under: 
 
(1)  The composition of the regulatory Boards shall be as under, namely:––  
(a)  the Under-graduate Allied & Healthcare Profession Board  shall 
consist of a President and Members from the eight Councils;  

96 
 
Provided that the members of the Under -graduate Allied & Healthcare 
Profession Board shall be persons of outstanding ability, proven ad ministrative 
capacity and integrity, possessing a postgraduate degree in any discipline of 
allied health sciences from any University and having experience of not less 
than ten years in such field, out of which at least five years shall be as a leader 
in t he area of allied and healthcare education, public health, community 
medicine or health research. 
(b)  the Post-graduate Allied & Healthcare Profession Board shall consist of 
a President and Members from the eight Councils  
Provided that the members of the Post-graduate Allied & Healthcare Profession 
Board shall be persons of outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity 
and integrity, possessing a postgraduate degree in any discipline of allied health 
sciences from any University and having experienc e of not less than fifteen 
years in such field, out of which at least seven years shall be as a leader in the 
area of allied and healthcare education, public health, community medicine or 
health research. 
(c)  Allied and Healthcare Profession Assessment an d Rating Board shall 
consist of a President and seventeen Members: Provided that the President and 
fifteen out of seventeen Members shall be chosen from the fifteen recognised 
categories of the Schedule and the remaining two Members shall be chosen 
from an y of the disciplines of management, quality assurance, law or science 
and technology;  
(d)  Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration Board shall 
consist of a President and seventeen Members:  
Provided that the President and fifteen out of seventeen Members shall 
be chosen from the 15 recognised categories of the Schedule and the 
remaining two Members shall be chosen from any of the disciplines of 
quality assurance, public health, law or patient advocacy. 
 
(2) One Member of each regulatory Boards, being a part -time Member, shall be 
chosen from amongst the elected Members of the State Allied Council in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
 
(3) The Central Government shall appoint the President and Members of the 
regulatory Boards on the recommendations made by the Search Committee 
constituted in accordance with the procedure specified in that specific section. 
 
 4.14.3 The Committee also recommends insertion of a clause that provides for the powers 
and function of the Under -Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board under the 
Chapter Regulatory/development Boards.  
  
4.14.4 The new clause may read as under: 
(1) The U nder-Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board shall perform the 
following functions, namely:—  
(a) determine standards of allied education at undergraduate level and oversee 
all aspects relating thereto;  

97 
 
(b) develop competency based dynamic curricul um at undergraduate level in 
accordance with the regulations made under this Act;  
(c) develop competency based dynamic curriculum for addressing the needs of 
primary health services, community medicine and family medicine to ensure 
healthcare in such area s, in accordance with the provisions of the regulations 
made under this Act;  
(d) frame guidelines for setting up of allied institutions for imparting 
undergraduate courses, having regard to the needs of the country and the 
global norms, in accordance with  the provisions of the regulations made under 
this Act;  
(e) determine the minimum requirements and standards for conducting courses 
and examinations for undergraduates in allied institutions, having regard to the 
needs of creativity at local levels, inclu ding designing of some courses by 
individual institutions, in accordance with the provisions of the regulations 
made under this Act;  
(f) determine standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of 
education in allied institutions providing undergraduate allied education in 
accordance with the provisions of the regulations made under this Act;  
(g) facilitate development and  training of faculty members teaching 
undergraduate courses;  
(h) facilitate research and the international student and faculty exchange 
programmes relating to undergraduate allied education;  
(i) specify norms for compulsory annual disclosures, electronically or 
otherwise, by allied institutions, in respect of their functions that has a bearing 
on the interest of all stakeholders including students, faculty, the Commission 
and the Central Government; 
(j) grant recognition to a allied qualification at the undergraduate level.  
(2) Under-Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board may, in the discharge of 
its duties, make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the 
Commission, as it deems necessary 
 4.14.5 The Committee also recom mends insertion of a clause that provides for the powers 
and function of the Post -Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board under the 
Chapter Regulatory Boards.  
 The new clause may read as under: 
 (1) The Post -Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education  Board shall perform the 
following functions, namely:—  
(a) determine the standards of allied education at the postgraduate level and 
super-speciality level in accordance with the regulations made under this Act 
and oversee all aspects relating thereto;  
(b) develop competency based dynamic curriculum at postgraduate level and 
super-speciality level in accordance with the regulations made under this Act, 
with a view to develop appropriate skill, knowledge, attitude, values and ethics 

98 
 
among postgraduates and  super-specialists to provide healthcare, impart allied 
education and conduct allied research;  
(c) frame guidelines for setting up of allied institutions for imparting 
postgraduate and super -speciality courses, having regard to the needs of the 
country and global norms, in accordance with the regulations made under this 
Act;  
(d) determine the minim um requirements and standards for conducting 
postgraduate and super -speciality courses and examinations in allied 
institution, in accordance with the regulations made under this Act;  
(e) determine standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and qualit y of 
education in allied institutions conducting postgraduate and super -speciality 
allied education, in accordance with the regulations made under this Act;  
(f) facilitate development and training of the faculty members teaching 
postgraduate and super-speciality courses;  
(g) facilitate research and the international student and faculty exchange 
programmes relating to postgraduate and super-speciality allied education;  
(h) specify norms for compulsory annual disclosure, electronically or otherwise, 
by all ied institutions in respect of their functions that has a bearing on the 
interest of all stakeholders including students, faculty, the Commission and the 
Central Government;  
(i) grant recognition to the allied qualifications at the postgraduate level and 
super-speciality level;  
(j) promote and facilitate postgraduate courses in family medicine.  
(2) Post-Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board may, in the discharge of its 
functions, make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the 
Commission, as it deems necessary. 
4.14.6 The Committee is also of the considered view that institutions of repute that provide 
quality education are important for a robust allied education system. At present, in the 
absence of bodies that assess and rate the allied institutions, there is no regulation on the 
allied institutes. The Committee recommends that the Government should encourage 
setting of National and regional Allied and Healthcare Institutions for imparting education 
at the Under Graduate & Pos t Graduate level and to facilitate training, research and 
development for the professionals preferring a teaching career. It should be ensured that 
such institutions must have adequate basic infrastructure and sufficient faculty. The 
measures so taken woul d also ensure that the allied and the healthcare profession would 
come out of medical dominance and would march ahead for its own development. The 
Committee understands that in order to perform such entrusted task, there is an urgent 
need for the creation  of an apex assessment and rating Board that would also lead to 
standardization of the education system so that the product of accredited institutions would 
get global recognition and acceptance. The Committee, therefore, recommends insertion of 
a clause that provides for powers and functions of the Allied and Healthcare Professionals 
Assessment and Rating Board under the new Chapter "Regulatory Boards". 
 

99 
 
4.14.7 The new clause may read as under: 
(1) The Allied and Healthcare Professionals Assessment and Rating Board shall 
perform the following functions, namely:— 
(a) determine the procedure for assessing and rating the allied institutions for 
their compliance with the standards laid down by the Under -Graduate Allied 
and Healthcare Education Board or the Post -Graduate Allied and Healthcare 
Education Board, as the ca se may be, in accordance with the regulations made 
under this Act;  
(b) grant permission for establishment of a new allied institution, or to start any 
postgraduate course or to increase number of seats, in accordance with the 
relevant provisions of the Act; 
(c) carry out inspections of allied institutions for assessing and rating such 
institutions in accordance with the regulations made under this Act:  
Provided that the Allied and Healthcare Assessment and Rating Board 
may, if it deems necessary, hire and  authorize any other third party 
agency or persons for carrying out inspections of allied institutions for 
assessing and rating such institutions: 
Provided further that where inspection of allied institutions is carried 
out by such third party agency or pe rsons authorized by the Allied and 
Healthcare Assessment and Rating Board, it shall be obligatory on such 
institutions to provide access to such agency or person; 
(d) conduct, or where it deems necessary, empanel independent rating agencies 
to conduct, ass ess and rate all allied institutions, within such period of their 
opening, and every year thereafter, at such time, and in such manner, as may be 
specified by the regulations;  
(e) make available on its website or in public domain the assessment and ratings 
of allied institutions at regular intervals in accordance with the regulations 
made under this Act;  
(f) take such measures, including issuing warning, imposition of monetary 
penalty, reducing intake or stoppage of admissions and recommending to the 
Commission for withdrawal of recognition, against an allied institution for 
failure to maintain the minimum essential standards specified by the Under -
Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board or the Post -Graduate Allied 
and Healthcare Education Board, as  the case may be, in accordance with the 
regulations made under this Act. 
(2) The Allied and Healthcare Professionals Assessment and Rating Board may, in the 
discharge of its functions, make such recommendations to, and seek such directions 
from, the Commission, as it deems necessary. 
4.14.8 The Committee also recommends constitution of the Allied and Healthcare 
Professionals Ethics and Registration Board that will be tasked with regulating 
professional conduct and promoting ethics among the allied healthca re professionals. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends insertion of a clause that provides for powers 
and functions of Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration Board. 

100 
 
4.14.9 The clause that provides for the powers and functions of the A llied and Healthcare 
Professionals Ethics and Registration Board may read as follows: 
(1) Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration Board  shall perform 
the following functions, namely:—  
(a) maintain  National Registers of all licensed allied practitioners in 
accordance with the provisions of section 31;  
(b) regulate professional conduct and promote ethics in accordance with the 
regulations made under this Act: Provided that Allied and Healthcare 
Professionals Ethics and Registration Board shall ensure compliance of the 
code of professional and ethical conduct through the State Allied Council in a 
case where such State Allied Council has been conferred power to take 
disciplinary actions in respect of p rofessional or ethical misconduct by allied 
healthcare professionals under respective State Acts;  
(c) develop mechanisms to have continuous interaction with State Allied 
Councils to effectively promote and regulate the conduct of Allied healthcare  
professionals;  
(d) exercise appellate jurisdiction with respect to the actions taken by a State 
allied Council under section 30.  
(2) Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration Board  may, in the 
discharge of its duties, make such recommendation s to, and seek such directions from, 
the Commission, as it deems necessary. 
 
CLAUSE 15 
 
4.15 Clause 15 deals with the Registration in Central Register 
 
4.15.1 Clause 15 reads as under: 
15. The Council may, on receipt of the report of registration of a person in a State 
Register or on an application made by any person, in such form and in such manner as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government, enter his name in the Central Register. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.15.2 Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologist s (ISRT) requested to limit initial 
registration in Central register for five years only subject to renewal for another 5 years on 
production of proof of credit hours and accordingly the clause may be revised. 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.15.3 With respect to a bove suggestion, the Ministry submitted that the provision already 
exists, as the details will be specified in the Rules  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.15.4 The Committee is of the view that the Central Register to be created under Clause 
15 should be a live register of qualified professionals and uploaded in the websit e and the 

101 
 
same sho uld be constantly updated. This register should be segmented on the basis of 
different educational standards, qualifications viz, diploma, degree, doctoral level, 
specializations etc. The Committee agrees that the initial registration should be for a set 
time period and the same should be constantly revised. 
 
4.15.5 Subject of the above recommendation, the clause is adopted.  
 
CLAUSE 17 
4.16 Clause 17 deals with Registration of additional qualifications 
4.16.1 Clause 17 (1) reads as under: 
17. (1) If any person whose name is entered in the Central Register obtains any other 
qualification in any recognised category in addition to any allied and healthcare 
qualification, he shall, on an application made in this behalf in such form and in such 
manner and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed by the Central Government, be 
entitled to have an entry stating such degree or diploma or such other qualification made 
against his name in the Central Register in addition to any entry previously made.   
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.16.2 A stakeholder suggested that instead of having additional qualification against  existing  
registration, registration to multiple categories may be made if requirements are met by the 
applicant. 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
4.16.3 The provision already exists under clause 15 and clause 17(1).  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
4.16.4 The Committee is in agreement with the plea of the Ministry that clause 17(1) takes 
care of the concern of the stakeholders for requirement of additional qualification in the 
Central Register as an application in such manner and payment of such fees as may be 
prescribed by th e Central Government.  In such manner that registration to multiple 
categories can be made by a profession only when he/she obtains the required additional 
qualification. He/she should have completed the required number of hours and years of 
study in that particular additional allied healthcare profession.  
4.16.5 The clause is adopted without any change. 
 
CLAUSE 19 
4.17 Clause 19 deals with Interim Council 
4.17.1 Clause 19 (1) reads as under: 
19. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be but within sixty days from the 
date on which this Act receives the assent of the President, constitute an interim Council, 
till a regular Council is constituted under section 3. 

102 
 
SUGGESTIONS:  
4.17.2 The following are the suggestions on clause 19  
(i) The Indian Association of Physiotherapists, All India Occupational Therapists’ 
Association (AIOTA) and Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) 
submitted that the tenure of Interim council should be fixed and within that tenure a 
regular council should start functio ning. The tenure of Interim Council should not be 
more than 2 years 
(ii) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) also suggested stipulating 
time frame of two years to set up an Elected Council/ Regular Council.  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
4.17.3 With respect to fixing the tenure of the interim Council the Ministry submitted that since 
there are so many professional categories, setting up the administrative framework will be 
tedious for the Interim Council; the timeline is thus subject to change in  case of any sudden 
leadership or membership change among others. However, two years can be targeted to complete 
the envisioned activities without specifying the same in the Bill.  
 
4.17.4 On a suggestion for stipulating time frame of two years to set up a n Council/ Regular 
Council, the Ministry submitted that the suggestion may be considered if the committee so 
recommends.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
4.17.5 The Committee is in agreement with the views of stakeholders that tenure of interim 
Commission s hould have a fixed tenure. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to specify, in the Bill, that the tenure of the proposed interim Commission should 
not be more than two years. The Committee also recommends the interim Commission to 
devise a qua lity control mechanism for the allied health professionals and ensure 
standardization of education and institutes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
this interim Commission should complete all its entrusted task within that stipulated 
period and the National Commission must convene its functions, thereafter, it should stand 
dissolved after two years.  The Committee, therefore, stand dissolved after two years. 
However, in exceptional circumstances, the tenure of Interim Commission may be extended 
by the Central Government for one year but not beyond that period. The Committee, 
therefore recommends the Ministry to specify the tenure of the Interim Commission during 
the transitional phase and in order to set up institutional framework and other necessar y 
task. The Committee also recommends to add a proviso regarding the extension of the 
tenure for one year under exceptional circumstances.  
4.17.6 Clause 19 (2) reads as under: 
(2) The interim Council constituted under sub -section (1) shall consist of the following, 
namely:—  
(a) Additional Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare—Chairperson;  
(b) Joint Secretary to the Government of In dia in the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare in charge of Medical Education—member;  

103 
 
(c) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of AYUSH —
member;  
(d) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development—member;  
(e) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment—member;  
(f) Joint Secretary to the Government of India i n the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship—member;  
(g) One representative of the Ministry of Defence not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India in the Directorate General of Armed Forces 
Medical Services—member;  
(h) One representative of NITI Aayog not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India — member;  
(i) One representative of the Directorate General of Health Services not below the 
rank of Deputy Director General—member;  
(j) One representative of the Dental Council of India not below the rank of Deputy 
Secretary—member;  
(k) One representative of the Indian Nursing Council not below the rank of 
Deputy Secretary—member;  
(l) One representative of the Medical Council of India not below the rank of 
Deputy Secretary—member;  
(m) One representative of the Pharmacy Council of India not below the rank of 
Deputy Secretary—member;  
(n) One representative of the Rehabilitation Council of India not below the rank 
of Deputy Secretary—member; and  
(o) One representative of the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board not below the rank 
of Deputy Secretary—member. 
SUGGESTIONS 
4.17.7 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
(i) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) suggested ensur ing post 
of Registrar/ CEO in the Interim Council also. 
 
(ii) All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) submitted that the 
representation of OTs must be included in the interim council in the following 
manner:- (i) At least 4 OT members nominated by the existing Government bodies, 
and (ii) Minimum 2 nominated from existing national association – AIOTA  
 
(iii) Indian Association of Physiotherapists and one stakeholder suggested inclusion of 
four physiotherapists in the interim Council  
 

104 
 
(iv) Indian Medical Association (Headquarter and Kerala Chapter) submitted that a s per 
this clause; sub clause (l) and (n), the Deputy Secretary of Medical Council of India 
and Rehabilitation Council of India who may not be a medical professional are 
designated to be nominated to the proposed interim council. This clause has to be 
modified and the members of Medical Council of India and Rehabilitation Council 
of India who are nominated by the respective councils should be included. The 
Association also suggested removal of JS AYUSH from the Council as this Bill 
comes under modern medicine.  
 
(v) United Physiotherapy Associations of India, Physiotherapy Forum and one 
stakeholder suggested that under Clause 19(2) (p), interim Council should include 
one physiotherapy representative from existing State Physiotherapy Councils not 
below the rank o f executive member. It was submitted that under Clause 19(2)(q), 
the interim Council should include two Physiotherapist each from central 
Government hospitals and autonomous organization to be nominated by Central 
Government. (To raise the concerns of Physiotherapists in the Government)  
 
(vi) Lokmanya Medical College of Physiotherapy, Mumbai, All Assam Physiotherapy 
Association (AAPA) and one stakeholder submitted that Interim Council to include 
one member from professions. 
 
(vii) Joint Forum of Medical Technologists  of India (JFMTI) also submitted that 
professional members from respective streams should be part of interim Council 
and unnecessary inclusion should be removed. 
 
(viii) Society of Indian Radiographers (SIR) suggested to include Allied and healthcare 
professionals in the interim council too as it is related to their profession and 
include three members from SIT in the interim committee  
 
(ix) Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association requested for an Interim Council - Formation 
of interim elected/ nominated physiotherapy board  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.17.8 On ensuring post of Registrar/ CEO in the Interim Council, the Ministry submitted that 
the role of interim Council is to set up administrative structure of the Council and is expected to 
have limited tenure.  On representation of OTs & Physiotherapists in the interim council and 
adding clause 19(2)(p) and clause 19(2)(q) in the Bill, the Ministry submitted that the suggestion 
is not agreeable as the role of interim Council is to set up administrative structure of the Council 
and establish processes for the smoo th functioning of the regular Council. However, the 
Professional Advisory bodies may be instituted simultaneously during the same period to initiate 
technical activities related to the respective professions. The issue of numeric representation is 
normative. On suggestion of Indian Medical Association (Headquarter and Kerala Chapter), the 
Ministry submitted that the provision already exists for nomination from the stated bodies, 
however, the tenure shall be retained to ensure appropriate representation from  all the existing 
statutory bodies. On removal of JS AYUSH from the Council, the Ministry submitted that this 
may be considered if the committee so recommends.  
 
4.17.9 With regards to inclusion of one member from all the professions, the Ministry submitte d 
that the role of interim Council is to set up administrative structure of the Council. However, the 
Professional Advisory bodies may be instituted simultaneously during the same period to initiate 
technical activities related to the respective profession s. The Ministry further submitted that the 

105 
 
issue of numeric representation is normative. On a suggestion on establishing interim committee 
for Ophthalmic Sciences Professionals, the Ministry submitted that this may be considered if the 
committee so recomme nds. The Ministry further submitted that the Professional Advisory 
Boards may be formed in parallel to the Interim Council so that the work on specific 
requirements of professions may begin.  
 
4.17.10 On formation of interim elected/ nominated physiotherap y board, The Ministry 
submitted that the provision already exists; the details will be specified in the Rules. Rather, the 
provision of limiting the tenure of the Interim Council may be specified to ensure expedited 
constitution of the Council and the professional advisory bodies within a specified time frame.  
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.17.11 The Committee notes that this interim Commission will discharge the 
functions assigned to the Commission till the regular Commission is constituted by the 
Central Government. The Committee has also recommended that the maximum tenure of 
this interim Commis sion should be two years to set up the administrative structure. The 
Committee believes that there is a need to appoint an officer who will perform the same 
functions as the Secretary. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to make a 
provision to appoint a Secretary for efficient performance of the functions of the interim 
Commission.  
 
4.17.12 The Committee notes that this Commission is set to regulate the allied and 
healthcare professionals but none of the professional groups have been given 
representation in the interim Commission. The Committee agrees with the concerns of the 
stakeholders that professionals from different allied and healthcare professions should be 
part of the Interim Commission. The Committee therefore recommends the Ministry  to 
add representation from each recognised category. The Committee also recommends 
adding two persons each representing the recognised categories, namely, Medical 
Laboratory Sciences, Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic Technology, 
Ophthalmic Scien ces, Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy; and one person each 
representing the rest of the recognised categories listed in the Schedule. These members 
should have the required expertise and experience as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to explore the addition of 
experts in other fields whose experience will benefit the Interim Commission in better 
discharge of its responsibilities. 
 
4.17.13 The Committee is also of the view that representatives from  Ministry of 
AYUSH and Ministry of Defence should be removed from the composition. The Committee 
is of the view that representatives from Dental Council of  India, Indian Nursing Council 
and Pharmacy Council of India should also be removed from the interim Commission.  
 
4.17.14 The Clause may read as under: 
 
(2) The interim Commission constituted under sub -section (1) shall consist of the 
following, namely:—  
 
(a) Additional Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare—Chairperson;  

106 
 
(b) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare in charge of Allied Healthcare Education—member;  
(c) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development—member;  
(d) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment—member;  
(e) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship—member;  
(f) One representative of NMC not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the 
Government of India — member;  
(g) One representative of the Direc torate General of Health Services not below 
the rank of Deputy Director General—member;  
(h) One representative of the Rehabilitation Council of India not below the rank 
of Deputy Secretary—member; and  
(i) One representative of the Atomic Energy Regulator y Board not below the 
rank of Deputy Secretary—member. 
(j) Two persons each representing the recognised categories, namely, Medical 
Laboratory Sciences, Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic 
Technology, Ophthalmic Sciences, Physiotherapy and Occupatio nal 
Therapy; and one person each representing the rest of the recognised 
categories listed in the Schedule 
 
4.17.15 Clause 19 (3) reads as under: 
(3) The interim Council shall discharge the functions assigned to the Council till the 
regular Council is constituted by the Central Government. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.17.16 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
(i) The Indian Optometric Association, Government Optometrist Association, Uttar 
Pradesh, National Ophthalmic Association, Ophthal  India (State unit of NOA) and 
Indian Optometry Federation submitted that after "shall discharge the functions 
assigned to the Council till the regular Council is constituted by the Central 
Government", "within 60 days after its formation" may be inserted. 
 
(ii) Bihar State Samajwadi Party submitted that Interim Committee for Ophthalmic 
Sciences Professionals should be established within 60 days of notification of the Bill  
 
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.17.17 The Ministry submitted that the stakeholders' suggestion is not acceptable 
considering the timeline is subject to change in case of any sudden leadership or membership 
change among others, this may not be explicitly stated in the Bill, however, the aim wil l be to 
initiate the envisioned activities at the earliest, upon the passing of the Bill and Presidential 
assent.  
 
 
 
 

107 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.17.18 Though the Committee  is in agreement with the views of the Government, 
however the Committee recommends that necessary course of action must be taken at the 
earliest to ensure timely execution of procedural matters and the commencement of the 
functioning of the Commission wit hin stipulated time frame. The Committee has already 
recommended that the maximum tenure of the interim Commission should be two years 
which can be extended to one year but only under exceptional circumstances.  The 
Committee hopes that the regular Commission would commence its functioning within that 
stipulated period of two to three years.  
4.17.19 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 20 
4.18 Clause 20 deals with the Constitution and composition of State Allied  and Healthcare 
Council. 
4.18.1 Clause 20 (1) reads as under: 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.18.2 The following are the suggestion of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
4.18.3 Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) suggested renaming State 
Councils at par with Central Council’s nomenclature. 
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.18.4 The Ministry submitted that the issue of title of the Bill has been debated on multiple 
occasions, including specific recommendations by the 31 st DRSC of 2010 to ensure that all 
stakeholders and their concerns were addressed adequately as part of the title of the Bill. The 
current title has been arrived at, after large scale stakeholder consultation and thorough 
examination of global literature.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
4.18.5 The Committee is in agreement with the Ministry regarding the nomenclature of 
State Council and recommends retaining the nomenclature, "State Allied and Healthcare 
Council" 
4.18.6 Clause 20 (3) reads as under: 
(3) The State Council shall consist of a Chairperson, to be elected from amongst the 
members specified in clauses (d) and (e), and the following members, namely:—  
(a) One Director or Additional Director or Joint Director representing medical 
or health sciences in the State Government—member, ex officio;  
(b) Four persons from the following State Chapters, not below the rank of Deputy 
Secretary—member, ex officio — (i) Dental Council of India; (ii) Indian Nursing 
Council; (iii) Medical Council of India; and (iv) Pharmacy Council of India; 

108 
 
(c) Two persons from any medical colleges run by the State Government, not 
below the rank of Dean or Head of the Department—member, ex officio;  
(d) Two persons each representing the recognised categories, namely, Medical 
Laboratory Sciences, Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic Technology, 
Ophthalmic Sciences and Physiotherapy, and one person each representing the 
rest of the recognised categories listed in the Schedule, to be nominated by the 
State Government having s uch qualifications and experience as may be 
prescribed by the State Government—member; and  
(e) Two persons representing charitable institutions engaged in education or 
services in connection with any recognised category, to be nominated by the State 
Government having such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by 
the State Government—member 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.18.7 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on Clause 20(3):- 
(i) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) submitt ed ensuring Vice 
Chairperson in State Councils at par with Central Council. 
 
(ii) All Assam Physiotherapy Association (AAPA) Lokmanya Medical College of 
Physiotherapy, Mumbai and Nishita Meshram submitted that the Clause should be 
reframed as follows: 
 
i. The Council shall consist of a Chairperson, to be elected from amongst the members 
specified in clauses (d) and (e). Along with members specified in clauses (d) and (e) 
the following members will be voting members of the council  
 
(iii) One stakeholder submitted  that the suggestion given in regard to 3(3) may be 
considered for State Council also.  
 
(iv) With regards to clause 20(3) (b) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists 
(ISRT) suggested ensuring representation of Scientific bodies in State councils 
instead of other Council members  
 
(v) United Physiotherapy Associations of India and Physiothera py Forum have 
suggested the following changes in Clause 20(3)(b)  
 
Two persons from the following State Chapters, not below the rank of  
Deputy Secretary—member, ex officio— 
 
(i) Indian Nursing Council;  
(ii) Medical Council of India; and  
 
(State units DCI and PCI may be submerged under this Council as prescribed in 
the ISCO. Also requesting to amend the MCI and INC acts to add one 
physiotherapist as member to maintain reciprocal representation)  
 
(vi) Another stakeholder submitted that two persons from INC and MCI State councils of 
DCI and PCI may be subsumed under this council. MCI and INC Acts to be 

109 
 
amended to add one Physiotherapist as member to maintain reciprocal 
representation. 
(vii) Indian Medical Asso ciation (Headquarter and Kerala Chapter) submitted that in 
clause 3 (b) (iii): Deputy Secretary of Medical Council of India who may not be a 
medical professional is designated to be nominated to the proposed state council. 
This clause has to be modified an d the member of Medical Council of India who is 
nominated by the respective councils should be included. The Association further 
submitted that in clause 3 (d): It is stated that representation of 2 persons each has 
been given to some categories like medic al lab technologies, medical radiology etc 
and one person each representing other categories. There should be equal 
representation from all categories of Allied Healthcare Professionals. It also 
submitted that in clause 3 (e): The inclusion of ‘representat ives from charitable 
institutions’ engaged in the field are unwarranted. 
(viii) With respect to Clause 20 (3) (d), Indian Society of Radiographers and 
Technologists (ISRT) suggested to Ensure minimum five representatives for 
categories like Radiological Technolog y and Medical Lab Technology in State 
Councils strictly through election. 
(ix) All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) submitted that composition 
of the Council must include OTs in the clause, with minimum 6 or equal number of 
representation as of other professions. At least 4 or as in other professions, members 
from institutions/ organisations of report representing OT may be nominated by the 
Central Government apart from those mentioned above  
(x) United Physiotherapy Associations of India, Physioth erapy Forum and Pawan 
Rohilla suggested the addition of Dentist and Pharmacist (As per ISCO and as per 
Article 14 of the constitution – similar application of the same laws to all persons 
who are similarly situated)  
(xi) Indian Association of Physician Assista nts (IAPA) suggested to consider inclusion 
of two representatives from the profession  
(xii) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) submitted that the Status 
of Charitable Institutions nominated in the Council may be clearly mentioned  
(xiii) United P hysiotherapy Associations of India, Physiotherapy Forum and Pawan 
Rohilla suggested the following changes in Clause 20 (3) (e): 
 
Two persons, eligible to be member of the council, representing charitable 
institutions engaged in education or services in connection with any recognised 
category, to be nominated by the Central Government having such 
qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government–member  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE 
4.18.8 With regards to Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT)’s suggestion 
regarding Vice Chairperson in State Councils, the Ministry submitted that the provision already 
exists and the concern raised will be dealt as per Clause 24(2) . With regards to All Assam 
Physiotherapy Association (AAPA)’s suggestion, the Ministry submitted that the provision 
already exists. The Ministry further submitted that Clause 24 (3) wh ich specifies that - All 
questions which come up before any meeting of the Council shall be decided by a majority of the 
members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his 
absence, the member presiding, shall hav e a second or casting vote. Thereby, all the members 
will have voting rights.  
 

110 
 
4.18.9 The Ministry submitted as the Bill currently only states healthcare or allied health 
professionals as per WHO classification of health workers, support workers and manag ement 
professionals have been kept out of the purview of this Bill, given their non -clinical roles. 
However, as per clause 66, this is subject to change in future. All new categories or professionals 
that are added to the schedule will automatically be eli gible for registration in the Council, and 
associated membership positions, including the Chairperson.  
 
4.18.10 The Ministry submitted that Members from regulators such AERB, MCI, INC, 
DCI have been included in this Bill to ensure multidisciplinary clinic al care inputs as per global 
standards, by a larger group of stakeholders. Other relevant bodies have been included through 
Ministry representation - UGC- HRD Ministry and ICMR and National Council of Clinical 
Establishment– MoHFW. MoS&T is not relevant in this context as they deal with basic sciences 
and not modern medicine. With regards to amendments in Clause 20(3)(b), the Ministry 
submitted that the suggestion is  not recommended as the members from MCI, INC, DCI have 
been included in this Bill to ensure  multidisciplinary clinical care inputs as per global standards, 
by a larger group of stakeholders. DCI and PCI cannot be merged as these are existing Councils.  
 
4.18.11 With regards to modification in clause 20(3)(b) iii, the Ministry submitted that the 
provision already exists for nomination from the stated body. With regards to ensuring minimum 
five representatives for categories like Radiological Technology and Medical Lab Technology in 
State Councils strictly through election, the Ministry submitted t hat as the representation of any 
profession on the Council is normative.  
 
4.18.12 With regards to representation from all recognised category in the State Council, 
the Ministry submitted that this is not recommended as  currently, the government does not h ave 
any authentic estimates of professions, other than what is being reported by associations or 
similar bodies. The Ministry in response to suggestion of adding Dentist and Pharmacists in the 
bill submitted that the current Bill only aims to regulate unre gulated allied and healthcare 
profession. Dentist and Pharmacist have existing Councils.  
 
4.18.13 The Ministry in response to add two persons “eligible to be members of the 
council” in the clause 20 (3)(e) submitted that the suggestion may be considered i f the 
Committee so recommends. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.18.14 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that clause 24(2) ensures 
that in case of absence of the chairperson, any other member chosen by the members 
present from amongst themselves at the meeting shall preside over the meeting. Therefore, 
the Committee believes there is no need to add the nomenclature of vice chairperson in the 
State Council.  
 
4.18.15 The Committee is in the agreement with provisions of the Bill that the 
Chairmanship of the Council should be from amongst the members specified in  clauses (d) 
and (e). However, the Chairperson, should be an allied healthcare professional of 
outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity and integrity, possessing a 
postgraduate degree in any profession of recognised category of allied health sci ences from 
any University.  
 
4.18.16 The need of the hour is to raise the status of the allied health sector from 
medical dominance, the Committee, therefore, is of the view that the ex -officio membership 

111 
 
from Dental Council of India, Indian Nursing Council and National Medical 
Commission(Medical Council of India) should be removed from the State Allied Councils.  
 
4.18.17 The Committee is also of the view that equal representation from all the 
professional categories is not possible as the numbers of professionals in each category is 
not equal. The Committee, therefore, recommends that once the State specific data of 
professionals is obtained, the membership from each category in the Council may be 
determined accordingly.  
 
4.18.18 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that Dentists and 
Pharmacists are regulated by Dental Council of India and Pharmacy Council of  India 
respectively; therefore, there is no need to add Dentists and Pharmacists in the State Allied 
Council.  
 
4.18.19 The Committee also recommends adding representation of two from 
Occupational Therapy in clause 20(3)(d) considering the number of Occupa tional 
therapists on the pattern of representation in National Commission. 
 
4.18.20 The Committee notes that there is ambiguity regarding the kind and 
eligibility of charitable institutes that have to be included in clause 20(3)(e). The 
Committee, therefor e, recommends the Ministry to make clear provisions regarding the 
charitable institutes so that any conflict of interest is avoided. The Committee also 
recommends that the clause 20(3)(e) may be amended as follows: 
 
Two persons, eligible to be member of th e council, representing charitable institutions 
engaged in education or services in connection with any recognised category, to be 
nominated by the Central Government having such qualifications and experience as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government–member  
 
4.18.21 The following are the general suggestions of the stakeholders on Clause 20:- 
 
(i) Lokmanya Medical College of Physiotherapy, Mumbai, All Assam Physiotherapy 
Association (AAPA) and one stakeholder suggested the following changes in the 
composition of the State Council. 
 
(a)  Include elected membership in the composition in the ratio  of 60:40 Government 
Nominated 
 
(b)  Increase representation of Physiotherapists in the Council wherein two 
Physiotherapist to be elected from amongst the registered physiotherapy 
professionals of respective State register; One Physiotherapist to be nominated by 
State Government from respecti ve state register; One Physiotherapy teacher to be 
nominated from recognised Physiotherapy institute of the respective State; 
Additionally change the tenure of members and the President to 5 year or at least 
3 years  
 
(ii) Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association h as also suggested to include elected membership 
in the composition in the ratio of 60:40, 60% elected and 40% Government nominated in 
the State Council. The Association, further submitted that the State or UTs where 
Councils do not exist, State Councils sh all be established in accordance with the central 
council with at least 14 members and not exceeding 20 members and to maintain the 

112 
 
above ratio. The Chairperson for the first term of the State Council may be the Principal 
Secretary, thereafter the chairperson shall be elected within the members of the Council.   
 
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE 
 
4.18.22 The Ministry submitted that the Council structure is envisaged to have over 70 
percent non-ex officio members at Centre and 75 percent at the State Council representing allied 
and healthcare professionals. The process of election or nomination of the non -ex officio 
members will be as per the Rules prescribed by the Central Government to be drafted by the 
Interim Council. This may be considered while drafting the Rules. The details of the constitution 
and composition of the State Council has been specified as per Clause 20 (3). The scope of the 
existing statutory Councils at State/UT will be expanded to include unregulated professions 
under its ambit, wherein t here exist Physiotherapy as well as Allied Council at State/UT, the 
State Government may decide on merging the bodies/ strengthen the more stable body with 
additional resources. The Ministry submitted that the representation of any profession on the 
Council is normative. The zonal distribution has not be considered at this time but it may 
considered for Professional Advisory Bodies.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
 
4.18.23 The Committee agrees with the views of the stakeholders that there should be 
more rep resentation of the professionals rather than the ex -officio members. The 
Committee also understands that ex -officio membership is also important to establish a 
smooth administrative setup. The Committee recommends the Ministry to set a balance 
between the elected and ex -officio members and recommends that the clause may be 
amended as follows: 
 
(3) The State Council shall consist of a Chairperson, to be nominated from amongst 
the members specified in clauses (c) and (d), and the following members, namely:—  
(a) One Director or Additional Director or Joint Director representing medical 
or health sciences in the State Government—member, ex officio;  
(b) Two persons from any medical colleges run by the State Government, not 
below the rank of Dean or Head of the Department—member, ex officio;  
(c) Two persons each representing the recognised categories, namely, Medical 
Laboratory Sciences, Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic 
Technology, Ophthalmic Sciences ,  Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy 
and one person each representing the rest of the recognized categories listed in 
the Schedule, to be nominated by the State Government having such 
qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by the State Gove rnment—
member; and  
(d) Two persons, eligible to be member of the council, representing charitable 
institutions (but not from any other NGO) engaged in education or services in 
connection with any recognised category, to be nominated by the State 
Government having such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by 
the State Government—member. 
4.18.24 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 

113 
 
CLAUSE 21 
4.19 Clause 21 deals with Term of office and conditions of service of members. 
4.19.1 Clause 21 (1) reads as under: 
21. (1) The members nominated under clauses (d) and (e) of sub -section (3) of section 20 
shall hold office for a term not exceeding two years, as the State Government may notify 
in this behalf, from the date on which they enter upon their office. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.19.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on Clause 21:- 
Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association, Indian Society of Radiographers and 
Technologists (ISRT) and one stakeholder submitted that the term of office of members 
may be increased to five years. It was also submitted that the term of President may be 
increased to five years, or at least three years.  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.19.3 The Ministry submitted that the term of a member is extendable to 6 years (which is more 
than recommended 4 years) as the same member may be nominated for three terms of two years 
each consecutively, as per clause 21(2). The Ministry further submitted that by virtue of this the 
Chairman can also have a tenure upto 6 years. There is no “President” position.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
4.19.4 The Committee observes that the term of the members and the Chairperson is 
already extendable to six years. Hence increasing the term of office for the members and 
chairperson is unwarranted.  The Committee is, therefore, in agreement with view of the 
Ministry.   
4.19.5 The clause is adopted without any change.  
 
CLAUSE 24 
4.20 Clause 24 deals with Meetings of State Council. 
4.20.1 Clause 24 (2) reads as under: 
(2) The Chairperson or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of the State 
Council, any other member chosen by the members present from amongst themselves at 
the meeting shall preside over the meeting. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.20.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on Clause 24: 

114 
 
(i) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technolo gists (ISRT) in clause 24(2) 
suggested insertion of word Vice -Chairperson in State Council as proposed for 
Central Council. 
 
(ii) Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association submitted that the minutes of proceedings 
shall be recorded in a book to be kept for the purpose and names of members of 
the Council present there at shall be entered in the minute book; and shall be 
signed in confirmation by the presiding authority in the same or next meeting. A 
copy of the minutes of proceeding shall be forwarded to the Cent ral Government 
within ten days from the date of confirmation. 
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.20.3 With regards to insertion of word Vice-Chairperson in the Clause, the Ministry submitted 
that the provision already exists as per the provision of Clause 24(2).  The Ministry with regards 
to recording the minutes of the proceedings submitted that the provision already exists and the 
details will be specified in the Rules.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
4.20.4 The Committee observes that clause 24(2) clearly specifies that when the 
Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the State Council, any other member chosen 
by the members present from amongst themselves at the meeting shall preside over the 
meeting. Therefore the Committee believes the provision reg arding vice -chairperson is 
unnecessary. The Committee, however, agreeing with the views of the Ministry, 
recommends the Ministry to make clear provision regarding recording the minutes of the 
meetings in the Rules.  
4.20.5 The clause is adopted without any change.  
 
CLAUSE 26 
4.21 Clause 26 deals with Officers and other employees of State Council. 
4.21.1 Clause 26 (1) reads as under: 
26. (1) Subject to such rules as may be made by the State Government in this behalf, the 
State Council may appoint a Chief Executive Officer and such other employees as it may 
think necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under the Act. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
4.21.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on Clause 26: 
 
(i) United Physiotherapy Associations of India, Physiotherapy Forum and Pawan Rohilla 
suggested that subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this 
behalf, the Council may appoint a Secretary or Registrar and other officers and 
employees as it may think necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under 
the Act  
 

115 
 
(ii) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) also suggested that the 
clause should ensure a Registrar/ CEO in all State Councils as proposed for Central 
Council  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.21.3 The Ministry submitted that the Council structure is envisioned to be one of a body 
corporate, i.e. headed by a Chief Executive Officer and other staff. This would ensure a more 
agile structure where performance and outcomes may be better managed, going aw ay from the 
traditional academic structure that has been followed in all the existing regulators in Health.  The 
Ministry during the meeting held for clause -by-clause consideration of the Bill, agreed to the 
suggestions for constitution of State Council Secretariat to be headed by a Secretary.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.21.4 The Committee observes that clause 26(1) provides for the appointment of a Chief 
Executive Officer and such other employees as it may think necessary for the efficient 
performance of its functions under the Act. The Committee  is of the view that since in the 
other legislations, i.e. NMC Act 2019, the NCISM Bill 2019 and the NCH bill 2019 meant 
for structural reforms in the health sector, the Secretariat is to be headed b y the Secretary, 
therefore, changing the nomenclature in the present Bill does not sound logical. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the State Government should appoint a Secretary 
and the clause may be amended as follows: 
 
26. (1) Subject to such r ules as may be made by the State Government in this behalf, 
the State Council may appoint a Secretary and such other employees as it may think 
necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under the Act. 
 
4.21.5 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted.  
 
CLAUSE 27 
4.22 Clause 27 deals with the functions of State Council. 
4.22.1 Clause 27 (c) reads as under: 
27. It shall be the duty of the State Council to take all such steps as it may think fit for 
ensuring coordinated and integrated development of education and maintenance of the 
standards of delivery of services under this Act and for the purposes of performing its 
functions, the State Council may— 
 
(c) ensure uniform entry examination with common counselling for admission into the 
allied and healthcare institutions at the diploma, undergraduate, postgraduate and 
doctoral level under this Act; 
 
SUGGESTIONS 
 
4.22.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on Clause 27: 
 
(i) United Physiother apy Associations of India, Physiotherapy Forum submitted that the 
clause should provide for or cause to be provided for uniform entry examination with 
common counselling for admission into the allied and healthcare institutions at the 

116 
 
diploma, undergraduat e, postgraduate and doctoral level in the manner as may be 
specified by the concerned sub -council; (the aptitude and skill requirement for each 
recognised profession differs. Model curriculum for physiotherapy recommended for 
abolition of diploma)  
 
(ii) One stakeholder also suggested to follow uniform entry examination and admission 
procedures as specified by the concerned sub-councils  
 
(iii) All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) suggested that there should be 
separate entry examinations and counselling for healthcare professionals of OT and PTs 
alone and separate each for other healthcare and allied professionals.  
 
 
(iv) United Physiotherapy Associations of India, Physiotherapy Forum and the stakeholder 
submitted that the following change amendments may be made in the clause: 
 
It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such steps as it may think fit for ensuring 
coordinated and integrated development of education and maintenance of the standards 
of machines, materials and delivery of services under this Act and for the purp oses of 
performing its functions, the Council may—  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE:  
 
4.22.3 The Ministry with regards to a separate or uniform entry exam for the professions 
submitted that the Bill takes care of 53 professions under 15 different categories and thus it is not 
feasible to conduct separate entry examination and counseling for all su ch professions. 
Considering the minimum entry requirement for all the professions is same, common entrance 
tests (CET may be conducted for entry level courses. This has been done even for medical and 
dental courses.  
 
4.22.4 The Ministry, however, submitte d that it may be even more efficient to expand NEET 
and to have counseling for allied and healthcare courses for candidates, after the first set of 
students who qualify for MBBS. It was submitted that the detailed deliberation may be 
conducted with technic al experts each representing the professions, to formulate the process 
under regulations.  
 
4.22.5 The Ministry with regards to Adding  ’standards of machines, materials and delivery of 
service' in the clause submitted that the provision already exists. The reference to “machines and 
materials” is not directly made since it is assumed to be a part of the “delivery of services”.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.22.6 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that conducting a different test 
for each category at the entry level would become not only a cumbersome process but a 
herculean task as well. The Committee notes that the minimum requirement for all the 
professions is the same, therefore a common entrance test may be conducted for entry level 
courses. The Committee has already recommended that a common entrance test (CET) 
may be conducted. The Ministry submitted that expanding NEET is also an option; 
however, the Committee notes that many professional courses do not have Science as the 
eligibility criteria. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to decide the exam 
pattern considering the students from all the streams and devise a Common Entrance T est 
(CET) for entry into the allied and healthcare professional courses. 

117 
 
 
4.22.7 The Committee also recommends that this Common Entrance Test should only be 
conducted under the overall supervision of the National Commission on Allied and 
Healthcare Profession. The proposed Commission will coordinate between the State Allied 
Councils and conduct one uniform entrance exam for all over the country.  
 
4.22.8 Clause 27 (d) reads as under: 
27. It shall be the duty of the State Council to take all such steps as it may think fit for 
ensuring coordinated and integrated development of education a nd maintenance of the 
standards of delivery of services under this Act and for the purposes of performing its 
functions, the State Council may— 
(d) ensure uniform exit or licensing examination for the allied and healthcare 
professionals under this Act; 
 
 
SUGGESTIONS 
 
4.22.9 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on Clause 27(d) :- 
 
(i) United Physiotherapy Associations of India, Physiotherapy Forum and a stakeholder  
suggested following the procedures prescribed by concerned sub -council for exit  or 
licentiate exam (the aptitude and skills varies as per NSQF and model curriculum)   
 
(ii) All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) also suggested separate exit 
and licensing examinations for each profession as the qualification, training and 
curriculum of each profession is unique and different from others.  
 
(iii) United Physiotherapy Associations of India, Physiotherapy Forum and a stakeholder 
suggested the following to be inserted under clause 27 (h) to ensure holistic 
regulations: (h) Provide minimum standards framework for machineries, materials 
and services.  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.22.10 With regards to a uniform exit or licensing examination, the Ministry submitted 
that the details will be specified in the regulations as provisioned in the clause, in consultation 
with the professional advisory bodies (not sub -council). The Ministry further submitted that it is 
understood that the licensing standards will differ by profession and thus there will be separate 
exams. With regards to adding clause 27 (h), the Ministry submitted that the provision already 
exists The reference to “ machines and materials” is not directly made since it is assumed to be a 
part of the “delivery of services”.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.22.11 The Committee has already recommended for a National Exit Test. The 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that the proposed National Commission for 
Allied and Healthcare Profession would be tasked with the responsibility of conducting a 
National Exit Tes t at all India level rather than State Allied and Healthcare Council 
conducting separate uniform tests for each State. To bring uniformity and standardisation 
in the Allied education and professional practice, conducting a uniform Exit Test is more 
important. The proposed National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Profession would 

118 
 
be the apex agency and will co -ordinate among the different State Allied Councils and 
ensure a National Exit Test for each profession. 
4.22.12 The Committee also recommends the  Ministry to add "(h) Provide minimum 
standards framework for machineries, materials and services" as one of the functions of the 
State Allied and Healthcare Council 
4.22.13 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted.  
 
CLAUSE 28 
4.23 Clause 28 deals with the Professional advisory bodies of State Council. 
4.23.1 Clause 28 reads as under: 
28. (1) The State Council shall constitute as many professional advisory bodies as may be 
necessary to examine specific issues relating to one or more recognised categories and 
recommend or advise the State Council thereon and also undertake any other activity as 
may be authorised by the State Council. 
 
 (2) A professional advisory body constituted under sub-section (1) shall be presided over 
by a member to be nominated by the Chairperson of the State Council, from amongst the 
member referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (3) of section 20. 
 
(3) Where there is no representation from a particular recognised category to chair the 
professional advisory body, the Chairperson of the State Council may nominate any other 
member of the State Council to chair the professional advisory body. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
4.23.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on Clause 28:- 
(i) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) suggested renaming 
Professional Advisory Body in State Council as Professional Advisory Board  
 
(ii) United Physiotherapy Associations of India, Physiotherapy Forum and a stakeholder 
suggested the following changes in the clause 28(1): 
 
The Council shall constitute sub -councils for each recognised profession to 
recommend or advise the Council thereon and also undertake any other activity as 
may be authorised by the Council. Its recommendations will be binding on matters in 
respect to its professional identity and practice.  
 
(iii) United Physiotherapy Associations of India, Physiotherapy Forum and a stakeholder 
suggested the following changes in the clause 28 (2): 
 
(2) A sub -council constituted under sub -section (1) shall be presided over by 
Chairman and consist of not less than six members elected from among the concerned 
professionals whose name entered in the Central register under sub -section (1) of 
Section 12  
 

119 
 
(iv) All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) submitted that the 
chairperson of the healthcare professional groups, should only be from the same 
profession for which the advisory body is constituted and also composition of the 
professional advisory bodies should only contain individuals belonging to the specific 
healthcare professional group, specifically in case of OTs and accordingly sub -clause 
3 should be modified.  
 
(v) United Physiotherapy Associations of India and Physiotherapy Forum submitted th at 
in case there is no representation from a particular recognised category it may be 
erased as Void ab -initio. A stakeholder also submitted that the clause 28(3) may be 
removed altogether. 
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.23.3 The Ministry with regards to renaming Professional Advisory Body in State Council as 
Professional Advisory Board submitted that this may be considered if the committee so 
recommends.  
 
4.23.4 The Ministry in response to amendments to clause 28(1) submitted that it is not agreeable 
as the idea of empowering the Council to establish professional advisory bodies is aimed at 
independent decision making by the professional bodies for their respective professions. The 
mandate of PAB will be to advice the Council on the specific issues related to their profession.   
The Ministry in response to amendments to clause 28(2) submitted that the provision already 
exists and the details will be specified in the Rules. The Ministry also submitted that the 
suggestion of All I ndia Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) has already been 
considered. 
 
4.23.5 In response to a suggestion on removal of clause 28(3), the Ministry submitted that the 
modalities regarding the number of professional advisory bodies and their specifi c composition 
etc. is expected to be made with wide technical considerations based on reasonably sound and 
reliable estimates of each professional category received. Some categories that are very minimal 
in number at this time may need to be merged with an  existing group, for administrative 
purposes. To erase a group as void ab -initio would be degrading the value of a particular 
profession or group and this is not desirable.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.23.6 The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion of ISRT and response of the 
Ministry thereto on renaming the Professional Advisory Body to Professional Advisory 
Board (PAB) rather than sub-council as suggested by other stakeholders. The Committee is 
of t he view that the State Allied and Healthcare Council may constitute Professional 
Advisory Boards to examine specific issues, whenever the need arises, so that the advice of 
experts from professionals could be sought. The Committee agrees with the view of t he 
Ministry that the mandate of the PAB should be to advice the Council on issues related to 
their profession. The Committee also recommends that the Professional Advisory Board 
thus formed should be chaired by the professional of that recognised category.  In case of 
multiple professions in the category, the chairperson should be appointed on rotation from 
each category. The Committee is also in agreement with the Ministry for not deleting 
clause 28 (3) and terming the category as void -initio, as the same w ould definitely degrade 
the value of a particular profession.  
 
4.23.7 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 

120 
 
CLAUSE 29 
4.24 Clause 29 deals with the State Allied and Healthcare Professionals’ Register 
4.24.1 Clause 29 (1) reads as under: 
29. (1) The State Allied and Healthcare Professionals’ Council shall cause to maintain a 
register of persons in separate parts in each of the recognised categories to be known as 
the State Allied and Healthcare Professionals’ Register which shall co ntain information 
including the names of persons who possess qualifications relating to any of their 
respective recognised categories, in the manner as may be specified by the regulations 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.24.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on Clause 29:- 
(i) Indian Optometric Association submitted that the phrase " in the manner as may be 
specified by the regulation " may be omitted and phrase " with detail of diploma and 
degree of academic qualification and institutions prior learning skill and experiences of 
all allied and health care professional covered under this Bill " may be added.  
 
(ii) Indian Optometry Federation submitted that Instead of ‘ …..in the manner as may be 
specified by the regulations ’ use ‘ with details of diploma and degree of academic 
qualification and institutions (Government/ Private or NGO), prior learning skill and 
experiences of Allied and Healthcare Professionals covered under AHP Bill’  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.24.3 The Ministry submitted that the suggestion may be considered if the committee so 
recommends. The Ministry pleaded that the phrase 's pecified by the regulation' must be retained, 
as the details will be specified and considered for inclusion in the Regulations.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.24.4 The Committee is of the view that the State Register to be created under Clause 29 
should be a live register of qualified professionals and should be constantly updated. This 
register should be segmented on the basis of different educational standards, qua lifications 
viz, diploma, degree, doctoral level, specializations etc.  
 
4.24.5 The Committee agrees with the recommendation of the stakeholder that the details 
of diploma and degree of academic qualification and institutions prior learning skill and 
experiences of all allied and health care professionals covered under this Bill should also be 
included in the live register. The Committee therefore recommends the Ministry to remove 
"in the manner as may be specified by the regulation " and add " with detail of  diploma and 
degree of academic qualification and institutions, prior learning skill, training and 
experiences of all allied and health care professional covered under this Act."  
 
4.24.6 The Committee reiterates its recommendations that NGOs should not be  allowed to 
grant degree/diploma to allied and healthcare professionals and only the degrees/diploma 
granted by accredited colleges/institutions should be eligible as allied and healthcare 
qualification. 
 
4.24.7 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 

121 
 
CLAUSE 30 
4.25 Clause 30 deals with Registration in State Register 
4.25.1 Clause 30(1) reads as under: 
30. (1) A person shall be entitled, on an application and on payment of the fee prescribed 
by the State Government, to have his name entered on the State Register if he resides in 
the State and holds a recognised allied and healthcare qualification. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.25.2 The Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) suggested to  limit initial 
registration as five years in State Council registers also and fix qualifications through regulations  
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.25.3 The provision already exists as the details will be specified in the Rules.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.25.4 The Committee agrees with the view of the stakeholders that the time limit for 
initial registration may be prescribed. The Committee, therefore recommends the Ministry 
to set the time limit for registration and also make specific guidelines regarding updation of 
any additional qualifications in the State register, if acquired by the professionals, thereby 
making the State Register, a live register.   
 
4.25.5 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 32 
 
4.26 Clause 32 deals with Renewal fees 
 
4.26.1 Clause 32(1) reads as under: 
32. (1) There shall be paid in every five years to the State Council, such fee in such 
manner and with such conditions as may be prescribed by the State Government for 
renewal of name of allied and healthcare professional in the State Register 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.26.2 The Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) suggested ensuring the 
continuation Education and Training for renewal of Registration after initial registration of five 
years.  
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.26.3 The provision already exists as the details will be specified in the Rules.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.26.4 The Committee believes that the allied and healthcare professionals should be 
encouraged to constantly update their skills with the changing times and adopt modern 

122 
 
tools and technology. Therefore, the Committee strongly supports continuation of 
education a nd especially training workshops for the professionals. The Committee, also 
notes that with a profession as dynamic as allied healthcare, there is an urgent need to 
constantly upgrade oneself to provide the best healthcare service. The Committee therefore 
recommends the Ministry to make explicit guidelines regarding every profession in the 
Rules that will have to be mandatorily fulfilled for renewal of registration on payment of 
the requisite fees.  
4.26.5 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 35 
4.27 Clause 35 deals with the recognition of persons offering services prior to commencement 
of Act 
4.27.1 Clause 35 reads as under: 
35. Every person who offers his services in any of the recognised categories on or before 
the commencement of this Act shall be allowed to register under the provisions of this Act 
within two years from such commencement in the manner as may be specified by the 
regulations. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
4.27.2 Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) suggested ensuring Minimum 
Qualifications of persons offering services prior to commencement of Act and to adopt Exit 
Exams for registration. 
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.27.3 The Ministry pleaded that the provision f or registration of professionals practicing before 
the commencement of the Act already exists. The Ministry maintained that  the licensing 
standards will differ by profession and thus there will be separate exams. The Ministry further 
stated that the detail s will be specified in the regulations as provisioned in the clause, in 
consultation with the professional advisory body. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.27.4 The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that only qualified professionals 
are registered. The students pursuing the allied healthcare courses, will have to pass the 
EXIT exam to practice. Similarly the professionals already practicing should also u ndergo 
some quality test that verifies their credibility. The Ministry, while registration of such 
professionals should set profession -specific licensing standards that is strictly adhered to.  
The Committee in this connection has already recommended for a  Minimum Qualifying 
Test (MQT) that should be incorporated under a Chapter on National Examination. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to incorporate a provision for skill development 
and training course for updating their knowledge as per the late st scientific and 
technological advancement followed by Minimum Qualifying Test (MQT) so that their 
knowledge base is widened as well as updated. 
 

123 
 
4.27.5 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
CLAUSE 36 
4.28 Clause 36 deals with the Recognition of allied and healthcare institutions and reciprocity. 
4.28.1 Clause 36 (1) and Clause 36 (3) reads as under: 
36. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, any corresponding qualification granted by 
the institutions outside India shall be the recognised allied and healthcare qualifications 
as may be specified by the regulations. 
 
(3) The Central Government, after consultation with the Council, may by notification, 
direct that the corresponding qualifications referred to in sub -section (1) in re spect of 
which a scheme of reciprocity is not in force, shall be recognised for the purposes of this 
Act or shall be so only when granted after a specified date: 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
4.28.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on Clause 36:- 
 
(i) One stakeholder with respect to clause 36(1) suggested that instead of only Indian 
citizens, consideration may be made for any person confirming to the requirements.  
Also the qualifications granted by institutions outside India may be recognized if 
approved and recognized by the statutory body in that country. Scheme of reciprocity 
may be an unending process, better to accept approval by statutory body in respective 
countries.  
 
(ii) With respect to clause 36(3), it was submitted that the  clause limits the inst itution and 
period where such candidates could be permitted which may lead to malpractices. Act 
should provide for open ended 10 -year window subject to mechanisms of checks and 
balances for enforcement of such period.  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
4.28.3 The Ministry with regards to amendments suggested in clause 36(1) submitted that it is 
not agreeable as the Bill by virtue of its title is applicable to the citizens of India. The scheme of 
reciprocity is a time tested method of approvals and is currently followed  in most developed 
countries around the world. The same rigor that is applied to Indian healthcare professionals 
elsewhere in the world needs to be followed for those coming to India and seeking educational or 
practice rights. The Ministry with regards to amendments suggested in clause 36(3) submitted 
that the Bill has undergone a through vetting by Legislative and Legal Affairs for technicalities 
and the suggestion of the stakeholder is not feasible, therefore, not agreeable.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
4.28.4 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that the same rigor that is 
applied to Indian healthcare professionals elsewhere in the world needs to be followed for 
those coming to India and seeking educational or practice rights. The Committee is of the 
view that the application regarding recognition to allied qualification should be made to the 

124 
 
National Commission on Allied and Healthcare Professions which should be thoroughly 
verified and only then the recognition granted or refused on case to case basis.  
4.28.5 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
CLAUSE 37 
4.29 Clause 37 deals with the Permission for establishment of new allied and healthcare 
institutions, new courses of study, etc. 
4.29.1 Clause 37 reads as under: 
37. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being 
in force, on and from the date of commencement of this Act, — (a) no person shall 
establish an allied and healthcare institution; or (b) no allied and healthcare inst itution 
shall— (i) open a new or higher course of study or training (including postgraduate 
course of study or training) which would enable students of each course of study or 
training to qualify himself for the award of any recognised allied and healthcar e 
qualification; or (ii) increase its admission capacity in any course of study or training 
(including postgraduate course of study or training); or (iii) admit a new batch of 
students in any course of study or training (including postgraduate course of st udy or 
training), except with the previous permission of the Council obtained in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that the allied and healthcare qualification granted to a person in respect of a 
new or higher course of study or new bat ch without prior permission of the Council shall 
not be a recognised allied and healthcare qualification for the purposes of this Act:  
Provided further that permission and certification in respect of courses for skilled health 
workers shall include aides or assistants providing assistive services under supervision 
and have formal training duration of not less than two thousand hours related to the 
allied and healthcare streams. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.29.3 The suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause 37: 
(i) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) suggested to regulate and 
abolish/ ban the unhealthy tendencies like fake courses conducted by spurious 
Institutions in Allied Health Professions  
 
(ii) Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association suggested Pre -requisite to open a new 
physiotherapy course –  
 
(a) to have own hospital not less than 200 -300 bedded with all the specialties 
and not the MoU between Physiotherapy institute/college and other private 
hospital which does not belong to stake holder of physiotherapy institute  
 
(b) should have medical/ Indian system of medicine college  
 
(iii) One stakeholder submitted that the Standards for each course including curriculum, 
duration, and infrastructure requirements, examination pattern, training requirements, 
accreditation etc. may be devised centrally for adoption across the country.  
 

125 
 
(iv) Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) suggested the proviso 
may be amended as follows:  
 
“Provided further that permission and certification in respect of courses for skilled 
health workers shall include aides or assistants providing assistive  services under 
supervision and have formal training duration of less than two thousand hours related 
to the allied and healthcare streams will be granted by the body duly notified by the 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, Government of India.”  
 
(v) Public Health Foundation of India has suggested that under clause 37,  person  is 
variably defined in three ways: (a) as any university institution or a trust (line 47); (b) 
as a person receiving the allied and healthcare qualification (line 39) and (c) as a 
person who is establishing an allied and healthcare institution (line 27).  The 
variability in interpretation should be clarified, since the explanation in lines 47 and 48 
is restricted to only one of these. 
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
4.29.4 The Ministry submitted that the suggestion of Indian Society of Radiographers and 
Technologists (ISRT) may be considered, if the committee so recommends. The Ministry 
submitted that Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association’s suggestion is not agreeable  as the  
Preliminary clause does not specify any profession. On suggestion of Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship , the Ministry submitted that it may be considered, based on 
the definition of allied and healthcare professionals as recommended by th e Committee, after 
seeking stakeholder inputs.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.29.5 The Committee is in agreement with the view of the stakeholder that conducting 
fake courses by spurious Institutions in Allied Health Professions have to be absolutely 
prohibited. The Committee has recommended the constitution of the Allied and Healthcare 
Assessment and Rating Board for assessing and rating the allied institutions for their 
compliance with the standards. The Committee recommends that this Board should also 
periodically inspect that such fake courses are not carried out in the Institutes.  
 
4.29.6 The Committee in its meeting held on 15.03.2019 heard the views of the  
representatives from the Ministry of Skill  Development and Entrepreneurship  (MSDE). 
The Senior Advisor of the MSDE expressed views on short term certificate courses with 
less than 2000 hours of formal skill training. The representative suggested that the  clause 
37 can be re-drafted in the Bill to establish an ecosystem that provides mobility to "aid and 
assistants" with less than 2000 hours  of formal training who will also  support the huge 
requirement of the allied and healthcare professionals.  
"Ministry, since 2014 when it came into existence, has been training people, through 
its short-term skill ecosystem, for different job roles; and geriatric care, bedside assistant, etc., 
are some of the job roles which are performed by the allied health pro fessionals. These are 
some of the job roles which my Ministry has given training.  However, as the Additional 
Secretary rightly said, our training courses are less than 2000 hours.  Sir, we understand that 
the intent of this particular Bill is not to cover less than 2000 hours of formal skill training …. 
People who are coming with less than 2000 hours of skill training, they are going to be called 
as ‘Aid and Assistant’.  But beyond that, because they are not recognized by this Council 
which is the proposed Council, they will not have any career progression pathway.  So, we are 

126 
 
in agreement, and the Ministry of Health has also agreed with our suggestion, that we can 
redraft Clause 37 to provide for skill training of less than 2000 hours also to be included in the 
Act and the training would be provided and recognized, the recognition will be granted by the 
body duly notified by the Ministry of Sill Development. Sir, we have a health sector Skill 
Council which is providing and which is doing the course curricul um content on our industry 
connect between the short -term training which is being given, less than 2000 hours’ training 
currently. So, our intent is that if this provision can be made by redrafting Clause 37, the 
people who are coming from our ecosystem wi ll also have a chance to progress. Sir, because 
once there are less than 2000 hours and if there is no mention, they cannot progress. Once 
there is a mention, there can be a provision within the Act to provide a bridge course which we 
will prepare in consu ltation with the Ministry of Health and which meets their standard also 
so that they can progress to 2000 plus kind of job roles."   
4.29.7 The Chairman of the Committee specifically wanted to know the opinion of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare o n the issue raised enshrined in Clause 37.  The 
Special Secretary deposed before the Committee that in the initial draft of the Bill, the 
courses of less than 2000 hours were to be certified by a Body nominated by the Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entr epreneurship. The Bill was sent to the Legislative Department 
for vetting and they were of the view that the Bill is being brought by the Health Ministry 
and enjoining the  responsibility upon anoth er Ministry through the Bill has never been 
done in the past. Therefore, courses with less than 2000 hours were not included in the Bill. 
The Special Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare also submitted that the if 
the Committee is convinced and the Legislative Department agrees, the same can be 
included in the Bill and the role for certifying courses with less than 2000 hours can be 
given to MSDE.  
4.29.8  The Committee is of the view that the current Bill is aimed at regulating the 
courses beyond 2000 study hours but at the same time, the Committee feels the need  for 
health workers to aid and assist the patient in rural, tribal and urban slum where there is 
huge gap in the demand and supply of skilled healthcare providers. In this context, the 
Committee feels that there is requirement for health work ers. However, since there is no 
standardization, determined curriculum content of the health care workers, there is a need 
for proper planning and execution of the intended objectives and arriving at consensus 
amongst the various Ministries concerned. The Committee feels that the Government may 
consider to plan and make policy for aids or assistants with training duration of less than 
two thousand hours .  The Government may also explore the possibilities of bringing the 
aids and assistants with less than 20 00 study hours under the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare for harmonious and assured career progression and also to fulfill the 
demand supply gap in the health sector. Retaining the aid and assistants in the Ministry of 
health and Family Welfare would  provide integrated health provision to the common 
masses being under the same administrative Ministry. While doing so, arrangement be 
made for issuing of certificates from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, itself.  
4.29.9  The Committee, in this context, also wanted to know the views of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for short term certificate courses in the 
Ophthalmic Science for rural areas. In response to that the Ministry accepted that there 
are several short term courses in vision care being run by various agencies under the skill 
development initiative. However, there is a dire need for standardization of such courses 
which is being encouraged by the Health Ministry. As a result, couple of short term courses 
have already been disbanded by the Skills Ministry recently. Further, the Ministry of 
Health and Family Wel fare has already drafted two short term courses pertaining to eye 
care which are in process of discussion and finalization under the guidance of DGHS.  

127 
 
4.29.10 The Committee is of the view that if the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare is contemplating to commence short term certificate courses for Ophthalmic 
Science, it may also explore the possibility of conducting similar short term certificate 
courses in other segments of Health sector as "aid and assistants" to be regulated by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare itself. 
4.29.11 The Committee therefore recommends the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare to nominate a body that will grant permission and certification in respect of 
courses for skilled health workers. The Committee, therefore, rec ommends that the Clause 
37 may be amended as follows: 
“Provided further that permission and certification in respect of courses for skilled 
health workers shall include aides or assistants providing assistive services under 
supervision and have formal training duration of less than two thousand hours related 
to the allied and healthcare streams will be granted by the body duly notified by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India.” 
4.29.12 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
CLAUSE 40 
4.30 Clause 40 deals with Withdrawal of Recognition 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.30.1 One stakeholder submitted that the  accreditation mechanism should be at central level to 
ensure uniformity  
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE:  
4.30.2 The provision already exists. The issue of recognition (accreditation is a voluntary 
process) of new institutions has been considered in detail in Chapter V.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.30.3 The Committee agreeing with the view of the stakeholder  on the issue of 
accreditation mechanism recommends the Ministry to ensure accreditation of all the 
Colleges/Institutes imparting allied courses. Accreditation of colleges has to be streamlined 
so that the quality of allied and healthcare education is improved. The Committee also feels 
that there is a need to conduct periodic inspection and auditing of educational institutions 
by a third party. 
 
4.30.4 The Committee, in this connection, has already recommended the constitution of a 
Allied and Healthcare Assessment and Rating Board that will assess and rate the allied 
institutions/colleges for their compliance and work in tandem with the Medical Assessment 
and Rating Board constituted under National Medical Commission because many m edical 
institutes also conduct allied and healthcare professional courses. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends adding the following provisions that deals with the actions to be 
taken by the Allied and Healthcare Assessment and Rating Board 
 
4.30.5 Clause 40(1) may be amended as follows: 
 
40 (1) Where, upon receiving a report from the Allied and Healthcare Profession 
Assessment and Rating Board or otherwise, if the Commission is of the opinion that— 

128 
 
  
(a) the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency 
required from candidates at any examination held by, a University or any allied and 
healthcare institution do not conform to the standards specified by the Under-Graduate 
Allied an d Healthcare Education Board or the Post -Graduate Allied and Healthcare 
Education Board, as the case may be; or  
 
(b) the standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education in 
Allied and Healthcare institution as determined by the Und er-Graduate Allied and 
healthcare Education Board or the Post -Graduate allied and healthcare Education 
Board, as the case may be, are not adhered to by any University or allied and 
healthcare institution, and such University or allied and healthcare instit ution has 
failed to take necessary corrective action to maintain specified minimum standards, the 
Commission may initiate action in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2):  
 
Provided that the Commission shall, before taking any action for suo motu withdrawal 
of recognition granted to the allied and healthcare professionals qualification awarded 
by a University or allied and healthcare institution, impose penalty on the advice of the 
Allied and Healthcare Profession Assessment and Rating Board. 
 
4.30.6 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 41 
 
4.31 Clause 41 deals with Grants by Central Government 
 
4.31.1 Clause 41 reads as under: 
41. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, make to the Council grants of such sums of money as the Central Government 
may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
4.31.2 Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of India (JFMTI)  submitted that there  is l ack of 
clarity over funding and management of Council  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE:  
4.31.3 The provision already exists.  Chapter VI of the Bill specifies the details of Finance, 
accounts and audit management. Further, the role of the interim  Council is to set up the 
administrative structure of the Council. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.31.4 The Committee is in the agreement with the view of the Ministry that the Bill 
contains adequate provision on finance, accounts and audit management.  
4.31.5 The clause is adopted without any change. 
 
 

129 
 
CLAUSE 42 
 
4.32 Clause 42 deals with Allied and Healthcare Council of India Fund. 
 
4.32.1 Clause 42 reads as under: 
 
42. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Allied and Healthcare Council 
of India Fund and there shall be credited thereto—  
 
(a) all moneys received from the Central Government;  
(b) all moneys received by the Council by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, 
bequests and transfers; and  
(c) all moneys received by the Council in any other manner or from any other source as 
may be decided upon by the Central Government 
 
 
SUGGESTIONS 
 
4.32.3 Public health Foundation of India submitted that the Clause 42 (1) and 47 (1) on Funding 
of the central and State councils does not allude to ‘Fees’. This may be mentioned since it will be 
an important source of sustainability for the Councils. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.32.4 The Committee recommends that the Allied and Healthcare Council of India Fund 
be renamed to National Allied and Healthcare Fund on the lines of National Medical 
Commission Fund in NMC Act. 
 
4.32.5 The Clause 42(1) may be amended as follows: 
 
42. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the National Allied and 
Healthcare Fund and there shall be credited thereto—  
 
(a) all  Government grants, fees, penalties and charges received by the 
Commission and the Regulatory Boards;  
(b) all  sums of money received by the Commission by way of grants, gifts, 
donations, benefactions, bequests and transfers; and  
(c) all sums of money re ceived by the Commission in any other manner or from 
any other source as may be decided upon by the Central Government.  
 
 4.32.6 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 47 
 
4.33 Clause 47 deals with the State Allied and Healthcare Council Fund 
 
4.33.1 Clause 47 reads as under: 
 
47. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the State Allied and Healthcare 
Council Fund and there shall be credited thereto— 
(a) all moneys received from the State Government; 

130 
 
(b) all moneys received by the State Council by way of grants, gifts, donations, 
benefactions, bequests and transfers; and 
(c) all moneys received by the State Council in any other manner or from any 
other source as may be decided upon by the State Government 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.33.2 The Committee recommends that the clause 47(1) may be amended as follows: 
 
47. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the State Allied and Healthcare 
Council Fund and there shall be credited thereto—  
 
(a) all sums of money received  by the State Council from the State 
Government;  
(b) all  sums of money received by the State Council by way of grants, gifts, 
donations, benefactions, bequests and transfers; and  
(c) all sums of money received by the State  Council in any other manner or 
from any other source as may be decided upon by the State Government. 
 
4.33.3 The suggested amendment to clause 47 (1) intends only to streamline language of the 
clause that is re-phrasing "all money" to "all sums of money"  
 
4.33.4 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
 
 
INSERTION OF NEW CLAUSE ON JOINT SITTINGS 
 
4.34.1 The Committee recommends the Ministry to insert a clause for making provision 
for joint sittings of the proposed Commission under the Bill, NCH, NMC and NCISM, for 
co-ordinated and integrated growth & development of Allied and Healthcare profession 
and understanding of proper task shifting. 
4.34.2 The Committee recommends that the joint sitting between the Commissions would 
provide a pla tform to discuss issues pertaining to interdisciplinary approach and methods 
of adhering to team work while delivering healthcare services.  
4.34.3 The new clause may read as under: 
(1) There shall be a joint sitting of the National Commission for Allied a nd 
Healthcare Professions, National Commission for Indian System of Medicine, 
the National Commission for Homoeopathy and the National Medical 
Commission, at least once a year, at such time and place as they mutually 
appoint, to enhance the interface betwe en Allied and Healthcare Profession, 
modern system of medicine, Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy,  
(2)  The Agenda for the joint sitting may be placed with mutual agreement by the 
Chairpersons of the Commissions concerned. 
(3)  The joint sitting may, by an affirmative vote of all members present and voting, 
decide on approving specific educational and medical modules or programs that 
could be introduced in the under -graduate and post -graduate courses across 
allied and healthcare and medical systems, and promote medical pluralism. 
 
 

131 
 
CLAUSE 52 
 
4.35 Clause 52 deals with Penalty for falsely claiming to be registered.  
 
4.35.1 Clause 52 reads as under: 
 
52. If any person whose name is not for the time being entered in the Central Register or 
a State Register, falsely represents that it is so entered or uses in connection with his 
name or title any words or letters to suggest that his name is so entered, he shall be 
punished on first conviction with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, and o n 
any subsequent conviction with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with 
fine not exceeding one lakh rupees or with both. 
 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
4.35.2 The stakeholders suggested that  punishment should include imprisonment at the first 
instance itself  and also pointed out that any punishment less than 3 years will not make it 
cognizable. 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE  
4.35.3 The Ministry submitted that t his provision already exists in chapter VII after a lot of 
detailed deliberation by the department of Legal affairs and legislative, under the Ministry of 
Law and Justice, based on precedents of such punishments.  
 
4.35.4 On a query raised by Members of th e Committee regarding the rationale for penalty 
clauses as enumerated in Chapter VII, the Ministry submitted that the penalty clauses are in line 
with the other regulatory frameworks such as the recently enacted National Medical Commission 
Act, 2019 and is  important for inclusion, as a check for negligence of practice/or overstepping 
scope of practice in order to ensure patient safety and avoid clinical harm. This will also ensure 
increased accountability within the system which is at present applicable onl y to Doctors in the 
healthcare system. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.35.5 The Committee notes that Chapter VII clearly stipulates the penalty for falsely 
claiming to be registered in the Central or State Register. The Committee has already 
recommended for constitution of an Allied Assessment and Rating Board that will take 
such measures including issuing warning, imposition of monetary penalty, reducing intake 
or stoppage of admissions and recommending to the Commission for withdrawal of 
recognition, against a medical institution for failure to maintain the minimum essential 
standards specified by the Under -Graduate Allied Education Board or the Post -Graduate 
Allied Education Board  as the case may be, in accordance with the regulations made under 
this Act.  
 
4.35.6 The clause is adopted without any change. 
 
CLAUSE 55 
 
4.36 Clause 55 deals with Penalty for contravention of provisions of Act. 
 

132 
 
4.36.1 Clause 55 reads as under: 
55. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rules or regulations 
made thereunder shall be punished with imprisonment which shall not be less than one 
year but which may extend to three years or with fine which shall not be less than one 
lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.36.3 Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association suggested adding on clause 35 the penalty for 
institute/ head of the institute in case of furnishing wrong details about infrastructure/ details of 
individual who has possessed degree of physiotherapy from that institute (e.g. attendance, part 
time, distance course etc.)  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE:  
4.36.4 The Ministry submitted that the suggestion is not agreeable on account of the fact that 
penalty clauses have already been considered under Chapter VII after a lot of detailed 
deliberation by the department of Legal affairs and legislative,  under the Ministry of Law and 
Justice, based on precedents of such punishments.  
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.36.5 The Committee observes that Chapter VII that deals with offences and Penalties 
provides for penalty only for individuals. The Committee is of the view that to prevent 
mushrooming of substandard colleges and institutes providing allied healthcare education,  
a mechanism for regulating such colleges need to be developed.  The Committee has 
already recommended for constitution of a Allied Assessment and Rating Board that will 
be responsible for granting permission for establishment of a new medical institution and 
take such measures including issuing warning, imposition of monetary penalty, reducing 
intake or stoppage of admissions and recommending to the National Commission for 
withdrawal of recognition, against a medical institution for failure to maintain the  
minimum essential standards specified by the Under -Graduate Allied Education Board or 
the Post -Graduate Allied Education Board  as the case may be, in accordance with the 
provisions of regulations framed under this Act.  
 
4.36.6 The Committee also observes that many medical institutes also run allied and 
healthcare profession courses. These medical institutes are regulated under the Medical 
Assessment and Rating Board constituted under the NMC Act. The Committee observes 
that both these Boards will have to work in coordination and co-operation with each other.  
 
4.36.7 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
CLAUSE 56 
4.37 Clause 56 deals with Cognizance of offences 
4.37.1 Clause 56 reads as under: 
 

133 
 
56. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except 
upon a complaint made by the order of the Central Government, the State Government, 
the Council or the State Council, as the case may be. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropo litan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the 
first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.37.2 One stakeholder submitted that  the Central/ State Govt., Council shall dispose of any 
representation received in this regard within 180 days, failure of which may be considered an 
approval of complaint by the entities. Competent Authority’ may be designated in each entity for 
this purpose.  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE  
4.37.3 The Ministry submitted that this is not recommended as the Bill has undergone a through 
vetting by Legislative and Legal Affairs for technicalities, and no binding clauses were suggested 
but may be deliberated upon. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.37.4 The Committee agrees with the view of the stakeholder that certain time limit has to 
be set for disposal of any representation. The Committee observes that number of days for 
deciding an appeal should be lesser than 180 days. The Committee, therefore, reco mmends 
the Ministry to make a provision for disposal of any representation within 90 days in the 
Bill.  The Clause should also take into account the complaints received by the Allied and 
Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration Board.  
4.37.5 The C ommittee therefore recommends that the Clause 56 may be amended as 
follows: 
56(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except 
upon a complaint made by the order of the Central Government, the State Government, 
the Commiss ion, the Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration 
Board or the State Council, as the case may be. 
 
4.37.6 The Committee is of the view that the registration of complaints filed against the 
Allied and healthcare professionals should be restricted to the area where the professional 
is practicing. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry may consider making 
provision, either in the Bill itself or regulations, restricting the place of registration of 
complaints at the place of practice rather than the residential place of complainant. 
 
4.37.7 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 58 
4.38 Clause 58 deals with Protection of action taken in good faith 
4.38.1 Clause 58 reads as under: 
58. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or State Government or against the Chairperson or any other member of the 
Council or the State Council or the professional advisory bodies, as the case may be, for 

134 
 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or 
any rule made there under in the discharge of official duties. 
 
SUGGESTIONS 
 
4.38.2 One stakeholder submitted that this provision may be subject to proceedings relating to 
defamation both of civil and criminal nature in cases proved where the entities have taken a 
decision based on malafide, prejudice.  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE  
4.38.3 The Ministry submitted that the penalty clauses have already been considered under 
Chapter VII after a lot of detailed deliberation by the department of Legal affairs and legislative, 
under the Ministry of Law and Justice, based on precedents of such punishments.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.38.4 The Committee is satisfied with the response of the Ministry and emphasises that 
the Committee has  recommended for the constitution of Regulatory /development Boards 
and eight Councils under the proposed overarching Commission. These 
Regulatory/development Boards will regulate important aspects relating to standard of 
education, professionals and institutions of the Allied Healthcare profession. The 
Committee notes that the National Medical Commission, National Commission of Indian 
System of Medicine and National Commission of Homoeopathy have been given the power 
to exercise appellate jurisdiction with respect to decisions of the Regulatory /development 
Boards. The Committee, on the same line strongly recommends that the proposed National 
Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professionals will ensure coordination amongst the 
Regulatory/development Boards and also exercise appellate jurisdiction. The Committee 
has also recommended this as one of the functions of the proposed National Commission of 
Allied and Healthcare.  
 
4.38.5 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the clause 58 should also include that 
no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the members from the 
Regulatory/development Boards and the members of the proposed Eight Councils.  
 
4.38.6 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
CLAUSE 60 
4.39 Clause 60 deals with Act to have overriding effect. 
4.39.1 Clause 60 reads as under: 
60. The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
4.39.2 The following are the suggestions of the Organisations/Association/Individual:- 

135 
 
(i) The United Physiotherapy Associations of India, Physiotherapy Forum and one 
stakeholder submitted the following amendments in the clause: 
 
The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act except the existing s tate 
councils for Physiotherapy Act.  
 
(If DCI and PCI are not submerged then the status quo to be maintained on the existing 
State physiotherapy councils to ensure equal protection of the laws with in the territory of 
India as per Article 14 of the constitution.)  
 
(ii) Gujarat Government Physiotherapist Association has suggested modification of the 
clause to retain the existing State councils of Physiotherapy. 
 
(iii) One stakeholder submitted that overriding effect may be removed not to destroy well 
working model of State Councils.  
 
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE:  
4.39.3 With regards to suggestions of stakeholder for modifications in the clause 60, the 
Ministry submitted that this is not agreeable as the idea of a unified Council structure at the 
central level followed by a similar unified structure in the States will enable efficient 
management and data flows. Multiple governance mechanisms for the same outcome will 
hamper progress, waste precious public resources and only serve to confuse students and 
educational institutions re: the statutory process. 
 
4.39.4 With regards to removal of overriding effect, the Ministry submitted that the Bill 
recommends expansion of work of the existing State Councils to incorporate other allied and 
healthcare courses as well. The overriding clause does not hamper or undermine their present 
status and has been added for uniformity.   
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.39.5 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that one of the main motives 
behind the Bill is to ensure standardisation among different allied healthcare professional 
courses. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that all other existing allied coun cils or 
associations will have to work under a unified council so that the envisioned goal and the 
mission objective of the Bill as envisioned in the Preamble to the Bill is achieved. In the case 
of States, where a State Council is already present, such a council should incorporate all 
the allied and healthcare recognised categories of the Schedule in its purview. The 
Committee, therefore, agrees with the view of the Ministry that this overriding effect 
should not be removed.  
4.39.6 The clause is adopted without any change. 
 
SHORT TITLE, EXTENT AND COMMENCEMENT 
4.40 Clause 1 deals with Short title, extent and commencement. 

136 
 
4.40.1 Clause 1 reads as under: 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Allied and Healthcare Professions Act, 2018. (2) It 
extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 
appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any 
reference in any prov ision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a 
reference to the coming into force of that provision. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
4.40.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the clause:- 
 
(i) Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of India (JFMTI) submitted that the short title 
of the Bill should be - The Allied Healthcare Professions Council Bill or Healthcare 
Professions Council Bill and should not be mentioned with two classifications. 
Accordingly, the name of the council should be Allied Healthcare Professions 
Council of India (AHPCI) or Healthcare Professions Council of India (HPCI)  
 
(ii) The Indian Association of Physiotherapists submitted that the Act may be called the 
National Commission for Physiotherapy, Allied and Healthcare Professional. 
 
(iii) Rajasthani Physiotherapy Association has suggested the following names: 
 
 The Physiotherapy Central Council Bill, 2019  
 The Physiotherapy and Healthcare professions Bill, 2019  
 The Healthcare Professions Bill, 2019  
 The Physiotherapy, Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2019  
 The Healthcare Professions and Allied Bill, 2019  
 The Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018  
 
(iv) Physiotherapy Forum submitted that the name of the Bill should be changed to The 
Physiotherapy and Allied and Health care Professions Bill. 
 
(v) Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists (ISRT) submitted that the title of 
the Bill should be changed to Allied Health Professions Act -2018 or The Health Care 
Professions Act 2018. ISRT has also recommended the constitution of a National 
Commission named as National Health & Care Professions' Commission (NHCPC) 
as an over -arching body. The association, further, submitted that it is essential to 
switch over to a National Commission than a mere council to achieve the effective 
regulatory control over professional education and professional practice of all 
unregulated streams, which are coming under the regulatory ambit of the statutory 
regulatory body envisage d to be constituted under the present Allied & Health Care 
professions Bill-2018. 
 
(vi) Indian Medical Association (Headquarter and Kerala Chapter) has suggested the 
removal of ‘AND’ from the title of the Bill and restate the terminology as ‘Allied 
Healthcare’ at all the places where ‘Allied and Healthcare’ has been used.  
 
(vii) One stakeholder has suggested single date for all provisions of the Act to come into 
force. 

137 
 
 
(viii) All India Occupational Therapists Association (AIOTA) suggested for constitution of 
National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Profession.   
 
 
MINISTRY's RESPONSE: 
 
4.40.3 The Ministry submitted that the issue of title of the Bill has been debated on multiple 
occasions, including specific recommendations by the 31 st DRPSC of 2010 to ensure that all 
stakeholders and their concerns were addressed adequately as part of the Title of the Bill. The 
current title has been arrived at, after large scale stakeholder consultation and thorough 
examination of global literature. T he Ministry further submitted that any statutory provision 
involves massive technical and administrative structural establishments to be enabled and is 
meant to exist indefinitely. The notification of the Act will be followed by the establishment of 
the In terim Council followed by the regular Council. Based on inputs received from 
stakeholders, the Interim Council may be given a definite time limit as decided by the 
Committee; however, all provisions coming into force immediately may cause more chaos than 
clarity and delay smooth implementation of the Act. The Ministry, however, during the course of 
clause by clause consideration of the Bill acceded to the suggestion of the stakeholders to amend 
the title of the Bill to "The National Commission for Allied an d Healthcare Professions Bill, 
2020". 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.40.4 The Committee acknowledges the urgent need for trained healthcare workforce in 
the country that is extremely important for successful implementation of the country’s 
healthcare policy. The Committee is of the view that the country’s current health 
infrastructure has failed to explore the true potentia l of the allied health space and utilize 
the available human resource. The Committee feels that the Allied and Healthcare 
Professions Bill, 2019 that is set to establish an overarching regulatory system for 
development of the allied healthcare sector, is a  step in the right direction to provide the 
much needed ecosystem for the progress of the Allied health professionals.  
 
4.40.5 The Committee has received several suggestions regarding the title of the Bill.  The 
Committee that examined the Paramedical and  Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007 
had made the following recommendations in its 31st Report.  
 
“The Committee is of the view that title of an Act needs to reflect the basic objective 
behind its enactment. It is also not practically possible to inc lude each and every 
special component in the title itself. However, nobody can also deny the fact that in the 
case of a particular Bill envisaged for a variety of specialities having distinct identities 
of their own, specific mention of one speciality and generalization of all the other 
specialities raises uncalled for complications and resultant controversies. The present 
Bill before the Committee is one such case. The Committee would like to point out that 
title of an Act is only meant for indicating its very core content. Proposed legislation 
before the Committee relates to setting up of three separate Central Councils for 
physiotherapy/ occupational therapy, medical laboratory technology and radiology 
technology. The Committee also takes note of the fact  that an enabling provision is to 
be included in the Bill which would open the way for future induction of other 
disciplines. The Committee feels that use of a common term in the title of the Bill 
encompassing all the present disciplines and likely additio ns in future will be the best 
option. 

138 
 
 
Taking the relative merits of all viewpoints into account, the Committee, concludes that 
the words ‘Paramedical and physiotherapy’ in the title of the Bill may be replaced by 
the words ‘Allied Health Professions’.” 
 
4.40.6 The Committee is of the view that all the allied professions are important part of the 
healthcare system and have their own identities. The Title of the Bill should not only reflect 
the basic objective behind its enactment but also include all these  multifarious professions 
in the Bill. Therefore, specific mention of one particular profession in the Bill is neither 
appropriate nor feasible. The Committee therefore reiterates its recommendation 
submitted in the 31 st Report and believes that the title should represent all the recognized 
categories and the likely additions in the future rather than one particular profession.   
 
4.40.7 The Committee understands that the Government  has brought forth structural 
reforms in the Health  Sector since the presentation of 31 st Report of the Committee with 
intended legislation pertaining to NMC Act, 2019 and proposed Commissions for ISM and 
Homeopathy. The Committee also recognizes the varied number of courses/programmes 
that impart medical education at diploma/graduate /higher 
education/specialization/professional level in the allied health sector. With the changing 
times, where the health sector globally is struggling with heavy disease burden especially 
non-communicable diseases, the Commi ttee believes it has become more imperative to 
strengthen the allied health sector. The Committee is of the view that categorisation of 
‘allied health professional’ and ‘healthcare professional’ in the Bill will address the 
shortage of trained technicians at clinical and non -clinical level as well as promote 
specialization in allied health sciences. Therefore, the Committee recommends retaining the 
word ‘and’ in the Bill. In this connection, the Committee also recommends the Ministry to 
incorporate a separa te Schedule containing the list of professions falling under the two 
categories, i.e. (i) allied health professional and  (ii)  healthcare professional to allay the 
apprehensions of the stakeholders. 
 
4.40.8 The Committee notes the suggestion of the stakeh olders regarding the structure of 
the apex body to be constituted under the Allied & Health care Professions Bill -2018. The 
stakeholders have suggested that in the light of changing concepts of professional 
regulation in Health care delivery system in Indi a, a National Commission for the Allied 
Healthcare Professionals should be constituted on the lines of National Medical 
Commission Act-2019 and proposed National Commissions for Indian system of Medicine 
and Homeopathy.  
 
4.40.9 The Committee, considering the diverse skill set required to be possessed by the 
professionals, believes that one single council for all the professions will not successfully 
address the diversities and intricacies of each recognised category under the Bill. The 
Committee, at the sa me time, also notes the existing non -standardisation in the education 
and practice of the allied professionals that necessitate uniform restructuring of the sector. 
The Committee believes that the structure under the Bill has to be redefined in a manner 
that facilitates development of each recognised category as well as different professions 
under one umbrella body.  The Committee , therefore, finds merit  in constituting an 
overarching Commission for the Allied and Healthcare Professions on the lines of Nati onal 
Medical Commission, National Commission on Indian System of Medicine and National 
Commission on Homeopathy that makes necessary regulations for respective medical field.  
 
4.40.10 The Committee also agrees with the view of the Ministry on the stakeholder’s 
suggestion of enforcement of all provisions of the Act on a single date and observes that the 

139 
 
present Allied Healthcare infrastructure in the country is not fully equipped to adop t all 
the provisions of the Act immediately. The Committee is of the view that this Bill is bound 
to bring structural reforms in the Allied Healthcare Sector and believes that carrying out 
such pioneering changes in a haphazard manner will do more harm tha n good. The 
Committee also feels that the Allied Healthcare sector is still in its nascent stage and when 
guided in the right direction has immense potential to strengthen the healthcare 
infrastructure of the country. The Committee also notes that consider ing the absence of a 
robust database of the professions, the Commission needs sufficient time to effectively 
implement all the provisions of the Act. The Committee , however, cautions the Ministry to 
not delay the implementation of the Act and devise an act ion plan for expediting its 
enforcement. 
 
4.40.11 The Committee, therefore, recommends renaming the Bill from "the Allied 
and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018" to "The National Commission for Allied and 
Healthcare Professions Bill, 2020" on the lines of t he National Medical Commission Act 
2019, National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill 2019 and National 
Commission for Homeopathy Bill 2019. 
4.40.12 The Committee also recommends the deletion of clause 1(2) as the Bill 
extends to the whole of India after the repeal of Article 370 of the Constitution of India. 
 
PREAMBLE 
4.41 The Indian Association of Physiotherapists submitted that the Preamble should provide 
for improving access to quality and affordable physiotherapeutic education and ensure 
availability of adequate and high quality Physiotherapy healthcare professionals of 
physiotherapeutic System of Medicine in all parts of the country. The Preamble should also 
promote equitable and universal healthcare that encourages community health persp ective; that 
has an objective periodic and transparent assessment of physiotherapy institutions and facilitates 
maintenance of a physiotherapy register of physiotherapeutic System of Medicine for India and 
enforces high ethical standards in all aspects of medical services; that is flexible to adapt to the 
changing needs and has an effective grievance redressal mechanism and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
4.41.1 The Committee notes that the Preamble to the Allied and Health Care Prof ession 
Bill, 2018 does not clearly specify the goals and objectives of the Bill. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the following amendments in the Preamble to the Bill:-  
To provide for Allied and Health Care Education System that improves access to 
quality and affordable Allied and Health Care Education, ensures availability of 
adequate and high quality Allied and Health Care Professionals in all parts of the 
country; that  promotes equitable and universal Health care that encourages 
community health perspective and make services of such Allied and Health Care 
Professionals accessible to all the citizens; that promotes national health goals; that 
encourages such Allied and H ealth Care Professionals to adopt latest scientific and 
technological research and development in their work and to contribute to research 
and scientific and technological development; that has an objective periodic and 
transparent assessment of Allied and  Health Care Institutions and facilitates 
maintenance of a Central Register of Allied and Health Care Professions and enforces 
high ethical standards in all aspects of Allied and Health Care Professionals Services; 

140 
 
that is flexible to adapt to changing nee ds and has an effective grievance redressal 
mechanism and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
4.42 The Committee adopts the remaining clauses as proposed in the Bill. The 
Committee is also in agreement with the provisions of the Financial Memoranda in the Bill.  
4.43 The Committee also recommends for all consequential changes to be carried out in 
the re levant clauses of the Bill keeping in view the Committee’s observations and 
recommendations contained in the report. The Committee also recommends the Ministry 
for making consequential changes in the numbering of the Chapters and clauses due to 
suggested insertion of new Chapters and clauses.   

141 
 
SCHEDULE 
 
DISTINCTION BETWEEN ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AND ALLIED AND 
HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
4.44.1 The following are the suggestions on this issue:- 
 
(i) Government Optometrist Association, Uttar Pradesh submitted that there are two 
categories Healthcare and Allied healthcare, it is proposed that a third category 
may be introduced – Medical and Health professions under which Optometry 
should be listed as Optometrist diagnose, treat and manage eye d isease and 
prescribe glasses. (Detailed justification has been provided - Optometrist being 
first point of contact, job description and role in primary care) Indian Association 
of Physiotherapists suggested to Specify as per the ISCO which professions are 
recognised as either Healthcare or Allied.  One stakeholder submitted that in the 
Allied Health Care Profession Bill 2018, there is no clear distinction made 
between “Allied Health Professional” and “Allied and Health Care Professional”  
 
(ii) Another stake holder suggested that the Categorization of professionals may be 
done as:-  
 
a.  Bachelors’ qualification- Healthcare Professionals  
b.  Diploma qualification- Allied health professionals  
c.  Certificate qualification- Paramedic worker  
 
(iii) Indian Dietetic Asso ciation (IDA) suggested that the nomenclature of dietician 
needs to be defined and there needs to be demarcation as to who is allied and who 
is healthcare within each professional category 
 
(iv) Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of India (JFMTI) suggested that the Note 
related to definition is not reflecting the actual role and may be revised as per the 
curricula of MoHFW, scope of practice at different levels should also be 
mentioned  
 
MINISTRY’S RESPONSE 
 
4.44.2 The Ministry submitted that there is no demarcation of allied vs healthcare professionals 
other than duration of study. By virtue of the number of years of existing training, Optometrists 
are already under the healthcare professional’s  category.  The definition of Optometry may be 
considered for further enhancement in the schedule, as per a global definition, and as suggested. 
However, the inclusion of a third category is unrealistic and may not be suggested for 
consideration. The Minis try submitted that the ISCO coding has already being specified against 
each of the professions in the Schedule. However, given the Indian scenario the professions have 
been clubbed in like categories so as to enable an organized techno-administrative approach.  
 
4.44.3 Moreover, Clause 66 enables the provision for amendment of the Schedule.  
 
4.44.4 The Ministry further submitted that categorisation of professionals based on qualification 
has already been considered. The schedule does not currently specify qualifications and degrees, 
only professionals. Specific guidelines on each profession will be undertaken by the Council, 

142 
 
when constituted. The Ministry submitted that the suggestions of Indian Dietetic Association 
may be considered if the Committee recommends and schedule modified accordingly. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.44.5 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that there is no need to include 
a third category in the Bill. The Committee observes that the professions have already 
being classified as per ISCO code, which makes the segmentation clear. The Committee 
also recommends the Ministry to incorporate a separate Schedule containing the list of 
professions falling under t he two categories, i.e. (i) allied health professional and  (ii)  
healthcare professional to allay the apprehensions of the stakeholders. 
 
4.44.6 The Committee also reiterates its recommendation that recognised category is a 
broad description that clubs ma ny professions with a very general idea that doesn't 
specifically defines the profession with discipline, scope and nature. The Committee agrees 
with the view of Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of India that the definition may be 
revised as per the cu rricula and scope of practice at different levels also taking all factors 
and circumstance in Indian control as well. 
 
4.45 CHANGE IN NOMENCLATURE 
 
SUGGESTIONS 
 
4.45.1 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders: 
 
(i) Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of India (JFMTI) suggested amendment 
with proper classification/ nomenclature as prevalent in India and overlapping of 
categories may be deleted  
 
(ii) One stakeholder suggested for change in Nomenclature of following professions:-  
 
a. Biochemist (non-clinical) to Biochemist (non-medical);  
b. Ecologist to Human Ecologist;  
c. EMT(Paramedic) to Emergency Medical Care Technologist;  
d. Movement Therapist to Mobility Therapist;  
e. Psychologist (Except …) to Non-clinical Psychologist  
f. Health Educator to Health Education Associate;  
g. Mental Health Support worker to Mental Health Associate;  
h. Community Health Promoters to Community Health Associate; and  
i. Physician Associates and Assistants to Medical Associate (no need of two 
categories)  
j. Dialysis Therapy Technologists or Urology Technologists to Dialysis 
Technician  
 
(iii) Indian Association of Clinical Psychologists submitted that Behavioural Health is 
not a preferred term to mental health.  
 
(iv) All India Association of Medical Social Work Professi onals suggested that the 
ISCO-08 has specified Social Work and Counselling as 2635 which has been 

143 
 
wrongly given under Behavioral Health Science Professional; add separate 
category as Category 16- Medical Social Work Professional  
 
(v) Society of Indian Radiographers (SIR) suggested considering Medical Physicists to 
be repositioned under category 12 along with Physician Associates and ECG and 
ECHO Technologist under 13 along with CVT Technologist (as they are related 
with Cardiac Science)  
 
(vi) Indian Association of Physician Assistants (IAPA) suggested considering removal 
of ‘Assistant’ word and replace it by ‘Associate’  
(vii) Indian Society of Extra Corporeal Technology suggested to designate 
‘Perfusionists’ as ‘Clinical Perfusionists’ and assig n a separate Code, not clubbed 
with other Technologists  
 
(viii) School of Allied Health Sciences, Manipal suggested to amend Health and 
Information Management Professional to “Health Information Management 
Professionals” and “Health Informatics Professionals ” As  well as divide the 
domains and specify roles under the respective domains. 
 
MINISTRY’S RESPONSE 
 
4.45.2 The Ministry submitted that the change in nomenclature partly be considered if the 
committee so recommends.  The proposed classification has been revie wed and wherever 
professional has been specified, however, the cadre progression titles does not pertain to the 
details of the Schedule and thus may not be considered for inclusion. On changing the 
nomenclature of various professions, the Ministry submitte d that the suggestion may be 
considered if the committee so recommends. Several of these suggestions may be considered, 
where in line with the duration of course and intended nomenclature w.r.t career progression. For 
instance, ‘Technician’ is a diploma le vel professional but a technologist is intended to have a 
degree or higher qualification of study. The Ministry submitted that the statement, ‘ Behavioural 
Health is not a preferred term to mental health” is factually incorrect. Globally, there is evidence  
on refraining from using the term “mental” to indicate behavior related health issues since it is 
considered derogatory and disrespectful to the patient.  
 
4.45.3 Psychiatric Social Workers can be considered under category 7 - Behavioural Health 
Sciences Professional, whereas the Clinical/ Medical Social workers may be under category 8 -
Primary, Community and other Miscellaneous Care Professional with the specified ISCO code . 
On Society of Indian Radiographers (SIR)’s suggestion, the Ministry submitted that  it may be 
partly considered and their appropriate placement in the schedule re -examined, if the Committee 
so  recommends;  
 
4.45.4 The statement that medical physicists work in cardiac -related care is factually incorrect; 
they work with medical radiology and oncology On Indian Association of Physician Assistants 
(IAPA)’s suggestion, the Ministry submitted that this may be considered if the committee so 
recommends. The Ministry on Indian Society of Extra Corporeal Technology’s suggestion, 
submitted that thi s may be partly considered w.r,t. nomenclature. Codes however are based on 
ISCO and the closest, most similar classification methodology has been used in case a profession 
does not find mention in the exact Indian context nomenclature. On School of Allied Science, 
Manipal's suggestion, the Ministry submitted that it may be considered if the Committee so 
recommends.  
 

144 
 
4.45.5 The Ministry submitted that Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of India's suggestion 
may be partly considered if the committee so recommends.  The Ministry acceded that the 
proposed classification has been reviewed and wherever professional has been spec ified it may 
be considered on final receipt of the recommendations of the Committee, however, the cadre 
progression titles does not pertain to the details of the Schedule and thus may not be considered 
for inclusion, hereat, in the schedule.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.45.6 The Committee is of the view that the present ISCO code for Ophthalmic Assistants 
and Optometrists is reasonable and may not be changed at the moment  The Committee 
also agrees with the view of the Ministry that use of Ophthalmic Physicians must be strictly 
prohibited. 
 
4.45.7 The Committee observes that the Ministry has acceded to the suggestion of the 
stakeholder to change the nomenclature of certain professions. The Committee, however 
views that the Ministry may change the nomen clature only after in depth examination and 
due consideration. The Committee recommends that the category “Physician Associate or 
Physician Assistant” may be renamed to “Physician Associate”. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to rename the Health and Information Management Professional 
to “Health Information Management Professionals” and “Health Informatics 
Professionals” and also define the specific roles under the specific domain. 
 
4.45.8 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry and recommends continuation 
of the term Behavioural Health Sciences Professional.  
 
4.45.9 The Committee , therefore, recommends that the Ministry may re - examine the 
categorization to avoid any overlapping of similar professions.   
 
 
4.46 OPTOMETRISTS/ OPHTHALMIC SCIENCE PROFESSIONALS 
 
SUGGESTIONS 
 
4.46.1 The following are the suggestions on the issue :- 
 
(i) All India Ophthalmic Physicians Association  and Rajesh Chudasama, Lok Sabha 
MP suggested to consider and include Ophthalmic Physicians (Ophthalmic  
Assistants/Officers) under ISCO 2211(general physician) as: 
 
 Course (Two year Diploma) launched in 1978 under NPCB with the duty 
charter for treating eye ailments, testing vision etc., led to limited growth 
prospects for OAs  
 Courses were then started in Bihar and Punjab (4 years+ Bachelor in 
Ophthalmology/ Ophthalmic Sciences) in which OAs get lateral entry and 
become qualified.  
 
(ii) Indian Optometric Association,  Indian Optometry Federation,  Government 
Optometrist Association,  Uttar Pradesh submitted that instead of Ophthalmic 
Sciences use Optometry Professionals   
 

145 
 
(iii) Regional Optometrists and Ophthalmic Society suggested removal of Ophthalmic 
Assistants and renaming the category as Optometrists as- 
  
 As per an Order issued by Mi nistry in 2017 about the duty chart of 
Paramedical OA, the tests to be performed by OA are aligned with the tasks to 
be performed by an Optometrist (As per ISCO) 
  
(iv) National Ophthalmic Association submitted revising ISCO code for OAs – 2240 or 
2267. Ophthalmic Assistants have been given 3256 ISCO code which is incorrect, 
as OAs have larger role in the primary healthcare system in India.  
 
(v) Punjab Ophthalmic Officer’s A ssociation suggested that the Course (2 years 
Diploma) launched in 1978 under NPCB as per WHO guidelines, with the duty 
charter for treating eye ailments, testing vision etc., led to limited growth prospects 
for OAs. Then entry qualification was 10+2 with medical, whereas for all other 
Diplomas was matriculation, thus equating this with graduation. Given the 
importance of this profession, State Government have re -designated this cadre as 
Ophthalmic Officer with original duty charter to treatment of eye dise ases. As 
Ophthalmic Officers are allowed to perform duties independently, this cadre 
should be registered under TSC code 2240 as Paramedical practitioners. 
 
(vi) Indian Optometrist Association submitted the following as the definition of 
Optometrist– 
 
Optometrists are the Primary Independent healthcare Practitioner of the eye and 
visual system that provides comprehensive eye and vision care includes refraction. 
Dispensing detection, diagnosis and treatment of disease of the eye 
 
(vii) National Ophthalmic Association and Ophthal India (State unit of NOA) submitted 
that in the definition of Ophthalmic Sciences consider inclusion of 2 year Diploma 
in Optometry under Optometrist and specify Ophthalmic Officers along with 
Ophthalmic Assistants as both the nomenclatures are used in Government. 
 
(viii) National Ophthalmic Association submitted to consider inclusion of professionals 
graduating with Bachelor of Ophthalmology/ Ophthalmic Sciences degrees; who 
have not been included in the Schedule under the Ophthalmic Sciences category.   
the Association further submitted inclusion of Ophthalmic Physicians (Ophthalmic 
Assistants/Officers) under ISCO 2211(general physician)  
 
(ix) Ophthal India (State unit of NOA), Drashti Eye Hospital and Bihar State 
Samajwadi Party suggested inclusion of prof essionals graduating with Bachelor of 
Ophthalmology/ Ophthalmic Sciences degrees who have not been included in the 
Schedule under the Ophthalmic Sciences category.  
 
MINISTRY’S RESPONSE 
 
4.46.2 The Ministry submitted that the Ophthalmic Assistants have been listed under the code - 
3256 as per the ISCO, which is a globally acceptable code and cannot be modified at a national 
level.  In case of OAs who have attained a higher qualification (Bachelor degree), the content of 
the program may be reviewed to see the comparability with Optometry course. Lateral entry, 
bridge programs and other mechanisms for equivalence, however, will be the jurisdiction of the 

146 
 
Council when it is established. The Ministry f urther submitted that the use of term – Ophthalmic 
Physicians must be strictly prohibited as this is medical post graduate degree for which the 
candidate must be at least a MBBS graduate.  
 
4.46.3 The Ministry also submitted that the category of Ophthalmic  Sciences is envisioned to 
include both Optometrist and Ophthalmic Assistants in the system, however any other more 
inclusive nomenclature if available and recommended by the committee may be considered.  
4.46.4 The Ministry further apprised the Committee that further the existing OAs cannot be 
listed under the ISCO 2240 as it refers to Paramedic professionals which includes occupations 
which normally require completion of tertiary -level training in theoretical and practical medical 
services. A diploma program does not entitle OAs for equivalence with advance degrees such as 
of clinical officers. The Ministry also submitted before the Committee that the schedule does not 
currently specify qualifications and degrees, only professionals. Specific guidelines on  each 
profession will be undertaken by the Council, when enacted. 
4.46.5 Ophthalmic Assistants have been listed under the code - 3256 as per the ISCO, which is a 
globally acceptable code and cannot be modified at a national level.  In case of OAs who have 
attained a higher qualification (Bachelor degree), the content of the program may be reviewed to 
see the comparability with Optometry course. 
4.46.6 Lateral entry, bridge programs and other mechanisms for equivalence, however, will be 
the jurisdiction of th e Council when it is established. The use of the term – Ophthalmic 
Physicians must be strictly prohibited as this is medical post graduate degree for which the 
candidate must be at least an MBBS graduate.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.46.7 The Committe e agrees with the view of the Ministry that the category of 
Ophthalmic Sciences includes both Optometrists and Ophthalmic Assistants and the 
present nomenclature may be continued. 
 
 
4.47 REQUEST FOR INCLUSION IN THE SCHEDULE: 
 
SUGGESTIONS 
 
4.47.1 The following are the suggestions on the issue:- 
 
(i) Indian Sterilization Healthcare Association suggested i ncluding CSSD 
Technicians in the Schedule and under the Bill .  All India Association of Medical 
Social Work Professionals suggested include Clinical So cial Worker (Medical 
Social Worker, Psychiatric Social Worker, Medical Social Service Officer, Social 
Worker etc.) under Sub -category ‘Behavioral Health Science Professionals’. All 
India Association of Medical Social Work Professionals suggested considerin g 
inclusion of the Psychiatric Social workers in the Bill. Definition of Psychiatric 
Social Worker has been provided as per the Mental Health Care Act, 2017.  
AIIMS Medical Social Service Officers Association suggested inclusion of 
Medical Social Worker, P sychiatric Social Worker, Medical Social Service 
Officer (MSSO), Social Worker, who fulfil all criteria of Healthcare professionals 
under Sub-category 7- ‘Behavioral Health Science Professionals’. AIIMS has re -

147 
 
designated MSW to MSSO, eligibility is Master’ s degree in Social Work with at 
least 2 years’ experience in the health sector.  
 
(ii) Indian Society of Professional Social Work also suggested for inclusion of 
Psychiatric Social Workers in the Schedule. 
 
(iii) One stakeholder suggested adding the following Professionals which are not 
included in the Schedule:  
 
i. Blood bank Technologist, Technical Supervisor (BB), Apheresis Technologist; 
ii. Embryologist; iii. Human Reproductive Biologist; iv. Audiologist ; v. Hearing 
Aid Dispenser; vi. CSSD Technologist; vii. Phlebotomist ; viii. Clinical 
Biochemistry Technologist; ix. Clinical Microbiologist; x. Molecular Biology 
Technologist; xi. Immunology Technologist; xii. Clinical Scientist ; xiii. Dental 
Clinical Support workers- Dental Assistant, Dental Hygienist, Dental Technician, 
Dental Lab Aide; xiv. Genetic Counselor; xv. Hair Transplant Technician; xvi. 
Message Therapist; xvii. Dispensing Optician; xviii. Orthoptist; xix. Sport 
Physiotherapist; xx. Podiatrist; xxi.  Prosthetist and Orthotists; xxii. Speech 
Therapist/ Assistant; xxiii. Anganwadi worker, ANM, ASHA Sahyogini.  
 
(iv) The National Academy of Psychology (NAOP) India suggested that separate 
category of professional psychologists (including Clinical and reha bilitation 
Psychologist) be made in the Bill. 
 
(v) Rajesh Kumar Sinha, School of Allied Health Sciences, Manipal suggested to 
Include Professionals/ Job titles  
 
 
 
rds Officer;  
 
 
 
Health Information Compliance Officer 
  
 
 
 
 
Health Informatics Domain: 
  
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE: 
 
4.47.2 The Ministry submitted that c urrently, CSSD Technicians  is part of Surgical and 
Anesthesia Technology. Specific nomenclature related issues will be dealt by the Council with 
inputs from PABs. The Ministry also submitted that inclusion of Clinical Social Worker, 

148 
 
Psychiatric social worker, Medical Social Worker, Social Worker may be considered if the 
Committee so recommends.  
 
4.47.3 The Ministry pointed out that the Psychiatric social worker Can be considered under 
category 7 - Behavioural Health Sciences Professional, whereas the Clinical/ Medical Social 
workers may be under category 8 -Primary, Community and other Miscellaneous Care 
Professional  
 
4.47.4 The Ministry also submitted that the schedule as a whole has been formulated based on 
the ISCO global codes for professionals, taking into consideration only those that fall under the 
ambit of “allied and healthcare professionals”.  Several of the professionals listed here are 
already covered in the schedule, possibly by an alternative nomenclature, under the said 
category. 
 
4.47.5 Professionals such as Audiologist, Prosthetics and Orthotics and Speech therapists are 
already covered u nder the RCI and are therefore not applicable to this schedule. The Ministry 
also submitted that since Clinical and Rehabilitation-related psychologists are currently under the 
jurisdiction of the Rehabilitation Council of India under the Ministry of Socia l Justice and 
Empowerment.  
 
4.47.6 ASHA workers, anganwadis etc. are part of the health system but without any formal 
training at this time. As and when they obtain the appropriate qualifications, any health worker 
may be considered for the appropriate ca tegory. The schedule may be amended at a later time as 
needed, if it is found necessary to include a specific category. Several of the professionals listed 
here are already covered in the schedule, possibly by an alternative nomenclature. An arbitrary 
inclusion of professionals is therefore not recommended at this time.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.47.7 The Committee notes that the Ministry has already included CSSD technicians 
under the Surgical and Anesthesia Technology. The Concern is already addre ssed. The 
Committee , however, recommends that the Clinical Social Workers should be included in 
the ‘Behavioral Health Science Professionals’’ The Committee also recommends that the 
Psychiatric social worker, Medical Social Worker, Social Worker may be in cluded in the 
Schedule under Behavioral Health Science Professional. The Committee, however, agrees 
with the view of the Ministry and recommends that the clinical Psychologists must be 
regulated under the Rehabilitation Council of India. 
 
4.48 SUGGESTIONS OF IMA (HEADQUARTER AND KERALA CHAPTER) 
 
4.48.1 The IMA suggested the following suggestions:- 
 
(i) Indian Medical Association (Headquarter and Kerala Chapter) suggested deletion 
of  ‘can work autonomously’ and ‘apply advanced clinical procedures for 
treating’. The Association, further suggested addition of ‘under the supervision of 
a modern medicine doctor’ in different categories of the Schedule. 
 
(ii) The said association suggested deletion of ‘appropriate investigations, provides 
treatment’, ‘diagnosis a nd treatment’, ‘practices independently’ and addition 
‘under the supervision of a Physiatrist or modern medicine doctor’ in different 
categories of schedule. It was also suggested by the said association that delete 

149 
 
‘competent to perform preventive, diagno stic and therapeutic services’ and add 
‘Documentary and supportive services’  
 
(iii) Indian Medical Association (Headquarter and Kerala Chapter) suggested deletion 
of  ‘treat disease’ and the addition of ‘under the supervision of a modern medicine 
doctor’ in Schedule (Sl.No. 4). The association also suggested the deletion of 
‘management of disorder’ and the addition of ‘under the supervision of an 
Ophthalmologist or modern med icine doctor’ in Schedule No 5. It suggested 
addition of ‘under the supervision of a Physiatrist or modern medicine doctor’ in 
Schedule No 6. 
 
 
MINISTRY’S RESPONSE: 
 
4.48.2 The Ministry disapproved the suggestions of Indian Medical Association as t he ISCO 
classification of the profession ensure global recognition of the professions and defines them 
with respect to their scope of practice. Supervision is based on the level of position and authority 
at such position, which may not be limited to a profession. It was pleaded by the Ministry that 
this Bill is intended to enact a statutory provision such that health and wellness may be assured 
to the citizens of India through quality services provided by allied and healthcare professionals, 
who otherwise have not received due recognition in the system.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS: 
 
4.48.3 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry and is of the view that the main 
aim of this Bill is to establish independent footing for the allied and healthcare 
professionals. Addition of “under the supervision of a modern medicine doctor” in the 
Schedule would place the allied and healthcare professionals under the shadow of the 
medical doctors. The Committee is of the view that the doctors and allied healthcare 
professionals have to work in sync with each other for establishing a robust healthcare 
delivery system in the country. The other suggestions submitted by IMA need not be 
included in the different category of schedules. 
 
4.49 SCHEDULE NO 3 deals with the Physiotherapy Professionals  
 
4.49.1 Foundation of Rajdhani Clinical Physiotherapists (FRCP) su ggested modification in the 
definition of Schedule (Sl.No. 3) as follows:  
 
Physiotherapists are health service professional, who practices Physiotherapeutic system 
of medicine by undertaking comprehensive clinical examination and on appropriate 
investigation, prescribe and implement an evidence identified therapy protocol, 
consultation and advices with consent subjected to the movement disorder, dysfunction, 
malfunction, disorder, disability, trauma , sports injury, pain, disease, post surgical, 
critical care illness, women’s health and palliative care using physical agents, including 
internal and external energy mode of therapy such as movements re -education, 
mobilisation, manual stretching, bio mechanical manipulations, all forms of 
electrotherapy, sound waves, electromagnetic agents for prevention, correction, 
diagnosis, treatment, health promotion and functional restoration.  The clinical physical 
therapist shall practice as an independently health professional with an extended scope of 
clinical research in the subjects. 
 

150 
 
4.49.2 All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) also submitted that the 
definition of physiotherapy includes ‘functional dysfunctio n’ which overlaps the domain of OT. 
Since the PT definition already has terms like movement disorder, malfunction, disorder and 
disability. Therefore, the term ‘functional dysfunction’ should be deleted to avoid confusion and 
overlap.  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE 
 
4.49.3 The Ministry submitted that the  current definition of Physiotherapist has been adopted 
from the definition of World Confederation of Physical Therapy (WCPT) which is globally 
accepted and has also been deliberated with the representatives of the national association - 
Indian Association of Physiotherapists, in great detail.  
 
4.49.4 The Ministry further submitted that the d efinition of Occupational Therapy may be 
reexamined based on global definitions and existing State Councils.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.49.5 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that the current definition of 
Physiotherapy must be continued as it is a globally accepted definition. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to re -examine the definition of Occupational Therapy based on 
global definitions and existing State Councils of Delhi, Maharashtra. 
 
4.50 SCHEDULE NO 6 
 
4.50.1 All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) submitted that the Definition 
should be adopted from either AIOTA or the existing State councils of Delhi and Maharashtr a. 
All India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA) is of the view that the category of OTs 
should be independent as in case of Physiotherapy, and Occupational Therapy should not be 
included with other group of professions some of which are not even in existence. AIOTA 
further submitted that Occupational Therapy is a fully developed, research and evidence based 
practice. The UG program is of 4.5 years with internship and PG program is of 2 -3 years 
duration. There are no Diploma programs in Occupational Therapy.  
 
4.50.2 President, AIOTA, New Delhi suggested to modify definition of Occupational Therapy - 
Add “The Occupational Therapist can practice independently or as a part of a multi -disciplinary 
team and has a minimum qualification of a baccalaureate degree” in the definition mentioned in 
Schedule. President, AIOTA, New Delhi suggested that Categories mentioned under Occupation 
Therapy profession i.e. Movement Therapist or Recreational Therapist or Podiatrist rarely exist 
in our country and hence may be kept in another column. Their basic qualificati on, course 
curriculum, syllabus, job profiles, duties, skills, responsibilities and rights are not as of an 
Occupational Therapist.  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE 
 
4.50.3 With respect to the definition of Occupational Therapy, the Ministry submitted that it 
may be considered if the committee so recommends. Definition of Occupational Therapy may be 
reexamined based on global definitions and existing State Councils. Categorisation may also be 
reexamined. The Committee further submitted that ISCO has already been specified against each 
profession in the Schedule. However, given the Indian Scenario of the health systems, 
professional categories have been clubbed in similar categories so as to  enable a more efficient 
and effective techno-administrative approach.  

151 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.50.4 The Committee recommends that the occupational therapists in line with 
physiotherapists must be given the opportunity to practice independently or as a part of a 
multi-disciplinary team. The Committee, therefore, recommends addition of “The 
Occupational Th erapist can practice independently or as a part of a multi -disciplinary 
team and has a minimum qualification of a baccalaureate degree” in the definition 
mentioned in Schedule No 6.  
 
4.50.5 The Committee recommends the Ministry to re -examine the different  professions 
under the recognized category of Occupational Therapy and place the other professions 
under suitable category. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Movement Therapist 
(including Art, Dance and Movement Therapists or Recreational Therapist ) and Podiatrist 
may be kept in another category. 
 
4.51 SCHEDULE NO 7 deals with Behavioural Health Science Professionals  
 
4.51.1 Indian Association of Clinical Psychologists Kerala region, Yogini Nath,  Nazema Sagi  
and School of Human Ecology, TISS, Mumbai suggested removing Behavioural Health Sciences 
category. Multiple levels clubbed into one category of Behaviour Health Sciences  
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE 
 
4.51.2 The option of individual independent Councils for individual professions has been 
examined and analysed in great detail and found to be not feasible.  The A&HP Bill is an 
endeavor to bring all currently unregulated healthcare professionals under one common  statutory 
structure, as was  also suggested by the 31st DRSC in 2010. It will ensure efficient 
administration and be realistic in terms of being established as a body in the future. It has taken 
more than three decades to reach such an advanced stage of e xamination of this crucial Bill.  If a 
certain profession is removed from the Bill at this juncture, the chances of the profession being 
standardised in the future will be very minimal, harming both, clinical care of patients and 
potential future career prospects for youth.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.51.3 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that this Bill is a novel initiative 
to regulate the different allied and healthcare professionals that are non -standardised. 
Removing any professi on from the ambit of the National Commission on Allied and 
Healthcare Profession would cause grave harm to the excluded profession. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Behavioural Health Sciences category must be continued. 
However, the Ministry may re -examine the professions that have been included in the 
category. The Committee also recommends defining each profession in a different schedule.  
 
4.52 SCHEDULE NO 9 deals with Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic 
Technology Professionals  
 
4.52.1 Society of Indian Radiographers (SIR) suggested removal of the line ‘….work under the 
supervision of radiologists or other medical professional’ from the definition, as the 
professionals work independently like all other allied and healthcare professionals  
 
 
 

152 
 
MINISTRY’s RESPONSE 
 
4.52.2 This may be partly considered if the Committee recommends, since there may be specific 
list of tests and procedures that could be considered for independent practice by radiographers, 
however, the details of the same may be formulated by the respective pro fessional advisory body 
when constituted.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
4.52.3 The Committee recommends that the Council for Medical Radiology, Imaging and 
Therapeutic Technology Professionals should formulate the specific list of tests and 
procedures th at the professionals may be permitted to conduct independently. Once the 
number and details of the tests are decided, the changes suggested by SIR may be 
incorporated.  
  

153 
 
CHAPTER – V  
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
5.1 The Committee believes that the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 is an 
important legislation which is going to change the face of the Allied and Healthcare Professions 
with regard to its education and practice.  Proper regulation as envisaged i n the Bill will go a 
long way in the development, regulation and standardization of these professions. Apart from the 
recommendations made by the Committee in the previous chapter with regard to clauses of the 
Bill, the Committee would also like to highlig ht some pertinent issues, that constitute the pre -
requisite conditions for successful implementation of the provision of the proposed legislation , 
need to be looked into for holistic development of this sector.  
5.1.1 Attention of the Committee has been dr awn to the Report from 'Paramedics to Allied 
Health Professionals: Landscaping the Journey and why Forward' prepared by Public Health 
Foundation of India. It has been rightly pointed out in this Report that Allied and Healthcare 
Professionals constitute no w-a-days a vital part of health system delivery, both nationally and 
internationally. Allied and Healthcare Professionals are an untapped treasure, critical to fixing 
the gaping holes in India’s health workforce, particularly the severe shortage of physici ans and 
specialists. At a time when there is acute need for critical reforms in public health, aim must be 
to improve access to health by focusing on preventive, promotive, curative and rehabilitative 
needs of the population, the Allied and Healthcare Prof essionals could be leveraged as highly 
skilled, trained and competent health human resources in the system.  
5.1.2 The Committee has been given to understand that the recent scientific and technological 
development and advancement has changed health care service delivery system as the domain no 
longer remain just a prerogative of physicians and nurses but has transformed team efforts, 
drawing upon the expertise of both clinicians and non -clinicians.  Historically recognized as 
“para-medical staff” or para -professinals or health -technicians have now been accorded better 
appreciation and is presently termed as Allied and Health Care Professionals that has been a key 
area for health sector reforms in India, specially due to shortage of doctors and nurses in sem i-
urban and rural areas of the country.   
5.1.3 The Committee feels that in order to achieve the objectives and goals of the Allied and 
Health Care Professionals Bill, 2018, there are other important aspects like the following which 
should be paid attention to :- 
(i) Streamlining Human Resources for Health (HRH) 
 The Committee believes that advancement in technology in recent times demands trained 
individuals who can provide reliable results in conjunction with patient safety. However, there is 
a huge dearth of trained technologists/technicians in the system. The Report of the Public Health 
Foundation of India (PHFI) has indicated a supply -demand gap allied health professionals when 
demand was calculated using basic international norms.  The Human Resources for Health 
(HRH) shortfalls have resulted in the uneven distribution of all cadres of health workers. The 
uneven distribution of professional colleges and schools has led to a severe health system 
imbalance across the states, both in the production capacit y and in the quality of education and 
training, leading to poor health outcomes. The Committee is in the agreement with the views of 
the National Knowledge Commission that recommended for producing more AHPs by 
improving the quality and orientation of serv ice provision towards better meeting the health 
needs of the people stipulating that, ‘there is a dire need to focus on increasing the quantum and 
quality of human resources for nursing and paramedical/allied health services .  Healthcare can 
only be improved if human resources for nursing and allied health services are developed, 
nurtured and enhanced in a systematic and planned manner.  The Committee hopes that 

154 
 
implementation of the provisions of the said legislation would st reamline the stewardship and 
oversight and provide HRM strategic framework for rational deployment of skilled manpower, 
performance management system, task shifting and associated career development pathways for  
allied and healthcare professionals.  
(ii) Balancing power and self-regulating team efforts equilibrium between medicine and 
Allied and Health Care Professions  
 
The Committee takes into account that the several factors have contributed to the uneven 
power balance between doctors and AHPs.  The fun ctions that were once the domain of parents, 
clergy, teachers, judges and social workers are now seen as medical functions. According to 
findings of Public Health Foundation of India, medical dominance coupled with what is called 
“Medicalisation” is consid ered to be a major reason. Medical power is manifested through the 
professional autonomy of doctors, their pivotal role in the economics of the health services, their 
dominance over allied health occupational groups, administrative influence and the collec tive 
influence of medical associations. High medical domination has been instrumental in lowering 
the status of AHPs in the eyes of people and is one of the reasons for the low morale and self -
esteem among AHPs which needs to be addressed immediately if th ey were to contribute 
meaningfully to the well-being of people.  The Committee believes that policy rationalisations by 
the Government would facilitate the functional equilibrium between medical professionals and 
the Allied and Healthcare Professionals. 
  
(iii) Education, Training and Development  
 
(a) Even though education and training will be the mandate of the proposed 
Commission, the Committee would like to emphasize upon the vital role of 
education and training for allied and healthcare professionals. The Committee is 
of the view that training and retraining for public health should be based on 
competencies, because effective delivery of healthcare services depends largely 
on the nature of education,  training and appropriate orientation towards 
community health of all categories of medical and health personnel, and their 
capacity to function as an integrated team.   
 
(b) The Committee agrees with the observation as in the Report of PHFI wherein 
importance has been laid on competency based training cours e involving models 
and simulation laboratories and clinical learning opportunities imparted through 
the use of advanced techniques. It has also been pointed out that in India, 
internship is not compulsory for the same course in a number of institutions.  T his 
situation exists due to lack of regulation. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that along with streamlining of educational curricula of all allied and healthcare 
courses, adequate attention should also be given to training and compulsory 
internship.  
 
(iv)  Need for Generation of Team Spirit 
 
The Committee believes that recent modernisation of healthcare has initiated a team -
based healthcare delivery model as medical teams are usually ‘action teams’ due to their 
dynamic work conditions, wherein teamwork and collaboration are the pre -requisites for patient 
safety. The Committee is of the view that not only the team approach is instrumental for safe 
patient outcomes but critical for efficient, cost -effective operations.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that while implementing the provision of  the Act, attention must be given to 
generate the  spirit of teamwork in the health sector reflecting interdisciplinary approach, 

155 
 
requiring a division of labour among the medical, nursing and allied and healthcare professionals 
on equal footing , although th e doctors being the captain of the team, for  better and faster and 
much more holistic decision-making.  
 
(v) Augmentation of Allied and Health Care Professions basic infrastructure 
 
The Committee is of the considered view that there is urgent need for plan ned courses 
and institutions, uniform nomenclature for the existing courses, standards of practice and 
qualified faculty for the quality of education and skills of the allied and healthcare professions in 
India. Lack of definitive and uniform criteria for faculty regarding essential qualifications for 
their classification, nomenclature, entry (direct versus lateral) and the absence of faculty 
development programmes perpetuate the challenges pertaining to the quantity and quality of 
AHPs. The Committee, ther efore, recommends that the Government must make available the 
educational resources such as availability of qualified faculty, libraries, simulation centres and 
modern information technology tools at all centers of learning.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that while implementing provisions of Act Government must take care of necessary 
improvement and upgradation in infrastructure and availability of qualified faculty in the interest 
of growth and development of allied and healthcare professions all over the country.  
 
(vi) Capacity building and training through PPP modes  
 
 The Committee is of the view that the Government alone cannot achieve much in 
infrastructural development without the support of private partners. The Committee believes that 
the Government can encourage private sector interest through initiatives such as provision of tax 
incentives, and permits to corporates to undertake healthcare for optimised use of resources 
through a capacity building and training initiatives. The Government should ensure 
standardization of education and putting in place quality control mechanisms for educational 
institutions, teaching methods, clinical protocols, workforce management and any other related 
issues.  The Committee, therefore, recommends for sett ing up of r obust Public Private 
Partnership models for infrastructure development and for the training of faculty and ensuring 
that the required numbers of students graduate each year. Some incentive or financial support 
should be provided to start these courses.  
 
(vii) Standards and acceptable terminologies for the various professionals  
 
The Committee is of the considered view that there is critical need to undertake a 
complete standardization of nomenclature for allied and healthcare professionals as pa rt of their 
career progression, so that promotional levels and associated pay grades may be normalized, 
accordingly. As recommended earlier, the Committee reiterates its recommendation for 
reorganisation of the various categories of Allied and Healthcare P rofessionals based on 
educational levels and specialty qualifications to match international nomenclature and highlight 
their importance as vital team players in the healthcare delivery system.  
 
(viii) Globally standards of courses for employment in the health sector 
 
The Committee feels that courses should follow international standards so that they are 
widely accepted and receive worldwide recognition. Course delivery, practical training and 
assessments should be standardised. Standardisation should inco rporate the demonstration of 
learning as well.  Strategies should be developed to create flexibility in course delivery through 
alternative delivery modes, multiple locations and timings. Students passing out from colleges 
should be in great demand and get  good jobs. The educational methods should produce such 
allied and healthcare professionals as worthy of recruitment in domestic as well as global 

156 
 
healthcare sector. In this regard, it is also pertinent to keep them abreast of knowledge and 
maintain good l iaison with the industry in search of employment. The Committee is also of the 
view that the provisions of the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 contains the capacity 
for transforming India into a hub of medical tourism - Indian physiotherapist a nd occupational 
therapist have got world -wide response, however, there is a need for standardization and Allied 
and Health Care Professions to fill up the national and global demands. 
(ix) Identification /creation of centres of excellence and globally recognised institutions 
 
(a) The Committee is of the view that for each course,  centres of excellence and 
globally recognized institutions should be identified along with hospitals with 
known good practices, which may become possible training sites. Those 
institutions willing to conduct courses or to become training sites should be 
incentivised by the government. It is for the institutions to conduct courses at 
various levels (diploma to post -graduate and doctoral) depending on their 
capacities, thus increasing the number of courses in various streams and the 
students for each course.  Such institutions should also be motivated to at least 
become clinical training sites rendering quality education to students.  
 
(b) The Committee desires to highlight that quality improvement can be implemented 
by establishing partnerships with internati onal institutions of excellence and PPPs 
to bring out the best in the profession. The standards developed at the centre and 
state levels should be in complete harmony with each other. Emphasis on research 
activities needs to be enhanced and the funding provided at regular intervals either 
by the centre, state or foreign direct investment, etc., which can be used for the 
development of the research centres.  
 
(x) Career Progression for Professionals 
 
 The Committee gives emphasis that there is need for laying -down strong foundation for 
robust carrier progression and pathway i.e. a journey from Allied Health Care to Health Care 
Profession in order to achieve the objective mission of the Bill.  There is a  need to define a 
pathway of an upgraded lateral entry within the allied health educational universe, such as for a 
diploma holder to enter a degree programme.  The Committee, in this regard, recommends that 
all avenues for each level of transition should be defined. With respect to public awareness, 
candidates should be well -versed with the difference in opting for any degree or diploma 
programme.  
 
(xi) Role of Allied Health Professionals at Primary, Secondary and Tertiary Levels 
 
The Committee also recom mends that the allied and healthcare professionals must play 
its pivotal role in providing community healthcare services and be the part and parcel of all the 
healthcare schemes especially, Pradhan Mantri Jan Aarogya Yojana - Ayushman Bharat. The 
Committee therefore, desires  that the Government should encourage the allied and healthcare 
professionals to provide its services in the rural, tribal and urban slum areas. The Committee also 
desires that the government should plug policy gaps and ensure generatio n of adequate and 
effective human resource for health to provide quality care at primary, secondary and terteisury 
level of health delivery in the country. The Committee, in this regard, recommends for 
synchronizing and  strengthening the allied health sci ences into articulate policies that help in 
capacity building and value realization of allied health professionals in the healthcare delivery 
system.    
 

157 
 
(xii) Elevating the status and pay structure of allied and health professionals  
 
(a) The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare in its 31st Report had made the following observations on the issue of pay 
structure and status of allied healthcare professionals :-  
 
During the course of interactions, the Committee observed that there was a lot 
of dissatisfaction among the allied health professionals particularly 
physiotherapists and occupational therapists with regard to their pay scales. 
It was brought to the notice of the Committee that their entry into Government 
service after completion of four and a half years degree course in the 
respective profession was not being addressed properly. The Committee was 
given to understand that their recurrent demands for bringing  parity in the 
pay scales have yielded no results so far. General perception was that 
discriminatory treatment was being meted out to them as their pay scales did 
not commensurate with their status and responsibility.  
 
The Committee feels that all the all ied health professionals including 
physiotherapists and occupational therapists play a crucial role in the field of 
medicine and physical rehabilitation. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that their legitimate interests should be taken care of and their 
existing pay structure may be revised according to their qualifications and 
duration of the course they have to put in before entering into a Government 
job. 
 
(b) The present Committee reiterates the above mentioned recommendations with the 
purpose of elevating the status of allied and healthcare professionals.  
 
(xiii) Nomination of MPs 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the Members of Parliament are the representatives of 
the people and hold immense importance in voicing the concerns of the gen eral public. The 
Committee believes that the Members of Parliament should be included in the Governing Bodies 
of Institutes of National Importance so that the concerns of all the stakeholders are also 
addressed while policy making. The Committee, therefore, recommends that three Members of 
Parliament (two from Lok Sabha and one from Rajya Sabha) should be nominated in the 
Governing Bodies of all the Allied and Healthcare Universities and Institutions of National 
Importance in the cou ntry.  On similar lines, two members of State Legislative Assembly, and 
one Member of State Legislative Council, in the case of bicameral state legislature, should be 
nominated in the governing bodies of all the allied and healthcare institutions in the state.         
 
Conclusion  
 
5.2 The Committee, therefore believes  that once the provisions of the  Allied and Health 
Care Professions Act are implemented, there would  certainly a facelift for the entire allied health 
workforce by establishing institutes o f excellence, the time is opportune for the government to 
review existing inputs, processes and outputs; standardise institutions, educational tools and 
methods; revisit career paths and progression; and reintroduce these professionals into the public 
system to reap much -awaited rewards in the form of improved health outcomes for the 
population living not only in metropolitan cities but also in far - flung rural areas, tribal areas and 
urban-slum areas in order to meet the goals of national health policy and mission and the mission 
objectives of Ayushmaan Bharat. 

158 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION OF THE BILL 
 The Committee is in agreement with the views of the Ministry and recommends for 
retaining the conjuncting word, "and" in terminology/definition of "Allied and Healthcare 
Institution" as the Bill pertains to both the Allied as well as the Healthcare professionals. 
 
(Para 4.2.3 of 117th Report) 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that professionals with varied 
qualifications should not be given a common nomenclature. Equating a professional who 
has devoted a substantial  amount of his/her life in research and academics with an 
apprentice in the same field will discourage individuals from pursuing higher education. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends retaining the nomenclature, “ allied and healthcare 
professional” 
(Para 4.2.7) 
 
 The Committee understands the objective of the Bill con taining the credit hours 
criteria for allied and healthcare professionals. However, the Committee feels a sketchy 
adoption of the credit  hour system without specifying the time duration may give rise to 
ambiguity and apprehensions in the minds of stakehold ers. The Committee, although, 
welcomes the introduction of a credit hour system but the way each University/institute 
calculates the credits should also be uniform throughout the country. The Committee 
further recommends that duration of course study of Al lied Health Professionals must be 
expressed in duration of calendar years with specific number of semesters to bring focus 
and clarity.  The number of hours for each profession should also be decided on the 
number of lecture hours and the number of hours d evoted in clinical practice. The 
Committee also notes that the clause does not specify the time duration in which the 
number of hours have to be completed. Absence of a time limit will give rise to non -
uniformity. The Committee, therefore, is of the view t hat the definition should specify the 
number of hours as well as the number of years in which the diploma/degree has to be 
obtained.  
(Para 4.2.12) 
 
 The Committee also  recommends that minimum and maximum time duration 
should also be specified in the Bill.  The Committee strongly recommends that the diploma 
or degree for "Allied Health Professional" should strictly be obtained as a result of a study 
at a higher educational institution for a duration which shall not be less than two thousand 
hours spread over a period of 2-3 years.  
(Para 4.2.13) 
 
Accordingly, after the amendments, the clause 2(c) will read as under: 
 
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 
(c) “allied health professional” includes an associate, technician or technologist 
who is trained to perform any technical and practical task to support diagnosis and 
treatment of illness, disease, injury or impairment, and to support implementation of 
any healthcare treatment and referral plan, recommended by a medical, nursing or 
any other healthcare professional, and, who has obtained any qualification of 

159 
 
diploma or degree under this Act, the duration of which shall not be less than two 
thousand hours sp read over a period of two -three years divided into specific 
semesters; 
(Para 4.2.14) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that any institute that conducts allied courses should 
be affiliated to a State/Central University. To avoid mushrooming of sub standard colleges 
and institutes, it is important that the degree granted by only accredited college/institutes 
are recognised as allied and healthcare qualification. 
(Para 4.2.18) 
 
 
 The Committee while deliberating with the Ministry in its meetings arrived at a 
conclusion that non -governmental organizations should not be given the freedom to 
conduct allied courses as such courses will only lead to non -standardisation and promote 
more ambiguity. The Committee is also of the view that considering the diverse profess ions 
that the proposed Act is set to regulate and the number of unregistered NGOs in the 
country, monitoring the courses conducted by NGOs will not only be a daunting task but 
also spoil the quality of education in the allied and healthcare Profession. The  Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that to discourage the proliferation of spurious degrees, 
only accredited colleges/institutes should be allowed to run degree or diploma courses. 
 
(Para 4.2.19) 
 
 The Committee also notes that the allied and healt hcare professionals are tasked 
with very crucial role in the health care system and their importance can be observed by 
the vital functions that they are bound to perform. The Committee is of the view that to 
make the degree attained in allied field more r eliable, granting of degree in allied and 
healthcare profession through distance learning mode must be completely prohibited. At 
present in the absence of a robust monitoring mechanism, qualitative assessment of the 
degree attained through distance mode is  not possible. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that only those degrees granted by accredited colleges/institutes through 
regular mode should be termed as allied and healthcare qualification.  
(Para 4.2.20) 
 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends the following changes in clause 2(d). Clause 
2(d) will be read as under:   
 
“allied and healthcare qualification” means a diploma or degree possessed by an allied 
and healthcare professional which is granted only by a accredited college/institute 
through regular learning mode under this Act; 
(Para 4.2.21) 
 
 The Committee understands the apprehension of some professionals that claim to 
have more than 3600 hours of course duration. As per the submissions of the 
Physiotherapists and Occupational Therapists, the time duration for completion of these 
courses is mo re than four years excluding the internship duration. However, the 
Committee also notes that 3600 is the minimum requirement and in the healthcare 
professional category, there can be professions that have course content spanning more 
than 3600 hours. The C ommittee strongly recommends that the time duration should also 

160 
 
be rationalized in the calendar year and divided into semesters for the healthcare 
professionals as well. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the degree for 
"Healthcare Professional" sho uld strictly be obtained as a result of a study at a higher 
educational institution for a duration which shall not be less than 3600 hours spread over a 
period of 3-5 years divided into specific semesters.   
(Para 4.2.26) 
 
Accordingly, after the amendments, Clause 2(g) will reads as under: 
“healthcare professional” includes a scientist, therapist or other professional who 
studies, advises, researches, supervises or provides preventive, curative, rehabilitative, 
therapeutic or promotional health services and  who has obtained any qualification of 
degree under this Act, the duration of which shall not be less than three thousand six 
hundred hours spread over a period of 3-5 years divided into specific semesters.; 
(Para 4.2.27) 
 
 The Committee observes that at p resent there is no standardization of education 
and practice of allied courses in AYUSH. The Committee while examining the National 
Commission on Indian System of Medicine Bill 2019 had made the same observation and 
recommended the following in its Report No. 115 on The National Commission for Indian 
System of Medicine Bill 2019:- 
 
"The Committee is also of the view that there is a need for standardization of education 
and practice of Paramedical Courses like nursing, therapists training etc in Ayurveda, 
Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
development and regulation of paramedical courses in different disciplines of Indian 
System of Medicine should also be mentioned as one of the functions of the National 
Commission of Indian System of Medicine so that these courses are recognized and a 
uniform curriculum can be developed." 
(Para 4.2.31) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that there is no need to add a clause stating the scope 
of the Bill. The Committee has already recommended that degree granted only by 
accredited colleges/institutions through regular m ode would be recognised as allied and 
healthcare qualification. 
(Para 4.2.35) 
 
 The Committee notes that stakeholders have submitted that the definition of the 
professions as well as the professional should be included in the Bill. However, the 
Committee observes that the schedule under Section 2(k) clearly defines each recognised 
category and mentions the ISCO code before each profession. During the course of clause 
by clause consideration, the Ministry submitted that the ISCO document already includes 
the definition of each profession. The Committee, therefore, concludes that the inclusion of 
definition of each profession in the Bill is unwarranted as the ISCO Code of each 
profession is already listed in the Schedule of the Bill.   
(Para 4.2.36) 
 
 The Committee observes that in order to have proper "Patient care" and safety in 
the existing scenario of shortage of doctors and nurses, there is urgent need for task -
shifting to qualified allied and healthcare professionals.  
(Para 4.2.37) 

161 
 
 
 The Committe e, therefore, is in agreement with the view of Public Health 
Foundation of India and recommends that " Task Shifting" may be defined under Clause 2 
as per the intention of Statement of Reasons and Objective of the Bill and globally accepted 
standard. 
(Para 4.2.38) 
 
Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.2.39) 
 
 The Committee observes that presently, there are 53 professions that the Bill aims to 
regulate and in subsequent paragraphs, the Committee has recommended change in the 
nomenclature of "Allied and Healthcare Council of India" as the National Commission for 
Allied and Healthcare Profession and the inclusion of more professions in the Bill. The 
proposed Commission shall have representation of two members from some recognised  
category and representation of one from the rest of recognised categories. The Committee 
also observes that all the recognised categories except Physiotherapy; Physician Associate 
or Physician Assistant; Renal Technology; and Primary Community and other 
Miscellaneous Care Professionals have  more than one profession under its ambit. The 
Committee, in view of the diverse set of professionals that this Bill is intended to serve, 
strongly believes that each profession from each recognised category must find i ts voice in 
the proposed Commission. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the representation 
from each recognised category should also be rotated among each profession after 
completion of tenure of two years. The Committee also observes that two p ersons will be 
nominated from each of the six zones representing the State Council and increasing the 
tenure of members would further delay the representation of States in the proposed 
Commission.  
(Para 4.3.4) 
 
 The Committee during the clause by clause c onsideration examined the proposal of 
increasing the tenure of the members of the proposed Commission but considering the 
number of professions and representation from the States, the Committee concluded that 
the tenure of the members, in the Commission is  reasonable and there is no need to make 
amendments in the provision stipulating the tenure of the members. The Committee also 
recommends that only in extraordinary circumstances when the member has proved to be 
an exceptional asset to the Commission, shou ld his/her tenure be extended but not beyond 
six years. 
 
(Para 4.3.5) 
 
 The Committee notes that there are allied professions in AYUSH as well which are 
not regulated by any central agency. The Committee in its Report No 115 th had 
recommended for regulation of AYUSH allied professionals under the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM). The Committee reiterates its 
recommendation made in the 115th Report on NCISM Bill 2019 and recommends removal 
of JS AYUSH fr om the membership of the proposed Commission. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry of AYUSH to expedite the regulation of the allied courses in 
AYUSH. 
(Para 4.3.9) 
 
 The Committee in its various meetings observed that the composition of the 
proposed Commission includes unnecessary representation from the bureaucrats which is 

162 
 
not justified. The Committee, therefore, is of the strong view that the proposed National 
Commission on Allied and Healthcare Professions should act as a platform for all the 
professionals to voice their opinion and advocates increasing their representation in the 
Commission. The Committee, therefore, recommends removal of officers from unrelated 
departments and Ministry in the Commission, viz, Joint Secretaries from AYUSH, Defence  
and representative from NITI AYOG.  The Ministry, during the course of clause by clause 
consideration of the Bill, has already agreed to the proposal.  
(Para 4.3.10) 
 
 The Committee understands the concerns of the stakeholders and strongly believes 
that the need of the hour is to raise the status of the allied healthcare professions and bring 
forth the profession out of medical dominance by standardisation of its education and 
practice. The Committee takes note of the relevant portion of SOR of the Bill t hat reads as 
under: 
 
"Health workforce in Indian healthcare system has been defined with focus limited 
to few cadres such as doctors, nurses and frontline workers, wherein, several other 
healthcare professionals have remained unidentified, unregulated and 
underutilised. The pe rsistent demand for a regulatory framework to ensure 
appropriate regulation and standardisation of such professions have been seen for 
several decades. In the last six years, over fifty allied and healthcare professions 
have been identified whose potential  may be utilised in improving the access to care 
and all those professions are globally regulated professions." 
(Para 4.3.14) 
 
 The Committee, therefore, is in agreement with the recommendations of Public 
Health Foundation of India for the need of de -medicalisation and bring forth the allied and 
Healthcare Profession to the forefront of patient care and safety.The Ministry, however, 
submitted to the Committee that it wishes to ensure multidisciplinary initiatives among 
medical and allied healthcare professi onals through their membership in the proposed 
Commission. However, the Committee notes that the Ministry  has kept ICMR Indian 
Council of Medical Research out of the Commission that is the apex research body in the 
country. The Committee is of the view tha t rather than representation for existing  
Councils, representation from ICMR is vital for facilitating multidisciplinary programmes 
especially in the research field.  
(Para 4.3.15) 
 
 The Committee also believes that a provision for joint sessions among the different 
Commissions and Councils would be a better way to encourage learning from other 
professions. The joint meetings can act as a forum and platform for exchange of ideas and 
adoption of best practices from different professions. The Committee has, t herefore, 
recommended for a provision for joint sitting among the Commission in the subsequent 
paragraphs.  
 
(Para 4.3.16) 
 
 The Ministry during clause by clause consideration deposed before the Committee 
that doctors, nurses, Pharmacists and the allied healthcare professionals are an integral 
part of the healthcare system and doctors have a major role to play.  The Committee, w hile 
examining the representation from other Councils in the proposed Commission noted that 
Institutes of National Importance have already been included in the Bill and the 

163 
 
representation from the other Councils may be avoided.  The Committee, therefore, a grees 
with the views of the stakeholders that representation from the Dental Council of India, 
Indian Nursing Council, and Pharmacy Council of India is unwarranted and should be 
removed. However, the Committee recommends retaining the representation from 
National Medical Commission.  
(Para 4.3.17) 
 
 The Committee also notes that the Medical Imaging and Radiology Professions falls 
under the purview of Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB), therefore AERB 
representation is acceptable. The Committee also notes that Rehabilitation Council of India 
(RCI) is the nodal agency for prescribing minimum standards of education and training of 
various categories of professionals/ personnel dealing with people with disabilities. 
Rehabilitation professionals such as audiologists and speech therapists are regulated under 
the Rehabilitation Act of India. Therefore, the Committee recommends retaining the 
membership from RCI. The Committee recommends that one member representing 
AERB, NMC and RCI on biennial rotation not below the rank of Deputy Secretary must 
be an ex-officio member of the proposed Commission.   
(Para 4.3.18) 
 
 The Committee also notes the concerns of the Physiotherapists regarding their 
representation in the other Councils. However, the Committee has recommend ed for the 
removal of DCI, INC, NMC, PCI from the proposed National Commission for Allied and 
Healthcare Profession. Therefore, any representation of the allied and healthcare 
professions in other councils is unnecessary. The Committee, in the subsequent 
paragraphs, has also recommended for a National A llied and Healthcare Professional 
Advisory Council that will include representation from UGC. The Committee through its 
recommendations in the composition of the proposed Commission has tried to include 
representation from all the related fields and it believes that this Commission will fairly 
address the concerns of all the stakeholders, therefore representation from any other 
Councils or Ministry is not required.  
(Para 4.3.19) 
 
 The Committee, therefore rec ommends that the clause 3(3)(j) may be amended as 
follows:  
 
(j) One person representing out of the following, on biennial rotation basis in the alphabetical 
order, not below the rank of Deputy Secretary, member ex officio— 
  
(i) Atomic Energy Regulatory Board;  
(ii) National Medical Commission; and  
(iii) Rehabilitation Council of India; 
 
(Para 4.3.20) 
 
 The Committee agrees with the concerns of the Ministry that the composition of the 
proposed Commission should be such that all the professionals are fairly represented and 
one group does not dominate the Commission. However, the Committee is of the view th at 
Institutions of National Importance or National Institutes with wide experience in running 
qualitative allied and healthcare courses in the country should also be given representation 
in the Commission. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to include persons 
at the level of Director/Deputy Director from Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya National Institute 
for Persons with Physical Disabilities, Delhi; National Institute of Rehabilitation Training 

164 
 
and Research, Cuttack; National Institute of Orthopedically Handicapped, Kolkata and All 
India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore, Karnataka in the proposed Commission. 
The Committee also advises the Ministry to explore addition of representation from other 
allied institutes that are imparting rich qualit y education to the related allied professionals 
so that the proposed Commission may benefit from the wide experiences of the Institutes 
and guide the other institutes in achieving the same benchmark . Representation from such 
institutions will not only fac ilitate better policy making but also provide the Commission 
with a closer outlook of the ground realties and problems that are plaguing the allied 
healthcare professional sector. 
(Para 4.3.24) 
 
  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the clause may be read as under: 
n. Three persons not below the rank of Director/Deputy Director/Medical Superintendent 
representing the following, on biennial rotation basis— 
 
1. All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi; 
2. All India Institute of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Mumbai; 
3. Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, 
Puducherry; and 
4. North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical 
Sciences, Shillong; 
5. Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya National Institute for Persons with Physical 
Disabilities, Delhi 
6. National Institute for Persons with Physical Disabilities, Delhi 
7. National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research, Cuttack;  
8. National Institute of orthopedically handicapped, Kolkata; and 
9. All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore 
(Para 4.3.25) 
 
 The Committee is in agreement of the Ministry that clause 3(3)(a) specifies the 
rotatory representation of the State Councils which is on the lines of the provision of NMC 
Act 2019. However to allay the apprehensi on of not being adequate representation of all 
State Councils in the National Commission, the Committee has recommended for the 
constitution of National Allied and Healthcare Professions Advisory Council, wherein 
adequate representation of States and Allie d and healthcare Professionals would be 
ensured for aiding and advising the National Commission on Allied and Healthcare 
Professions. The Committee has recommended the composition and the functions of the 
National Allied and Healthcare Professions Advisory  Council in the subsequent 
paragraphs. 
(Para 4.3.29) 
 
 The Committee has been given to understand that Medical Laboratory Sciences, 
Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic Technology, Ophthalmic Sciences and 
Physiotherapy have been given representation of two members each, considering the 
number of professionals in these categories. The Committee feels that this representation of 
2 is adequate and need not be increased to 6 as suggested by some stakeholders.  
(Para 4.3.33) 

165 
 
 
 The Committee also notes the observations made by the Department -related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee in its 31 st Report on the Paramedical and 
Physiotherapy Central Council Bill, 2007 with respect to Occupational Therapy that 
differentiates the profession of Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy as two 
independent professions with e ntirely different course of study, mode of treatment and 
approach in treatment and rehabilitation of patients, wherein the Occupational Therapists 
are responsible for detailed assessment, planning and implementation of treatment 
regimen.  
(Para 4.3.34) 
 
 
 In view of the above observations, the Committee notes that the Occupational 
Therapy and Physiotherapy are two different independent professions that are at equal 
footing, The Committee observes that the Ministry, during the course of clause by clause 
consideration of the Bill, has already agreed to the proposal of enhancing the number of 
Occupational Therapists in the proposed Commission to two. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends increasing the representation of Occupational Therapists to 2 at par with t he 
Physiotherapists and keeping in view the vital role of OTs in patient care and safety.  
(Para 4.3.35) 
 
 The Committee also recommends the Ministry to prepare a database of the number 
of professionals in each category and revise the representation of eac h category once the 
verified and correct estimates of the number of professionals in each category are obtained.   
(Para 4.3.36) 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry and observes that the category 
of Ophthalmic Science Professionals includes both Optometrist and Ophthalmic Assistants. 
Therefore, the nomenclature of Ophthalmic Sciences Professional may be retained. 
(Para 4.3.37) 
 
 The Committee does not agree with the view of the stakeholder and believes that 
mandating selection of cha irperson only from the five professional category holding two 
seats is not justified as that is against democratic creed.The Committee, however, 
recommends that the chairperson of the Commission s hould be an allied and healthcare 
professional of outstandin g ability, proven administrative capacity and integrity and 
possess a postgraduate degree in any profession of recognised category of allied and 
healthcare sciences from any University. He/She should also have an experience of not less 
than twenty years in the field of allied and health care professions, out of which at least ten 
years should be as a leader in the area of allied and healthcare education. This eligibility 
criterion will ensure that only an individual with wide expertise in allied and healthc are 
science is selected as the chairperson of the Commission irrespective of the professional 
category he/she belongs to. 
(Para 4.3.38) 
 

166 
 
 The Committee is of the view that a well regulated structure is already present for 
Dentistry and its allied services under the Dental Council of India. The Committee has 
already recommended removal of ex -officio membership of Dental Council of India from 
the Commission. The Committee emphasizes that this Bill aims to regulate those allied 
healthcare professionals which remain unregulated and non -standardized. However, the 
Committee also takes note of the concerns of Dental Hygienists and feels that awarene ss 
and knowledge about this profession is very less and limited only to the metropolitan cities. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry that it may consider to include 
representation from the Dental Hygienists in the Dental Council of India and devise a 
mechanism for mainstreaming of the professionals.  
(Para 4.3.39) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that on the line of NMC, NCISM and NCH Bill, the 
selection of chairperson and the members of the proposed Commission should be on the 
recommendation of a Search Committee. This mechanism will ensure fair selection of the 
members and avoid favoritism and nepotism. The composition of the Search Committee is 
stated in the subsequent paragraphs.  
(Para 4.3.40) 
 
 The Committee also notes that many recognized categories under Schedule 2 
comprise of multiple professions. Clause 3(3)(m) provides for two persons each 
representing the recognised categories, namely, Medical Laboratory Sciences, Medical 
Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic Technology, Ophthalmic Sciences and Physiotherapy; 
and one person each representing the rest of the recognised categories listed in the 
Schedule, to be nominated by the Central Government. Therefore, at a single instance, 
representation from all the professions of a particular recogni zed category in the proposed 
Commission is practically not possible as there is a provision of either two or one person 
representing the categories. This will lead to many professions getting unrepresented in the 
proposed Commission. The Committee, therefo re strongly recommends that the 
membership should be rotated among the different professions in a recognized category so 
that every profession gets an opportunity to be part of the Commission.  
(Para 4.3.41) 
 
 
 The Committee notes that in the allied health system, many institutes are also owned 
by charitable organizations along with the public  and private sector. Therefore, the 
Committee is also of the view that removing this clause is not feasible as representat ion of 
allied and healthcare professions from existing charitable bodies is also important. The 
Committee, however, feels that the individuals nominated from such charitable 
organizations must fulfil the required eligibility criteria as prescribed by the C entral 
Government. The Committee also recommends that the nominated person should have the 
prescribed expertise in allied and healthcare professions. The Committee also recommends 
the Ministry to set the eligibility criteria for such charitable institutes so that only 
professionals from qualified institutes of repute are nominated to the proposed 
Commission and not from spurious NGO. 
(Para 4.3.45) 
 
 The Committee therefore, recommends that the clause may be amended as follows:-  

167 
 
 
“(n) Two persons, eligible to be members of the council representing charitable 
institutions engaged in education or services in connection with any recognised 
category, to be nominated by the Central Government having such qualifications and 
experience as may be prescribed by the Central Government–member” 
(Para 4.3.46) 
 
 The Committee would like to emphasize again that the basis of representation in the 
Commission must be empirical facts and figures instead of normative conclusion. The 
Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to create a database of the number of Allied 
Health Professionals in the country on a priority basis. The Committee there fore directs 
the Ministry to devise a mechanism through which not only the number but also the 
qualification (degree/specialization/training taken etc) of the professionals are easily 
accessed and verified by the required agencies. The Ministry should also  make optimum 
use of technological advancement and create online software for registration of the Allied 
Health Professionals. This database should be regularly updated so that an authentic 
record of the number and qualifications of professionals is easily  available. This will not 
only help in tracking the actual number of practicing professionals but also reflect the core 
competency and quality of the professionals. 
(Para 4.3.49) 
  
 The Committee  is in agreement with the suggestion of the stakeholders that  the 
representation of different streams of Allied and Health Professionals in the proposed 
Commission should be proportionate to their numbers in the Profession as well as the 
functioning necessity of healthcare team. The Committee, therefore, strongly re commends 
the Ministry to expedite the collection of correct estimates of the Allied Health 
Professionals in the country which is also reflected in the proposed Commission so that the 
Professionals are given fair and equitable representation and democratic functioning of the 
regulatory body is ensured.  
(Para 4.3.50) 
  
 Consequent to the recommendations made by the Committee with respect to the 
title of the Bill and the composition of the National Commission on Allied and Healthcare 
Professions, Clause 3 after amendments will read as follows: 
 
Clause 3 provides for Constitution and composition of Commission. 
 
(1)  The Central Government shall constitute a Commission, to be known as the 
National Commission of Allied and Healthcare Professions, to exercise the 
powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this 
Act. 
 
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by 
the same name sue or be sued. 
 

168 
 
(3) The Chairperson shall be a person of outstanding ability, proven 
administrative capacity and integrity, possessing a postgraduate degree in any 
profession of recognised category of allied health sciences from any University 
and having experience of not less than twenty years in the field of allied health 
sciences, out of which at least ten years shall be as a leader in the area of 
allied education.  
 
(4)  The Commission shall consist of the following persons to be appointed by the 
Central Government, namely:—  
(a)  a Chairperson;  
(b)  twenty-two ex officio Members; and 
(c)  thirty-four part-time Members. 
 
(5)  The following persons shall be the ex officio Members of the Commission, 
namely:- 
 
a.  Joint  Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Legal 
Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice—member ex officio; 
o. Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare in charge of Allied Health Sciences and Education–
member ex officio; 
p. Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship–member ex officio; 
q. Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, M inistry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment–member ex officio; 
r. One person representing the Directorate General of Health Services not 
below the rank of Deputy Director General–member ex officio; 
s. One person representing the Indian Council of Medical Research not 
below the rank of Deputy Director General–member ex officio 
t. One person representing out of the following, on biennial rotation basis in 
the alphabetical order, not below the rank of Deputy Secretary, — 
(i) Atomic Energy Regulatory Board; 
(ii) National Medical Commission; and 
(iii)Rehabilitation Council of India; 
u. Three persons not below the rank of Director/Deputy Director/ Medical 
Superintendent representing the following, on biennial rotation basis— 
 
(x) All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi; 
(xi) All India Institute of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
Mumbai; 
(xii) Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and 
Research, Puducherry; and 
(xiii) North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and 
Medical Sciences, Shillong; 
(xiv) Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya  National Institute for Persons with 
Physical Disabilities, Delhi 
(xv) National Institute for Persons with Physical Disabilities, Delhi 
(xvi) National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research, 
Cuttack; 
(xvii) National Institute of orthopedically handicapped, Kolkat a; 
and 

169 
 
(xviii) All India Institute of Speech and Hearing. Mysore, Karnataka. 
 
v. the President of the Under -Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education 
Board; 
w. the President of the Post -Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education 
Board; 
x. the President of the Allied and Healthcare Assessment and Rating Board; 
y. the President of the Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and 
Registration Board; 
z. the Presidents of the Eight Councils; 
 
(6) The following persons shall be appointed as part -time Members of the 
Commission, namely:— 
 
(c) Two persons from each of the six zones representing the State Councils on 
biennial rotation in the alphabetical order as per the zonal distribution 
having such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government to be nominated by the concerned State Government; 
 
(d) Two persons each representing the recognised categories, namely, Medical 
Laboratory Sciences, Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic 
Technology, Ophthalmic Sciences, Physiotherapy and Occupational 
Therapy; and  one person each representing the rest of the recognised 
categories listed in the Schedule, to be nominated by the Search Committee 
having such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 
 
(c)  Two persons, eligible to be members of the council representing charitable 
institutions engaged in education or services in connection with any 
recognised category, to be nominated by the Central Government having 
such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by the Central  
Government–member” 
(Para 4.3.51) 
 
 
Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.3.52) 
 
 
INSERTION OF NEW CLAUSE ON CONSTIUTION OF EIGHT COUNCILS 
 The Committee notes that in the 31 st Report on the Paramedical and Physiotherapy 
Central Council Bill, 2007 , the Committee had recommended for constitution of (a) The 
Physiotherapy Central Council, (b) The Occupational Therapy Central Council, (c) The 
Medical Laboratory Technology Central Co uncil, and (d) The Radiology Technology 
Central Council. The Committee while examining the Allied and Healthcare Professions 
Bill 2018 also came across the suggestions submitted by almost all the 53 Allied and 
Healthcare professions seeking their separate Council for each profession, thereby, 
meaning 53 Councils in the Allied and healthcare sector which is not feasible as the same 
would provide plethora of structural framework. The Committee examined the suggestions 
and arrived at a conclusion that a separa te Council for each profession would provide 
multiple institutional framework for the Allied and Healthcare Professions and therefore, 

170 
 
the Committee disapproved the proposal for constitution of separate 53 Councils as the 
numbers of professions is likely to increase in future as provided in clause 66 of the Bill.  
(Para 4.4.1) 
 
 The Committee also recommends that the National Commission for Allied and 
Healthcare Profession can act as a central coordinating body and facilitate overall 
supervision in the general interest of promotion and development of each and every 
profession. The Committee is of the view that the Commission can delegate its powers and 
functions pertaining to that specific category of profession to these independent Councils 
falling under the ambit of the proposed Commission.  
(Para 4.4.2) 
 
 The Committee understan ds that Clause 3 will provide for the constitution and 
composition of the National Commission on Allied and Healthcare Professions instead of a 
Council. The Committee, after examining all the views of the professionals, is of the view 
that considering the diverse allied health professions in the country, there is certainly a 
need to constitute different councils for these professions so that none of the profession 
remains neglected and the whole allied healthcare sector progresses. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends constitution of eight Councils by merging various categories of 
profession.  
(Para 4.4.3) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the Councils may comprise of allied and 
healthcare professionals from Institutes of National Repute granting degree/diploma in 
that particular profession. The Council of Physiotherapists may consists of physiotherapy 
professionals from the following National Institutes, namely, Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya 
National Institute for Persons with Physical Disabilities, Delhi; National Institute of 
Rehabilitation Training and Research, Cuttack; and National Institute of orthopedically  
handicapped, Kolkata etc.  The Committee is of the view that the Physiotherapist having 
minimum 10 years of experience in the field of Physiotherapy and holding Master of 
Physiotherapy or equivalent must be the minimum qualification.  
(Para 4.4.4) 
 
 The C ouncil of Occupational therapy may consist of nominated members from 
recognized institutions of National repute at the level of Director/Deputy Director/HOD, 
namely, Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya National Institute for Persons with Physical Disabilities, 
New Del hi; National Institute of Locomotor Disabilities, Kolkata; Swami Vivekananda 
National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research, Cuttack. The members may 
also be nominated from the existing councils of Occupational Therapy and Physiotherapy 
from di fferent States. Members may also be nominated from existing National level 
associations in Occupational Therapy. 
(Para 4.4.5) 
 
 The Council for Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic Technology 
Professional must include representation from all the prof essions under this category, 

171 
 
namely, Medical Physicists; Nuclear Medicine Technologists; Radiology and Imaging 
Technologist (Diagnostic Medical Radiographer, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), 
Computed Tomography (CT); Mammographer, Diagnostic Medical Sonog raphers); 
Radiotherapy Technologist; Dosimetrist; and Electrocardiogram (ECG) Technologist or 
Echocardiogram (ECHO) Technologist.  On similar lines, the Committee recommends that 
the Ministry must ensure that each Council must comprise of the members perta ining to 
the related profession only. The Committee further recommends that the Chairperson of 
the Council should be a person from the allied and healthcare sector and should be 
appointed from amongst the members of the Council. 
(Para 4.4.6) 
 
 
 The concerns of the stakeholders regarding Ophthalmic Science Professionals will 
be addressed by the Council for Ophthalmic Sciences. The Committee recommends that  
the Council for Ophthalmic Sciences should have equal representation from Optometry as 
well as O phthalmic Assistants. Diploma holders as well as Graduates from both the 
Professions should be given representation in the Council. The Committee also notes that 
optometrist and ophthalmic assistants have different scope of work and practice 
accordingly.  
(Para 4.4.7) 
 
 
 The Committee recommends the Ministry to explore the composition of the other 
Councils on the same lines for other Councils.  
(Para 4.4.8) 
 
 The Committee, however, recommends that these eight councils will work under the 
overarching National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professions and would be 
responsible for developing a comprehensive regulatory framework for the allied and 
healthcare professions. The Committee also recommends that the Secretariat for the 
National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Profession must also provide Secretariat 
Assistance to the eight Professional Councils that will be established under the National 
Commission for Allied and Healthcare Profession Bill-2018.   
(Para 4.4.9) 
 
 
 The Committee also observes that two persons each representing the recognised 
categories, Medical Laboratory Sciences, Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic 
Technology, Ophthalmic Sciences and Physiotherapy are proposed to be the part of the 
Council. The Committee considering their number recommends a council under the 
Commission for each of these categories. The Committee recommends that Sr. No 2 
Trauma and Burn Care Professional, Sr. No 13 Cardio -vascular, Neuroscience and 
Pulmonary Technology Professional, Sr. No 14 Renal Technology Professional and Sr. No. 
15 Surgical and Anaesthesia -related Technology may be grouped under a common 
nomenclature of "Medical Technologists" and may be regulated under a common Council.  
The Committee also recommends the constitution of a separate Council for Occupational 
Therapy Professionals. Sr. No. 1 Life Science Professionals, Sr. No. 4 Nutrition Science 
Professional and Sr. No. 7 Behavioural Health Sciences Professionals may be grouped 

172 
 
under one common council. Like wise, Sr. No. 11 Health & Information Management 
Professionals, Sr. No. 12 Physician Associate or Physician Assistant and Sr. No 8 Primary, 
Community and other Miscellaneous Care Professional may be grouped under one council. 
The same is illustrated through the following table: 
 
 
Sr. 
No. 
COUNCIL NAME Sr. No. in 
the 
Schedule 
CATEGORIES 
INCLUDED 
1 Council for Physiotherapy 
Professionals 
3 Physiotherapy 
Professional. 
2 Council for Medical Radiology, 
Imaging and Therapeutic 
Technology Professional 
9 Medical Radiology, 
Imaging and Therapeutic 
Technology Professional. 
3 Council for Medical Laboratory 
Science Professionals 
10 Medical Laboratory 
Sciences Professional 
4 Council for Ophthalmic Sciences 5 Ophthalmic Sciences 
Professional 
5 Council for Occupational Therapy 
Professionals 
6 Occupational Therapy 
Professional 
6 Council for Medical Technologists 2 
 
13 
 
14 
 
 
 
15 
Trauma and Burn Care 
Professional; 
Cardio-vascular, 
Neuroscience and 
Pulmonary Technology 
Professional; 
Renal Technology 
Professional; and 
Surgical and Anaesthesia-
related Technology 
Professional. 
7 Council for Life, Nutrition and 
Behavioural Health Science 
Professionals 
1 
4 
7 
Life Science Professional; 
Nutrition Science 
Professional; and  
Behavioural Health 
Sciences Professional. 
8 Council for Health & Information 
Management, Physician Associate, 
Primary, Community and other 
Miscellaneous professional 
11 
 
12 
 
8 
Health and Information 
Management 
Professional; 
Physician Associate or 
Physician Assistant; and  
Primary, Community and 
other Miscellaneous Care 
Professional. 
 
(Para 4.4.10) 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for insertion of a clause that 
provides for constitution of the following eight Councils under the National Commission on 
Allied and Healthcare Professions:  
 
i. Council for Physiotherapy Professionals; 

173 
 
ii. Council for Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic Technology 
Professional; 
iii. Council for Medical Laboratory Science Professionals; 
iv. Council for Ophthalmic Sciences; 
v. Council for Occupational Therapy Professionals; 
vi. Council for Medical Technologists; 
vii. Council for Life, Nutrition and Behavioural Health Science Professionals;  
viii. Council for Health & Information Management, Physician 
Associate/Assistant, Primary, Community and other Miscellaneous 
professional. 
(Para 4.4.11) 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends for insertion of a separate Chapter 
containing clauses relating to the constitution, composition and functions of eight Councils 
as organs of National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professions and also for 
overall regulation and development of various allied and healthcare professions under the 
recognized categories mentioned in the Schedule. The Committee again emphasizes that the 
National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professions should delegate its functions  
pertaining to the specific professions of different categories to the respective Councils. This 
will ensure decentralization of the power and Functions entrusted to the Commission and 
ensure development of the profession.  
 
(Para 4.4.12) 
 
INSERTION OF NEW CLAUSE ON SEARCH COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee also recommends for constitution of a Search Committee for 
appointment of Chairperson, part -time members of the Commission and members of the 
Regulatory /development Boards to give the required credibility and up hold the 
importance of manner of appointment of the said officials by scrutiny of their 
qualifications and experience by a Search Committee. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that after clause 3, a new clause that will provide for Search Committee for 
appointment of Chairperson and Members may be added which will read as follows: 
 
(1)  The Central Government shall appoint the Chairperson, Members referred to 
in clause (a), clause (b), clause (c) of sub -section (6) of section 3 and the 
Secretary referred to in section 9 on the recommendation of a Search 
Committee consisting of— 
 
(a)  the Cabinet Secretary—Chairperson; 
(b)  four experts, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of 
not less than twenty -five years in the field of allied and healthcare 
education, public health education and health research, to be 
nominated by the Central Government— Members; 
(c)  one per son, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of 
not less than twenty -five years in the field of management or law or 
economics or science and technology, to be nominated by the Central 
Government— Member; and 
(d)  the Secretary to the Governme nt of India in charge of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, to be the Convenor—Member. 
 

174 
 
(2)  The Central Government shall, within one month from the date of occurrence 
of any vacancy, including by reason of death, resignation or removal of the 
Chairperson or a Member, or within three months before the end of tenure of 
the Chairperson or Member, make a reference to the Search Committee for 
filling up of the vacancy. 
(3)  The Search Committee shall recommend a panel of at least three names for 
every vacancy referred to it. 
(4)  The Search Committee shall, before recommending any person for 
appointment as the Chairperson or a Member of the Commission, satisfy itself 
that such person does not have any financial or other interest which is likely 
to affect prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson or Member. 
(5)  No appointment of the Chairperson or Member shall be invalid merely by 
reason of any vacancy or absence of a Member in the Search Committee. 
(6)  Subject to the provisions of sub -sections (2) to (5), the Search Committee may 
regulate its own procedure 
(Para 4.5.1) 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry in regard to the tenure of the 
Chairman and believes the provision in the Bill regarding the term of a member is 
adequate. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that only in extraordinary 
circumstances when the member has proved to be an exceptional asset to the Commission, 
should his/her tenure be extended but not beyond six years. 
(Para 4.6.5) 
 
 The clause is adopted without any change. 
(Para 4.6.6) 
 
 
 The Committee recommends the Ministry to specify the provisions regarding the 
minutes of proceedings and the details of manner and conduct of meetings in the Rules and 
Regulations. The Committee also recommends the Minis try to make explicit provision 
regarding the quorum and the frequency of meetings under the Section. The Committee 
strongly believes that the Commission should meet frequently, at least once every quarter. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Clause 7 may be amended as follows:  
 
7. (1) The Commission shall meet at least once every quarter at such time and place as 
may be appointed by the Chairperson. 
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Commission and if, for any 
reason, the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Commission, any Member 
being the President of the Regulatory Boards, nominated by the Chairperson shall 
preside at the meeting.  
(3) Unless the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Commission is otherwise 
provided by regulations, one -half of the total number of Members of the Commission 
including the Chairperson shall constitute the quorum and all decisio ns of the 
Commission shall be taken by a majority of the members, present and voting and in the 
event of equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the President of the 
Regulatory  Board nominated under sub-section (2), shall have the casting vote. 
(4) The general superintendence, direction and control of the administration of the 
Commission shall vest in the Chairperson.  

175 
 
(5) No act done by the Commission shall be questioned on the ground of the existence 
of a vacancy in, or a defect in the constitution of, the Commission.  
(6) A person who is aggrieved by any decision of the Commission may prefer an appeal 
to the Central Government against such decision within thirty days of the 
communication of such decision. 
(Para 4.7.4) 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.7.5) 
 
 The Committee observes that each recognised category has been represented in the 
proposed Commission but under each category, there are many professions. Therefore, at 
any instance, all the professions of every recognised category will not be represented i n the 
Commission. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry that in such instances 
when there is no representation from that particular profession in the Commission, the 
Ministry must give the professionals an opportunity to be heard when any decis ion 
affecting that profession is made.  
(Para 4.8.4) 
 
 The Ministry, in its reply, stated that inputs from Professional Advisory Bodies will 
be taken in such instances but the Committee also notes that as per the present structure of 
the Bill, the Professional Advisory Body will be formed to examine specific i ssues and all 
the Professions will not have a Professional Advisory Body. However, the Committee in the 
subsequent paragraphs has recommended for the constitution of eight Councils by merging 
the 15 categories which will give the desired representation to the Professions in the 
proposed Commission. However, considering the number and diverse set of professionals, 
such instances can arise when few professions may not be represented in the Commission. 
Therefore, the Council structure proposed by the Committee  becomes more important 
wherein the Council President can put forth the apprehensions of all the professions under 
it before the Commission. Nevertheless, the Commission must also hear the concerned 
professionals when any important policy that aims to brin g a substantial change in that 
profession is being implemented.  
(Para 4.8.5) 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.8.6) 
 
 The Committee observes that the Government has made provision for a Secretariat 
to be headed by a Se cretary in the NMC Act, NCISM Bill and NCH Bill.  The Committee 
also takes note of the submission of the Ministry during the course of clause by clause 
consideration that acceded to the suggestion of a stakeholder for a provision in the Bill for 
a Secretariat and other employees to assist the Commission.  
(Para 4.9.4) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that since in the other legislations, i.e. NMC Act 2019, 
the NCISM Bill 2019 and the NCH bill 2019 meant for structural reforms in the health 

176 
 
sector, the Secretariat is to be headed by the Secretary, therefore, changing the 
nomenclature in the present Bill does not sound logical. 
(Para 4.9.5) 
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for constituting a Secretariat 
which shall be headed by a Secretary t o be appointed by the Central Government on the 
lines of the provisions pertaining to Search Committee for appointment of Chairperson and 
members of the National Medical Commission Act. The Committee views that constitution 
of a Secretariat to be headed by  a Secretary would ensure efficient performance of the 
National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professions functions, in line with Section 
8 of NMC Act. 
(Para 4.9.6) 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.9.7) 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the stakeholders and believes that the 
Central Register should contain details of academic qualification, the training undertaken, 
skills and experiences of the Allied Healthcare Professionals. The Committee also desires 
that the same should be updated periodically so that any extra skills or degree acquired is 
also reflected in the database. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
create a dynamic online database that reflects the active allied professionals i n the country. 
Clause 10 (c) will read as under: 
 Create and maintain an up to date Central Register with details of diploma and degree 
of academic qualification and institutions, training undertaken, skill and experiences 
of Allied and Healthcare Professionals covered under this Bill  
(Para 4.10.4) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that maintaining high quality and high standards in 
allied and healthcare education has to be one of the main functions of the Commission. 
This sub clause further makes the proposed Commission responsible for assessment, 
examination, training, research and other aspects of the sector which is a step in the right 
direction. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the clause may be amended as 
follows: 
(d) provide basic standards of education, courses, curricula, physical and instructional 
facilities, staff pattern, staff qualifications, quality instructions, assessment, 
examination, training, research, continuing professional education, maximum tuition 
fee payable in respect of various recognised categories, proportionate dist ribution of 
seats and promote innovations in recognised categories; 
(Para 4.10.8) 
 
 The Committee also desires that constant efforts have to be made by the Ministry so 
that the Student: Teacher and Patient: Therapists Ratio is as per the international norm s. 
However, in the absence of any conclusive data on the number of Allied and Healthcare 
Professionals, determining this accurate ratio may not be possible at present. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Ministry should first create a dynamic dat abase 
that reflects the active allied and healthcare professionals in the country. 
(Para 4.10.9) 

177 
 
 
 The Committee notes that the Council proposed under the Bill is tasked with the 
responsibility of conducting a uniform entry examination with common counseli ng for 
admission into the allied and healthcare professionals.  The Committee understands the 
apprehensions of the stakeholders considering the different aptitude and skill requirement 
of each profession at diploma, undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral  level. The 
Committee also notes the response of the Ministry regarding the 53 professions that the Bill 
is set to regulate and agrees that conducting separate entry examination and counselling 
for all such professions is not feasible. Now -a-days when we a re moving towards one 
common entrance exam (NEET) for admission into different MBBS, dental and AYUSH 
courses, demanding separate exams for each Allied and Healthcare Profession is not 
prudent.  
(Para 4.10.14) 
 
 The Committee also notes that at present the re is no uniform exam structure for 
admission into undergraduate allied professional courses. Some institutes admit students 
through NEET score; some conduct their own exams; whereas some institutes declare a set 
intermediate percentage as the cut off for admissions. In such a scenario where there is no 
common criteria for admissions and exams, there is bound to be a wide gap in the quality 
of students who graduate from different institutes each year. The Committee, therefore, 
agrees with the view of the Mi nistry that a common entrance tests must be conducted for 
entry level courses in the Allied and Healthcare Sector.  
(Para 4.10.15) 
 
 The Ministry, in its response has suggested expansion of NEET for admission and 
counseling in allied and healthcare courses  for candidates, after the first set of students 
who qualify for MBBS. The Committee, however, also notes that there are certain 
professions in the allied and healthcare that do not necessarily require 
Biology/Physics/Chemistry as a compulsory subject in I ntermediate. The Committee, 
thereafter, is of the view that enrollment in such courses through NEET is not feasible. At 
the same time, the Committee feels that conducting a common entrance exam is essential 
but this exam may not necessarily be the NEET exa m. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends conducting a common entrance tests (CET) for entry level courses in the 
Allied and Healthcare Profession. The Committee is of the view that this exam should be 
conducted by the Commission that will be consti tuted under the proposed legislation. The 
clause providing for the Common Entrance Test will be specified in the subsequent 
paragraphs.  
(Para 4.10.16) 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that the Commission will have 
to conduct a separate  exit and licensing examinations for each profession. The Committee 
acknowledges the fact that each profession follows a specified curriculum and deals with 
different technical skill, therefore conducting a uniform single licensing exit exam for all 
the professions is not quite possible. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry 
to conduct separate exit exams for each profession to assess the quality of students 
graduating from the allied institutes/colleges.  

178 
 
(Para 4.10.20) 
 
 The Committee also notes that at present, there is no uniform exam structure for 
admission to undergraduate as well as postgraduate health professional courses.  The 
Committee has already recommended insertion of a clause on Common Entrance Exam for 
admission into undergraduate allied healthcare courses.  
(Para 4.10.21) 
 
 The Committee observes that conducting a common final undergraduate exam that 
can act as an exit licensing exam as well as Post Graduate National Entrance Exam, on the 
lines of NMC, NCISM and NCH Bill would be the most optimum way to bring about 
standardization and reduce the multiplicity of exams. However, the Committee also notes 
the present status of the allied health sector in the country and observes that before 
rolling/commencing out such a common exam, the curriculum as well as the standards of 
all the colleges have to be assessed and harmonized. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Commission, only after due ground assessment and standardisation 
of curriculum/syllabus may de vise a common exam structure for each profession that will 
act as the final year exam, licensing exam and Post graduate entrance exam. 
(Para 4.10.22) 
 
 The Committee also notes that presently States and Universities conduct their own 
entrance examinations for admission into Postgraduate courses. The Committee 
understands that since the professions are different from each other, conducting one PG 
NET for admission into all the allied and healthcare courses admission is not possible. The 
Committee, therefore strongly recommends that each profession should conduct its own 
final year exam which will also act as the licensing exam. The clause that provides for the 
National Exit Test will be specified in the subsequent paragraphs.  
(Para 4.10.23) 
 
 The Committee i s of the view that consequent to the recommendations of the 
Committee with respect to the constitution of the Commission, Councils and 
Regulatory/development Boards, the functions of the proposed Commission have to be 
revisited. The Committee, therefore, r ecommends adding the following functions of the 
proposed Commission in clause 10: 
It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such steps as it may think fit for ensuring 
coordinated and integrated development of education and maintenance of the 
standards of delivery of services under this Act and for the purposes of performing its 
functions, the Council may— 
(j) provide minimum standards framework for machineries, materials and services 
(k) lay down policies for maintaining a high quality and high standards in allied 
education and make necessary regulations in this behalf; 
(l) lay down policies for regulating allied institutions, researches and professionals 
and make necessary regulations in this behalf; 

179 
 
(m) assess the requirements in allied healthcare, including human resources for 
health and healthcare infrastructure and develop a road map for meeting such 
requirements; 
(n) promote, co -ordinate and frame guidelines and lay down policies by making 
necessary regulations for the proper functioning of the Commission, the 
Councils, the Regulatory Boards and the State Allied Councils; 
(o)  ensure co-ordination among the Regulatory Boards; 
(p)  take such measures, as may be necessary, to ensure compliance by the State 
Allied Councils of the guidelines framed and regulations made under this Act 
for their effective functioning under this Act; 
(q)  exercise appellate jurisdiction with respect to the decisions of the Regulatory 
Boards; 
(r)  lay down policies and codes to ensure observance of professional ethics in allied 
and healthcare profession and to promote ethical conduct during the provi sion 
of care by allied and healthcare professionals; 
(Para 4.10.26) 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.10.27) 
 
INSERTION OF NEW CLAUSE ON NATIONAL EXAMINATIONS 
 The Committee notes that the proposed National Commission for  Allied and 
Healthcare Profession will also conduct the National Level examinations for all allied and 
Healthcare Professionals. Considering the need for addition of separate provisions of 
Common Entrance Exam, National Exit Test, National Teachers Eligibi lity Test and 
Minimum Qualifying Test, the Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to 
incorporate a new Chapter in the Bill on the lines of NMC Act, NCISM and NCH Bill, 
under the head National Examinations, incorporating the provisions of following exams: 
(i) Common Entrance Test (CET); 
(ii) National Exit Test (NEXT); 
(iii) National Teachers Eligibility Test (NTET); and  
(iv) Minimum Qualifying Test (MQT).  
(Para 4.11.1) 
 
COMMON ENTRANCE TEST (CET) 
 
 The Committee again highlights the need to conduct an entrance exam for 
admission into the allied and healthcare professional courses. The Committee recommends 
that the proposed Commission after exhaustive research and deliberations should devise a 
suitable format of the Common Entrance Test (CET) for entry level courses in the Allied 
and Healthcare Profession.  
(Para 4.11.2) 
 

180 
 
The Committee therefore, strongly recommends adding a clause on Common 
Entrance Test, in the Bill that will read as follows: 
 
(1)  There shall be a uniform Common Entrance Test for admission to the 
undergraduate courses in each of the professions of the recognized categories 
in all the allied healthcare institutions governed under this Act: 
(2)  The Commission shall conduct the Common  Entrance Test in English and in 
such other languages, through such designated authority and in such manner, 
as may be specified by regulations. 
(3)  The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of conducting 
common counseling by the designated a uthority for admission to all the allied 
institutions governed under this Act:  
 
Provided that the common counseling shall be conducted by the designated authority 
of–– 
 
(i)   the Central Government, for All India seats; and 
(ii) the State Government, for the remaining seats at the State level. 
(Para 4.11.3) 
NATIONAL EXIT TEST (NEXT) 
 The Committee reiterates that the proposed Commission only after due assessment 
may devise a common exam called National Exit Test (NEXT) for each profession that will 
act as the final year exam, licensing exam and Post graduate entrance exam.  Accordingly, 
the Committee recommends for insertion of a clause on National Exit Test under the 
Chapter National Examinations that will provide for a National  Exit Test which will read 
as follows: 
(1)  A final year undergraduate examination, to be known as the National Exit Test, 
shall be held for granting licence to practice as independent professionals and 
for enrolment in the State Register or National Register, as the case may be. 
(2)  The Commission shall conduct the National Exit Test for Allied Professionals 
in English and in such other languages, through such designated authority and 
in such manner as may be specified by regulations. 
(3)  The National Ex it Test shall become operational on such date, within three 
years from the date of commencement of this Act, as may be appointed by the 
Central Government, by notification.  
(4)  The National Exit Test shall be the basis for admission to the postgraduate 
broad-speciality allied education in institutions which are governed under the 
provisions of this Act or under any other law for the time being in force and 
shall be done in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
(Para 4.11.4) 
 
NATIONAL TEACHERS ELIGIBILITY TEST (NTET) 
 
 The Committee also recommends that the Commission should also conduct a 
National Teachers Eligibility Test for Allied and Healthcare Professionals as it can be the 
best way to tap qualified persons into the teaching profession. The Committee is aware of 
the fact that one of the major challenges in promotion of Allied and Healthcare education is 
the inadequate faculty and non -standardisation of different professions. The Committee is 
of the view that such a merit based examination will certainly improve the education being 
imparted to students studying Allied and healthcare Professionals as well as improve the 

181 
 
quality of health care services. The Committee therefore recommends adding a clause on 
National Teachers' Eligibility Test under the Chapter National Examinations that will read 
as under: 
 
A National Teachers’ Eligibility Test shall be conducted separately for the 
postgraduates of each profession of Allied and Healthcare Profession  who desire to 
take up teaching profession in that discipline. 
(Para 4.11.5) 
 
MINIMUM QUALIFYING TEST (MQT) 
 The Committee also recommends the Ministry to add a Minimum Qualifying Test 
(MQT) under this Chapter that will test the competency of professionals who are already 
practising. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should ensure that only qualified 
professionals are registered under the provisions of the Act as mentioned in the clause 35. 
(Para 4.11.6) 
 
 The Committee understands that Minimum Qualifying Test (MQT) would give 
recognition to persons offering h is/her services in any of the recognised categories on and 
before the commencement of this Act within two years from such commencement and thus 
enabling him to get registered under the provisions of the Act.   
(Para 4.11.7) 
 
 The Committee finds the provision of constitution of as many professional advisory 
bodies as may be necessary to examine specific issues vague and ambiguous as several 
specific issues may lead to proliferation of plethora of advisory bodies. The Committee 
therefore finds a rational in constitution of a Central Advisory Council, namely, National 
Allied and Healthcare Advisory Council to recommend or advise the commission on several 
issues and finalizing the advice/suggestion of the specific Council for Profe ssionals on 
specific issue that may be referred to any of the eight Councils.  
(Para 4.12.5) 
 
 The Committee is also of the view that considering the diverse range of allied 
healthcare professionals, representation from each of these professional categorie s is very 
important. The Committee, however, cannot overlook the importance of the role of States 
in the proposed Commission. The Committee strongly believes that States have to play a 
very crucial part in successful implementation of the Act and their representation as well as 
participation is as important as the professionals. The Committee notes that the country at 
present is categorised into six zones and two persons from each of the six zones 
representing the State Councils on biennial rotation will be come members of the proposed 
Commission. The Committee very well understands the apprehension of the stakeholder 
where a particular State in the alphabetical order as per the zonal distribution will have to 
wait for many years to be part of the Commission.  
(Para 4.12.6) 
 

182 
 
 The Committee therefore, recommends the constitution of an Allied Advisory 
Council on the lines of the Medical Advisory Council in the National Medical Commission 
Act, the Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine in the National Commission for 
Indian Sy stem of Medicine Bill, 2019 and the Advisory Council for Homeopathy in the 
National Commission for Homeopathy Bill, 2019. The Committee is of the view that the 
States have been grossly ignored in the Bill whereas the onus of implementing the Act falls 
on t he shoulders of the State. When Centre is aiming at bringing a fundamental shift in 
how the allied healthcare professionals are perceived by the society, it becomes imperative 
to make State equal partners in this mission.  
(Para 4.12.7) 
 
 The Committee, th erefore, recommends for constitution and composition of 
National Allied and Healthcare Professional Advisory Council.  The new clause may read 
as follows: 
(1) The Central Government shall constitute an advisory body to be known as the 
National Allied and Healthcare Professionals Advisory Council.  
(2) The Council shall consist of a Chairperson and the following members, namely:—  
(a)  the  Chairperson of the National Commission of Allied and Healthcare 
Professions shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the Advisory Council;  
(b)  every member of the Commission shall be the ex officio members of the 
Council;  
(c)  one member to represent each State, who is the Vice -Chancellor of a health 
University in that State, to be nominated by that State Government;  
(d)  one member to represent each Union territory, who is the Vice -Chancellor of 
a health University in tha t Union territory, to be nominated by the Ministry 
of Home Affairs in the Government of India;  
(e)  one member to represent each State and each Union territory from amongst 
elected members of the State Allied Council, to be nominated by that State 
Allied Council;  
(f)   the Chairman, University Grants Commission;  
(g)  the Director, National Assessment and Accreditation Council;  
(h) four members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst 
persons holding the post of Director in the Indian Insti tutes of Technology, 
Indian Institutes of Management and the Indian Institute of Science:  
Provided that if there is no health University in any State or Union territory, the 
Vice-Chancellor of a University within that State or Union territory having the l argest 
number of allied colleges/institutes affiliated to it shall be nominated by the State 
Government or by the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Government of India:  
Provided further that if there is no University in any Union territory, the Ministry 
of Home Affairs shall nominate a member who possesses such allied healthcare 
qualification and experience as may be prescribed 

183 
 
(Para 4.12.8) 
 
 The Committee recommends that whenever specific issues arise, it may be referred 
to that profession specific Council under which the profession falls.  
(Para 4.12.9) 
 
 The Committee thus recommends that there is no need for constituting the various 
Professional Advisor y Bodies. The National Allied and Healthcare Professional Advisory 
Council will examine general issues related to professions of recognised categories. The 
Committee again recommends that the National Allied and Healthcare Professional 
Advisory Council can refer the specific issues to one of the eight Councils, under which the 
subject matter falls, which shall be responsible to the Advisory Council for the disposal of 
the issues raised. The National Allied and Healthcare Professional Advisory Council will 
act as coordinating and harmonising the general interest of each and every profession of 
allied and healthcare profession besides providing a platform for States and Union 
territories. 
(Para 4.12.10) 
  
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.12.11) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that only the National Allied and Healthcare 
Professional Advisory Council or the spe cific Council out of the eight proposed Councils 
may review the specific cases and recommend the same to the Commiss ion which will be 
the apex body in deciding the rights of various professionals.  
(Para 4.13.4) 
 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted.  
(Para 4.13.5) 
 
INSERTION OF NEW CLAUSE ON REGULATORY/DEVELOPMENT BOARDS  
 
 The Committee also feels the need to create Boards for regulating the professional 
ethics of the allied and healthcare professionals. The Committee has recommended for 
constitution of four different Boards that will facilitate overall growth and developmen t 
and regulation of the allied Healthcare Sector. The Committee also recommends for adding 
a Chapter on Boards in the Bill that will provide for constitution of the Boards, 
composition of the Boards and the powers and Functions of the Boards under the Bill. 
 
(Para 4.14) 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends adding a new clause under the new Chapter 
of Boards which will read as under: 
 

184 
 
(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute the following Boards, 
under the overall supervision of the Commission, to perform the functions assigned to 
such Boards under this Act, namely:—  
 
(a) the Under-graduate Allied & Healthcare Profession Board  ;  
(b) the Post-graduate Allied & Healthcare Profession Board;  
(c) Allied and Healthcare Profession Assessment and Rating Board; and  
(d) Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration Board.  
 
(2) Each Board ref erred to in sub -section (1) shall be an regulatory body which shall 
carry out its functions under this Act subject to the regulations made by the 
Commission. 
(Para 4.14.1) 
 
  The Committee also recommends that the Regulatory/Development Boards should 
include members from the different professions of the recognised categories. The new 
clause providing for the composition of the Regulatory/development Boards will read as 
under: 
 
(1)  The composition of the regulatory Boards shall be as under, namely:––  
(a)  the Under -graduate Allied & Healthcare Profession Board  shall 
consist of a President and Members from the eight Councils;  
Provided that the members of the Under -graduate Allied & Healthcare 
Profession Board shall be persons of outstanding ability, p roven administrative 
capacity and integrity, possessing a postgraduate degree in any discipline of 
allied health sciences from any University and having experience of not less 
than ten years in such field, out of which at least five years shall be as a lea der 
in the area of allied and healthcare education, public health, community 
medicine or health research. 
(b)  the Post-graduate Allied & Healthcare Profession Board shall consist of 
a President and Members from the eight Councils  
Provided that the members of the Post-graduate Allied & Healthcare Profession 
Board shall be persons of outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity 
and integrity, possessing a postgraduate degree in any discipline of allied health 
sciences from any University and having e xperience of not less than fifteen 
years in such field, out of which at least seven years shall be as a leader in the 
area of allied and healthcare education, public health, community medicine or 
health research. 
(c)  Allied and Healthcare Profession Asses sment and Rating Board shall 
consist of a President and seventeen Members: Provided that the President and 
fifteen out of seventeen Members shall be chosen from the fifteen recognised 
categories of the Schedule and the remaining two Members shall be chosen  
from any of the disciplines of management, quality assurance, law or science 
and technology;  
(d)  Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration Board shall 
consist of a President and seventeen Members:  
Provided that the President and fifte en out of seventeen Members shall 
be chosen from the 15 recognised categories of the Schedule and the 

185 
 
remaining two Members shall be chosen from any of the disciplines of 
quality assurance, public health, law or patient advocacy. 
 
(2) One Member of each regulatory Boards, being a part -time Member, shall be 
chosen from amongst the elected Members of the State Allied Council in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
 
(3) The Central Government shall appoint the President and Members of the 
regulatory Boards on the recommendations made by the Search Committee 
constituted in accordance with the procedure specified in that specific section. 
 
(Para 4.14.2) 
 
  The Committee also recommends insertion of a clause that provides for the powers 
and function of the Under -Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board under the 
Chapter Regulatory/development Boards.  
 (Para 4.14.3) 
 
 The new clause may read as under: 
(1) The Under -Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board shall perform the 
following functions, namely:—  
(a) determine standards of allied education at undergraduate level and oversee 
all aspects relating thereto;  
(b) develop  competency based dynamic curriculum at undergraduate level in 
accordance with the regulations made under this Act;  
(c) develop competency based dynamic curriculum for addressing the needs of 
primary health services, community medicine and family medicine  to ensure 
healthcare in such areas, in accordance with the provisions of the regulations 
made under this Act;  
(d) frame guidelines for setting up of allied institutions for imparting 
undergraduate courses, having regard to the needs of the country and th e 
global norms, in accordance with the provisions of the regulations made under 
this Act;  
(e) determine the minimum requirements and standards for conducting courses 
and examinations for undergraduates in allied institutions, having regard to the 
needs of  creativity at local levels, including designing of some courses by 
individual institutions, in accordance with the provisions of the regulations 
made under this Act;  
(f) determine standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of 
education i n allied institutions providing undergraduate allied education in 
accordance with the provisions of the regulations made under this Act;  
(g) facilitate development and training of faculty members teaching 
undergraduate courses;  
(h) facilitate research an d the international student and faculty exchange 
programmes relating to undergraduate allied education;  

186 
 
(i) specify norms for compulsory annual disclosures, electronically or 
otherwise, by allied institutions, in respect of their functions that has a bear ing 
on the interest of all stakeholders including students, faculty, the Commission 
and the Central Government; 
(j) grant recognition to a allied qualification at the undergraduate level.  
(2) Under-Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board may, in th e discharge of 
its duties, make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the 
Commission, as it deems necessary 
(Para 4.14.4) 
 
  The Committee also recommends insertion of a clause that provides for the powers 
and function of the Post -Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board under the 
Chapter Regulatory Boards.  
 The new clause may read as under: 
 (1) The Post -Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board shall perform the 
following functions, namely:—  
(a) determine the standards of allied education at the postgraduate level and 
super-speciality level in accordance with the regulations made under  this Act 
and oversee all aspects relating thereto;  
(b) develop competency based dynamic curriculum at postgraduate level and 
super-speciality level in accordance with the regulations made under this Act, 
with a view to develop appropriate skill, knowledg e, attitude, values and ethics 
among postgraduates and super -specialists to provide healthcare, impart allied 
education and conduct allied research;  
(c) frame guidelines for setting up of allied institutions for imparting 
postgraduate and super -speciality courses, having regard to the needs of the 
country and global norms, in accordance with the regulations made under this 
Act;  
(d) determine the minimum requirements and standards for conducting 
postgraduate and super -speciality courses and examinations in  allied 
institution, in accordance with the regulations made under this Act;  
(e) determine standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of 
education in allied institutions conducting postgraduate and super -speciality 
allied education, in accordance with the regulations made under this Act;  
(f) facilitate development and training of the faculty members teaching 
postgraduate and super-speciality courses;  
(g) facilitate  research and the international student and faculty exchange 
programmes relating to postgraduate and super-speciality allied education;  
(h) specify norms for compulsory annual disclosure, electronically or otherwise, 
by allied institutions in respect of t heir functions that has a bearing on the 
interest of all stakeholders including students, faculty, the Commission and the 
Central Government;  

187 
 
(i) grant recognition to the allied qualifications at the postgraduate level and 
super-speciality level;  
(j) promote and facilitate postgraduate courses in family medicine.  
(2) Post-Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board may, in the discharge of its 
functions, make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the 
Commission, as it deems necessary. 
(Para 4.14.5) 
 
 The Committee is also of the considered view that institutions of repute that provide 
quality education are important for a robust allied education system. At present, in the 
absence of bodies that assess and rate the allied institutions, there is no regulation on the 
allied institutes. The Committee recommends that the Government should encourage 
setting of National and regional Allied and Healthcare Institutions for imparting education 
at the Under Graduate & Pos t Graduate level and to facilitate training, research and 
development for the professionals preferring a teaching career. It should be ensured that 
such institutions must have adequate basic infrastructure and sufficient faculty. The 
measures so taken woul d also ensure that the allied and the healthcare profession would 
come out of medical dominance and would march ahead for its own development. The 
Committee understands that in order to perform such entrusted task, there is an urgent 
need for the creation  of an apex assessment and rating Board that would also lead to 
standardization of the education system so that the product of accredited institutions would 
get global recognition and acceptance. The Committee, therefore, recommends insertion of 
a clause that provides for powers and functions of the Allied and Healthcare Professionals 
Assessment and Rating Board under the new Chapter "Regulatory Boards". 
(Para 4.14.6) 
 
 The new clause may read as under: 
(1) The Allied and Healthcare Professionals Assessment and Rating Board shall 
perform the following functions, namely:— 
(a) determine the procedure for assessing and rating the allied institutions for 
their compliance with the standards laid down by the Under -Graduate Allied 
and Healthcare Education Board or the Post -Graduate Allied and Healthcare 
Education Board, as the ca se may be, in accordance with the regulations made 
under this Act;  
(b) grant permission for establishment of a new allied institution, or to start any 
postgraduate course or to increase number of seats, in accordance with the 
relevant provisions of the Act; 
(c) carry out inspections of allied institutions for assessing and rating such 
institutions in accordance with the regulations made under this Act:  
Provided that the Allied and Healthcare Assessment and Rating Board 
may, if it deems necessary, hire and  authorize any other third party 
agency or persons for carrying out inspections of allied institutions for 
assessing and rating such institutions: 

188 
 
Provided further that where inspection of allied institutions is carried 
out by such third party agency or persons authorized by the Allied and 
Healthcare Assessment and Rating Board, it shall be obligatory on such 
institutions to provide access to such agency or person; 
(d) conduct, or where it deems necessary, empanel independent rating agencies 
to conduct, a ssess and rate all allied institutions, within such period of their 
opening, and every year thereafter, at such time, and in such manner, as may be 
specified by the regulations;  
(e) make available on its website or in public domain the assessment and ratings 
of allied institutions at regular intervals in accordance with the regulations 
made under this Act;  
(f) take such measures, including issuing warning, imposition of monetary 
penalty, reducing intake or stoppage of admissions and recommending to the 
Commission for withdrawal of recognition, against an allied institution for 
failure to maintain the minimum essential standards specified by the Under -
Graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board or the Post -Graduate Allied 
and Healthcare Education Board, as the case may be, in accordance with the 
regulations made under this Act. 
(2) The Allied and Healthcare Professionals Assessment and Rating Board may, in the 
discharge of its functions, make such recommendations to, and seek such directions 
from, the Commission, as it deems necessary. 
(Para 4.14.7) 
 
 The Committee also recommends constitution of the Allied and Healthcare 
Professionals Ethics and Registration Board that will be tasked with regulating 
professional conduct and promoting ethics among the alli ed healthcare professionals. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends insertion of a clause that provides for powers 
and functions of Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration Board. 
(Para 4.14.8) 
 
 The clause that provides for the powers and functions of the Allied and Healthcare 
Professionals Ethics and Registration Board may read as follows: 
(1) Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration Board  shall perform 
the following functions, namely:—  
(a) maintain National Registe rs of all licensed allied practitioners in 
accordance with the provisions of section 31;  
(b) regulate professional conduct and promote ethics in accordance with the 
regulations made under this Act: Provided that Allied and Healthcare 
Professionals Ethics and Registration Board shall ensure compliance of the 
code of professional and ethical conduct through the State Allied Council in a 
case where such State Allied Council has been conferred power to take 
disciplinary actions in respect of professional or et hical misconduct by allied 
healthcare professionals under respective State Acts;  

189 
 
(c) develop mechanisms to have continuous interaction with State Allied 
Councils to effectively promote and regulate the conduct of Allied healthcare  
professionals;  
(d) exe rcise appellate jurisdiction with respect to the actions taken by a State 
allied Council under section 30.  
(2) Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration Board  may, in the 
discharge of its duties, make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, 
the Commission, as it deems necessary. 
(Para 4.14.9) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the Central Register to be created under Clause 
15 should be a live register of qualified professionals and uploaded in the websit e and the 
same should be constantly updated. This register should be segmented on the basis of 
different educational standards, qualifications viz, diploma, degree, doctoral level, 
specializations etc. The Committee agrees that the initial registration should be for a se t 
time period and the same should be constantly revised. 
(Para 4.15.4) 
 
 
 Subject of the above recommendation, the clause is adopted.  
(Para 4.15.5) 
 
 
 The Committee is in agreement with the plea of the Ministry that clause 17(1) takes 
care of the concern of the stakeholders for requirement of additional qualification in the 
Central Register as an application in such manner and payment of such fees as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. In such manner that registration to multiple 
categories can be  made by a profession only when he/she obtains the required additional 
qualification. He/she should have completed the required number of hours and years of 
study in that particular additional allied healthcare profession.  
(Para 4.16.4) 
 
 The clause is adopted without any change. 
(Para 4.16.5) 
 
 The Committee is in agreement with the views of stakeholders that tenure of interim 
Commission should have a fixed tenure. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to specify, in the Bill, that the tenure of the proposed interim Commission should 
not be more than two years. The Committee also recommends the interim Commission to 
devise a quality control mechanism for the allied health professionals and ensure 
standardization of education and institutes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
this interim Commission should complete all its entrusted task within that stipulated 
period and the National Commission must convene its functions, thereafter, it should stand 
dissolved after two years.  The Committee, therefore, stand dissolved after two ye ars. 
However, in exceptional circumstances, the tenure of Interim Commission may be extended 
by the Central Government for one year but not beyond that period. The Committee, 
therefore recommends the Ministry to specify the tenure of the Interim Commission during 

190 
 
the transitional phase and in order to set up institutional framework and other necessary 
task. The Committee also recommends to add a proviso regarding the extension of the 
tenure for one year under exceptional circumstances.  
(Para 4.17.5) 
 
 The Committee notes that this interim Commission will discharge the functions 
assigned to the Commission till the regular Commission is constituted by the Central 
Government. The Committee has also recommended that the maximum tenure of this 
interim Commission  should be two years to set up the administrative structure. The 
Committee believes that there is a need to appoint an officer who will perform the same 
functions as the Secretary. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to make a 
provision to ap point a Secretary for efficient performance of the functions of the interim 
Commission.  
(Para 4.17.11) 
 
 The Committee notes that this Commission is set to regulate the allied and 
healthcare professionals but none of the professional groups have been give n 
representation in the interim Commission. The Committee agrees with the concerns of the 
stakeholders that professionals from different allied and healthcare professions should be 
part of the Interim Commission. The Committee therefore recommends the Mini stry to 
add representation from each recognised category. The Committee also recommends 
adding two persons each representing the recognised categories, namely, Medical 
Laboratory Sciences, Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic Technology, 
Ophthalmic S ciences, Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy; and one person each 
representing the rest of the recognised categories listed in the Schedule. These members 
should have the required expertise and experience as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to explore the addition of 
experts in other fields whose experience will benefit the Interim Commission in better 
discharge of its responsibilities. 
(Para 4.17.12) 
 
 
 The Committee is also of the view that represe ntatives from Ministry of AYUSH 
and Ministry of Defence should be removed from the composition. The Committee is of the 
view that representatives from Dental Council of India, Indian Nursing Council and 
Pharmacy Council of India should also be removed from the interim Commission. 
  
(Para 4.17.13) 
 
 The Clause may read as under: 
 
(2) The interim Commission constituted under sub -section (1) shall consist of the 
following, namely:—  
 
(a) Additional Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare—Chairperson;  
(b) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare in charge of Allied Healthcare Education—member;  
(c) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development—member;  

191 
 
(d) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment—member;  
(e) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship—member;  
(f) One representative of NMC not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the 
Government of India — member;  
(g) One representative of the Directorate General of Health Services not below 
the rank of Deputy Director General—member;  
(h) One representative of the Rehabilitation Council of India not below the rank 
of Deputy Secretary—member; and  
(i) One representative of the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board not below the 
rank of Deputy Secretary—member. 
(j) Two persons each representing the recognised categories, namely, Medical 
Laboratory Sciences, Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic 
Technology, Ophthalmic Sciences, Physiotherapy and Occupational 
Therapy; and one person each representing t he rest of the recognised 
categories listed in the Schedule 
(Para 4.17.14) 
 
 Though the Committee is in agreement with the views of the Government, however 
the Committee recommends that necessary course of action must be taken at the earliest to 
ensure timely execution of procedural matters and the commencement of the functioning of 
the Commission wit hin stipulated time frame. The Committee has already recommended 
that the maximum tenure of the interim Commission should be two years which can be 
extended to one year but only under exceptional circumstances.  The Committee hopes that 
the regular Commiss ion would commence its functioning within that stipulated period of 
two to three years. 
(Para 4.17.18) 
  
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.17.19) 
 
 The Committee is in agreement with the Ministry regarding the nomenclature of 
State Council and recommends retaining the nomenclature, "State Allied and Healthcare 
Council" 
(Para 4.18.5) 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that clause 24(2) ensures that in 
case of absence of the chairperson, any other member chosen by the members present from 
amongst themselves at the meeting shall preside over the meeting. Therefore, the 
Committee believes there is no need to add the nomenclature of vice chairperson in the 
State Council.  
(Para 4.18.14) 
 
 
 The Committee is in the agreement with provisions of the Bill that the 
Chairmanship of the Council should be from amongst the members specified in clauses (d) 

192 
 
and (e). However, the Chairperson, should be an allied healthcare professional of 
outstanding abi lity, proven administrative capacity and integrity, possessing a 
postgraduate degree in any profession of recognised category of allied health sciences from 
any University.  
(Para 4.18.15) 
 
 
 The need of the hour is to raise the status of the allied health  sector from medical 
dominance, the Committee, therefore, is of the view that the ex -officio membership from 
Dental Council of India, Indian Nursing Council and National Medical 
Commission(Medical Council of India) should be removed from the State Allied Councils.  
 
(Para 4.18.16) 
 
 
 The Committee is also of the view that equal representation from all the 
professional categories is not possible as the numbers of professionals in each category is 
not equal. The Committee, therefore, recommends that once the State specific data of 
professionals is obtained, the membership from each category in the Council may be 
determined accordingly.  
(Para 4.18.17) 
 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that Dentists and Pharmacists 
are regulated by Dental Council of India and Pharmacy C ouncil of India respectively; 
therefore, there is no need to add Dentists and Pharmacists in the State Allied Council.  
 
(Para 4.18.18) 
 
 The Committee also recommends adding representation of two from Occupational 
Therapy in clause 20(3)(d) considering the number of Occupational therapists on the 
pattern of representation in National Commission. 
(Para 4.18.19) 
 
 
 The Committee notes that there is ambiguity regarding the kind and eligibility of 
charitable institutes that have to be included in clause 20(3 )(e). The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to make clear provisions regarding the charitable institutes so 
that any conflict of interest is avoided. The Committee also recommends that the clause 
20(3)(e) may be amended as follows: 
 
Two persons, eligible to be member of the council, representing charitable institutions 
engaged in education or services in connection with any recognised category, to be 
nominated by the Central Government having such qualifications and experience as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government–member  
(Para 4.18.20) 
 
 The Committee agrees with the views of the stakeholders that there should be more 
representation of the professionals rather than the ex-officio members. The Committee also 
understands that ex -officio membership is also important to establish a smooth 
administrative setup. The Committee recommends the Ministry to set a balance between 

193 
 
the elected and ex -officio members and recommends that the clause may be amended as 
follows: 
 
(3) The State Council shall consist of a Chairperson, to be nominated from amongs t 
the members specified in clauses (c) and (d), and the following members, namely:—  
(a) One Director or Additional Director or Joint Director representing medical 
or health sciences in the State Government—member, ex officio;  
(b) Two persons from any med ical colleges run by the State Government, not 
below the rank of Dean or Head of the Department—member, ex officio;  
(c) Two persons each representing the recognised categories, namely, Medical 
Laboratory Sciences, Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeuti c 
Technology, Ophthalmic Sciences,  Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy 
and one person each representing the rest of the recognized categories listed in 
the Schedule, to be nominated by the State Government having such 
qualifications and experience as m ay be prescribed by the State Government —
member; and  
(d) Two persons, eligible to be member of the council, representing charitable 
institutions (but not from any other NGO) engaged in education or services in 
connection with any recognised category, to be nominated by the State 
Government having such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by 
the State Government—member. 
(Para 4.18.23) 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.18.24) 
 
 The Committee observes that the term of the members and the Chairperson is 
already extendable to six years. Hence increasing the term of office for the members and 
chairperson is unwarranted.  The Committee is, therefore, in agreement with view of the 
Ministry.   
(Para 4.19.4) 
 The clause is adopted without any change.  
(Para 4.19.5) 
 
The Committee observes that clause 24(2) clearly specifies that when the 
Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the State Council, any other member chosen 
by the members present from amongst themselves at the meeting shall preside over the 
meeting. T herefore the Committee believes the provision regarding vice -chairperson is 
unnecessary. The Committee, however, agreeing with the views of the Ministry, 
recommends the Ministry to make clear provision regarding recording the minutes of the 
meetings in the Rules.  
(Para 4.20.4) 
 

194 
 
 The clause is adopted without any change.  
(Para 4.20.5) 
 
 The Committee observes that clause 26(1) provides for the appointment of a Chief 
Executive Officer and such other employees as it may think necessary for the efficient 
performance of its functions under the Act. The Committee is of the view that since in t he 
other legislations, i.e. NMC Act 2019, the NCISM Bill 2019 and the NCH bill 2019 meant 
for structural reforms in the health sector, the Secretariat is to be headed by the Secretary, 
therefore, changing the nomenclature in the present Bill does not sound  logical. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the State Government should appoint a Secretary 
and the clause may be amended as follows: 
 
26. (1) Subject to such rules as may be made by the State Government in this behalf, 
the State Council may appoint a Secretary and such other employees as it may think 
necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under the Act. 
(Para 4.21.4) 
 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted.  
(Para 4.21.5) 
 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that conducting a different test 
for each category at the entry level would become not only a cumbersome process but a 
herculean task as well. The Committee notes that the minimum requirement for all the 
professions is the same, therefore a common entrance test may be conducted for entry level 
courses. The Committee has already recommended that a common entrance test (CET) 
may be conducted. The Ministry submitted that expanding NEET is also an option; 
however, the Committee notes that many professional courses do not have Science as the 
eligibility criteria. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to decide the exam 
pattern considering the students from all the streams and devise a Common Entrance T est 
(CET) for entry into the allied and healthcare professional courses. 
(Para 4.22.6) 
 
 The Committee also recommends that this Common Entrance Test should only be 
conducted under the overall supervision of the National Commission on Allied and 
Healthcare Profession. The proposed Commission will coordinate between the State Allied 
Councils and conduct one uniform entrance exam for all over the country.  
(Para 4.22.7) 
 
 The Committee has already recommended for a National Exit Test. The Committee 
reiterates its recommendation that the proposed National Commission for Allied and 
Healthcare Profession would be tasked with the responsibility of conducting a National 
Exit Test at all India level rather than State Allied and Healthcare Council conducting 
separate uniform tests for each State. To bring uniformity and standardisation in the Allied 
education and professional practice, conducting a uniform Exit Test is more important. 
The proposed National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Profession would be the 
apex agency and will co -ordinate among the different State Allied Councils and ensure a 
National Exit Test for each profession. 
(Para 4.22.11) 
 

195 
 
 The Committee also recommends the Ministry to add "(h) Provide minimum 
standards framework for machineries, mate rials and services" as one of the functions of the 
State Allied and Healthcare Council. 
(Para 4.22.12) 
 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted.  
(Para 4.22.13) 
 
The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion of ISRT and response of the 
Ministry thereto on renaming the Professional Advisory Body to Professional Advisory 
Board (PAB) rather than sub-council as suggested by other stakeholders. The Committee is 
of t he view that the State Allied and Healthcare Council may constitute Professional 
Advisory Boards to examine specific issues, whenever the need arises, so that the advice of 
experts from professionals could be sought. The Committee agrees with the view of t he 
Ministry that the mandate of the PAB should be to advice the Council on issues related to 
their profession. The Committee also recommends that the Professional Advisory Board 
thus formed should be chaired by the professional of that recognised category.  In case of 
multiple professions in the category, the chairperson should be appointed on rotation from 
each category. The Committee is also in agreement with the Ministry for not deleting 
clause 28 (3) and terming the category as void -initio, as the same w ould definitely degrade 
the value of a particular profession.  
(Para 4.23.6) 
 
 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.23.7) 
 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the State Register to be created under Clause 29 
should be a live register of qualified professionals and should be constantly updated. This 
register should be segmented on the basis of different educational standards, qua lifications 
viz, diploma, degree, doctoral level, specializations etc.  
(Para 4.24.3) 
 
 
 The Committee agrees with the recommendation of the stakeholder that the details 
of diploma and degree of academic qualification and institutions prior learning skill and 
experiences of all allied and health care professionals covered under this Bill shoul d also be 
included in the live register. The Committee therefore recommends the Ministry to remove 
"in the manner as may be specified by the regulation " and add " with detail of diploma and 
degree of academic qualification and institutions, prior learning s kill, training and 
experiences of all allied and health care professional covered under this Act."  
(Para 4.24.4) 
 
 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendations that NGOs should not be allowed to 
grant degree/diploma to allied and healthcare professionals  and only the degrees/diploma 
granted by accredited colleges/institutions should be eligible as allied and healthcare 
qualification. 

196 
 
(Para 4.24.5) 
 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.24.6) 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the stakeholders that the time limit for 
initial registration may be prescribed. The Committee, therefore recommends the Ministry 
to set the time limit for registration and also make specific guidelines regarding updation of 
any additional qualifications in the State register, if acquired by the professionals, thereby 
making the State Register, a live register.   
(Para 4.25.4) 
 
 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.25.5) 
 
 
 The Committee believes that the allied and healthcare professionals should be 
encouraged to constantly update their skills with the changing times and adopt modern 
tools and technology. Therefore, the Committee strongly supports continuation of 
education a nd especially training workshops for the professionals. The Committee, also 
notes that with a profession as dynamic as allied healthcare, there is an urgent need to 
constantly upgrade oneself to provide the best healthcare service. The Committee therefore 
recommends the Ministry to make explicit guidelines regarding every profession in the 
Rules that will have to be mandatorily fulfilled for renewal of registration on payment of 
the requisite fees.  
(Para 4.26.4) 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.26.5) 
 
 The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that only qualified professionals 
are registered. The students pursuing the allied healthcare courses, will have to pass the 
EXIT exam to practice. Similarly the professionals  already practicing should also undergo 
some quality test that verifies their credibility. The Ministry, while registration of such 
professionals should set profession -specific licensing standards that is strictly adhered to.  
The Committee in this connect ion has already recommended for a Minimum Qualifying 
Test (MQT) that should be incorporated under a Chapter on National Examination. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to incorporate a provision for skill development 
and training course for updatin g their knowledge as per the latest scientific and 
technological advancement followed by Minimum Qualifying Test (MQT) so that their 
knowledge base is widened as well as updated. 
(Para 4.27.4) 
 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.27.5) 
 

197 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that the same rigor that is 
applied to Indian healthcare professionals elsewhere in the world needs to be followed for 
those coming to India and seeking educational or practice rights. The Committee is of the 
view that the application regarding recognition to allied qualification should be made to the 
National Commission on Allied and Healthcare Professions which should be thoroughly 
verified and only then the recognition granted or refused on case to case basis.  
(Para 4.28.4) 
 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.28.5) 
 
 The Committee is in agreement with the view of the stakeholder that conducting 
fake courses by spurious Institutions in Allied Health Profes sions have to be absolutely 
prohibited. The Committee has recommended the constitution of the Allied and Healthcare 
Assessment and Rating Board for assessing and rating the allied institutions for their 
compliance with the standards. The Committee recommen ds that this Board should also 
periodically inspect that such fake courses are not carried out in the Institutes.  
(Para 4.29.5) 
 
 
 The Committee in its meeting held on 15.03.2019 heard the views of the 
representatives from the Ministry of Skill Developmen t and Entrepreneurship (MSDE). 
The Senior Advisor of the MSDE expressed views on short term certificate courses with 
less than 2000 hours of formal skill training. The representative suggested that the clause 
37 can be re-drafted in the Bill to establish a n ecosystem that provides mobility to "aid and 
assistants" with less than 2000 hours of formal training who will also support the huge 
requirement of the allied and healthcare professionals.  
"Ministry, since 2014 when it came into existence, has been training people, through 
its short -term skill ecosystem, for different job roles; and geriatric care, bedside 
assistant, etc., are some of the job roles which are performed by the allied health 
professionals. These are some of the job roles which my Ministry has given training.  
However, as the Additional Secretary rightly said, our training courses are less than 
2000 hours.  Sir, we understand that the intent of this particular Bill is not to cove r less 
than 2000 hours of formal skill training …. People who are coming with less than 
2000 hours of skill training, they are going to be called as ‘Aid and Assistant’.  But 
beyond that, because they are not recognized by this Council which is the propose d 
Council, they will not have any career progression pathway.  So, we are in agreement, 
and the Ministry of Health has also agreed with our suggestion, that we can redraft 
Clause 37 to provide for skill training of less than 2000 hours also to be included in the 
Act and the training would be provided and recognized, the recognition will be granted 
by the body duly notified by the Ministry of Sill Development. Sir, we have a health 
sector Skill Council which is providing and which is doing the course curricu lum 
content on our industry connect between the short -term training which is being given, 
less than 2000 hours’ training currently. So, our intent is that if this provision can be 
made by redrafting Clause 37, the people who are coming from our ecosystem w ill also 
have a chance to progress. Sir, because once there are less than 2000 hours and if 
there is no mention, they cannot progress. Once there is a mention, there can be a 
provision within the Act to provide a bridge course which we will prepare in 

198 
 
consultation with the Ministry of Health and which meets their standard also so that 
they can progress to 2000 plus kind of job roles."   
(Para 4.29.6) 
 
The Chairman of the Committee specifically wanted to know the opinion of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on the issue raised enshrined in Clause 37.  The 
Special Secretary deposed before the Committee that in the initial draft of the Bill, the 
courses of less than 2000 hours were to be certified by a Body nominated by the Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. The Bill was sent to the Legislative Department 
for vetting and they were of the view that the Bill is being brought by the Health Ministry 
and enjoining the responsibility upon another Ministry through the Bill has never been 
done in the past. Therefore, courses with less than 2000 hours were not included in the Bill. 
The Special Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare also submitted that the if 
the Committee is convinced and the Legislative Department agrees, the same can b e 
included in the Bill and the role for certifying courses with less than 2000 hours can be 
given to MSDE.  
(Para 4.29.7) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the current Bill is aimed at regulating the courses 
beyond 2000 study hours but at the same time, the Committee feels the need for health 
workers to aid and assist the patient in rural, tribal and urban slum where there is huge 
gap in the demand and supply of skilled healthcare providers. In this context, the 
Committee feels that there is requirement f or health workers. However, since there is no 
standardization, determined curriculum content of the health care workers, there is a need 
for proper planning and execution of the intended objectives and arriving at consensus 
amongst the various Ministries c oncerned. The Committee feels that the Government may 
consider to plan and make policy for aids or assistants with training duration of less than 
two thousand hours.  The Government may also explore the possibilities of bringing the 
aids and assistants wit h less than 2000 study hours under the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare for harmonious and assured career progression and also to fulfill the 
demand supply gap in the health sector. Retaining the aid and assistants in the Ministry of 
health and Family  Welfare would provide integrated health provision to the common 
masses being under the same administrative Ministry. While doing so, arrangement be 
made for issuing of certificates from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, itself.  
(Para 4.29.8) 
 
 The Committee, in this context, also wanted to know the views of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare for short term certificate courses in the Ophthalmic Science for 
rural areas. In response to that the Ministry accepted that there are several short term 
courses in vision care being run by various agencies under the skill development initiative. 
However, there is a dire need for standardization of such courses which is being 
encouraged by the Health Ministry. As a result, couple of short term courses have already 
been disbanded by the Skills Ministry recently. Further, the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare has already drafted two short term courses pertaining to eye care which are in 
process of discussion and finalization under the guidance of DGHS.  
(Para 4.29.9) 
 

199 
 
 The Committee is of the view that if the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is 
contemplating to commence short term certificate courses for Ophthalmic Science, it may 
also explore the possibility of conducting similar short term certi ficate courses in other 
segments of Health sector as "aid and assistants" to be regulated by the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare itself. 
(Para 4.29.10) 
 
 The Committee therefore recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
to nominate a body that will grant permission and certification in respect of courses for 
skilled health workers. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Clause 37 may be 
amended as follows: 
 “Provided further that permission and certification in respect of courses for  skilled health 
workers shall include aides or assistants providing assistive services under supervision and 
have formal training duration of less than two thousand hours related to the allied and 
healthcare streams will be granted by the body duly notifie d by the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Government of India.” 
(Para 4.29.11) 
 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.29.12) 
 
 The Committee agreeing with the view of the stakeholder on the issue of 
accreditation mechanism recommends the Ministry to ensure accreditation of all the 
Colleges/Institutes imparting allied courses. Accreditation of colleges has to be streamlined 
so that the quality of allied and healthcare education is improved. The Committee also feels 
that there is a need to conduct periodic inspection and auditing of educational institutions 
by a third party. 
(Para 4.30.3) 
 
 
The Committee, in this connection, has already recommended the constitution of a  
Allied and Healthcare Assessment and Rating Board that will assess and rate the allied 
institutions/colleges for their compliance and work in tandem with the Medical Assessment 
and Rating Board constituted under National Medical Commission because many me dical 
institutes also conduct allied and healthcare professional courses. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends adding the following provisions that deals with the actions to be 
taken by the Allied and Healthcare Assessment and Rating Board. 
(Para 4.30.4) 
 
 Clause 40(1) may be amended as follows: 
 
40 (1) Where, upon receiving a report from the Allied and Healthcare Profession 
Assessment and Rating Board or otherwise, if the Commission is of the opinion that— 
  
(a) the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency 
required from candidates at any examination held by, a University or any allied and 
healthcare institution do not conform to the standards specified by the Under-Graduate 

200 
 
Allied an d Healthcare Education Board or the Post -Graduate Allied and Healthcare 
Education Board, as the case may be; or  
 
(b) the standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education in 
Allied and Healthcare institution as determined by the Und er-Graduate Allied and 
healthcare Education Board or the Post -Graduate allied and healthcare Education 
Board, as the case may be, are not adhered to by any University or allied and 
healthcare institution, and such University or allied and healthcare instit ution has 
failed to take necessary corrective action to maintain specified minimum standards, the 
Commission may initiate action in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2):  
 
Provided that the Commission shall, before taking any action for suo mo tu withdrawal 
of recognition granted to the allied and healthcare professionals qualification awarded 
by a University or allied and healthcare institution, impose penalty on the advice of the 
Allied and Healthcare Profession Assessment and Rating Board. 
(Para 4.30.5) 
 
 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.30.6) 
 
 
 The Committee is in the agreement with the view of the Ministry that the Bill 
contains adequate provision on finance, accounts and audit management.  
(Para 4.31.4) 
 
 The clause is adopted without any change. 
(Para 4.31.5) 
 
 
 The Committee recommends that the Allied and Healthcare Council of India Fund 
be renamed to National Allied and Healthcare Fund on the lines of National Medical 
Commission Fund in NMC Act. 
(Para 4.32.4) 
 
 The Clause 42(1) may be amended as follows: 
 
42. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the National Allied and 
Healthcare Fund and there shall be credited thereto—  
 
(a) all  Government grants, fees, penalties and charges received by the 
Commission and the Regulatory Boards;  
(b) all  sums of money received by the Commission by way of grants, gifts, 
donations, benefactions, bequests and transfers; and  
(c) all sums of money re ceived by the Commission in any other manner or from 
any other source as may be decided upon by the Central Government.  
(Para 4.32.5) 
 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.32.6) 

201 
 
 
 The Committee recommends that the clause 47(1) may be amended as follows: 
 
47. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the State Allied and Healthcare 
Council Fund and there shall be credited thereto—  
 
(a) all sums of money received  by the State Council from the State 
Government;  
(b) all  sums of money received by the State Council by way of grants, gifts, 
donations, benefactions, bequests and transfers; and  
(c) all sums of money received by the State Council in any other manner or 
from any other source as may be decided upon by the State Government. 
(Para 4.33.2) 
 
 The suggested amendment to clause 47 (1) intends only to streamline language of the 
clause that is re-phrasing "all money" to "all sums of money" . 
(Para 4.33.3) 
 
 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.33.4) 
 
INSERTION OF NEW CLAUSE ON JOINT SITTINGS 
 
 The Committee recommends the Ministry to insert a clause for making provision 
for joint sittings of the proposed Commission under the Bill, NCH, NMC and NCISM, for 
co-ordinated and integra ted growth & development of Allied and Healthcare profession 
and understanding of proper task shifting. 
(Para 4.34.1) 
 
 The Committee recommends that the joint sitting between the Commissions would 
provide a platform to discuss issues pertaining to interdisciplinary approach and methods 
of adhering to team work while delivering healthcare services.  
(Para 4.34.2) 
 
 The new clause may read as under: 
(1) There shall be a joint sitting of the National Commission for Allied and 
Healthcare Professions, National Commission for Indian System of Medicine, 
the National Commission for Homoeopathy and the National Medical 
Commission, at least once a year, at such t ime and place as they mutually 
appoint, to enhance the interface between Allied and Healthcare Profession, 
modern system of medicine, Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy,  
(2)  The Agenda for the joint sitting may be placed with mutual agreement by t he 
Chairpersons of the Commissions concerned. 
(3)  The joint sitting may, by an affirmative vote of all members present and voting, 
decide on approving specific educational and medical modules or programs that 
could be introduced in the under -graduate and post-graduate courses across 
allied and healthcare and medical systems, and promote medical pluralism. 

202 
 
(Para 4.34.3) 
 
 The Committee notes that Chapter VII clearly stipulates the penalty for falsely 
claiming to be registered in the Central or State Registe r. The Committee has already 
recommended for constitution of an Allied Assessment and Rating Board that will take 
such measures including issuing warning, imposition of monetary penalty, reducing intake 
or stoppage of admissions and recommending to the Com mission for withdrawal of 
recognition, against a medical institution for failure to maintain the minimum essential 
standards specified by the Under -Graduate Allied Education Board or the Post -Graduate 
Allied Education Board  as the case may be, in accordance with the regulations made under 
this Act.  
(Para 4.35.5) 
 
 
 The clause is adopted without any change. 
(Para 4.35.6) 
 
 
 The Committee observes that Chapter VII that deals with offences and Penalties 
provides for penalty only for individuals. The Committee is of the view that to prevent 
mushrooming of substandard colleges and institutes providing allied healthcare education,  
a mechanism for regulating such colleges need to be developed.  The Committee has 
already recommended for constitution of a Allied Assessment and Rating Board that will 
be responsible for granting permission for establishment of a new medical institution and 
take such measures including issuing warning, imposition of monetary penalty, reducing 
intake or stoppage of admissions and recommending to the National Commission for 
withdrawal of recognition, against a medical institution for failure to maintain the  
minimum essential standards specified by the Under -Graduate Allied Education Board or 
the Post -Graduate Allied Education Board  as the case may be, in accordance with the 
provisions of regulations framed under this Act.  
(Para 4.36.5) 
 
 
 The Committee als o observes that many medical institutes also run allied and 
healthcare profession courses. These medical institutes are regulated under the Medical 
Assessment and Rating Board constituted under the NMC Act. The Committee observes 
that both these Boards will have to work in coordination and co-operation with each other. 
(Para 4.2.3) 
  
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.36.7) 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the stakeholder that certain time limit has to 
be set for disposal of any representation. The Committee observes that number of days for 
deciding an appeal should be lesser than 180 days. The Committee, therefore, reco mmends 
the Ministry to make a provision for disposal of any representation within 90 days in the 
Bill.  The Clause should also take into account the complaints received by the Allied and 
Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration Board.  
(Para 4.37.5) 

203 
 
 
 The Committee therefore recommends that the Clause 56 may be amended as 
follows: 
56(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except 
upon a complaint made by the order of the Central Government, the State Government, 
the Commission, the Allied and Healthcare Professionals Ethics and Registration 
Board or the State Council, as the case may be. 
(Para 4.37.6) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the registration of complaints filed against the 
Allied and healthcare professionals should be restricted to the area where the professional 
is practicing. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry may consider making 
provision, either in the Bill itself or regulations, restricting the place of registration of 
complaints at the place of practice rather than the residential place of complainant. 
(Para 4.37.7) 
 
 
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.37.8) 
 
 
 The Committee is satisfied with the response of the Ministry and emphasises that 
the Committee has  recommended for the constitution of Regulatory/development Boards 
and eight Councils under the proposed overarching Commission. These 
Regulatory/development Boards will regulate important aspects relating to standard of 
education, profess ionals and institutions of the Allied Healthcare profession. The 
Committee notes that the National Medical Commission, National Commission of Indian 
System of Medicine and National Commission of Homoeopathy have been given the power 
to exercise appellate j urisdiction with respect to decisions of the Regulatory/development 
Boards. The Committee, on the same line strongly recommends that the proposed National 
Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professionals will ensure coordination amongst the 
Regulatory/development Boards and also exercise appellate jurisdiction. The Committee 
has also recommended this as one of the functions of the proposed National Commission of 
Allied and Healthcare.  
(Para 4.38.5) 
 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the clause 58 should also include that 
no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the members from the 
Regulatory/development Boards and the members of the proposed Eight Councils. 
(Para 4.38.6) 
  
 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
(Para 4.38.7) 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that one of the main motives 
behind the Bill is to ensure standardisation among different allied healthcare professional 
courses. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that all other existing allied coun cils or 
associations will have to work under a unified council so that the envisioned goal and the 

204 
 
mission objective of the Bill as envisioned in the Preamble to the Bill is achieved. In the case 
of States, where a State Council is already present, such a council should incorporate all 
the allied and healthcare recognised categories of the Schedule in its purview. The 
Committee, therefore, agrees with the view of the Ministry that this overriding effect 
should not be removed.  
(Para 4.39.5) 
 The clause is adopted without any change. 
(Para 4.39.6) 
 
SHORT TITLE, EXTENT AND COMMENCEMENT 
 The Committee acknowledges the urgent need for trained healthcare workforce in 
the country that is extremely important for successful implementation of the country’s 
healthcare policy. The Committee is of the view that the country’s current health 
infrastructure has failed to explore the true potential of the allied health space and utilize 
the available human resource. The Committee feels that the Allied and Healthcare 
Professions Bill, 2019 that is set to establish an overarching regulatory system for 
development of the allied healthcare sector, is a step in the right direction to provide the 
much needed ecosystem for the progress of the Allied health professionals.  
(Para 4.40.4) 
 
 
 The Committee has received several suggestions regarding the title of the Bill.  The 
Committee that examined the Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007 
had made the following recommendations in its 31st Report.  
 
“The Committee is of the view that title of an Act needs to reflect the basic objective 
behind its enactment. It is also not practically possible to include each and every 
special component in the title itself. However, nobody can also deny the fact that in the 
case of a particular Bill envisaged for a variety of specialities having distinct identities 
of their own, specific mention of one speciality and generalization of all the other 
specialities raises uncalled for complications and resultant controversies. The prese nt 
Bill before the Committee is one such case. The Committee would like to point out that 
title of an Act is only meant for indicating its very core content. Proposed legislation 
before the Committee relates to setting up of three separate Central Councils  for 
physiotherapy/ occupational therapy, medical laboratory technology and radiology 
technology. The Committee also takes note of the fact that an enabling provision is to 
be included in the Bill which would open the way for future induction of other 
disciplines. The Committee feels that use of a common term in the title of the Bill 
encompassing all the present disciplines and likely additions in future will be the best 
option. 
 
Taking the relative merits of all viewpoints into account, the Committee, concludes that 
the words ‘Paramedical and physiotherapy’ in the title of the Bill may be replaced by 
the words ‘Allied Health Professions’.” 
(Para 4.40.5) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that all the allied professions are important part of the 
healthcare system and have their own identities. The Title of the Bill should not only reflect 
the basic objective behind its enactment but also include all these multifarious professions 

205 
 
in the Bill. Therefore, specific mention of one particular profession in the Bil l is neither 
appropriate nor feasible. The Committee therefore reiterates its recommendation 
submitted in the 31 st Report and believes that the title should represent all the recognized 
categories and the likely additions in the future rather than one particular profession.   
(Para 4.40.6) 
 
 The Committee understands that the Government  has brought forth structural 
reforms in the Health  Sector since the presentation of 31 st Report of the Committee with 
intended legislation pertaining to NMC Act, 2019 and proposed Commissions for ISM and 
Homeopathy. The Committee also recognizes the varied number of courses/programmes 
that impart medical education at diploma/graduate /higher 
education/specialization/professional level in the allied health sector. With the changing 
times, where the health sector globally is struggling with heavy disease burden especially 
non-communicable diseases, the Committee believes it has become more imper ative to 
strengthen the allied health sector. The Committee is of the view that categorisation of 
‘allied health professional’ and ‘healthcare professional’ in the Bill will address the 
shortage of trained technicians at clinical and non -clinical level as well as promote 
specialization in allied health sciences. Therefore, the Committee recommends retaining the 
word ‘and’ in the Bill. In this connection, the Committee also recommends the Ministry to 
incorporate a separate Schedule containing the list of pro fessions falling under the two 
categories, i.e. (i) allied health professional and  (ii)  healthcare professional to allay the 
apprehensions of the stakeholders. 
(Para 4.40.7) 
 
 The Committee notes the suggestion of the stakeholders regarding the structure  of 
the apex body to be constituted under the Allied & Health care Professions Bill -2018. The 
stakeholders have suggested that in the light of changing concepts of professional 
regulation in Health care delivery system in India, a National Commission for t he Allied 
Healthcare Professionals should be constituted on the lines of National Medical 
Commission Act-2019 and proposed National Commissions for Indian system of Medicine 
and Homeopathy.  
(Para 4.40.8) 
 
 The Committee, considering the diverse skill set required to be possessed by the 
professionals, believes that one single council for all the professions will not successfully 
address the diversities and intricacies of each recognised category under the Bil l. The 
Committee, at the same time, also notes the existing non -standardisation in the education 
and practice of the allied professionals that necessitate uniform restructuring of the sector. 
The Committee believes that the structure under the Bill has to be redefined in a manner 
that facilitates development of each recognised category as well as different professions 
under one umbrella body.  The Committee, therefore, finds merit in constituting an 
overarching Commission for the Allied and Healthcare Profe ssions on the lines of National 
Medical Commission, National Commission on Indian System of Medicine and National 
Commission on Homeopathy that makes necessary regulations for respective medical field.  
(Para 4.40.9) 
 
 The Committee also agrees with the vi ew of the Ministry on the stakeholder’s 
suggestion of enforcement of all provisions of the Act on a single date and observes that the 
present Allied Healthcare infrastructure in the country is not fully equipped to adopt all 
the provisions of the Act immed iately. The Committee is of the view that this Bill is bound 
to bring structural reforms in the Allied Healthcare Sector and believes that carrying out 
such pioneering changes in a haphazard manner will do more harm than good. The 

206 
 
Committee also feels that  the Allied Healthcare sector is still in its nascent stage and when 
guided in the right direction has immense potential to strengthen the healthcare 
infrastructure of the country. The Committee also notes that considering the absence of a 
robust database of the professions, the Commission needs sufficient time to effectively 
implement all the provisions of the Act. The Committee, however, cautions the Ministry to 
not delay the implementation of the Act and devise an action plan for expediting its 
enforcement. 
(Para 4.40.10) 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends renaming the Bill from "the Allied and 
Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018" to "The National Commission for Allied and Healthcare 
Professions Bill, 2020" on the lines of the National Medical Commissio n Act 2019, National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill 2019 and National Commission for 
Homeopathy Bill 2019. 
(Para 4.40.11) 
 
 The Committee also recommends the deletion of clause 1(2) as the Bill extends to the 
whole of India after the repeal of Article 370 of the Constitution of India. 
(Para 4.40.12) 
PREAMBLE 
 The Committee notes that the Preamble to the Allied and Health Care Profession 
Bill, 2018 does not clearly specify the goals and objectives of the Bill. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the following amendments in the Preamble to the Bill:-  
To provide  for Allied and Health Care Education System that improves access to 
quality and affordable Allied and Health Care Education, ensures availability of 
adequate and high quality Allied and Health Care Professionals in all parts of the 
country; that promotes equitable and universal Health care that encourages 
community health perspective and make services of such Allied and Health Care 
Professionals accessible to all the citizens; that promotes national health goals; that 
encourages such Allied and Health Care  Professionals to adopt latest scientific and 
technological research and development in their work and to contribute to research 
and scientific and technological development; that has an objective periodic and 
transparent assessment of Allied and Health Ca re Institutions and facilitates 
maintenance of a Central Register of Allied and Health Care Professions and enforces 
high ethical standards in all aspects of Allied and Health Care Professionals Services; 
that is flexible to adapt to changing needs and has  an effective grievance redressal 
mechanism and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Para 4.41.1) 
 
 The Committee adopts the remaining clauses as proposed in the Bill. The 
Committee is also in agreement with the provisions of the Financial Memoranda in the Bill.  
(Para 4.42) 
 
 The Committee also recommends for all consequential changes to be carried out in 
the relevant clauses of the Bill keeping in view the Committee’s observations and 

207 
 
recommendations contained in the report. The Committ ee also recommends the Ministry 
for making consequential changes in the numbering of the Chapters and clauses due to 
suggested insertion of new Chapters and clauses.  
(Para 4.43) 
 
DISTINCTION BETWEEN ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AND ALLIED AND 
HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that there is no need to include 
a third category in the Bill. The Committee observes that the professions have already 
being classified as per ISCO code, which makes the segmentation clear . The Committee 
also recommends the Ministry to incorporate a separate Schedule containing the list of 
professions falling under the two categories, i.e. (i) allied health professional and  (ii)  
healthcare professional to allay the apprehensions of the stakeholders. 
(Para 4.44.5) 
 
 
 The Committee also reiterates its recommendation that recognised category is a 
broad description that clubs many professions with a very general idea that doesn't 
specifically defines the profession with discipline, scope and nature. The Committee agrees 
with the view of Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of India that the definition may be 
revised as per the curricula and scope of practice at different levels also taking all factors 
and circumstance in Indian control as well. 
(Para 4.44.6) 
 
CHANGE IN NOMENCLATURE 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the present ISCO code for Ophthalmic Assistants 
and Optometrists is reasonable and may not be changed at the moment  The Committee 
also agrees with the view of the Ministry that use of Ophthalmic Physicians must be strictly 
prohibited. 
(Para 4.45.6) 
 
 The Committee observes that the Ministry has acceded to the suggestion of the 
stakeholder to change the nomenclature of certain professions. The Committee, however 
views that the Ministry may change the nomencla ture only after in depth examination and 
due consideration. The Committee recommends that the category “Physician Associate or 
Physician Assistant” may be renamed to “Physician Associate”. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to rename the Health and Information Management Professional 
to “Health Information Management Professionals” and “Health Informatics 
Professionals” and also define the specific roles under the specific domain. 
(Para 4.45.7) 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry an d recommends continuation 
of the term Behavioural Health Sciences Professional.  
(Para 4.45.8) 
 
 

208 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may re - examine the 
categorization to avoid any overlapping of similar professions. 
(Para 4.45.9) 
   
OPTOMETRISTS/ OPHTHALMIC SCIENCE PROFESSIONALS 
 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that the category of 
Ophthalmic Sciences includes both Optometrists and Ophthalmic Assistants and the 
present nomenclature may be continued. 
(Para 4.46.7) 
 
 
REQUEST FOR INCLUSION IN THE SCHEDULE: 
 
The Committee notes that the Ministry has already included CSSD technicians 
under the Surgical and Anesthesia Technology. The Concern is already addressed. The 
Committee , however, recommends that the Clinical Social  Workers should be included in 
the ‘Behavioral Health Science Professionals’’ The Committee also recommends that the 
Psychiatric social worker, Medical Social Worker, Social Worker may be included in the 
Schedule under Behavioral Health Science Professiona l. The Committee, however, agrees 
with the view of the Ministry and recommends that the clinical Psychologists must be 
regulated under the Rehabilitation Council of India. 
(Para 4.47.7) 
 
SUGGESTIONS OF IMA (HEADQUARTER AND KERALA CHAPTER) 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry and is of the view that the main 
aim of this Bill is to establish independent footing for the allied and healthcare 
professionals. Addition of “under the supervision of a modern medicine doctor” in the 
Schedule would pla ce the allied and healthcare professionals under the shadow of the 
medical doctors. The Committee is of the view that the doctors and allied healthcare 
professionals have to work in sync with each other for establishing a robust healthcare 
delivery system in the country. The other suggestions submitted by IMA need not be 
included in the different category of schedules. 
(Para 4.48.3) 
 
SCHEDULE NO 3 deals with the Physiotherapy Professionals  
 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that the current definition of 
Physiotherapy must be continued as it is a globally accepted definition. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to re -examine the definition of Occupational Therapy based on 
global definitions and existing State Councils of Delhi, Maharashtra. 
(Para 4.49) 
 
SCHEDULE NO 6 
 
The Committee recommends that the occupational therapists in line with 
physiotherapists must be given the opportunity to practice independently or as a part of a 
multi-disciplinary team. The Committee, therefore, r ecommends addition of “The 

209 
 
Occupational Therapist can practice independently or as a part of a multi -disciplinary 
team and has a minimum qualification of a baccalaureate degree” in the definition 
mentioned in Schedule No 6.  
(Para 4.50.4) 
 
 The Committee recommends the Ministry to re -examine the different professions 
under the recognized category of Occupational Therapy and place the other professions 
under suitable category. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Movement Therapist 
(including Art, Dance and Movement Therapists or Recreational Therapist) and Podiatrist 
may be kept in another category. 
(Para 4.50.5) 
 
SCHEDULE NO 7 deals with Behavioural Health Science Professionals  
(Para 4.51) 
 
 
 The Committee agrees with the view of the Ministry that this Bill is a novel initiative 
to regulate the different allied and healthcare professionals that are non -standardised. 
Removing any profession from the ambit of the National Commission on Allied and 
Healthcare Profession would cause grave harm to the exclu ded profession. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Behavioural Health Sciences category must be continued. 
However, the Ministry may re -examine the professions that have been included in the 
category. The Committee also recommends defining each profession in a different schedule.  
(Para 4.51.3) 
 
SCHEDULE NO 9 deals with Medical Radiology, Imaging and Therapeutic Technology 
Professionals  
(Para 4.52) 
 
The Committee recommends that the Council for Medical Radiology, Imaging and 
Therapeutic Technology Professionals should formulate the specific list of tests and 
procedures that the professionals may be permitted to conduct independently. Once the 
number a nd details of the tests are decided, the changes suggested by SIR may be 
incorporated.  
(Para 4.52.3) 
 
 
  

210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
  

211 
 
IV  
 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3:00 p.m. on Thursday, the 24 th January, 2019 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   -   Chairman 
  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 
2.  Dr. Vikas Mahatme 
3.  Shri Jairam Ramesh  
4.  Dr. Santanu Sen 
5.  Shri Ashok  Siddharth 
6.  Dr. C. P. Thakur 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA  
 
7.  Shri Arjunlal Meena 
8.  Shri C. R. Patil 
9.  Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Desh Deepak Verma   Secretary-General 
2. Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Rakesh Naithani    Director 
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
5. Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
 
I. Opening Remarks 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committ ee and apprised them 
that three Bills, namely (i) t he Allied and Hea lthcare Professions Bill,  2018, (ii) *** have been 
referred to the Committee for examination and report. The Allied and Healthcare Professions 
Bill, 2018 aims to regulate and standardize the education and services of healthcare professionals 
other than doctors and the Committee has to submit a report on the Bill in three months. ***. The 
Chairman also apprised the Committee that in view of the paucity of time, the examination of the 
*** has been prioritized and in the process, ***. The examination of Allied and Healthcare 
Professions Bill, 2018, for which three months deadline has been earmarked, can accordingly be 
taken up later. 
*** Relates to other matter 

212 
 
3. The Committee deliberated that the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 contains 
66 clauses and is very comprehensive and complex with wide implications impacting large 
number of stakeholders/organizations/associations/individuals. With a view to holistically 
examine the Allied and Hea lthcare Professions Bill,  2018, th e Committee decided to issue a 
Press Release inviting memoranda and suggestions from a wide cross section of stakeholders on 
the Bill.  
4. *** 
5. *** 
  
6. *** 
 II. *** 
7. ***. 
8. *** 
9. ***   
Witnesses then withdrew 
10. ***  
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
12. The Committee then adjourned at 4:30 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** Relates to other matter 
V 
 

213 
 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Friday, the 15 th March, 2019 in Committee Room 
"A", Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. 1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav         -         Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA       
2.       Dr. Vikas Mahatme 
3.       Shri Ashok Siddharth 
4.       Shri K. Somaprasad 
5.       Dr. C. P. Thakur 
LOK SABHA 
6.       Dr. K Kamaraj   
7.       Shri C. R. Patil 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rakesh Naithani    Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
1. Shri Arun Singhal, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sudansh Pant, Joint Secretary 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
3. Smt. Sunita Sanghi, Senior Advisor  
 
 I. Opening Remarks 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
apprised them that the meeting has been convened to hear the views of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship on  
the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill,  2018, which has  been referred to the 
Committee for examination and report  till 1 st April, 2019 . The Chairman also apprised 
the members that with a view to holistically examine the Bill, a Press Release inviting 
memoranda an d suggestions from a wide section of stakeholders was issued . The 
Secretariat has received more than 100 memoranda on the Bill. 

214 
 
3. ***  
4. *** 
II. Oral evidence of the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
and Senior Advisor, Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
5.  The Committee, then, heard the views of Additional Secretary of Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare on the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018. A 
power point presentation was made on the Bill which highlights:- 
 
(i) Definition of the Allied and Healthcare Professionals;  
(ii) categories comprising of Allied and Healthcare Professionals; 
(iii) importance of the proposed legislation;  
(iv) major milestones in the establishment of regulatory framework for Allied and 
Healthcare Professionals in India;  
(v) state of regulation for the Allied and Healthcare Professionals around the 
World; (vi) comments of the public rec eived on the draft of the Allied and 
Healthcare Professionals Bill, 2015;  
(vii) recommendations from the State Governments on draft Alli ed and Healthcare 
Professional Bill, 2015;  
(viii) recommendations from the Professional s Associations, Civil Organizat ion 
and State Councils;  
(ix) inter-ministerial consultations (2017-18);  
(x) institutional structure under the Bill;  
(xi) constitution and functions of the Central Council;  
(xii) composition and functions of the State Council; and  
(xiii) analysis of additional comments received after the Bill introduced in  Rajya 
Sabha. 
 
6. Thereafter, the Senior Advisor of the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship gave her views on the Bill and the role played by the Ministry in this 
regard. She also voiced reservations of the Ministry with respect to clause 37 of the Bill.  
 
7. After the presentation of the Ministries, the Members raised some queries w.r.t the 
Bill. The Chairman directed the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to send written 
replies within a week's time. 
 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9. The Committee then adjourned at 4:50 p.m. 
 
*** Relates to other matter 
 
   

215 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 10 th October, 2019 in 
Committee Room "A", Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -            Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA       
2.       Shri A.K. Antony 
3.       Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4.       Shri Suresh Prabhu 
5.       Shri K. Somaprasad 
6.       Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
7.       Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
8.      Ms. Ramya Haridas 
9.     Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon  
10.     Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya  
11.     Shri Arjunlal Meena 
12.     Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
13.     Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
14.     Adv. Adoor Prakash 
15.     Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
16.     Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
17.     Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
18.     Shri Anurag Sharma 
19.     Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
 20.    Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
  
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri J. Sundriyal                                           Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                             Additional Director 
3. Smt. Harshita Shankar                                 Under Secretary 

216 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
  
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
1. Smt. Preeti Sudan, Secretary 
2. Shri Arun Singhal, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Sudansh Pant, Joint Secretary 
4. Dr. Kavita Narayan, Technical Advisor 
  
 I.        Opening Remarks 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
apprised them about the agenda of the day i.e to hear the views of the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare on "The Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018."  ***. He then 
informed the members that in  these three Bills, there are provisions for constitution of 
State Councils/Commissions. He proposed that since the implementing mechanism of the 
policies under the proposed legislation re sts with the State Governments, it would, 
therefore, be appropriate for the Committee to solicit the views of the State 
Governments for comprehensive examination of the three Bills. The Committee , then, 
agreed to the proposal of the Chairman. 
II.      Oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on the 
Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 
  
3.        The Committee, then, hea rd the views of the Secretary,  Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare on the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018. The Secretary 
apprised the  members about the background of the Bill and need for  proposed 
legislation; Consultative process and  approach while drafting the Allied and Healthcare 
Professions Bill, 2018; its salient features; constitution an d functions of Central and 
States Councils; maintenance of Central and States Registers and updated status on the 
Bill. The Joint Secretary then  made a power point presentation befo re the Committee 
that highlighted the following:- 
 
(i) definition of the Allied and Healthcare Professionals;  
(ii) categories comprising of Allied and Healthcare Professionals; 
(iii) importance of the proposed legislation;  
(iv) major milestones in the establishment of regulatory framework for Allied and 
Healthcare Professionals in India;  
(v) status   of regulation for the Allied and Healthcare Professionals around the 
world;  
 
*** Relates to other matter 
 

217 
 
(vi) comments  of the public received on the draft of the Allied and Healthcare 
Professionals Bill, 2015;  
(vii) recommendations from the State Governments on draft Allied and Healthcare 
Professional Bill, 2015;  
(viii) recommendations from the Professionals Association s, Civil Organization 
and State Councils;  
(ix) inter-ministerial consultations (2017-18);  
(x) institutional structure under the Bill;  
(xi) constitution and functions of the Central Council;  
(xii) composition and functions of the State Councils; and  
(xiii) analysis of public comments received through this Committee .  
  
 
4.       After the presentation of the Joint Secretary, the members raised some queries 
w.r.t the Bill which are as follows:- 
 Title of the Bill; 
 Provisions relating to disciplinary action; 
 Composition of the Central and State Councils; 
 Presence and dominance of ex-officio members in the Council; 
 Representation of various  professions and civil society members;  
 Inclusion of elected representatives in the Council; 
 Inclusion of other professions like supportive nursing etc in the Bill; 
 Absence of an effective grievance redressal mechanism; 
 More autonomy and freedom to State Councils 
 Effective Decentralization; 
 Short term courses for the professionals; 
 Representation of elected members of National/State Legislature in Central/States 
Councils etc 
5.       Thereafter, the Secretary replied to some of the queries raised by the members. 
The Chairman directed the Department to send written replies to the queries within a 
week's time. He also directed the Secretariat to forward a questionnaire on the Bill to the 
Department for their written comments. 
 
6.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
7.       The Committee then adjourned at 5:00 p.m to meet again at 10:30 am on 11 th 
October, 2019. 
  

218 
 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. on Friday, the 11 th October, 2019  in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
2. 1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav         -         Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA       
2.      Shri A.K. Antony 
3.       Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4.       Shri Suresh Prabhu 
5.       Shri K. Somaprasad 
6.       Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
7.       Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
8.       Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
9.       Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
10.     Shri Arjunlal Meena 
11.     Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
12.     Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
13.     Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
14.     Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
15.     Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
16.     Shri Anurag Sharma 
17.     Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
18.     Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
3. Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
 
 

219 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
I Representatives of Physiotherapists Associations   
1. Dr. M. Selvam, Vice-President, Physiotherapists Forum  
2. Dr. Pooja Shetty, Physiotherapists Forum 
3. Dr. G.K. Meena, General Secretary, Physiotherapists Forum of AIIMS 
4. Dr. V.P. Gupta, Physiotherapists Forum of AIIMS 
5. Dr. Rajiv Agarwal, Physiotherapists Forum of AIIMS 
6. Dr. Sanjiv Jha, Executive President, Indian Association of Physiotherapist 
7. Dr. K. M. Annamalai, Indian Association of Physiotherapist 
8. Dr. Prabhat Ranjan, Indian Association of Physiotherapist 
9. Dr. Koshy K Mathai, President, Foundation of Rajdhani Clinical Physiotherapy  
10. Dr. Ajeet Kumar Saharan, General Secretary, Rajasthani Physiotherapy 
Association 
11. Prof. (Dr.) Sanjay Parm ar, Advisory Member, Rajasthani Physiotherapy 
Association 
12. Dr. Sudeep H. Kale, President, Maharashtra State Occupational Therapy & 
Physiotherapy Council 
13. Dr. Sandeep Bhagwat, Maharashtra State Occupational Therapy & 
Physiotherapy Council 
14. Shri R. Gopakumar, President, Kerala Physiotherapy Association   
15. Shri Manoj M, Kerala Physiotherapy Association   
16. Ms. Deepti Wardhan, Kerala Physiotherapy Association   
17. Ms. Krishna Chandan, Sports Injury Center, Safdarjung 
 
II Representatives of Optometrists Associations/Federations 
 
1. Ms. Laxmi Shinde, President Optometry Council of India 
2. Ms. Monica Chaudhry  
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar Mishra 
4. Shri Rajbir Berwal 
5. Shri Aditya Goyal, President, Association of Schools and Colleges of Optometry 
6. Ms. Prema Chande, Board Member, Optometry Council of India 
7. Shri Subodh Kumar Dixit, President, Indian Optometric Association 
8. Shri Subodh Khanduri, Vice President, Indian Optometric Association 
9. Shri Rajeev Prasad, Secretary, Indian Optometric Association  
10. Shri Sarvesh Patil, General Secretary, Government Optometrist Association 
11. Shri Ravindra Kumar Yadav, General Secretary, UP Optometrist Association 
12. Shri Sanjeev Raghav, Member, UP Optometrist Association   
 
III Shri Rajesh Kumar Sinha, Head, School of Allied Health Sciences, Manipal 
 

220 
 
IV Representatives of All India Allied and Healthcare Professional Association 
1. Dr. Harpreet Singh Aurora, President 
2. Dr. Rashmil Preet Singh, Secretary-General  
 
V Representatives of Ophthalmic Associations 
1. Shri Jatinder Katoch, General Secretary, All India Ophthalmic Physician 
Association 
2. Dr. Atul Uppadhayye, All India Ophthalmic Physician Association 
3. Shri Kamal Kumar, All India Ophthalmic Physician Association 
4. Shri S.P. Yadav, National President, National Ophthalmic Association  
5. Shri S. S. Tanwar, National President, National Ophthalmic Association 
6. Shri Harpal Singh, Chairman, Punjab Ophthalmic Officers Association 
7. Shri Mohanjit Singh, Punjab Ophthalmic Officers Association 
 
VI Representatives of Occupational Therapist Associations 
1. Dr. Anil K. Srivastava, President, All India Occupational Therapists Association  
2. Dr. R.K. Sharma, Member, All India Occupational Therapists Association 
3. Dr. Neeraj Mishra, Member, All India Occupational Therapists Association 
4. Shri Akhilesh Kumar Shukla, Assistant Professor, Pt. Deendayal Upadhaya 
National Institute for Persons with Disabilities 
5. Dr. Lalit Narayan, Pt. Deendayal Upadhaya National Institute for Persons with 
Disabilities 
 
VII  Representatives of Medical Laboratory Associations 
1. Shri Kaptan Singh  Sehrawat, General Secretary, Joint Forum of Medical 
Technologists of India 
2. Shri Gurvinder Singh Wadhawan, President, Joint Forum of Medical 
Technologists of India 
3. Shri Mohan Lal Bhagwat, Vice -President, Joint Forum of Medical 
Technologists of India 
4. Shri Manish Kumar, President, All India Association of Anaesthesia and 
Operation Theatre 
5. Shri Firoz Alam, All India Association of Anaesthesia and Operation Theatre  
6. Shri Manoj Kumar, All India Association of Anaesthesia and Operation Theatre 
7. Shri Devendra Prasad, State Secretary,  All India Medical Laboratory 
Technologists Association 
8. Dr. Satya Nand Choudhary, Editor Chronicle, All India Medical Laboratory 
Technologists Association 
9. Shri S. C. Bose, Zonal Secretary, All India Medical Laboratory Technologists 
Association 
10. Shri Ramesh Kumar, President, Haryana State Lab Technician Association 

221 
 
11. Shri Balbir Sharma, Haryana State Lab Technician Association 
12. Shri Jaswant Singh, Haryana State Lab Technician Association 
13. Shri Jignesh M Patel, Pranam Laboratory 
14. Shri Paresh T. Patel, Pranam Laboratory 
15. Shri Shailesh C. Babariya, Pranam Laboratory 
 
VIII Representatives of Social Welfare Association/Unit  
 
1. Shri B.R. Shekhar, Chief Medical Social Service Officer, Medical Social Welfare 
Unit, AIIMS, New Delhi 
2. Shri Rajeev Maikhuri,  - do- 
3. Dr. Om Prakash Giri, General Secretary, All India Association of Medical Social 
Work Professionals, PGIMER, Chandigarh 
4. Dr. Anil Kumar Goswami, AIIMS, Delhi 
 
IX Representatives of Corporeal Societies 
 Shri PVS Prakash, General Secretary, Indian Society of Extra Corporeal Technology 
1. Shri Emmanuel Raj Singh, Treasurer, Indian Society of Extra Corporeal 
Technology 
2. Shri Radhakrsihna Nair, Ex. Committee Member, Indian Society of Extra 
Corporeal Technology 
3. Smt. Kamala Rana, Ex-President, Indian Society of Extra Corporeal Technology 
X Representatives of Dietician Association 
 
1. Dr. Neelanjana Singh, National Executive Member, Indian Dietician Association 
2. Ms. Anuja Agarwala, National Executive Member, Indian Dietician Association 
 
XI Representatives of Dental Hygienist Association 
 
1. Dr. Ramakant Pandey , President, Federation of Indian Dental Hygienists 
Association 
2. Dh Surendra k shukla, General Secretary, Federation of Indian Dental Hygienists 
Association 
3. Dh BMM Singh, Federation of Indian Dental Hygienists Association 
XII Representatives of Radiographers Societies 
 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Siramdas , Working General Secretary, Society of Indian 
Radiographers 
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Popli, Vice-president, Society of Indian Radiographers  

222 
 
3. Shri Shankar K Bhagat, National Coordinator, Society of Indian Radiographers 
XIII Representatives of Association Physician Assistants  
 
1. Shri R. Shiva Kumar, President, Indian Association of Physician Assistants 
2. Ms. Gomathi Sundar, Indian Association of Physician Assistants 
3. Ms. Anitha Chandrasekhar, Indian Association of Physician Assistants 
I. Opening Remarks 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them 
about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the views of the stakeholders in connection with the 
Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 which had been referred to the Committee for 
examination and report on 2nd January, 2019. 
3. The Chairman apprised the Members that the Committee would be hearing the views of 
the representatives of the (i) Physiotherapists Associations; (ii) Optometrists 
Associations/Federations; (iii) School of Allied Health Sciences, Manipal ;  (iv) All India Al lied 
and Healthcare Professional Association (v) Ophthalmic Associations (vi) Occupational 
Therapist Associations (vii) Medical Laboratory Associations (viii) Social Welfare 
Association/Unit (ix) Corporeal Societies (x) Dietician Association (xi) Dental Hy gienist 
Association (xii) Radiographers Societies (xiii) Association of Physician Assistants on the Allied 
and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018. 
4.  Evaluating the work to be done by the Committee on the Allied and Healthcare 
Professions Bill, 2018 and the wide implications of the proposed legislation on the regulatory 
oversight of Allied and Healthcare Education in the country, the Committee decided that it 
needed to hear the views of some experts in addition to the views of the stakeholders. The 
Chairman apprised the members that a Press Release on the Bill has been published in all 
leading English and vernacular newspapers on 5th February, 2019 inviting views of a wide 
spectrum of important experts/stakeholders before finalizing its Report on the Bill.  The 
Committee has already received a large number of memoranda from a wide cross -section of 
stakeholders in response to the Press Release that were sent to Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare for their comments. The comments of the Ministry on such memoran da have been 
received by the Committee from the Ministry.  

223 
 
II. Oral evidence of the representatives of various associations/federations  
 
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of Shri Rajesh Kumar Sinha  Head, School of 
Allied Health Sciences, Manipal on the Bill. He inter-alia suggested to make a provision for 
health information management professionals to create a position in the Indian healthcare 
industry and hospital. 
6. The Committee then heard the views of Dr. Koshy K Mathai, President, Fo undation of 
Rajdhani Clinical Physiotherapy who inter alia requested for establishing an independent 
statutory regulatory body for physiotherapy. Dr. Rajiv Agarwal of  Physiotherapists Forum of 
AIIMS,  also submitted that the Bill should be renamed as "Phy siotherapy, Allied and Health 
Care Professions Bill, 2018", and a separate chapter within this Bill enabling formation of 
Physiotherapy Council of India, excluding the physiotherapists from the category of allied and 
health care professionals should be incorporated. 
7. Ms. Monica Chaudhry, representative from Optometry Association/Federations 
suggested that the term "ophthalmic science" should be replaced with "optometrist professional" 
and definition of optometrist in the Bill should be as per WHO and Worl d Council of Optometry 
(WCO).  She, further, stated that optometrists are independent primary eye care providers so they 
should be given right to practice independently and the minimum qualification should be four 
years. 
8. Mr. Jatinder Katoch, representat ive of Ophthalmic Associations submitted that since 
there was no promotion at all and no professional qualification enhancement, a degree of 
Bachelor of Ophthalmic Medical Science should be included in allied health under ISCO code 
2211 as an ophthalmic physician. 
9. Dr. Anil K. Srivastava,  representative of Occupational Therapist Associations inter-
alia suggested that Central Council of Occupational Therapy should be formed. Dr Neeraj 
Mishra also a representative of Occupational Therapist Associations submitted that a clause 
for their independent practice should be added in the Bill and the definition of Occupational 
Therapist should be adopted from existing councils of Maharashtra, Delhi or Chhattisgarh. 
10. Shri Kaptan Singh Sehrawat, representative of Medical Laboratory Associations inter-
alia submitted that the word "and" should be removed from the definition of the Bill and the 
definition of Allied Health Professional & Medical Laboratory Science should be as per 
Curricula Handbook approved by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
11. Dr. Omprakash Giri, representative of Social Welfare Association/Unit suggested that 

224 
 
Medical and Psychiatric Social Worker cadre should be included in the Bill. 
12. Shri P.V.S. Prakash,  representative of Corporeal Societies proposed that the  term 
"Perfusionist" in the Bill should be replaced with "Clinical Perfusionist" and they should be 
included in healthcare professionals instead of allied health professionals. 
13. Ms. Anuja Agarwala, National Executive Member, representatives of Dietician Association 
inter-alia submitted that the nomenclature of a Dietician should be defined and the definition 
should be exhaustive. 
14. Dr. Ramakant Pandey,  representative of Dental Hygienist Association submitted that 
Dental Hygienists want optimum representation under section 3(m) of the Bill. 
15. Shri Srinivasulu Siramdas, representative of Radiographers Societies was of the view that 
they should be treated as healthcare professionals and opposed the skill development and short 
term courses. 
16. Shri R. Shiva Kumar, representative of Association of Physician Assistants submitted 
that the word "assistant" should be replaced with "associate". They should be classified as 
healthcare professionals and two representatives of physician assistants should be kept in both 
the National and State Councils. 
17. Dr. Harpreet Singh Aurora, representative of All India Allied and Healthcare Professional 
Association inter alia stressed on the eligibility to get admission in the allied courses and t here 
should be no biasness on the basis of University or distance or regular programme. 
18. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
19. The Committee then adjourned at 12.05 p.m.  
 
  

225 
 
VIII 
 
EIGHTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3:00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 10th December, 2019 in Room No. 139, 
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
3. 1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav         -         Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA       
2. Shri A.K. Antony 
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween  
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Chaudhary Birender Singh 
8. Shri K. Somaprasad  
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
11. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
12. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
13. Shrimati Malothu Kavitha 
14. Shri P. K. Kunhalikutty 
15. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
16. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
17. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
18. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
19. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
20. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
21. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
22. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
23. Shri Anurag Sharma 
24. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
25. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
 

226 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
3. Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
Representatives of Quality Council of India 
 
1. Dr. R.P. Singh, Secretary General 
2. Dr. Atul Mohan Kochhar, CEO, National Accreditation Boards for Hospitals & 
Healthcare Providers (NABH) 
3. Dr. A.V. Jayakrishnan, IMA representative to NABH 
4. Shri Rudraneel Chattopadhyay, Project Manager, 
Representative of Public Health Foundation of India 
 
1. Ms. Preeti Kumar, Vice-President, Public Health Systems Support. 
 
I. Opening Remarks 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them 
that the Committee would hear the views of the experts in connection with the Allied and 
Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 which had been referred to the Committee for examination and 
report. 
3. The Chairman also sought the suggestions of the  Members on the future course of action 
pertaining to the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 on as the Committee has to 
expedite its examination and report. The Members were of the view that the said Bill is 
complicated and exhaustive and more de liberations are required for further examination of the 
Bill in order to hear the views of stakeholders/experts, clause -by-clause consideration of the Bill, 
internal discussion and consideration and adoption of the report. The Committee felt that it needs 
more time for examination of the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 and therefore, 
decided to seek extension of time till the first day of last week of the first part of the Budget 
Session-2020 for presentation of Report. The Committee authorised  the Chairman of the 
Committee to request Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for extension of time. 

227 
 
 II. Oral evidence of the representatives of Quality Council of India  
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of Dr. R.P. Singh,  Secretary General, Quality 
Council of India on the Bill. He inter-alia made the following suggestions on the Bill:  
i. Adopting a leaner constitution for the Central and State Councils;  
ii. Reducing the role of Government in regulation of professions and make the Councils 
autonomous. 
iii. Making the procedure and term of appointment of Chairperson of Councils 
consistent. 
iv. Including QCI in the Central Council. 
v. Emphasized upon the role of accreditation. 
vi. Need for creation of Appellate Tribunal for a second appeal. 
vii. Consider allowing civil courts jurisdiction as third level of appea. 
viii. Allowing recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) ab initio for professionals. 
ix. Recognizing input criteria in training in line with National Occupational Standards 
(NOS) to ensure homogeneity across the sector. 
x. Recognizing voluntary certification/accreditation to higher standards through 
accredited Certification Bodies (CBs). 
xi. All modes of delivery of learning; outcome must be in line with National Skills 
Qualifications Framework (NSQF) and certified through accredited Person nel CBs 
based on ISO 17024. 
III  Oral evidence of the representative of Public Health Foundation of India 
 
5. The Committee then heard the views of the Ms. Preeti Kumar, Vice -President, Public 
Health Systems Support, Public Health Foundation of India. She inter-alia submitted that the 
legislation was excellent and addresses a major gap in India’s health workforce. She mentioned 
about global and national evidence that supports the role and attests the value of Allied 
Healthcare Professionals. Re -assignment of roles and responsibilities previously restricted to 
doctors, to non -doctors who have the requisite skill sets, is a rational choice that optimizes all 
available resources in the health system. She also made the following  points on the Bill:- 
i. In order to a chieve primary health care coverage by 2030, the creation of Allied Health 
Professionals in different categories of Allied Health Professional  workforce must be 
driven through a health system approach. 
ii. Establishment of Public Health Cadre in States provide s an opportunity for career 
growth of highly qualified allied health professionals through integration in health 
systems in public health management, faculty creation (education) and research for 
AHPs. 
iii. Education should be skill based and competency driven and focus on skills, scale, salary 
and social status of Allied Health Professionals. 

228 
 
iv. States should retain the flexibility to innovate and the National council should be a 
platform for exchange of best practices and enabler for replication and scale up.  
 
6. After the oral evidence of the experts/stakeholders, the Members raised some queries w.r.t 
the Bill which were replied to by the witnesses. 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8. The Committee then adjourned at 4:35 p.m.  
 
 
 
  

229 
 
IX 
 
NINTH MEETING 
  
 The Committee met at 3:00 p.m. on Monday, the 6th January, 2020 in Committee Room 
A, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA    
2. Shri A.K. Antony 
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween 
5. Dr. Santanu Sen 
6. Chaudhary Birender Singh 
7. Shri K. Somaprasad 
8. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
9. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
10. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
11. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
12. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
13. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
14. Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
15. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
16. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
17. Shri Anurag Sharma 
18. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
19. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. P. Singh    Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare: 
 
1. Shri Arun Singhal, Special Secretary  
2. Shri Alok Saxena, Joint Secretary, Allied Health Services (AHS)  
3. Shri Anil Kumar Gupta, Deputy Secretary, Allied Health Services, (AHS)  
4. Shri Sunil Kumar Gupta, Under Secretary, Allied Health Services, (ARS)  
5. Ms. Shivangini Kar Dave, Lead Consultant, Human Resources for Health  
6. (HRH)  

230 
 
7. Shri Vivek Bhatnagar, Sr. Consultant, Human Resources for Health (HRH)  
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Law & Justice  
 
Department of Legislative Department 
 
1. Shri K. Biswal, Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Srivastava, Deputy Legislative Counsel  
Department of Legal Affairs 
 
1. Shri R.S. Verma, Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Mahendra Khandelwal, Additional Government Advocate  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them 
that the meeting was convened to have clause -by-clause consideration on the Allied and 
Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018 . The Chairman also apprised the Committee that Secretary, 
Department of Health & Family Welfare has sought leave of absence as she is out of the country 
for attending a Conference in Maldives. She has howev er authorized the Special Secretary, 
Department of Health and Family Welfare to appear on her behalf.  The Chairman further 
informed the Members that the Bill has 66 Clauses and the Secretariat has identified 25 -30 
Clauses on which the Committee has to formulate its observations and recommendations.  
3. The Members of the Committee first deliberated on various clauses of the Allied and 
Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018  and gave various suggestions on the provisions of the Bill 
which are as follows:  
(i) Clause 1: The title of the Bill may be called as "The National Commission for Allied and 
Healthcare Professions Bill, 2020"  instead of "The Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill, 
2018";  
(ii) Clause 2: The duration of hours may be reflected in the calenda r year so as, to understand 
the course of duration in a distinct manner;  
(iii) Clause 3: An overarching National Commission for the Allied and Healthcare Professions  
may be constituted on the lines of the National Medical Commission, National Commission on 
Indian System of Medicine and National Commission on Homeopathy;  
(iv) Eight Councils may be constituted  by merging various categories of Allied and Healthcare 
professions; 

231 
 
(v) Clause 3: The proposed  Commission may have  more representation from the Prof essions 
rather than the bureaucracy;  
(vi)  Clause 7: Explicit provisions regarding the quorum and the frequency of meetings may be 
made; 
(vii) Clause 9:  A Secretariat headed by a Secretary may be constituted; 
(viii) Clause 10: A Central Register should be created which may contain details of academic 
qualifications, the training undertaken, skills and experiences of allied healthcare professionals;  
(ix)  Clause 11 : The National Allied and Healthcare Professional Advisory Council may be 
constituted on the lines of the Medical Advisory Council in the NMC Act.  ;  
(x)  A Common Entrance Test and National Exit Test may be conducted under supervision of the 
National Commission on Allied and Healthcare Profession;  
(xi)   Clause 28: The Professional Advisory Body of the States  may be renamed as State Allied 
and Healthcare Professional Advisory Board.;  
(xii)  Accreditation of all the colleges/institutes running allied courses may be ensured;  
(xiii)  An Allied and Healthcare Assessment and Rating Board may be constituted to assess and 
rate allied institutions/colleges for their compliance; and  
(xiv) Clause 42:  Allied and Healthcare Council of India Fund  should be renamed as National 
Allied and Healthcare Professions Fund on the lines of National Medical Commission Fund in 
the NMC Act.  
4. Members raised the following queries with respect to certain provisions: 
i. The title of the Bill needs to be changed; 
ii. Representation of NGOs in the proposed Commission should be avoided; 
iii. Specific semester or year, apart from the hours of teaching, should be specified; 
iv. Distance education or certification training allied courses should not be imparted; 
v. Representation from the Institutes of South India like All India Institute of Speech 
and Hearing, Mysore should also be included in the Commission; 
vi. The Commission should meet frequently, at least once every quarter; 
vii. A live register of the allied and healthcare professionals should be created; 
viii. The term of Interim Council must be two years;  
ix. Disposal of any representation made in the Commission should be within 90 days;  

232 
 
x. The proposed Commission should have more representation from the Allied and 
Healthcare Professionals rather than the Ministries; and 
xi. Entrance and E xit/Licentiate test should be conducted for Allied and Healthcare 
Professional Courses etc. 
5. Addressing the queries of the Committee members, t he Special Secretary, Department of 
Health and Family Welfare  submitted that the degrees in Allied and Healthca re Professional 
courses will be granted only by recognized Colleges and Institutes  and the hours as well as years 
will also be incorporated for allied and healthcare courses. He further submitted that the All India 
Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore w ill be represented in the Commission and explicit 
provision regarding the quorum and frequency of the meetings will be made in the Bill. A 
dynamic online register will also be created and term of the Interim Council will also be defined. 
He added that the representation from the Ministries of AYUSH, Defence and Niti Ayog may be 
removed but the Joint Secretary, Ministry of law and Justice may remain part of the 
Commission. All the appeals to the Commission will be decided well in time. He further added 
that an entrance test for admission into the allied and healthcare professional courses and an exit 
licentiate tests will also be conducted, this exit test will also be used as a PG entrance test.  
6. The Chairman then directed the Secretariat to prepare the draft Report on the Bill as per 
the views finalized on the Bill.   
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5:07 p.m.  
   
 
 
  

233 
 
X 
TENTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3:00 p.m. on Friday, the 17 th January, 2020 in Committee Room 
A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA    
2. Shri A.K. Antony 
3. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween 
4. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
5. Chaudhary Birender Singh 
6. Shri K. Somaprasad 
7. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
LOK SABHA 
8. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
9. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
10. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
11. Shri Anurag Sharma 
12. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary  
2. Shri V.S. P. Singh              Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar   Additional Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar      Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting 
which has been convened to consider a nd adopt the draft 117 th Report on the Allied and 
Healthcare Professions Bill 2018.    
3. The Committee then considered the draft 117th Report on the Allied and Healthcare 
Professions Bill 2018. After some discussion and few modifications, the Committee adopted the 
report. 
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Report may be presented to the Rajya Sabha 
and simultaneously laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Friday, the 31 st January, 2020. The 
Committee authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Shri K. Somaprasad 

234 
 
and in their absence Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey to present the Report in Rajya Sabha. The 
Committee also authorized Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. and  in his absence Shri Anurag 
Sharma to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3:30 p.m.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

235 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
  

236 
 
ANNEXURE- I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copy of the Bill  
 
https://rajyasabha.nic.in/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/BillFile/Bill/14/113/LX%20of%20201
8_2019_2_14.pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

237 
 
ANNEXURE- II 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
1. Smt. Preeti Sudan, Secretary  
2. Shri Arun Singhal, Special Secretary  
3. Shri Sudansh Pant, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Alok Saxena, Joint Secretary, Allied Health Services (AHS)  
5. Shri Anil Kumar Gupta, Deputy Secretary, Allied Health Services, (AHS)  
6. Shri Sunil Kumar Gupta, Under Secretary, Allied Health Services, (ARS)  
7. Ms. Shivangini Kar Dave, Lead Consultant, Human Resources for Health (HRH)  
8. Shri Vivek Bhatnagar, Sr. Consultant, Human Resources for Health (HRH)  
9. Dr. Kavita Narayan, Technical Advisor 
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
 1. Smt. Sunita Sanghi, Senior Advisor  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE  
 
Department of Legislative Department 
 
1. Shri K. Biswal, Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Srivastava, Deputy Legislative Counsel  
 
Department of Legal Affairs 
 
1. Shri R.S. Verma, Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Mahendra Khandelwal, Additional Government Advocate  
 
Representatives of various organizations/individuals/experts  
 
 
I Representatives of Physiotherapists Associations   
 
1. Dr. M. Selvam, Vice-President, Physiotherapists Forum  
2. Dr. Pooja Shetty, Physiotherapists Forum 
3. Dr. G.K. Meena, General Secretary, Physiotherapists Forum of AIIMS 
4. Dr. V.P. Gupta, Physiotherapists Forum of AIIMS 
5. Dr. Rajiv Agarwal, Physiotherapists Forum of AIIMS 
6. Dr. Sanjiv Jha, Executive President, Indian Association of Physiotherapist 
7. Dr. K. M. Annamalai, Indian Association of Physiotherapist 
8. Dr. Prabhat Ranjan, Indian Association of Physiotherapist 
9. Dr. Koshy K Mathai, President, Foundation of Rajdhani Clinical Physiotherapy  

238 
 
10. Dr. Ajeet Kumar Saharan, General Secretary, Rajasthani Physiotherapy 
Association 
11. Prof. (Dr.) Sanjay Parmar, Advisory Member, Rajasthani Physiothera py 
Association 
12. Dr. Sudeep H. Kale, President, Maharashtra State Occupational Therapy & 
Physiotherapy Council 
13. Dr. Sandeep Bhagwat, Maharashtra State Occupational Therapy & 
Physiotherapy Council 
14. Shri R. Gopakumar, President, Kerala Physiotherapy Association   
15. Shri Manoj M, Kerala Physiotherapy Association   
16. Ms. Deepti Wardhan, Kerala Physiotherapy Association   
17. Ms. Krishna Chandan, Sports Injury Center, Safdarjung 
 
II Representatives of Optometrists Associations/Federations 
 
1. Ms. Laxmi Shinde, President Optometry Council of India 
2. Ms. Monica Chaudhry  
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar Mishra 
4. Shri Rajbir Berwal 
5. Shri Aditya Goyal, President, Association of Schools and Colleges of Optometry 
6. Ms. Prema Chande, Board Member, Optometry Council of India 
7. Shri Subodh Kumar Dixit, President, Indian Optometric Association 
8. Shri Subodh Khanduri, Vice President, Indian Optometric Association 
9. Shri Rajeev Prasad, Secretary, Indian Optometric Association  
10. Shri Sarvesh Patil, General Secretary, Government Optometrist Association 
11. Shri Ravindra Kumar Yadav, General Secretary, UP Optometrist Association 
12. Shri Sanjeev Raghav, Member, UP Optometrist Association   
 
III Shri Rajesh Kumar Sinha, Head, School of Allied Health Sciences, Manipal 
IV Representatives of All India Allied and Healthcare Professional Association 
1. Dr. Harpreet Singh Aurora, President 
2. Dr. Rashmil Preet Singh, Secretary-General  
 
V Representatives of Ophthalmic Associations 
1. Shri Jatinder Katoch, General Secretary, All India Ophthalmic Physician 
Association 
2. Dr. Atul Uppadhayye, All India Ophthalmic Physician Association 
3. Shri Kamal Kumar, All India Ophthalmic Physician Association 
4. Shri S.P. Yadav, National President, National Ophthalmic Association  
5. Shri S. S. Tanwar, National President, National Ophthalmic Association 
6. Shri Harpal Singh, Chairman, Punjab Ophthalmic Officers Association 
7. Shri Mohanjit Singh, Punjab Ophthalmic Officers Association 
 

239 
 
VI Representatives of Occupational Therapist Associations 
1. Dr. Anil K. Srivastava, President, All India Occupational Therapists Association  
2. Dr. R.K. Sharma, Member, All India Occupational Therapists Association 
3. Dr. Neeraj Mishra, Member, All India Occupational Therapists Association 
4. Shri Akhilesh Kumar Shukla, Assistant Professor, Pt. Deendayal Upadhaya 
National Institute for Persons with Disabilities 
5. Dr. Lalit Narayan, Pt. Deendayal Upadhaya National Institute for Persons with 
Disabilities 
 
VII  Representatives of Medical Laboratory Associations 
1. Shri Kaptan Singh Sehrawat, General Secretary, Joint Forum of Medical 
Technologists of India 
2. Shri Gurvinder Singh Wadhawan, President, Joint Forum of Medical 
Technologists of India 
3. Shri Mohan Lal Bhagwat, Vice -President, Joint Forum of Medical 
Technologists of India 
4. Shri Manish Kumar, President, All India Association of Anaesthesia and 
Operation Theatre 
5. Shri Firoz Alam, All India Association of Anaesthesia and Operation Theatre  
6. Shri Manoj Kumar, All India Association of Anaesthesia and Operation Theatre 
7. Shri Devendra Prasad, State Secretary,  All India Medical Laboratory 
Technologists Association 
8. Dr. Satya Nand Choudhary, Editor Chronicle, All India Medical Laboratory 
Technologists Association 
9. Shri S. C. Bose, Zonal Secretary, All India Medical Laboratory Technologists 
Association 
10. Shri Ramesh Kumar, President, Haryana State Lab Technician Association 
11. Shri Balbir Sharma, Haryana State Lab Technician Association 
12. Shri Jaswant Singh, Haryana State Lab Technician Association 
13. Shri Jignesh M Patel, Pranam Laboratory 
14. Shri Paresh T. Patel, Pranam Laboratory 
15. Shri Shailesh C. Babariya, Pranam Laboratory 
 
VIII Representatives of Social Welfare Association/Unit  
1. Shri B.R. Shekhar, Chief Medical Social Service Officer, Medical Social Welfare 
Unit, AIIMS, New Delhi 
2. Shri Rajeev Maikhuri,  - do- 
3. Dr. Om Prakash Giri, General Secretary, All India Association of Medical Social 
Work Professionals, PGIMER, Chandigarh 
4. Dr. Anil Kumar Goswami, AIIMS, Delhi 
 

240 
 
IX Representatives of Corporeal Societies 
1. Shri PVS Prakash, General Secretary, Indian Society of Extra Corporeal Technology 
2. Shri Emmanuel Raj Singh, Treasurer, Indian Society of Extra Corporeal Technology 
3. Shri Radhakrsihna Nair, Ex. Committee Member, Indian Society of Extra Corporeal 
Technology 
4. Smt. Kamala Rana, Ex-President, Indian Society of Extra Corporeal Technology 
X Representatives of Dietician Association 
1. Dr. Neelanjana Singh, National Executive Member, Indian Dietician Association 
2. Ms. Anuja Agarwala, National Executive Member, Indian Dietician Association 
 
XI Representatives of Dental Hygienist Association 
1. Dr. Ramakant Pandey , President, Federation of Indi an Dental Hygienists 
Association 
2. Dh Surendra k shukla, General Secretary, Federation of Indian Dental Hygienists 
Association 
3. Dh BMM Singh, Federation of Indian Dental Hygienists Association 
XII Representatives of Radiographers Societies 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Siramdas, Working General Secretary, Society of Indian 
Radiographers 
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Popli, Vice-president, Society of Indian Radiographers  
3. Shri Shankar K Bhagat, National Coordinator, Society of Indian Radiographers 
XIII Representatives of Association Physician Assistants  
1. Shri R. Shiva Kumar, President, Indian Association of Physician Assistants 
2. Ms. Gomathi Sundar, Indian Association of Physician Assistants 
3. Ms. Anitha Chandrasekhar, Indian Association of Physician Assistants 
 
Representatives of Quality Council of India 
 
1. Dr. R.P. Singh, Secretary General 
2. Dr. Atul Mohan Kochhar, CEO, National Accreditation Boards for Hospitals & 
Healthcare Providers (NABH) 
3. Dr. A.V. Jayakrishnan, IMA representative to NABH 
4. Shri Rudraneel Chattopadhyay, Project Manager, 
Representative of Public Health Foundation of India 
 
1. Ms. Preeti Kumar, Vice-President, Public Health Systems Support. 
 
**** 