 
       
                                                                                       
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2022/ Chaitra, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
    REPORT NO. 
133 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY SIXTH REPORT ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS 2021-22 (DEMAND NO. 44) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th March ,, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th March , 2022) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2022/ Chaitra, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
On 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY SIXTH REPORT ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS 2021-22 (DEMAND NO. 44) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th  March,, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th March , 2022) 
 
  
 

 
CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. PREFACE (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS  (iii)-(v) 
4. REPORT  
 Chapter–I  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Ministry 
1 – 42 
 Chapter–II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of the Ministry's replies 
43 – 62 
 Chapter–III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Ministry have not been accepted by the Committee 
63 – 104 
 Chapter–IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Ministry have not been received 
105 - 109 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A  
GLANCE 
110 – 119 
6. MINUTES 120 – 122 
7. ANNEXURES 123 - 133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri A.K. Antony     
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Vacant 
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Shri A. D. Singh  
8. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shrimati Kavitha Malothu 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjun Lal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
22. Shri K. Navaskani 
23. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil 
24. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
25. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
26. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
27. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
31. Shri Lorho S Pfoze 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S.P.Singh   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                          Additional Director 
4. Shrimati Harshita Shankar     Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma  Assistant Committee Officer 
6. Ms. Monika Garbyal   Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 (i) 

PREFACE 
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this One Hundred Thirty Third Report of the Committee on Action Taken by 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the One Hundred Twenty 
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2021-22 (Demand No. 44) of the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare (Ministry of Health & Family Welfare).  
2.  The One Hundred Twenty Sixth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on 
the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th March, 2021.  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare was 
requested to forward the Action Taken Note on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 126 th Report within three months of the presentation of the Report in the Parliament. 
However, in view of the exceptional circumstances caused due to Covid -19, the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare sought repeated extensions and finally furnished the Action Taken 
Note on the Report on 8th December, 2021.  
3.  The Committee made a total of 135 recommendations in its 126 th Report, out of which 60 
recommendations have been accepted by the Ministry and have been enumerated under Chapter 
I. Chapter II contains 27 recommendations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Ministry‘s replies. In Chapter III there are 41 recommendations/observations in 
respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the Committee and the 
Committee has made further recommend ations thereon. While a total number of 7 
recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been 
received, has been categorized under Chapter IV. 
4.  The Committee, in its meeting held on the 21st February, 2022 considered and adopted 
the draft Report.  
 
NEW DELHI  
21st February , 2022  
Phalguna 2, 1943 (Saka) 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
 CHAIRMAN 
Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS (NHM SECTOR) 
AB-NHPM - Ayushman Bharat – National Health Protection Mission 
ANM  - Auxiliary Nurse Midwife 
ASCI  - Advertising Standards Council of India 
CHCs  - Community Health Centres 
eVIN  - Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network 
HWCs  - Health and Wellness Centres 
INCHIS - Integrated Child Health and Immunization Survey 
JSSK  - Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram 
JSY  - Janani Suraksha Yojana 
MoHFW - Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MR  - Measles-Rubella 
NCCMIS - National Cold Chain Management Information System 
NCDs  - Non Communicable Diseases 
NFHS  - National Family Health Survey 
NHM  - National Health Mission 
NHP  - National Health Policy 
NHPM  - National Health Protection Mission 
NHPS  - National Health Protection Scheme 
NIHFW - National Institute of Health and Family Welfare  
NRHM  - National Rural Health Mission 
NUHM  - National Urban Health Mission 
NSS  - National Service Scheme 
OOPE  - Out of Pocket Expenditure 
PCV  - Pneumococcal Vaccine 
PFMS  - Public Financial Management System 
PHCs  - Primary Healthcare Centres 
PIPs  - Programme Implementation Plans 
PMMVY - Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana 
PRC  - Population Research Centres 
RCH  - Reproductive and Child Health 
RE  - Revised Estimate 
RNTCP  - Revised National TB Control Programme 
RSBY  - Rastriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
RVV  - Rotavirus Vaccine 
SBA  -  Skilled Birth Attendance 
SDG  - Sustainable Development Goals 
SHS  - State Health Society 
SIPV  - Sabin Strains Inactivated Polio Vaccine 
SRS  - Sample Registration System 
TOT  - Training of Trainers 
ULBs  - Urban Local Bodies 
UTs  - Union Territories 
 
(HEALTH SECTOR) 
AIIMS  -  All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
BE   -  Budget Estimate 
BJMC  -  B.J. Medical College 
BIS  -  Bureau of Indian Standard 
CDSCO   -  Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
C-DAC            - Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
 
(iii) 

 
CE  -   Conformité Européene 
CGHS  -   Central Government Health Scheme 
CHS   -  Central Health Service 
CMO               -   Chief Medical Officer 
CPWD   -  Central Public Work Department 
CTVS   -  Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgeons 
DG  -  Director General  
DGHS   -  Director General of Health Services 
DUSIB  -  Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board 
EA   -  Executing Agencies 
FSSAI             - Food Safety and Standards Authority of India      
FY   -  Financial Year 
GDP   -  Gross Domestic Product 
GDMO  -  General Duty Medical Officer 
GMC                 -                       Government Medical Colleges/Institutions 
GIA   -  Grants In Aid 
GFR   -  General Financial Rules 
HEFA   -  Higher Education Financing Agency 
HITES   -  HLL Infra Tech Services Ltd. 
HLL   -  Hindustan Latex Limited  
HSCC   -  M/S Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation 
ICU   -  Intensive Care Unit 
IIFCL              -  India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited 
IVF   -  In Vitro Fertilization 
JICA   -  Japan International Cooperation Agency 
JR   -  Junior Resident 
L&T  -  Larsen & Toubro Limited 
LDC   -  Lower Division Clerk 
 MOA  -   Memorandum of Agreement 
MOH&FW -  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MoHRD -   Ministry of Human Resource and Development 
MOU  -  Memorandum of Undertaking 
NACO  -  National Aids Control Organization  
NBCC             -   National Buildings Construction Corporation 
NCT  -  National Capital Territory 
NDMC  -  New Delhi Municipal Council 
NEIGRHIMS  - North-Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical 
Sciences , Shillong 
NER   -  North-Eastern Region 
OBC   -  Other Backward Classes 
OPD   -  Out Patient Department 
OT   -  Operation Theatre 
PG   -  Post Graduate 
PGIMER         -  Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research 
PMSSY            -  Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana 
PORB   -  Pension and Other Retirement Benefits  
PSA   -  Procurement Support Agency 
RDTL    -  Regional Drugs Testing Laboratory  
RE   -  Revised Estimates 
RIMS                 - Regional Institute of Medical Sciences, Imphal 
RISE                  - Revitalising Infrastructure and Systems in Education   
RML   -  DR. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital 
 
(iv) 

 
SACS                 -  State Aids Prevention and Control Societies 
SFC  -  Standing Finance Committee 
SR   -  Senior Resident 
SSC   -  Standing Selection Committee  
UC  -  Utilization Certificate 
UG   -  Undergraduate 
UPSC   -  Union Public Service Commission 
USFDA -   U S Food and Drug Administration 
VMMC  -  Vardhaman Mahavir Medical College 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)

 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Twenty Sixth Report of the Committee on 
Demand for Grants 2021-22 (Demand No 44) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare. 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in 126th  Report. They have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 208, 2.15, 
2.23, 3.6, 3.18, 3.43, 3.60, 3.69, 3.87, 3.91, 3.94, 3.100, 3.109, 3.119, 3.120, 3.127, 3.133, 
3.136, 3.137, 3.148, 3.152, 3.156, 3.170, 3.183, 3.195, 3.210, 3.212, 3.268, 4. 5, 4.6, 4.7, 
4.14, 4.19, 4.22, 4.27, 4.28, 4.33, 4.34, 4.35, 4.40, 4.41, 4.45, 4.103, 4.112, 4.133, 4.134, 
5.1, 5.3, 5.5, 5.7, 5.12, 5.16, 5.17, 5.18, 5.19, 5.14, 5.15, 5.24, 5.26 and 5.34   
        Total - 60 (Chapter I)  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the Ministry‘s replies:  Paras 2.22, 2.31, 3.14, 3.25, 3.55, 3.76, 3.86, 3.101, 3.138, 3.159, 
3.162, 3.191, 3.204, 4.50, 4.54, 4.62, 4.68, 4.69, 4.77, 4.91, 4.107, 4.108,4.109, 4.123, 
5.20, 5.25 and 5.29 
        Total- 27 (Chapter II) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee:  Paras 1.1, 2.9, 2.10, 2.16, 2.17, 2.18, 2.21, 2.27, 3.8, 3.11, 
3.20, 3.27, 3.29, 3.31, 3.40, 3.48, 3.50, 3.56, 3.75, 3.115, 3.142, 3.182, 3.185, 3.200, 
3.202, 4.23, 4.76, 4.82, 4.83, 8.84, 4.100, 4.101, 4.102, 4.104, 4.118, 4.119, 4.120, 4.132, 
5.27, 5.28 and 5.31 
        Total - 41 (Chapter III) 
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect of which fi nal replies of the Ministry are still 
awaited: Paras 3.42, 3.116, 3.146, 3.173, 3.175, 3.178 and 3.188  
        Total-  7 (Chapter IV) 
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi)   

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.1 The Committee agrees that Nutrition, safe drinking water and clean sanitary conditions are 
fundamental in paving the way towards holistic health. The Government in encompassing all 
these parameters under the head, "Health and Well Being" has attempted to adopt the much 
needed multi-sectoral approach to hea lth. However, the Committee observes that the 137 percent 
increase in the health outlay from Rs. 94,452 crore in 2020 - 21 to Rs. 2,23,846 crore in 2021 -22 
does not compensate the inadequate funds allocated to both the Departments of Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare and the Ministry of AYUSH. This Rs. 2,23,846 crore outlay on Health 
and Well Being includes the budget for the Department of Health and Family Welfare, 
Department of Health Research, Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation, Ministry of 
AYUSH, Package for Vaccination, Nutrition and Finance Commission(FC) Grants for Water and 
Sanitation and FC Grants for Health. Thus effectively, the budgetary allocation for health is just 
32 percent of the much hyped Rs. 2,23,846 crore funds. 
1.2 The Committee notes the observations of the Economic Survey that quotes the data from 
World Bank and WHO (Global Health Expenditure DataBase) which ranks India at 179th 
position out of 189 countries in prioritization accorded to health in its Government Budgets. The 
Committee is dismayed to note that in 2018, when the Government Health Expenditure (GHE) as 
percentage of GDP was as high as 9.27% and 9.21% in developed economies of Sweden and 
Japan, the same was just 1.4% in 2018 -19 of India. Even for developing economi es such as 
Maldives, Argentina and Colombia the GHE as % of GDP amounted to 6.65, 5.91, and 5.47 % 
respectively. 
(Para 2.8 & 2.15 of 126th Report) 
Action Taken  
1.3 The Government of India is committed to increasing health expenditure. The National 
Health Policy of 2017 is geared up towards increasing government health expenditure. The policy 
document recognizes the role of government health expenditure to ensure univ ersal health 
coverage to all. As per the NHA estimates between 2013 -14 and 2017 -18 Government health 
expenditure as a share of GDP has increased from 1.15% to 1.35%. 
 
Recommendation/Observations 
1.4 The Committee is of the view that this mismatch in alloca tion and actual expenditure is a 
sign of poor financial management and subsequently results into slashing of funds in the next 
year. The Committee understands that funds under some schemes remained unspent in view of the 
unprecedented situation due to the pandemic, however the Ministry must now take charge of the 
situation and work towards prudent budgetary allocation under different schemes. 
(Para 2.23) 
 

2 
 
Action Taken 
1.5 Due to the outbreak of COVID Pandemic some of the activities were affected and funds 
had to be reallocated to cater the emergency activities. The recommendation of the Committee is 
well taken and in view of felt need of Programme Divisions prudent budgetary allocation under 
different schemes would be done. 
 
Recommendation 
1.6 The Committee takes notes of the steps taken for strengthening the monitoring mechanism 
and simplification of referral system and issuance of guidelines for treatment of beneficiaries 
under emergent situation for effective working of the CGHS and special arrangement ma de for 
extending emergency services to the beneficiaries during PandemicCOVID -19. The Committee 
recommends the Department to give impetus to fresh measures, as per the requirement of the 
emerging situation, for upgrading the operational efficiency of CGHS so that the beneficiaries of 
CGHS get better and timely treatment. 
(Para 3.18) 
Action Taken 
1.7 The recommendations of Hon‘ble Committee have been noted. Reform measures under 
CGHS is a continuous and dynamic process. 
Recommendation 
1.8 The Committee also notes that to encourage Medical Device Industry in India and 
participate in the Government‟s “Make in India” initiative, the Institute should been couraged to 
procure equipment with CE/BIS certification. The Institute should avoid inappropriate 
procurement of medical devices/equipment with USFDA certification for basic equipment. 
However, high end equipment which is not manufactured by Indian Companies may be purchased 
from foreign manufacturers and exemption may be granted to RML hospital and such other 
hospitals/Institutes for such purchase under the "Make in India" programme. 
(Para 3.43) 
Action Taken 
1.9 As advised by the committee, the Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Medical Sciences and 
Dr. RML Hospital is already giving preferences for purchases to ―Make in India‖ initiatives. This 
hospital also encourages CE/ BIS certification to procure equipments. 
Recommendation 
 
1.10 The Committee has been given to understand that the funds allocated under BE/RE 2020 -
21 and BE 2021 -22 under Revenue and Capital for various Institutions/Organisations are 
estimated to suffice the requirement to meet the cost of establishment charges of various 
subordinate/field offices engaged in providing medical care, technical research,  vaccines/sera 
production, Drug Quality and Standards, health education and intelligence, Nursing education, 
communicable diseases. The Committee, however recommends the Department to plead for 
allocation of additional funds, if required, during 2021-22 at Restage. 
(Para 3.60) 

3 
 
Action Taken  
1.11 The Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.12 The Committee takes note that PMSSY scheme is financed through two sources, CRIF and 
GBS. PMSSY encompasses two components viz. setting up of new AIIMS and up gradation of 
Govt. Medical Colleges (GMCs). So far, setting up of 22 new AIIMS and 75 up -gradation projects 
of GMCs have been sanctioned under PMSSY. The Committee observes that keeping in view the 
past experience, there is a need to strictly monitor the execution of the PMSSY Scheme in order to 
ensure the completion of the project within the scheduled time. In order to achieve the set 
objectives, the Department also requires to have effective monitoring mechanism to cont rol the 
financial progress and to co -ordinate with the implementing agencies for ensuring timely 
implementation of the projects undertaken on setting up of new AIIMS and up -gradation of 
Government Medical Colleges (GMCs). The management of the 16 AIIMS and  GMCs must have 
Always Better Control (ABC) in order to keep the implementing agencies on the alert mode. 
 
(Para 3.69) 
Action Taken  
1.13 The Ministry has been closely monitoring the progress of PMSSY Projects in the matter of 
construction, procurement &  installation of medical equipment and recruitments of faculty and 
non-faculty personnel on a regular basis. Project monitoring and resolution of any problems in 
execution of projects happens at multiple levels.  
1.14 New AIIMS and GMC up -gradation projects in Phase III/IV onwards are being executed 
in EPC mode under which Executing Agencies (EA) are appointed for each of the Projects, who 
are empowered to take all contractual decisions. For procurement of medical equipment, HITES, 
which is a PSU of the Min istry of Health and Family Welfare, acts as the Procurement Support 
Agency (PSA). Progress of the projects, both in terms of civil works and procurement of medical 
equipment is regularly reviewed with EA and PSA, wherein all components of the project are 
reviewed in detail so as to ensure their time bound completion. A review committee as per rule 
141 of GFR 2017, has also been constituted in the Ministry to review the progress of the work of 
the projects. Recently, the Ministry has also started use of done  technology for a near real time 
and comprehensive review of projects.  
1.15 All State specific issues / hindrances with respect PMSSY projects are resolved through 
continuous and intensive engagement with concerned State Governments, through 
communications at various levels, one-to-one interaction and review meetings. 
Recommendation 
1.16 The C ommittee understands that the re is  urgent need to undertake following specific 
course of action to achieve the objectives of the programme i.e. (i) prevention, (ii) taking care, 
support and treatment to people living with HIV/AIDS, (iii) capacity building, (iv) Strategic 
information management: - 
(i) Since only 76% of  the PLHIV know their HIV status, therefore, augmenting contact 
tracing and index testing promoting early detection of undiagnosed infections as index 
testing could link HIV -positive individuals to life -saving treatment, break chains of 

4 
 
transmission and link people to other appropriate related services. 
(ii) The Committee has been given to understand that NACO developed client -centric IT 
enabled integrated monitoring, evaluation & surveillance system with embedded supply 
chain information system as the next gene ration of MIS. Since system is to be rolled out by 
31st March 2021, therefore, IT -enabled client -centric integrated strategic information 
management system with embedded supply chain management would be quite useful, not 
only for generating alerts, but also to avoid a loss to follow up etc. 
(iii) Though the National Strategic Plan (2017 -24) aims to achieve, inter alia, the elimination 
of mother to child transmission of Syphilis by 2020, however, out of the estimated 3 Crore 
pregnant women, only 57% were tested fo r Syphilis in the financial year 2019 -20, thus 
leaving a gap of 43%. Therefore, leveraging dual test kits (HIV & Syphilis) to (i) fast -track 
progress on the elimination of mother to child transmission of Syphilis, and (ii) promotion 
of an integrated approa ch for offering HIV and STI services to the people who are at 
higher risk of HIV and Syphilis infections would be result-oriented. 
(iv) Endeavours be made to mitigate linkage loss across screening -confirmation-treatment-
retention by leveraging technology, stren gthening outreach, up skilling field resources, 
improving counselling and building synergy across service delivery points. Adoption of 
clinical decision support systems using artificial intelligence would help in identification of 
PLHIV requiring additional care and attend to the same timely. 
(v) Given the fact that 12 months‟ retention among PLHIV on ART is hovering at 72 -75%, 
adherence to differentiated care model would improve the quality of services provided to 
PLHIV and also will optimize the output of the existing ART centre staff. 
(vi) Prioritize sexual and reproductive health services for women at increased risk of HIV 
infection and women living with HIV through upskilling at NACP service delivery points as 
well as augmenting synergies through national health mission. 
(vii) Adapting new approaches viz, by outsourcing the services under PPP model and by 
strengthening a network of public sector labs to expand the reach of viral load testing 
services 
(viii) Considering the fact that 29% of estimated pregnant women seek delivery services in the 
private sector, therefore, enhancement of private sector engagement under the programme 
to optimize the resources. 
(ix) COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the context of technology to facilitate the delivery of 
services as well as enable  online programme management. The best practices developed 
during COVID -19 can be further strengthened and leveraged to expand the reach of 
services under NACP 
(x) Enhancement of community support through community system strengthening through 
formal and infor mal engagement with an emphasis on the decentralized model of district -
level programme monitoring and community feedback loop. 
(xi) The reach of National AIDS response has a potential to increase multi -fold across 
prevention-detection-treatment by leveraging st rengths of the National Health Mission. 
Similarly, many of the national health programme may dovetail NACP systems and their 
reach to offer multiple services with minimal additional resources. HIV -TB collaboration, 
Hepatitis prevention and treatment among HRG populations, use of HIV sentinel 
surveillance systems towards integrated HIV -Hepatitis-Syphilis surveillance system are 
key points in thecontext. 
(xii) Anchoring the response through focussed and strategic programme management and 
review. 

5 
 
(xiii) Enhancing the strat egic information systems to meet the evidence needs inever -evolving 
and dynamic epidemiological and programmatic context. 
(Para 3.87) 
Action Taken  
1.17 Augmenting contact tracing and index testing promoting early detection of undiagnosed 
infections is integral to the next phase of NACP. Development of operational manuals towards the 
strengthening of contact tracing and index testing is under development. 
1.18 The IT-enabled next generation of MIS under the NACP has been launched. The uptake of 
the same is being scaled-up. 
1.19 Leveraging dual test kits (HIV & Syphilis) is one of the newer strategies adopted under 
next phase of NACP to allow for early diagnosis for HIV and Syphilis by reducing testing barriers 
and increasing uptake of testing for both HIV  and Syphilis. The consultation for procurement of 
dual test kits (HIV & Syphilis) under NACP has been initiated. 
1.20 Addressing linkage loss across screening confirmation treatment -retention by leveraging 
technology, strengthening outreach, upskilling fi eld resources, improving counselling and 
building synergy across service delivery points has been incorporated as a key strategy under the 
next phase of NACP. IT -enabled next general of MIS has been launched to facilitate early 
detections on linkage loss and initiate follow-up actions. 
1.21 The strategy has been duly incorporated in next phase of NACP. Activities like multi -
month dispensations and community -led dispensation of Antiretroviral (ARV) drugs has been 
launched in select States. 
1.22 The NACP Phase-V has included offering of age and population appropriate need -based 
comprehensive package of sexual and reproductive health services to those who are at increased 
risk of HIV infection as well as to the women living with HIV/AIDS. 
1.23 The systematic and institutional engagement of private sector for enhancing its role across 
prevention-testing-treatment continuum of the programme has been included as one of the key 
programmatic strategies under NACP -V. NACO has constituted a National Technical Worki ng 
Group (NTWG) for private provider engagement under National AIDS Control Programme 
(NACP). First meeting for the NTWG was convened on 7th July 2021. 
1.24 During COVID -19 pandemic, IT -enabled technology has been leveraged to bring 
efficiency under NACP i ncluding on areas like programme review, capacity building and supply 
chain management. Newer approach such as take -home dosage (Opioid Substitution Therapy), 
multi-month dispersion (Antiretroviral) of drugs has been adopted. Learnings from the best 
practices during the COVID -19 pandemic has been included under NACP -V and being 
implemented in phase-wise manner to expand the reach of services under NACP. 
1.25 NACO has organized a national level consultation with the communities to strengthen the 
community systems in India. A Community-led monitoring is under development. 
1.26 The NACP has operational synergy with National Tuberculosis Elimination Programme 
and National Viral Hepatitis Control Programme. Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C has been added as 
integrated biomarker under the HIV Surveillance System of NACP. Building and augmenting 
synergies with national health programmes has been included as one of the key strategies under 
the NACP-V. 

6 
 
1.27 NACO has established a programme management and review division th rough 
repurposing of existing resources. 
1.28 The strategic information systems under the NACP are being enhanced. A global 
consultation with experts and stakeholders has been organised towards integrated and enhanced 
surveillance & epidemiology of HIV, ST Is and related co - morbidities under NACP. Budget has 
been built into the State GIA towards research activities enabling to promote research on priority 
area in line with local needs. 
Recommendation 
 
1.29 The Committee observes that the amount released in FY 2020-21 is less as compared to 
the allocated funds due to temporary suspension of NFHS -5 survey field work for eight months as 
a result of outbreak of Pandemic COVID -19 that impacted the timeline of achievement of 
milestones fixed as per MoA of the surv ey, which in turn has led to release of lesser funds to IIPS 
in the 2020-21 FY. As the NFHS-5 survey work has restarted in November, 2020 and the activities 
are attaining pace, the Committee recommends the Department to make all out efforts to revitalize 
the activities so as to ensure optimal  utilization of available of funds towards achievement offset 
goals and objectives. 
(Para 3.91) 
Action Taken  
1.30 Rs.68.60 Crores out of the total allocated funds of Rs.73.14 Crores was released to IIPS, 
nodal agency for conducting NFHS -5 activities as per milestones achieved by them. As regards 
the progress of NFHS -5, it is submitted that the 22 Phase -I States/UTs Factsheets comprising of 
estimates on 131 key indicators and State Reports has already been released by the Ministry and is 
available in public domain. The field work for remaining 14 Phase -II States/UTs which got 
temporarily suspended in March 2020 due to emergent COVID -19 pandemic induced nationwide 
lockdown and could restart in November 2020, has now been completed in March 2021. The 
factsheets of the remaining 14 Phase -II States/UTs and All -India Factsheet comprising of 
estimates on 131 key indicators has been submitted by IIPS for approval of the Ministry and 
would be released soon. The National Report an d remaining Phase-II State reports are likely to be 
completed by September 2021. 
Recommendation 
1.31 The Committee understands the pivotal role of PRCs in critical research based inputs 
related to the Health and Family Welfare Programs and Policies at the national and state levels. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to revitalize the PRCs with adequate 
budgetary provision so that PRCs must contribute in a better way by undertaking research work 
on various flag ship schemes like HWC, HBNC, L aqshya, NQAS, Kayakalp, NCDs, NVHCP etc. 
of NHM. 
(Para 3.94) 
Action Taken  
Revitalizing the PRCs  
1.32 The PRC scheme is being independently evaluated by NITI Aayog to examine the real 
outcome of scheme on Population Research Centres (PRCs), its role in policy making and the 

7 
 
need for course correction. The 3 rd Party evaluation report prepared by ASCI containing the 
recommendation for continuation of the PRC scheme was submitted to NITI Aayog vide letter of 
even no. dated 21.8.2019.  
1.33 NITI Aayog vide its e-mail dated 26th May 2020  sent the final recommendations of NITI 
Aayog as draft report on Restructuring and Re-energizing the PRCs network .  
1.34 Since then meeting to finalize the draft report on Evaluation and restructuring and re -
energizing the PRCs was held on 16.10.2020 and 12.4.2021 in NITI Aayog under the 
chairpersonship of Vice Chairman, NITI A ayog. The main recommendations of the Committee 
are continuation of the PRC scheme,  revival of PRCs as research/innovation centers and to 
provide a uniform staff structure to all the 18 PRCs. Accordingly, a redistributed staff structure 
has been proposed by MoHFW.  Other recommendation include providing functional and 
administrative autonomy to the PRCs to ensure their accountability. However, the 
recommendations will be finalized after the acceptance of the report.  
Annual Work Plan/ Output of PRCs  
1.35 During 2020-21, the PRCs conducted 95 secondary data research studies. PIP Monitoring 
could not be conducted due to COVID Pandemic. The studies have been increased to 148 
(primary and secondary date) research studies and PIP Monitoring of 455 districts hav e been 
assigned to 18 PRCs during 2021-22.  
Annual Budget  
1.36 The Revised Estimate allotted to PRC scheme during the year 2020 -21 was 21.75 crores. 
The Budget Estimate allotted to PRC scheme has increased to 29.05 crores for the year 2021-22.   
Recommendations/Observations 
1.37  The Committee cautions the Government that Anti -Microbial Resistance (AMR) has 
emerged as a major threat to public health estimated to cause 10 million deaths annually by 2050. 
Since India has been referred to as 'the AMR capital of the world‟, the Commit tee recommends 
that suitable measures for combating the threat of AMR must be taken. 
(Para 3.100) 
Action Taken 
 Government of India has given due cognizance to the problem of AMR and in addition to the 
National Programme on AMR Containment (details shared u nder 3.99) has launched National 
action plan on AMR (NAP -AMR) developed in alignment with the Global action plan with 
One Health approach, it was released in April 2017. 
 For coordination of the implementation of NAP -AMR by at least 10 stakeholder 
ministries/departments, 3 committees have been constituted namely Intersectoral committee on 
AMR, Technical advisory Committee on AMR and Core working group on AMR.  
 Guidance document has also been provided to the states for developing the state a action plan 
on AMR and 3 states have developed the State action plans namely Delhi, Madhya Pradesh and 
Kerala. 
 
 

8 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.38     Disaster does not arrive with prior notice and health is the first casualty of the disaster. 
Strengthening of healthcar e disaster preparedness is therefore the need of the hour to give the 
matching human response to the vicissitude of the disaster. The first and the foremost of any 
disaster is the deployment of disaster warriors and medical services for the affected person s on 
urgent basis. Keeping these facts into consideration, the Committee recommends the department 
to give greater impetus to the scheme for better human response while combating the disaster. 
(Para 3.119) 
Action Taken 
1.39 Ministry of Health has already an ongoing Scheme for Health Sector Disaster 
Preparedness and Response. Under the scheme identified target groups including district level 
health officers, hospital administrators, doctors working in and around nuclear power plants, 
psychiatrists/ psychologists/ psycho-social workers are supported for capacity building in disaster 
management including addressal of various issues including psycho -social care in disaster 
settings.  
 1.40 Similarly, the scheme Human Resource Deve lopment for Emergency Medical Services 
provides for capacity building of doctors, nurses and paramedics working in emergency 
departments in critical lifesaving interventions. 
 1.41 Both these schemes have already been approved for extension for the period 2021-26 with 
enhanced targets. 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.42 The Committee, in this regard, cautions the Government against the consequences of 
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) disasters and at the same time urges the 
policy maker  to underline the need for giving special impetus to develop specialised capacity 
building to combat the potential threat of CBRN Disaster. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends for setting up of the CBRN Medical Management Centre. The Committee further 
recommends the Department to finalize Modern Training Curriculum and Modules for National 
Emergency Life Support (NELS) course for doctors, nurses and paramedics and its immediate 
implementation. The need of the hour is to sensitize all States and UTs for c reation of requisite 
training infrastructure and implementation of NELS course. 
(Para 3.120) 
Action Taken  
1.43 Development of both tertiary and secondary level facilities for medical management of 
chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) eme rgencies with enhanced budgetary 
provisions has been approved under the SFC proposal for the scheme Health Sector Disaster 
Preparedness and Response for the period 2021-26. 
1.44 The National Emergency Life Support (NELS) course for doctors has been finaliz ed. 
NELS course for nurses is also at advanced stage of finalization. Executing agency for 
development of NELS course for paramedics has also been finalized. These courses prepared in 
consultation with subject expert contain the most up to date knowledge o n the subject tailored to 
Indian settings. 

9 
 
Recommendation 
1.45  The Committee has been given to understand that Detailed Project Report (DPR) to set up 
tertiary level CBRN Centre could not be finalized due to outbreak of pandemic Covid -19 and 
secondary level CBRN centres project could also not take off due to procedur al hassles. The 
Committee, however, feels that with the waning a way of the impact of pandemic Covid -19, all out 
steps should be taken to finalize the DPR of the tertiary level CBRN and Government would also 
invite the eligible bidder for secondary level C BRN Centres project. The Committee also 
underscores the significance of setting up of Health Emergency Operation Centre (HEOC) for 
enhancing capacity to respond to public health emergencies involving CBRN hazards. The 
Committee believes that once the imple mentation of the scheme progresses as per plan, there 
would be optimal utilization of capital outlay to the tune of Rs. 52.82 crore earmarked in BE 
2021-22. 
(Para 3.127) 
Action Taken 
1.46 MoHFW has already initiated steps to expedite activities in coordination with other 
stakeholders including concerned State Health Departments for setting up of tertiary and 
secondary level CBRN medical management centers.  
1.47 HEOCs are being established under PM-ASBY. MoHFW has already coordinating with 
States for setting up HEOCs in State Health Departments. The executing agency along with user 
requirements and specifications have also been finalized. 
Recommendation 
1.48  The Committee takes note of the various components of Covid -19 Emergency Response 
and Health System Preparedness Package and allocation of funds on each component meant for 
combating the challenges of pandemic Covid -19. The Committee is pleased to note that the 
country has shown the grea t statesmanship in sailing through the turbulent situation caused due 
of outbreak of the pandemic. The Committee is of the view that the threat is not all over and 
recommends that the Department should prepare itself to combat the new variants of Corona 
virus so that the Nation must come out of the after shock of pandemic Covid -19 and march ahead 
towards the achievement of set goals in various sectors of economy so as to accelerate GDP at the 
expected rate. 
(Para 3.133) 
Action Taken 
1.49 Government of India  under the Indian SARS -CoV-2 Genomics Consortium (INSACOG) 
network of laboratories is also undertaking genomic sequencing of positive samples. Information 
on genome sequencing for mutant variants of SARS -CoV-2 is regularly shared with the States. 
The issue of mutant variants is also flagged to the States through regular formal communications 
to all States/UTs. The samples from health care facility are being collected from patients with 
severe illness, vaccine breakthrough infections and other atypical clini cal presentations, long 
haulers etc. to enhance the understanding of unusual events like vaccine breakthrough, suspected 
reinfections, super spreader events, outbreaks etc. The number of laboratory is being increased 
continuously and there are a total of 3 3 laboratories under INSACOG network as on 30 th 
September 2021. 

10 
 
Recommendation 
1.50 The issue of reluctance to vaccine and the trend of State wise utilization of the allocated 
vaccines indicates varying vaccine acceptance by healthcare workers who have bee n offered the 
vaccines on the priority basis. In the Committee‟s meeting held on 17 th February, 2021, the 
Committee understands that vaccine hesitancy is caused because of inadequate understanding of 
the benefits and risks of vaccination added by exaggerated perception of the side effects of the 
vaccines. Moreover, the controversy about the relative efficacy and safety of Covishield and 
Covaxin further fuelled the hesitant attitude of the health workers. The Committee, in this regard, 
is of the vie w that the Department must chalk out a foolproof strategy to dispel the 
misunderstanding of the health workers by adopting the decentralized system and process of 
Information, Education, Communication (IEC) at district, town and panchayat level. 
(Para 3.136) 
Action Taken 
1.51 As part of the Information -Education-Communication (IEC) activities, Government of 
India has undertaken all measures to ensure dissemination of correct and scientific information on 
the Covid-19 vaccination program across the country, through advertisements, posters, hoardings, 
citizen friendly upgradation of Co -WIN, establishment of 24x7 national call center to address 
queries from general public on COVID -19 and the vaccination process etc.  In order to raise 
awareness about safety and efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines, address vaccine hesitancy and sustain 
vaccine confidence, a communication strategy is in place. Some key interventions as part of 
communication strategy include FAQs for general public and healthcare & frontline workers 
which have been developed & uploaded on Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) 
website; ( https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/FAQsforHCWs&FLWs.pdf). Media channels, radio 
jockeys etc. have been oriented on correct  information regarding COVID -19 vaccination; op -eds 
and articles by identified experts published to build vaccine confidence; dissemination of fact 
check videos by key experts to provide correct & factual information. MoHFW has advised 
States/UTs to dissem inate clear, consistent, transparent and factual information to general public 
to clear misconceptions and sustain vaccine confidence. 
Recommendation 
1.52 The Committee further recommends the Government to expedite vaccine approval to 
broadbase the choice of the people in terms of opting for a particular vaccine. Currently, only two 
vaccines are cleared for emergency use; therefore, process needs to be streamlined for approval 
of pending and future vaccines, after following all the due processes & procedures. 
(Para 3.137) 
Action Taken 
1.53 As on date, the following Six Covid -19 vaccines have received Emergency Use 
Authorization (EUA) by the Drug Control General of India (DCGI):  
i) Covishield vaccine manufactured by M/s Serum Institute of India; 
ii) Covaxin manufactured by M/s Bharat Biotech Ltd; 
iii) Sputnik-V Vaccine by M/s Dr. Reddy‘s Lab; 
iv) Zycov-D Vaccine by M/s Cadilla Healthcare Limited; 
v) Moderna Vaccine; 
vi) Johnson & Johnson Vaccine. 

11 
 
1.54 A few more vaccines are under development and are in different stages of clinical trials. 
Recommendation 
 
1.55 The Committee is in agreement with the findings and recommendations of the National 
Institute of Health and Family Welfare for not only the continuation of NOTP during the period 
2021-26 involving an amo unt to the tune of Rs. 426.61 crore, but also for strengthening the 
programme in terms of infrastructure, administrative powers, human resources, training and 
budget, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends the department to formulate action plan for 
the said duration and the Ministry in consultation with NITI Aayog and Department of 
Expenditure, must give green signal to the proposal of continuation of the scheme. 
(Para 3.148) 
Action Taken 
1.56 Third party evaluation of NOTP was conducted by National Institute of Health and Family 
Welfare (NIHFW) wherein continuation of the programme was recommended during the period 
2021-26. Action plan in this regard was formulated in consultation with Department of 
Expenditure and NITI Aayog and discussed during a m eeting held under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (HFW) wherein AS&FA and representative from NITI Aayog were also present. The 
continuation of NOTP for the period 2021 -26 has been agreed to. However, as per the instruction 
of Department of Expenditure the cost of programme for 2021-26 has been approved for Rs. 94.92 
Cr. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.57 The Committee takes into account that the Government has notified Transplantation of 
Human Organs and Tissues Rules 2014 to implement various provisions of the THOA 
(Amendment) Act, 2011. The Amendment and the Rules have many enabling provisions for 
improving organ donation rate in the country. The Committee, however, observes with concern 
that the amendment act and the rules are applicable only in the 16 States and UTs. The remaining 
States are also required to adopt the amendment act. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the 
Department to keep on pursuing the remaining States regularly and take followup action with the 
State Government to adopt THOA (Amendment) Act, 2011. 
(Para 3.152) 
Action Taken 
1.58 Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994 is applicable in all States/UTs except Andhra 
Pradesh and Telangana as these States have their own Act on the lines of Central Act. The Act 
was amended in 2011 and Rules were framed  in 2014. The Ministry has continuously been 
persuading the States for early adoption of amendment Act, as a result of which Amendment Act 
has been adopted by 19 States and all UTs. As suggested by Committee, the Ministry will keep on 
pursuing the remainin g States regularly and take follow up action with the State Government to 
adopt THOTA (Amendment) Act, 2011. 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.59 The Committee welcomes the announcement of National Digital Health Mission (NDHM) 
that envisages the creation of National Digital Health Ecosystem for providing universal health 
coverage in an efficient, affordable, accessible, timely and safe manner. The Committee hopes 
that the successful implementation of the mission in its first phase in the select six UTs would 
ultimately lead to nation wide rollout in the third phase, the second being expansion of the 
Mission in the States. The Committee, however, recommends the Department to have a strict 
monitoring mechanism for adherence to the timeline of the Mission for its ultimate success. 
(Para 3.156) 
Action Taken 
1.60 ABDM was launched nationally on 27th September 2021by Hon‘ble Prime Minister. The 
Committee‘s recommendations regarding monitoring mechanism for adherence to timeline of the 
mission has been duly noted. Necessary provisions have been made in the RFP for selection of 
Managed Service Provider (MSP) for ABDM in order to adhere to these timelines. Further, 
Results framework and performance matrix for key indicators of ABDM have been prepared . 
These will be adhered to. 
STATUTORY AND REGULATORY BODIES 
(A) FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARD AUTHORITY OF INDIA (FSSAI) 
Recommendation 
1.61   The Committee has been given to understand that the FSSAI is undergoing organizational 
restructuring as the revised st ructure has been approved by the Food Authority on 20th October, 
2020. The work of the Headquarter has accordingly been divided into 12 divisions on the 
functional requirement basis and each division to be headed by the Executive Director and 
reporting to CEO and Chairperson. The Committee, in this connection, recommends that the 
organizational restructuring of FSSAI should be conducted within the set time frame. Committee 
also recommends the filling up of vacant posts for effective and efficient working of FSSAI. 
(Para 3.170) 
Action Taken  
1.62 The organisational and functional restructuring of FSSAI has since been finalised. At the 
Headquarters, four verticals with 12 Divisions have been created. One vertical each will be 
headed by either an Executive Director or an Advisor.  Two Executive Directors and two 
Advisors will report to the CEO. Each Division will be headed by a Director level officer who 
will report to either an Executive Director or an Advisor. 
 
1.63 Field Units of FSSAI have been divided into four Regional offices (East, West, North 
and South) and four National Food Laboratories. Under each Regional Office, branch offices 
and import offices will function. New branch/ import offices at Chandigarh, Bhopal, 
Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Hyderabad,  V isakhapatnam, Attari, Mundra , Kandla, Krishnapatnam 
and Raxual are set up/ in the process of being set up. These offices will facilitate faster licensing 
of food businesses and also ensure prompt clearance of imported food articles. 
 
 

13 
 
1.64 FSSAI has been making all efforts to speed up recruitment to various vacant posts. 
Despite delay due to COVID , the first phase of direct recruitment process was completed in 
Dec., 2020 and more than 200 candidates have joined till date. About 70 more candidates are 
likely to join by September, 2021. The second phase of recruitment process for 37 middle level 
posts is presently on and likely to be completed by November/ December, 2021. The third and 
final phase of recruitment for 250 posts will be taken up in August 2021 and is likely to be 
completed within an year from then. 
 
Recommendation 
1.65 The Committee has been given to understand that the burns units of AIIMS has  not been 
made functional yet despite the completion of the construction of the new building for the purpose. 
While the Committee would like to know the reasons for non - operationalisation of the units, it 
recommends that the unit be made functional without any further delay. 
(Para 3.183) 
Action Taken 
1.66 The Burn & Plastic Surgery Block has been inaugurated in Jan 2021, before that said 
facility has been kept for standby for COVID -19 patient care from May 2020. During the second 
wave of COVID-19 patient were admitted and said facility has been used for COVID patient care.   
 
Recommendation 
 
1.67 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the vacancy of 354 faculties and 2239 
non-faculty posts in a premier institute like AIIMS. The Committee,  reiterates its recommendation 
for filling up of the vacant faculty and non-faculty posts by expediting the recruitment process and 
framing of recruitment rules at the earliest for reducing the patient care load and timely 
healthcare delivery to the needy patients. The Committee applauds the Patient care management 
by AIIMS, New Delhi, however, the Committee feels that the Patient Care management can be 
further improved by reducing/minimizing existing demand supply mismatch between the available 
services. 
(Para 3.195) 
Action Taken  
1.68 In so far as Recruitment Cell is concerned it is to be submitted that 597 posts of Nursing 
Officer were advertised, result declared for 531 posts and 412 candidates have joined. For rest of 
the posts the process of joining is underway. 
  
1.69 Further, for 632 Non -faculty posts advertisements have also been issued. Result declared 
for 434 posts, 192 candidates have joined. For rest of the posts, process of joining is underway. 
 
1.70 Regarding 867 vacancies available under the mode of promotion. Department Promotion 
Committee are being convened from time to time to fill up the vacancies where eligible candidates 
are available. However, presently, pre -requisite formalities are being car ried out to convene 
DPC‘s in expeditious manner. Moreover, certain clarifications are being sought from DoPT with 
regard to reservation in promotion. 

14 
 
1.71 The posts of Bariatric Coordinator & Genetic Counsellor have been advertised. Further 
recruitment process is underway. 
1.72 The process of finalization of recruitment rule for the post of Epidemiologist is underway, 
the same will be completed in due course of time. 
 
1.73 The vacant post of faculty as on 01.07.2021 is 366. Out of 366, following posts ar e not 
going to advertised:- 
 
I. 92 posts of Professor (Direct), (Matter regarding the issue of seniority between Direct & 
APS is pending before the Hon‘ble High Court due to which recruitment at this level could 
not be initiated. 
II. 54 posts are not going to advertised due to revision of Recruitment Rules/nomenclature. 
III. Presently 55 contractual Assistant Professor is working at AIIMS, New Delhi to copeup 
the patient care work. 
 
1.74 In this context, it is mention here that posts would have been advertised in 2020 on regular 
basis with existing Reservation Roster but due to Reservation in Teacher‘s Cadre Act, 2019, 
Government instruction received from Ministry of Health & Family Welfare vide letter dated 
23.02.2021 to re-draw the Reservation Rosters for recruitment of faculty in AIIMS. The Institute 
is in the process of re -drawing the Reservation Roster as per Reservation in Teachers Cadre Act, 
2019. A Committee has already been constituted for the propose and the Reservation Roster is 
being finalized and onwards vacant post will be advertisd. 
 
JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST GRADUATION MEDICAL EDUCATION AND 
RESEARCH, PUDUCHERRY 
Recommendation 
 
1.75 The Committee observes that JIPMER has not optimally utilized the allocated fund, for 
various reasons viz non -filling up va cant post and due to slow pace of expenditure and 
availability of unspent balance of previous financial year led to idle parking of fund in the past. 
The Committee feels that administrative lapses have led for the under utilisation of funds which 
could hav e been addressed by strict monitoring. The Committee cautions the Institute against 
under-utlilization of earmarked amount during 2021 -22. The Committee, also, recommends the 
Department to have resilient monitoring mechanism for timely execution of ongoing  
developmental projects/creation of capital assets which inter -alia include establishment of animal 
house at JIPMER, construction of 50 rooms international hostel, modernisation and upgradation 
of cancer centres at JIPMER, construction of JIPMER Karaikal n ew campus (Phase -I) etc. and 
completion of all such projects within the set timeframe and without cost overruns. 
(Para 3.210) 
Table 
40 Vacancy position of faculty and non-faculty 
 
 Sanctioned Existing Vacant 
Faculty 367 316 51 
Non Faculty 4568 3640 928 
 

15 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.76 It is stated that the meticulous observation, strict monitoring of expenditure pattern and 
accuracy of expenditure forecast during formulation of Revised Estimates for the year 2020 -21 
and Budget Estimates for the year 2021 -22 pertaining to this Institute, has resulted in fullest and 
optimal utilization of funds under Grants -in-Aid components such as Salaries, General, Creation 
of Capital Assets and Swachhta Action Plan leading to 'Nil balance without any under -utilization 
of grants or savings at the end of the financial year 2020-21 as on 31.03.2021. 
1.77 During the first quarter of the financial year 2021-22, 25% of the allotted BE to the tune of 
Rs. 250.00 Crore released as first installment of grants for the year 2021 -22 has been fully spent 
by this Institute and the remaining grants to be released as per the allotted BE also would be 
utilized completely without any under-utilization of earmarked amount for the year 2021-22. 
1.78 The Institute would make all possible efforts for ef fective monitoring and timely 
completion of ongoing developmental projects/creation of capital assets within set timeframe 
without cost overruns and also get engaged into filling up of vacant posts both Faculty and Non -
Faculty as early as possible without any further delay. 
Recommendation 
 
1.79 The Committee expresses its concern over the vacancy position of faculty and non - faculty 
in JIPMER. The Committee is not convinced with the clarification given by the Department. The 
very fact of 51 vacancies agains t the sanctioned strength of 367 posts faculty posts and 928 non -
faculty posts lying against the sanctioned strength of 4568 posts spells out faulty recruitment 
policy and process of the Institute. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Institute to stri ve 
hard in piloting its proposal for filling up of vacant posts without further delay. 
(Para 3.212) 
Action Taken 
1.80 The recruitment/filling up of the post is an ongoing process. The vacant posts are being 
filled by the Institute from time to time as per the provisions of recruitment rules for the posts. 
The Institute would make all possible efforts for filling up of vacant posts both Faculty and Non -
Faculty as early as possible without any further delay. 
 
Recommendation 
 
1.81 The Committee appreciates the role of LGBRIMH, Tezpur Assam in integration of Mental 
Health with General Health under NMHP. The Committee also notes the activities of the Institute 
during Covid -19 by extending Psycho -social support and mental health counselling to the 
quarantine people. The Committee, would like the Institute to continue its efforts especially in the 
rural areas in development and would like distribution of IEC material in local language and 
conduct targeted intervention cum screening camps to generate knowledge and sk ill on mental 
health. 
(Para 3.268) 
 
 

16 
 
Action Taken 
1.82 LGBRIMH, Tezpur, Assam has already started collaboration with other North -Eastern 
States to promote the concept of mental health care delivery service. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.83 The Committee observes with concern that as against the projected demand forNHM of 
Rs. 69,925 crore, the Department has been allocated only Rs 31,100 crore leadingto a shortfall of 
Rs.38,825 crore, despite the fact that the Scheme has a track record 
of100%ormoreutilizationofbudgetary resources. 
(Para 4.5) 
Action Taken 
1.84 The Department of Health and Family Welfare agrees with the concerns of the Committee 
and will take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance in future. Besides NHM, central 
assistances amounting to Rs. 12,185.30 crore have been provided to the Agency –National Health 
Mission (NHM) for release to States/UTs under India COVID -19 Emergency Response and 
Health Systems Preparedness Package –Phase –II (ECRP -II) during 2021 -22 to tackle the 
COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
Recommendation  
1.85 The Committee takes into account that a slew of initiatives are carried out under NHM's 
sub components: National Rural Health Mission and National Urban Health Mission. The Scheme 
provides healthcare services related to mental health, child health, universal immunisation, Non -
communicable diseases etc. The Committee emphasizes that increasing the budget of the Scheme 
will not only supplement the efforts of the States but also provide access to affordable healthcare 
at the primar y level. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for enhancement in its 
budgetary allocation. 
(Para 4.6) 
Action Taken 
1.86 The Department of Health and Family Welfare agrees with the recommendations of the 
Committee for enhanced allocation during 2022-23 B.E. to provide access to affordable healthcare 
at the primary level. The Department of Health and Family Welfare will take up the matter with 
the Ministry of Finance for seeking additional resources.  
 
Recommendation 
1.87 The Committee observes that a strong network of Primary Health Care centres is 
fundamental for a robust health care delivery system. It strongly recommends that the primary 
health expenditure should be increased to two -thirds or more of the total health expenditure as 
envisaged in the National Health Policy with a view to strengthen the primary health care 
services under NHM. 
(Para 4.7) 

17 
 
Action Taken 
1.88 The Department of Health and Family Welfare agrees with the recommendations of the 
Committee that the primary health expenditure to be increased to two -thirds or more of the total 
health expenditure as envisaged in the National Health Policy (NHP) 2017 in order to strengthen 
the primary health care services under NHM. In this context, the Department of Health & Family 
Welfare has been making consistent efforts to increase its investment in public health services and 
to tap other resources for increasing pub lic health spending. Further, efforts will be made to 
strengthen the primary health care services under NHM.  
 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.89 The Committee takes note of the fact that as against the global MMR decline of 45% 
between 1990 to 2017, MMR de cline in India has been almost double, i.e, 80% during the same 
period. Five States have already attained SDG targets. However, the Committee finds that the 
overall Maternal Mortality Ratio in 2018 -19 was 113 whereas the 2030 Sustainable Development 
Goals Target is 70. The Committee believes that ensuring easily accessible and better quality 
healthcare for pregnant women is fundamental to reducing MMR. India still lags behind the 
envisaged target for MMR and the Ministry will have to make concerted efforts to reduce the 
MMR in the country to bring it below the SDG target. The Committee is of the view that 
increasing the number of institutional deliveries alongwith ensuring regular checkups and proper 
nutrition for the mother has to be pursued vigorously. The  Committee notes that ASHA and ANM 
act as a link between the Government and the pregnant women. Their role as a facilitator in 
providing adequate antenatal, natal and postnatal care can substantially improve health 
outcomes on various indicators. The Commi ttee also recommends the Ministry and the States to 
increase the outreach of the healthcare services under NHM especially in the backward and 
remote areas. 
(Para 4.14) 
Action Taken 
1.90 The Department of Health and Family Welfare acknowledges the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee to increase number of institutional deliveries alongwith 
ensuring regular check-ups and proper nutrition for the mother.  
1.91 National Family Health Surveys (NFHS) shows that institutional deliveries have risen 
from 38.7% in 2005 -06 (NFHS -3) to 78.9% in 2015 -16 (NFHS -4) and more importantly, 
institutional births in public facilities have increased from 18% to 52% during this peri od. 
Recently released first phase of NFHS -5 data available for 22 States/UTs has reflected that there 
has been a rise in institutional deliveries in 14 States/UTs with more than 90%  of institutional 
births in health facilities.  
1.92 Further, s everal i nitiatives under National Health Mission  have been taken to increase 
institutional deliveries:  
Existing initiatives:  
 Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY),  a promotion scheme launched in April, 2005 with the 
objective of reducing maternal and infant mortality. This is a conditional cash transfer 
scheme for pregnant women coming into the institutional fold for delivery.  JSY promotes 

18 
 
institutional delivery among pregnant women especially with weak socio -economic status 
i.e. women from Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and BPL households. It has been 
lauded as a successful scheme bringing about a surge in institutional deliveries since its 
launch. O n an average, around 1 Crore number of JSY beneficiaries are availing JSY 
benefits annually.  
 Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK): JSSK launched in 2011 entitles all 
pregnant women delivering in public health institutions  to absolutely free and no expe nse 
delivery, including for Caesarean Section. The entitlements include free drugs and 
consumables, free diet, free diagnostics, free blood and free transport between home to 
institution & back and between facilities in case of a referral. Similar entitlem ents also 
cover complications during ante-natal and post-natal period and also sick infants upto one 
year. All the 36 States/UTs are implementing JSSK. During FY 2020 -21, around 1.17 
crore beneficiaries availed the benefits under JSSK.  
Recent initiatives:  
 Surakshit Matritva Aashwasan (SUMAN),  a comprehensive multipronged and 
coordinated approach aims to provide assured, dignified, respectful and quality healthcare 
at no cost and zero tolerance for denial of services to every woman and new -born visiting 
public health facilities in order to end all preventable maternal and new -born deaths and 
morbidities and provide positive birthing experience. Under SUMAN, all existing schemes 
for maternal and neonatal health have been brought under one umbrella in order to create a 
comprehensive and cohesive  initiative which goes beyond entitlements and provides a 
service guarantee for the entitlements.  
All State/UTs are in process of notification of SUMAN CEmONC/ BEmONC/ BASIC 
facilities. Total 7,665 facilities have alre ady been identified across the country under 
SUMAN i.e. CEmONC -1029, BEmONC-2540 and Basic -4096. Budgetary provision has 
been made under National Health Mission‘s Programme Implementation Plan based on 
proposals received from States/UTs on generation of awareness. 
 Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan (PMSMA): Under PMSMA, all pregnant 
women in the country are provided fixed day, free of cost, assured quality Antenatal Care 
on the 9th day of every month. Since inception during the year 2016, more than 2.84 Crore 
antenatal check -ups have been conducted at PMSMA sites for comprehensive services 
under the programme and more than 22.98 lakhs high risk pregnant women have been 
detected. 
 LaQshya - LaQshya programme launched in  December 2017 is to improve the quality of 
care in Labour Room (LR) and Maternity Operation Theatres (OT) to ensure that pregnant 
women receive respectful and quality care during delivery and immediate post -partum 
period.Till 30 th June 2021, States/UTs have identified 2805 LRs and 1905 OTs facilities 
for certification of LaQshya. Out of which, total 1480 LRs / OTs (801 LRs & 679 OTs) are 
certified at State level and 727 LRs / OTs (404 LRs & 323 OTs) are certified at Nati onal 
level under this initiative. 
 Midwifery programme has been initiated in 2018 with the aim to create a cadre for Nurse 
Practitioners in Midwifery who are skilled in accordance to International Confederation of 
Midwives (ICM) competencies and capable of providing compassionate women -centred, 
reproductive, maternal and new-born health care services. 
 14 National Midwifery Training Institutes (NMTIs) have been identified across different 
States for training of the Midwifery Educators. First batch of Midwifer y Educators was 
initiated at Fernandez Foundation, Telangana which included participants from 5 States (6 
candidates each from UP, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Odisha, and Andhra Pradesh).  

19 
 
 The Midwifery Educator Curriculum has been circulated to all identified  NMTIs and State 
Nursing councils and Gazette notification has been done for the NPM curriculum by the 
Indian Nursing Council (INC). 
Strengthening public health infrastructure:  
 Delivery Points : Over 25,000 Delivery Points  have been strengthened with trained and 
skilled human resources, infrastructure, equipment, drugs and supplies, referral transport, 
etc. for providing quality and comprehensive RMNCH+A services. 
 Functionalization of First Referral Units (FRUs) : Provision of Emergency Obstetric 
Care at FRUs is being done by operationalizing all FRUs in the country with special thrust 
on strengthening the critical components such as manpower, blood storage units, referral 
linkages etc. 3,313 facilities (including 668 DHs, 82 1SDHs and 1706 CHCs & 118 MCs) 
have been operationalized as First Referral Units (FRUs) under NHM.  
 Maternal and Child Health (MCH) Wings are established at high caseload facilities to 
improve the quality of care provided to mothers and children. More than  600 dedicated 
MCH Wings with more than 42,000 additional beds have been sanctioned till date. 
 Obstetric HDU & ICU: Operationalization of Obstetric ICU/HDU in high caseload 
tertiary care facilities is being done across the country to handle complicated pregnancies. 
278 Obstetric HDUs & ICUs have been approved in high caseload tertiary care facilities 
across the country to handle complicated pregnancies. 
 Skill Labs: 5 National Skill labs and 104 stand -alone skill labs have been established in 
different States/UTs to strengthen skills of staff working at delivery points. 
 Birth Waiting Homes: In remote/inaccessible hilly and tribal areas with poor road 
connectivity and poor access to health facilities, pregnant women often have to be carried 
by palkis /carts/cots to the nearest road head. To improve access in such areas, "Birth 
Waiting Homes" h ave been operationalised within the compound of the health facility or 
close proximity. Pregnant women can come and stay in these homes well before their 
expected date of delivery (EDD) and transferred to the facility once they go into labour. 
Enhancing capacity building of health workers: 
 Skill building through training programmes for all categories of service providers e.g.  
Training of MBBS doctors in Life Saving Anesthesia Skills (LSAS), Emergency Obstetric 
Care including C -sections, training of Nurses and ANMs in Skilled Birth Attendance 
(SBA), Training of MOs in Comprehensive   Abortion Care (CAC) etc. 
1.93 The Department of Health & Family Welfare also agrees with the observations of the 
Committee that ASHA and ANM act as a link between the Government  and the pregnant women 
and their role as a facilitator in providing adequate ante natal and postnatal care will substantially 
improve health outcomes on various indicators. 
1.94 ANMs are responsible for early registration of pregnancies, provision of antenatal care 
check up to pregnant women and postnatal care check up to mothers. Skilled Birth Attendant 
(SBA) training is also being provided to ANMs to strengthen their capacity to  provide maternal 
health services.  
1.95 Whereas, ASHAs are tasked with the role of mobilizing, counselling and supporting 
pregnant women in the community, particularly in relation to institutional delivery, antenatal care 
and postnatal care. Scheduled home visits are conducted by ASHA in her catchment areas. ASHA 
ensures that every pregnant woman avails antenatal care and postnatal care. 

20 
 
1.96 Beside this, ANMs and ASHAs are also responsible to create awareness and provide 
information to the community on ex isting health services and the need for timely utilization of 
maternal health service provisions such as antenatal care check -ups, PMSMA camps, tracking of 
high risk pregnancy cases, birth micro planning, institutional delivery, JSY and JSSK provisions. 
Incentive is being provided to ASHA for maternal health services. 
1.97 The Department of Health & Family Welfare also agrees with the recommendations of the 
Committee to increase the outreach of the healthcare services under NHM especially in the 
backward and remote areas. In order to comply with the above recommendations, States/UTs are 
being supported for various outreach activities in rural and remote areas under National Health 
Mission as under:  
 Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Days (VHSNDs) are o bserved for provision of 
maternal, child health, family planning, etc. services and creating awareness in 
convergence with the Ministry of Women and Child Development.  
 Special plan for tribal areas such as special outreach camps, setting up of Birth Waiti ng 
Homes, etc. are being approved in Annual Programme Implementation Plan (PIP) of 
States/UTs. 
 To strengthen immunization service in tribal areas, States have been asked to plan and 
develop tribal immunization strategies. Proposals from the States like Arunachal Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Manipur & Mizoram for tribal spe cific 
activities / Tribal area specific immunization activities have been approved under NHM.  
 ANMs trained in SBA are also incentivized for attending home deliveries in pre -identified 
and notified villages in remote and inaccessible areas where it is difficult to bring a woman 
to the health facility for delivery on account of geographical barriers/climatic exigencies. 
 In addition, States/UTs are also advised to map out remote and inaccessible areas/pockets 
located in the hilly and tribal districts, and acc ord priority to intensive monitoring of 
progress (physical, financial) of all health activities in these areas, and also taking 
necessary actions to address bottlenecks and speed up processes for implementation. 
Recommendation 
1.98 The Committee takes note  of POSHAN Abhiyan, the flagship programme of the 
Government for tackling malnutrition in the country. The Committee is of the view that the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in collaboration with the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development should make  targeted interventions for delivery of nutritional and health benefits 
under NHM. 
(Para 4.19) 
Action Taken 
1.99 The Department of Health & Family Welfare fully agrees with the suggestion of the 
Committee to collaborate with the Ministry of Women and Child Development and make targeted 
interventions for delivery of nutritional and health benefits under National Health Mission 
(NHM).  
1.100 The main programme for addressing the delivery of nutrition interventions is being 
implemented by the Ministry of Women and Child Development (MoWCD). However, under 
NHM, different health and nutrition related programmes and activities are being implemente d 
with the objective of improvement in health status of the population. Some of the nutrition 
interventions are as under:  

21 
 
 The POSHAN (Prime Minister‘s Overarching Scheme for Holistic Nourishment) 
Abhiyaan, launched in 2018, implemented by MoWCD, is the Go vernment of India‘s 
flagship programme to improve nutritional outcomes for children, pregnant women and 
lactating mothers.   
 It is a multi-Ministerial convergence mission with the vision to accelerate India‘s progress 
on malnutrition. Effective implementat ion of the different nutrition programmes under 
various Ministries converges under the POSHAN Abhiyaan as it facilitates cross -sectoral 
convergence to address multidimensional nature of malnutrition. 
 The Anemia Mukt Bharat (AMB) strategy and Home Based Car e for Young Child 
(HBYC) programme are the important initiatives under the POSHAN Abhiyaan 
implemented by MoHFW.  
 The Mother and Child Protection (MCP) card and celebration of Village Health Sanitation 
and Nutrition Days (VHSNDs) are the joint initiative of MoWCD and MoHFW in order to 
improve the health and nutrition status of pregnant and lactating mother, children and 
adolescents.  
 In addition, MoHFW and MoWCD carries out various convergent activities targeted at 
various vulnerable age groups such as prom otion of breastfeeding and complementary 
feeding, counselling on health and nutrition during pregnancy, etc.  
 MoHFW also conducts other targeted interventions such as Antenatal Care (ANC) and 
Post Natal Care (PNC) checkups, Home Based Newborn Care (HBNC) and Home Based 
care of Young Child (HBYC), Immunisation for pregnant mothers, children and 
adolescents, micronutrient supplementation including Iron and Folic acid in different age 
groups under AMB strategy, Vitamin -A supplementation for under five children, National 
Deworming Day (NDD), promotion of ORS and Zinc under Intensified Diarrhoea Control 
Fortnight (IDCF) , management of sever acute malnutrition children with medical 
complications, etc.  
Recommendations/Observations 
1.101 The Committee recommends the Department to expand the vaccination programme in far 
flung and rural areas also. The Committee also recommends the Department to continue efforts to 
make the immunization programme hundred percent successful. The Committee also underlines 
the need of conducting awareness campaigns in rural areas highlighting the importance of 
vaccines and develop communication toolkits to educate people accordingly. 
(Para 4.22) 
Action Taken 
1.102 The Department of Health & Family Welfare agrees with the recommendations of the 
Committee for expansion of vaccination programme in far flung and rural areas through various 
awareness campaigns and by developing communication toolkits to educate people. In this 
context, the Ministry is making following efforts to make immunization programme hundred 
percent successful: 
 Under Universal Immunization Program (UIP), free of cost vaccines are  provided to all 
eligible children and pregnant women , as per the National Immunization schedule, 
including in far flung, remote, inaccessible and rural areas. 
 Constant efforts are being made by the Department to increase the immunization coverage 
and cove r partially immunized and left out children which includes the underserved & 
hard to reach populations through intensive immunization drives like Mission 

22 
 
Indradhanush, Gram Swaraj Abhiyaan, Extended Gram Swaraj Abhiyaan & Intensified 
Mission Indradhanush, along with strengthening of Routine Immunization activities under 
Universal Immunization Program. 
1.103 Other steps undertaken by the Government to increase immunization coverage are: 
 Concurrent monitoring and regular review of routine immunization programme. 
 Incentives to ASHA for mobilization of children to immunization session site and also for 
ensuring complete immunization within first year, second year and fifth year of life of the 
child. 
 Ensuring robust supply chain management system. 
1.104 The targeted steps being taken by the Government in spreading awareness about the 
immunization in children across the country are: 
 Comprehensive Communication guidelines prepared & shared to disseminate correct 
information about vaccines and address hesitancy. 
 Awareness generation through electronic & print media like radio spots, television, poster, 
hoardings etc. 
 Inter personal communication by front line health workers like Auxiliary Nurse Midwife 
(ANM) and Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs). 
 Media e ngagement, utilizing social media platforms like Twitter, Facebook, WhatsApp 
and print media platforms.  
 Social mobilization & community engagement by Accredited Social Health Activists 
(ASHAs) and other community workers. The workers are incentivized for same.   
 Inter-sectoral convergence for creation of awareness is also undertaken. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1.105 The Committee expresses its concern over the lack of sanitary pads and non practice of 
menstrual hygiene leading to rising infection and cancer among women. The Committee, 
therefore, impresses upon the need to conduct awareness campaigns on menstrual hygiene 
especially in rural areas and work towards eradicating the stigma attached to menstruation. The 
Committee advocates the strong need of  "no tax policy" on sanitary pads so that the pads are 
easily available even to the women of economically weaker sections of the society. 
(Para 4.27) 
Action Taken 
1.106 The Department of Health &  Family Welfare agrees with the concerns of the Committee 
regarding conducting awareness campaigns on menstrual hygiene especially in rural areas and to 
work towards eradicating the stigma attached to menstruation. In this context, the Ministry has 
implemented Scheme for Promotion of Menstrual Hygiene since 2011 among adolescent girls in 
the age group of 10-19 years. Under Menstrual Hygiene Scheme (MHS), apart from increasing the 
access and use of high quality sanitary napkins to adolescent girls, one of th e key objectives is 
also to increase awareness among adolescent girls on menstrual hygiene practices and remove the 
stigma around menstruation. Besides, the Ministry also provides funds for IEC/BCC activities for 

23 
 
promoting menstrual hygiene as per the prop osal submitted by the States/ UTs in annual 
Programme Implementation Plans (PIPs). Recently, the Ministry has shared a compendium of 
IEC/BCC materials with all the States/UTs for awareness generation activities at all level of 
health institutions especially at the Sub-Health Centres and Primary Health Centres. 
1.107 The Committee has advocated the strong need of ―No tax policy" on sanitary pads. The 
matter does not come under the purview of MoHFW. 
 
NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION 
Adolescent Health 
Recommendation 
1.108 The Committee recommends the Department to increase the allocation under the RCH 
flexible pool programs and ensure that financial constraints do not pose a road block in achieving 
the targets envisaged under the program. The Committee urges the Minis try to consider targeted 
interventions in the aspirational districts and States that have consistently performed poorly on 
various health indicators. The Committee is particularly concerned for rural and remote areas 
and urges the Ministry to increase the outreach of the different initiatives under the RCH Flexible 
Pool in such areas. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to monitor the progress of all 
the States/UTs made under various special initiatives. 
(Para 4.28) 
Action Taken 
 
(a) Under National Health Mission (NHM), support is provided to States/ UTs for strengthening 
of their healthcare system based on their proposals in State Programme Implementation 
Plans (PIPs). The approvals are provided judiciously so that no component of the programme 
face financial constraints. In case of need for additional funds, States/UTs proposes for the 
same through Supplementary PIP. 
States have also been given full flexibility to deploy resources according to area specific 
needs. More resources are a llocated to High priority Districts, Aspirational Districts, etc. 
within the States' Resource Envelopes.For Aspirational Districts, special provisions have 
also been accorded for effective implementation of Health initiatives. These provisions are: 
 
● Additional weightage for preparation of District Health Action Plan (DHAP) to 
ensure district specific needs under Conditionality framework. 
● Extra financial resources for Aspirational districts. 
● Relaxation of norms for manpower. 
● Flexibility to hire specialists with top up allowances. 
● Priority sanctioned under Infrastructure development 
 
(b) Various initiatives and strategies are being prioritized to facilitate the provision of a 
comprehensive Healthcare service in Aspirational Districts. With a holistic, health  systems 
approach, efforts are being harnessed to improve the access to health care with quality 
services. Evidence based interventions along with a holistic planning and coordination 
among multiple stake holders are being implemented with an aim to improv e the health 
outcomes such as reduction in mortality rates among child, new -born and mothers. Health 

24 
 
indicator specific approaches are being channelized among all the Aspirational Districts to 
bring about reformative changes in Health.  
 
Key Interventions for improving Health in Aspirational Districts: 
● Three Year Health Action Plan : Prepared by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
with short and long term targets to improve the status of Health across all Aspirational 
Districts. Under this Health action plan, all the key thematic areas of Health such as 
Reproductive, Maternal, Child and Adolescent Health, Nutrition, Communicable disease, 
etc. with a health systems approach have been covered.  
● Focused and  context specific strategies in Health  such as operationalization of HWCs, 
Anaemia Mukt Bharat (AMB), LaQshya, Home Based Young  Child Care (HBYC), 
National Tuberculosis Elimination Program (NTEP) etc. have been prioritized in these ADs 
to bring about the desired changes in Health indicators. 
● Collaboration between multiple stakeholders : District level technical and managerial 
support from Lead development partners such as USAID, UNICEF, BMGF, UNFPA etc. 
are in place to provide support and assistance to the district administration in improving the 
health parameters.  
 
1.109 In addition, special provisions under NHM have also been acc orded Aspirational Districts 
for an effective implementation of health initiatives. These provisions are: 
o Ensuring Availability of Critical HR: Flexibility to hire specialists and propose 
salaries/top up allowances (fixed/ performance based) in NHM PIPs. 
o Priority sanctions for Critical Infrastructure: Up-gradation and operationalization of 
critical units such as MCH wings, SNCUs, NRCs, etc. for uninterrupted service provision 
on priority. 
o Enhancement of Resources: Extra financial resources, relaxation of norms for manpower 
and focused monitoring and supervision. 
1.110 Therefore, all these interventions plan to bring about tangible changes and improve the 
health in Aspirational Districts. 
(c) States/UTs are being supported for various outreach activities in rur al and remote areas under 
NHM. These activities are: 
● Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Days (VHSNDs) are observed for provision of 
maternal, child health, family planning etc. services and creating awareness in convergence 
with the Ministry of Women and Child Development.  
● Special plan for tribal areas such as special outreach camps, setting up of Birth waiting 
homes etc. are being approved in Annual Programme Implementation Plan (PIP). 
● In order to strengthen immunization service in tribal areas, Stat es/UTs have been asked to 
plan and develop tribal immunization strategies. Proposal from the States like Arunachal 
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur & Mizoram for tribal 
specific activities / Tribal area specific immunization acti vities have been approved under 
NHM.  
● ANMs trained in SBA are also incentivized for attending home deliveries in pre -identified 
and notified villages in remote and inaccessible areas where it is difficult to bring a woman 
to the health facility for delivery on account of geographical barriers/climatic exigencies. 
● In addition, States/UTs are also advised to map out remote and inaccessible areas/pockets 
located in the hilly and tribal Districts, and accord priority to intensive monitoring of progress 

25 
 
(physical, financial) of all health activities in these areas, and also taking necessary actions to 
address bottlenecks and speed up processes for implementation. 
 
(d) Structured monitoring and supervision mechanism are in place to monitor the various 
activities under NHM. The Ministry has been monitoring the implementation of various 
schemes through:  
 
● Annual Common Review Missions 
● NPCC (National Programme Coordination Committee) meetings with States and UTs 
● Quarterly Review Meetings 
● Regional review meetings 
● State review meetings 
● Community monitoring by VHSNCs.  
1.111 A structured Output Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) is also in place to track the 
progress of key indicators under RMNCHA+N. Beside this, key deliverables are identified for 
each of the programme, intervention and important activities at the time of fi nalization of the 
PIPs. Progress on the key deliverables is captured through the Health Management Information 
System (HMIS) and through quarterly financial and physical progress reports.  
1.112 Regular review meetings are held with States/UTs for monitori ng of progress on the key 
deliverables for the year, besides regular monitoring visits from National Program Management 
Unit and Ministry‘s officials. 
1.113 Activities are also monitored through quarterly progress reports, desk review, data 
monitoring and data triangulation to understand the implementation status, challenges and 
solutions for improvement. 
 
B.  HEALTH SYSTEM STRENGTHENING UNDER NRHM 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1.114 The Committee finds that Health System Strengthening under NRHM is the bedrock of 
NHM under its five major components, namely, Ayushman Bharat -Health and Wellness Centres, 
ASHAs & HRH, Free essential Drugs and Diagnostics, National Ambulance Services and M obile 
Medical Units (NAS & MMUs) and Quality Infrastructure Untied Funds. The Committee is of the 
view that there is a substantial scope for increasing the absorption capacity under this head. As 
per data furnished by the Ministry, over 70%of OOPE is on Ou t-Patient care (of which 60% is on 
medicines and 10% is on diagnostic services). In a scenario when medical emergencies have the 
potential of driving people to poverty, availability of free essential drugs and diagnostic services 
can go a long way in easin g the financial hardships of a common man. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Government should pay serious attention to this issue and provide financial 
protection against health risks. 
(Para 4.33) 
Action Taken 
 
1.115 Government has taken many steps under the National Health Mission (NHM) to enhance 
the access to affordable health care and thereby reducing the out of pocket expenditure (OOPE) by 

26 
 
households. These include supplementing the efforts of the States for provi ding a host of free 
services related to mental health, child health, adolescent health, family planning, universal 
immunization, free drugs and diagnostics services initiative, Prime Minister National Dialysis 
Programme, major diseases like Tuberculosis, V ector Borne Diseases, and Non -Communicable 
Diseases, etc.  
1.116 The Government has launched Ayushman Bharat to mitigate financial hardships caused by 
high OOPE. It has two components – Ayushman Bharat Health & Wellness Centers (AB -HWC) 
and Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM -JAY). While AB -HWC provides comprehensive 
primary health care, PM-JAY aims to provide health coverage of Rs. 5.00 lakh per family per year 
to around 10.74 Crore poor and vulnerable families for secondary and tertiary hospitalization. 
1.117 The National Health Policy, 2017 envisages achievement of Universal Health Coverage in 
progressive manner. The Government is committed to setting up of 1.5 lakh AB -HWCs by 
December, 2022. 
1.118 The National Health Policy, 2017 also envisages to incre ase public health expenditure to 
2.5% of GDP in a time bound manner. An increase in expenditure on health by both the Central 
and State Governments would also lower the OOPE. 
 
Recommendation 
1.119 The Committee also applauds ASHA and other frontline health workers for their role as 
foot soldiers in India's fight against the pandemic. In its previous Reports, the Committee has 
noted that the ASHA workers have proved pivotal in connecting the weaker a nd marginalized 
community to a host of health services. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare to allocate specific funds under the budget for these frontline workers 
and ensure their fair minimum wage. The Committee  recommends the Ministry to consider 
incentives and financial protection for the ASHA workers under the ASHA package. 
(Para 4.34) 
Action Taken 
1.120 Under the National Health Mission, ASHAs are envisaged to be community health 
volunteer and are entitled to  task/activity based incentives. In FY 2018 -19, the Union Cabinet 
approved the revised amount of routine recurrent incentive for ASHAs from Rs.1000/month to 
Rs.2000/month. Now, ASHAs receive a fixed monthly incentive of Rs. 2000 per month for 
undertaking r outine and recurring activities. Details of incentives for routine and recurring 
activities given to ASHAs is given at Annexure-I. Further, details of performance -based 
incentives to ASHAs for a varied set of activities under various National Health Progra mmes are 
given at Annexure- II. 
 
1.121 State Governments also provide a range of monetary incentives to the ASHAs. State -wise 
details of incentives provided to the ASHAs are given at Annexure-III.  
 
1.122 With operationalisation of Ayushman Bharat - Health and Wellness Centres (AB -HWCs), 
ASHAs are now additionally eligible for Team Based Incentives (TBIs) along with ANMs based 
on monitored performance indicators (up to Rs. 1000 per month). Under NHM, States/ UTs are 
also supported for provision of non-monetary benefits to ASHAs such as uniform, mobile phones, 

27 
 
welfare schemes, CUG mobile connection, enrolment in educational equivalency programmes, 
ASHA rest rooms, ASHA help desk, organisation of ASHA Sammelans, ASHA awards, etc.  
 
1.123 The incentives to ASHAs are regularly being reviewed and activities for which ASHAs 
would get incentives are expanded from time to time. In the year 2018, the ASHA benefit package 
was introduced acknowledging significant contribu tion and commitment of ASHAs. The package 
providing coverage for: 
 Pradhan Mantri Jeevan JyBeema Yojana (PMJJBY) with a benefit Rs.2.00 lakh in case of 
death of the insured (annual premium of Rs.330 contributed by GOI).  
 Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Beema Yojana  (PMSBY) with a benefit of Rs. 2.00 lakh for 
accidental death or permanent disability; Rs. 1.00 lakh for partial disability (annual 
premium of Rs. 12 contributed by GOI).  
 Pradhan Mantri Shram Yogi Maan Dhan (PM -SYM) with pension benefit of Rs. 3000 pm 
after age of 60 years (50% contribution of premium by GOI and 50% by beneficiaries).  
 The government has also approved a cash award of Rs.20,000/ - and a citation to ASHAs 
who leave the programme after working as ASHAs for minimum of 10 years, as 
acknowledgement of their contribution.  
 States/UTs have been asked to ensure provision of safety tools like masks, gloves, soaps 
and sanitizers etc. for ASHAs.  
 Moreover, under the Prad han Mantri Garib Kalyan Package, Insurance Scheme has been 
introduced for all health workers, including ASHAs. This insurance scheme provides an 
insurance cover of Rs. 50.00 lakhs in -case of loss of life on account of COVID -19 related 
duty.  
 
1.124 Further, in view of the significant contribution towards the COVID -19 pandemic related 
work by ASHAs, States were advised to pay an additional incentive of Rs.1000/ - per month for 
those ASHAs engaged in COVID -19 related work using the resources of COVID -19 Health  
System Preparedness and Emergency Response Package. 
 
Recommendation 
1.125 The Committee recommends the Ministry to extend National Ambulance Services (NAS) 
and Mobile Medical Units (MMUs) to rural and the remotest regions of the country.NAS and 
MMUs can ensure better accessibility of healthcare services in under -served areas. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to provide enhanced allocations for 
Health System Strengthening under NRHM in right proportion which will help actualize th e 
initiatives under the Scheme. 
(Para 4.35) 
Action Taken  
1.126 Ambulance under National Health Mission, State/UTs are being supported for augmenting 
the referral network in the country by Advanced Life Support (ALS), Basic Life Support (BLS) 
and Patient Transport Vehicle (PTV) ambulance system in both rural and urban areas. Presently, 
under NHM, support is being provided for 26,849 ambulances which are linked a toll -free number 
(102/108). States have the flexibility under NHM to deploy the ambulances in consideration of 
time to care approach to decrease the response ti me of ambulances in hilly, tribal and remotest 
areas Furthermore, Govt. of India is providing support in augmentation of existing fleet of 

28 
 
ambulances to the States under ECRP -II. Presently, MMUs (maximum 5 per District) are 
supported under NHM to increase the access in remote, difficult and hard to reach areas. These 
MMUs conduct outreach activities to offer range of services in difficult areas. However, States are 
motivated to provide assured services (facility -based services) through setting up public hea lth 
facilities such as HWCs in these remote and inaccessible areas. States have the flexibility to 
deploy more numbers of MMUs in hilly, tribal and remotest areas for better coverage of outreach. 
Accordingly, States can propose for additional MMU support if required for such areas. 
 
Recommendation 
1.127 The Committee notes with concern that against the target of 70,000 AB-HWCs for the year 
2020-21, as on 10th February 2021, 59,542 HWCs are functional. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to make the remain ing HWCs functional so that the envisaged target of 1.5 lakh Health 
and Wellness Centres is achieved by December, 2022. The Committee observes that there are 
critical gaps in the Primary health centres and therefore urges upon the Ministry to monitor the 
functioning of already established HWCs. A brick mortar structure without the required health 
work force, medical infrastructure and specialist doctors cannot deliver the targeted health 
services. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to further enhanc e the allocation under 
this head. The Committee is also dismayed at the huge inter -State disparity in the healthcare 
sector and recommends the Ministry to pay special focus to States that perform poorly in health 
outcomes. 
(Para 4.40) 
Action Taken 
1.128 Operationalization of the AB-HWCs have been scaled at the greater pace across the entire 
country yielding the total of 74,947 AB -HWCs operationalized in FY 20 -21 against the target of 
70,000. Operationalization of AB -HWCs has been prioritized by the states  to meet the target of 
1,50,000 AB -HWCs by December 2022.  States/UTs are provided necessary technical and 
financial assistance in this regard. Efforts of the States in this regard has been documented and all 
such materials are available in the portals of the Ministry viz 
 https://main.mohfw.gov.in/documents/ImplementationofAB-HWCsintheStates/UTs 
https://nhsrcindia.org/reports-implementation-hwcs-states  https://ab-
hwc.nhp.gov.in/Home/Implementation_hwc_state 
1.129 Distribution of funds among States is as per NHM Framework formula that takes into 
account socioeconomic backwardness of various States/U Ts. States have also been given full 
flexibility to deploy resources according to area specific needs in a state. More resources are 
allocated to High Priority Districts, Aspirational districts, etc. within the States‘ Resource 
Envelopes. 
Recommendation 
1.130 The Committee also notes that the Fifteenth Finance Commission has recommended health 
grants aggregating to Rs. 70,051 for urban HWCs, building less sub centres, PHCs, CHCs, block 
level public health units, support for diagnostic infrastructure for t he primary healthcare 
activities and conversion of rural sub centres and PHCs to HWCs. The FC has recommended for 
release of these grants to local governments. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to 
release the earmarked grants so that the gaps in public health  system at the primary health care 
level can be addressed. 

29 
 
(Para 4.41) 
Action Taken 
1.131 Ministry is working closely with Department of Expenditure for release of the FC -XV 
Health Grants through Local Governments to the States. Technical and Operational Guidelines 
were shared with the States on 31 st August 2021. The National Committee will be meeting on 8 th 
October 2021 to appraise the proposals from the States and approve the same. Ministry will take 
all the steps to release the earmarked grants so that the gaps in public health system at the primary 
healthcare level can be addressed.  
 
Recommendation 
1.132 The Committee intends to highlight that according to the World Health Organisation 
(WHO), Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) kills 41 million people each year globally. Almost 
5.8 million people die from NCDs (Heart and Lung diseases, Stroke, Cancer and Diabetes) every 
year. (WHO report 2015). The Committee takes note of the fact that while 71% of global deaths 
and about 65% of deaths in  India are caused by non -communicable diseases. Between 1990 and 
2016, the contribution of NCDs increased 37% to 61% of all deaths. The Committee is concerned 
at the increasing cases of Non -Communicable Diseases in the country and recommends the 
Ministry to conduct state specific surveys regarding its incidence so that targeted policies can be 
framed for containing NCDs. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to launch life style 
awareness programs that focus on healthy eating and healthy living. The Mi nistry must also 
include lifestyle modification programme especially for controlling obesity amongst adolescents. 
(Para 4.55) 
Action Taken 
 
1.133 The suggestions regarding State -specific surveys regarding its incidence so that targeted 
policies may be framed for containing NCDs and forwarded to the Indian Council of Medical 
Research (ICMR) for further consideration. 
1.134 The preventive aspect of NCDs is being strengthened under Comprehensive Primary 
Health Care (CPHC) through the Ayushman Bharat Health  Wellness Centre (AB-HWC) scheme, 
by promotion of wellness activities and targeted communication at the community level. In 
addition, NPCDCS gives financial support under NHM for awareness generation (IEC) activities 
for NCDs to be undertaken by the States /UTs as per their Programme Implementation Plans 
(PIPs). 
1.135 The Ministry is already putting continuous efforts through Social Media Campaigns to 
raise awareness about common risk factors of NCDs, prevention, and control of NCDs, and 
leading a healthy li festyle. Special days pertaining to NCDs are regularly observed i.e. World 
Cancer Day, National Cancer Awareness Day, World Kidney Day, World Stroke Day, World 
Diabetes Day, World COPD day etc. to spread awareness on risk factors, prevention, and 
management o NCDs through webinars, IEC campaign, etc. being involving key stakeholders. 
Targeted messaging for the promotion of healthy lifestyle is also done through Twitter, Instagram, 
You tube, and Facebook. 
Recommendation 

30 
 
1.136 The Committee also observes that  despite the launch of NPCDS, there is limited 
awareness amongst the people regarding cancer, diabetes and Cardiovascular diseases. The 
Committee, in its previous Reports, has emphasized that the lack of access to screening, 
diagnostic and treatment centre s at Primary, Secondary and tertiary levels is one of the major 
cause for poor survival rate. The Committee, again reiterates its recommendation and urges the 
Department to make more concerted efforts to tackle the growing burden of these diseases. 
(Para 4.103) 
Action Taken 
 
i) National Programme for prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes Cardiovascular 
Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS) is being implemented under National Health Mission 
(NHM) with focus on strengthening infrastructure, human resources development, health 
promotion & awareness generation, early diagnosis, management and referral to an 
appropriate level institution for treatment. 
ii) To tackle the challenge of Non -Communicable diseases, 640 NCD Clinics at District level 
and 5148 NCD Clinics a t Community Health Centre level have been set up under the 
NPCDCS.  
iii) Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) (Diabetes, hypertension and common cancer viz oral 
breast and cervical cancer) has also been rolled out under NHM, as a part of comprehensive 
primary healthcare. Under this initiative, frontline health workers such as Accredited Social 
Health Activists (ASHA) and Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANM), inter alia, are leveraged to 
carry out screening and generate awareness about the risk factors of NCDs among the 
masses. The initiative is under implementation in over 697 districts across the country. 
Screening for common NCDs including diabetes is also an integral part of service delivery 
under Ayushman Bharat Health and Wellness Centres. 
iv) The Ministry is putting cont inuous efforts through Social Media Campaigns to raise 
awareness about common risk factors of NCDs, prevention and control of NCDs and 
leading a healthy lifestyle. Special days pertaining to NCDs are regularly organized i.e. 
World Cancer Day, National Canc er Awareness Day , World Kidney Day, World Stroke 
Day, World Diabetes Day, etc. to spread awareness on risk factors, prevention and 
management of NCDs through webinars, IEC campaign etc. being involving key 
stakeholders. Targeted messaging for promotion of  healthy 'lifestyle is also done through 
Twitter, Instagram, You tube and Facebook.  
v) Ministry has been organizing "Swasthya Chetna Evam Jan Sampark Abhiyan" every year 
during India International Trade Fair where screening for cancer, diabetes, Hypertension, 
Body Mass Index, and counseling on dietary intake and practicing healthy lifestyle is 
organized. This mega event attracted lakhs of people for screening, guidance and awareness 
on risk factor of Non -Communicable Diseases (NCDs). Due to COVID -19 Pandemic, such 
events have suffered a set-back. 
vi) Healthy eating is also promoted by various means including through FSSAI. There is 'Eat 
Right India' movement; project' safe and nutritious food' and Aaj se thoda kum' awareness 
activities are also initiated. 
 
Recommendation 
1.137 The Committee notes the above mentioned key concern areas identified in implementation 
of NHRM and NUHM. The Committee is concerned to note that the major volume of services 
delivered under NHM was severely impacted during the pandemic. The Committee feels  that the 

31 
 
concerns raised by the Ministry shed light on the ground harsh realities. The Ministry should 
therefore take up the matter with States/UTs and fill up the vacancies under NHM. Grants or 
incentives to better performing States must also be provided. The Committee strongly recommends 
the Ministry to take effective measures to overcome the hurdles in delivery of health care services 
under NHM. 
(Para 4.112) 
Action Taken  
1.138 The Department including NHM had taken various initiatives during the COVID 
pandemic for management of the health services at the public health facilities.  
1.139 Community Health Officer/Mid -Level Health Care Provider (MLHP) in addition to the 
team of MPWs and ASHAs are providing community-level screenings and basic curative services, 
especially for remote and difficult areas. Tele -consultation services through ‗eSanjeevani‘ which 
connects AB -HWCs (spokes) to District Hospitals/Medical colleges (Hubs) are providing 
specialist consultation services to citizens in the confines of their homes.  
1.140 Regular meetings were also held with the States/UTs to review the services offered to 
public and support is being provided to strengthen the service delivery. 
1.141 Further directives were issued from MoHFW dated 10th April 2020 to all States that 
disruption to critical essential health services is minimized. States were advised that particular 
attention needs to be paid to providing essential healthcare for specif ic sub population groups 
including: 
 Pregnant women likely to deliver in the period of lockdown with a particular focus on 
High Risk Pregnant Women, 
 New -borns and young children, 
 patients on treatment for chronic communicable and non-communicable diseases, 
 elderly people, and  
 patients needing dialysis, chemotherapy as well as 
 Those requiring transfusion of blood and blood products. 
1.142 Health being a state subject, availability of HR for the public health facilities is 
responsibility of the State Govt. However, NHM provides fund to supplement the existing HR and 
to bridge the gap. Flexibility is provided to the States/UTs for: 
1. Provision for additional allowance to staff posted in rural and remote areas 
2. Provision for paying performance -based team incentiv es to staff after achieving over and 
above defined threshold of performance. 
3. For engaging specialists for public health facilities by various mechanisms like 
‗contracting in‘ and ‗contracting out‘ of specialist services. 
4. Providing scope for professional gr owth and continuous professional learning. Such as 
initiating Started DNB and CPS courses in the district hospitals. 
1.143 In addition, non -Monetary incentives such as preferential admission in post graduate 
courses for staff serving in difficult areas and  improving accommodation arrangement in rural 
areas have also been introduced under NHM.  
1.144 Grants or incentives for better performing States have been provided under NHM every 
year based on annual assessment of States/UTs as per conditionality framewo rk. Under NHM, 

32 
 
20% of the central allocation is linked for release as an incentive based on performance of the 
States/UTs. Under the mechanism, States are incentivized/ disincentivized based on their scores as 
per the assessment. Therefore, more funds are available to the better performing States/UTs. 
1.145 Further, the recommendation of the Committee to overcome the hurdles in delivery of 
efficient health services under NHM from all the aspects will be ensured. 
Recommendation  
1.146 The Committee notes tha t NHA is preparing to undertake a mass e -card generation drive 
across the country which is expected to rapidly scale up the number of card holders under the 
scheme. The Committee recommends the Ministry to take special care that the entitled 
beneficiaries are not denied the benefits of the scheme due to unavailability of e -cards as there 
have been concerns about many stakeholders being left out. 
(Para 4.133) 
Action Taken  
1.147 All beneficiaries are entitled to avail services under the scheme from the day of launch of 
the scheme and Ayushman card (erstwhile e -card) is not essential to avail services under 
Ayushman Bharat. However, beneficiary identification is undertaken to facilitate delivery of 
services in a smooth and effective manner. Further, possessio n of Ayushman cards bestows a 
sense of empowerment to the scheme beneficiaries which enables them to demand services at 
empanelled hospitals. Ayushman card is an effective medium for IEC as well and it has been 
clearly observed that there is direct correla tion between scheme uptake and beneficiary card 
issuance. 
1.148 In view of this, NHA launched a comprehensive campaign ―Aapke Dwar Ayushman‖ to 
issue Ayushman cards in mission mode. The salient features of the campaign are as follows: 
 Aapke Dwar Ayushman s eeks to leverage the network of frontline health workers, 
Panchayati Raj executives (elected representatives and officials), and village level 
entrepreneurs from CSC and UTIITSL to conduct door -to-door beneficiary mobilization 
and Ayushman card generation. 
 The campaign is currently active in 10 out of the planned 16 States and UTs. 
1.149 The campaign has achieved all -time record in number of verified beneficiaries daily. As 
on date, nearly 2.9 crore beneficiaries have been verified in the ongoing drive sinc e January 2021, 
of which 1.5 crore records were created in March 2021 alone. 
1.150 At the same time, it is informed that NHA has deployed robust grievance redressal and 
anti-fraud protocols to ensure that there is no denial of services to the beneficiary o r any 
infringement on her rights by unscrupulous elements. 
 
Recommendation  
1.151 The Committee also notes that the entitled individual under AB -PMJAY can avail the 
benefits if he/she is included in the SECC census 2011. The Committee is concerned that 
identifying the list of beneficiaries through the outdated SECC census 2011 data may lead to 
exclusion of many real beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 

33 
 
expand the list of beneficiaries under AB -PMJAY. The Committee also recommends the Ministry 
to conduct awareness campaigns for wider dissemination of guideli nes by engaging the 
community health workers and the local government. 
(Para 4.134) 
Action Taken 
1.152 With regards to issues related to the SECC database, the following is submitted: 
 The beneficiary families under Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
(AB-PMJAY) have been identified from the Socio Economic Caste Census (SECC) of 
2011 on the basis of select deprivation and occupational criteria across rural and urban 
areas. Details in Annexure–IV. As on date nearly 10.74 crore beneficiary families have 
been identified as per SECC 2011. The database of beneficiary families was frozen as per 
the Cabinet approval during inception of the AB -PMJAY. However, it may be noted that 
the 33 States and Union Territories implementing AB -PMJAY have further expanded the 
beneficiary base to cover 13.18 crore households (approximately 65 crore individuals) 
which covers approximately 50% of the population.   
 However, there are certain limitations in the SECC database: 
o The SECC data was compiled in 2011 and there is no provision to update the 
database 
o There is weak correlation with on-ground poverty estimates 
o Nearly 30-40% of beneficiary families cannot be traced on the ground 
o It is difficult to  communicate to beneficiaries about their eligibility as per SECC 
database. Further, searching the beneficiary database based on demographic details 
is a cumbersome activity.  
 To overcome these issues NHA is undertaking following measures: 
o Collaborating with other ministries running welfare schemes using SECC database 
(Ministry of Power, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs, and Ministry of Rural Development )  for the purpose of 
reaching out to common beneficiaries th rough their  updated address and mobile 
number, thereby addressing certain gaps in the existing SECC database. It may be 
noted that this activity has already commenced for the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala 
Yojana SECC beneficiaries shared by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.   
Further, NHA is also exploring alternative data sources and has undertaken 
stakeholder consultations in this regard. 
o NHA has signed MoUs with leading organizations such as CSC and UTIITSL to 
facilitate bulk issuance of Ayushman cards for the scheme beneficiaries. 
o NHA has launched Aapke Dwar Ayushman – a mass campaign to drive beneficiary 
identification activities across several key States and UTs. Under this initiative, 
approximately 2.6 crore beneficiaries have been verified in the 1 st quarter of 2021, 
of which nearly 1.5 crore verifications were conducted in March 2021. 
o Under AB -PMJAY various steps have been undertaken to raise the awareness 
about the scheme. A comprehensive media and outreach strategy to spread 
awareness and empowering t he beneficiaries about their entitlements and rights 
under the scheme has been followed. This included the use of multiple media 
platforms such as outdoor media, social media, national and regional press 
coverage, op -eds and advertorials in print media, ra dio campaign, telecast of 
beneficiary testimonials via Doordarshan, mass messaging through SMS,. 

34 
 
Additionally, personalized letters to the beneficiary families had been sent by 
Hon‘ble Prime Minister explaining about the benefits of the scheme. Outreach 
programme like school contact programs, activation programs at village level, van 
campaigns etc. are also being undertaken suitably in consultation with respective 
State Health Agencies. 
Recommendation 
1.153 The Committee is of the view that the outbreak of Pandemic Covid -19and its Management 
has brought the Paradigm Shift behind the philosophy of Budgeting for theCovid -19 period and 
the Health Sector seized the centre stage of Economic Policy Programme not on ly for the 
National Economy but the International Economy as a whole. Although the apprehension about 
continuing incidence of Covid cases and occurrence and emergence and its re -surge of its various 
strains of Covid-19 cannot be ruled out, awareness toward s the threat of Covid -19 should not be 
underestimated. All efforts at each level must continue for strict adherence to adoption of Covid -
19 Appropriate Behavior (CAB) viz. mask wearing, social distancing of two yards, guard against 
the Covid-19 and report to the Covid designated hospital in case of suffering from Covid -19. The 
Committee believes that Government should not take the guard off against the potential and 
possible threat emanating as reflected in fluctuating trend of incidence of Covid -19 i.e. moving up 
and down with new strains. The rising incidence of Covid -19 cases is a matter of concern to the 
Committee and therefore, the Government should continue to keep the monitoring vigilance 
against the pandemic Covid -19 and implementation of Covid Appro priate Behaviour in public 
places, common mass gathering and the rural areas.  
(Para 5.1) 
Action Taken 
1.154 MoHFW continues to maintain a close vigil over the dynamic COVID -19 situation in the 
country. States/UTs are monitored regularly based on number of  cases/ case trajectory and sample 
confirmation rates. In cases of increasing trajectory, States are supported by deployment of 
Central multi -disciplinary teams to undertake risk assessment, take a stock of on -ground 
implementation of laid down protocols a nd assist State Health Departments in control and 
containment measures. Observations and recommendations of the Central teams are reiterated to 
State Governments to take necessary corrective public health preparedness and response 
measures. 
1.155 Further, formal communications as well as virtual meetings are held regularly with 
States/UTs at the level of senior officials.  
1.156 States/UTs have been urged not to lower their guard and focus on five-fold strategy of test-
track-treat-vaccinate and COVID appropriate behaviour. 
1.157 Formal communications highlighting need for adherence to COVID -19 appropriate 
behaviour in view of upcoming festive season have been issued to all States/UTs. 
1.158 Regular press briefings, dissemination of IEC materials in print, vi sual and social media, 
expert interviews on COVID -19 are held to orient the community on COVID appropriate 
behaviour.  
Recommendation 

35 
 
1.159 The Committee desired to know the steps that could be undertaken to make the health 
infrastructure agile to enable I ndia to effectively respond to Covid -19 like future pandemics. The 
Department maintained that, as part of its COVID -19 response, COVID -19Emergency Response 
and Health Systems Preparedness project was initiated. The project outlines the broad strategy to 
enable India to effectively respond to the current Covid -19and future pandemic like situation. 
Further, the Ministry has initiated a new scheme i.e. Pradhan Mantri Atma Nirbhar Swasth 
Bharat Yojna (PM -ASBY) with an outlay of Rs.64,180 crores over 6 years. Th is is yet to be 
approved by the Cabinet. The scheme will develop capacities of primary, secondary, and tertiary 
care Health Systems, strengthen existing national institutions, and create new institutions, to cater 
to detection and cure of new and emerging diseases. The Committee, however, strongly feels that 
creation of healthcare infrastructure must be adequate. The Committee has come across the 
situation of inadequate basic facilities viz. inadequate postings of doctors in rural areas, 
especially lack of healthcare services by the specialists, reference was made Shivpuri Trauma 
Centre where reportedly payment has not been made to the staff for last three years. Another 
example has been cited Udaipur district Rajasthan where Ayushman Bharat Yojna is not pro perly 
working and it is reported Covid patient had to made payment in medical college/university. It 
has also been pointed out that the people of Banshwara, Dungarpur and Pratapgarh had to travel 
Udaipur to get treatment under AB Yojna, therefore, arrangem ent may be made in the district 
headquarter for treatment of patient. 
(Para 5.3) 
Action Taken  
1.160 With respect to Health System Preparedness to meet challenges arising out of COVID -19 
pandemic, it is submitted that ‗India COVID -19 Emergency Response & Health System 
Preparedness Package: Phase -II‘ has also been approved by the Cabinet with Rs 23,123 crores 
(with Rs. 15,000 Cr as Central Component & Rs 8,123 Cr as State component) and is to be 
implemented from 1st July 2021 to 31st March 2022.  
1.161 This includes support to State/UT level for ramping up Health Infrastructure including 
those in rural, tribal and peri -urban areas closer to the community, providing support for 
procurement of drugs and diagnostics to enhance service delivery at district and s ub district levels 
for management of COVID -19 cases (including paediatric care) and for maintaining a buffer of 
drugs, support for IT Interventions such as implementation of Hospital Management Information 
System and expanding access to tele -consultations in all districts, and support for capacity 
building and training for all aspects of management of COVID-19. 
Recommendation 
1.162 The Committee believes that the effective and efficient implementation of Atma Nirbhar 
Swasth Bharat Yojana on the ground level would ensure the development of capacities of primary, 
secondary, and tertiary care Health Systems, strengthening the existing national institutions, and 
creating new institutions for catering to detection and cure of new and emerging diseases. 
(Para 5.5) 
Action Taken 
1.163 The observations of the Committee are noted. PM -ASBY has recently been approved by 
the cabinet. 
 

36 
 
Recommendation 
1.164 The Committee desires that the Department should continue to give impetus to  achieve the 
set objectives and physical targets laid down in National Health Policy 2017.  The Committee 
believes that successful implementation of NHM, PMJAY and operationalization of Ayushmaan 
Bharat Health & Wellness Centres (AB-HWCs) and several disease specific programmes would 
enable to control and prevent various Communicable and Non-Communicable diseases. 
(Para 5.7) 
Action Taken 
1.165 The observations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation 
1.166 The Ministry submitted that as per the Fifteenth Finance Commission Report, the  total 
grants-in-aid support of Rs. 1,06,606 crore has been given to the health sector over  the award 
period from 2021-22 to 2025-26. The Committee recommends that the Department must continue 
to pursue with the Ministry of Finance for adequate allocation to the tune of Rs. 597907.56 crore 
during the award period from 2021-22 to 2025-26 to the Department for creating adequate health 
care infrastructure in the country. 
(Para 5.12) 
Action Taken 
1.167   The Fifteenth Finance Commission (FC -XV) recommended grants for the health sector 
as follows: (i) grants aggregating to Rs. 70,051 Crores through local governments and (ii) 
sectoral grants aggregating to Rs. 31,755 Crores to States.   The XV-FC had also recommended 
State-specific grants for health amounting to Rs. 4,800 Crore. The total grants -in-aid support to 
the health sector over the award period works out to be Rs. 1,06,606 Crore.   On the 
recommendations for the sectoral grants of various ministries including of Health Ministry, the 
Union Government had clarified that due consideration to sectors identified by the Commission 
will be given while formulating and implementing existing and new Centrally Sponsored and 
Central Sector Schemes.  The Union Government on 30 -01-2021 vide Explanatory 
Memorandum as to the Action Taken on the Recommendations made by the Fifteenth Finance 
Commission in its Final Report for the years 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 inter -alia accepted the 
recommendations of the FC-XV only in respect of the Local Bodies. 
1.168    Accordingly, the accepted recommendation of FC -XV through Health Grants through 
Local Governments (grants of Rs 70,051 Crore for the period to 2021 – 22 to 2025 -2026) to 
strengthen the health care system at the primary health care level are provided for the 
following:  Urban Health and Wellness Centres (HWCs), building -less Sub Health Centres, 
PHCs, CHCs, Block Level Public Health Units, support for diagnostic infrastructure for the 
primary healthcare activities and conversion of rural Sub Health Centres and Primary Health 
Centres to HWCs.     
 1.169   Further, Prime Minister Atmanirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana ( PMASBY) Scheme with 
an outlay of about Rs. 64,180 Cr  is announced in Budget 21 -22 on 1 st February 2021. The 

37 
 
proposed PMASBY, which is recently approved by Cabinet, is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
with some Central Sector Components.  
 1.170   The measures under the Atmanirbhar Bharat Package for the health sector focus on 
developing capacities of health systems and institutions across the continuum of care at all 
levels viz. primary, secondary and tertiary and on preparing health systems in responding 
effectively to the current and future pandemics/disasters.  
1.171  The PMASBY targets to build an IT enabled dise ase surveillance system by developing 
a network of surveillance laboratories at block, district, regional and national levels, in 
Metropolitan areas & strengthening health units at the Points of Entry, for effectively detecting, 
investigating, preventing a nd combating Public Health Emergencies and Disease Outbreaks. 
Increased investments are also targeted to support research on COVID -19 and other infectious 
diseases, including biomedical research to generate evidence to inform short -term and medium-
term response to COVID -19 like pandemics and to develop core capacity to deliver the One 
Health Approach to prevent, detect, and respond to infectious disease outbreaks in animals and 
humans. The Scheme will speed up country‘s progress towards the achievement of t he goals 
and targets of the National Health Policy 2017 (NHP, 2017) and the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs).  
1.172   The Ministry will continuously pursue with the Ministry of Finance for allocation of 
required resources for creating adequate healthcare infrastructure in the country. 
 
Streamlining Human Resources for Health (HRH) 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.173 The Committee, in its 117th Report, has deliberated upon the need for streamlining  Human 
Resources for Health (HRH). The Committee is of the view that advancement in  technology in 
recent times demands trained individuals who can provide reliable results in  conjunction with 
patient safety. However, there is a huge dearth of trained technologists/technicians in the system. 
The Report of the Public Health Foundation of  India (PHFI) has indicated a supply -demand gap 
allied health professionals when demand  was calculated using basic international norms.  The 
Human Resources for Health (HRH)  shortfalls have resulted in the uneven distribution of a ll 
cadres of health workers. The  uneven distribution of professional colleges and schools has led to 
a severe health system  imbalance across the states, both in the production capacity and in the 
quality of education  and training, leading to poor health ou tcomes. The Committee is in the 
agreement with the  views of the National Knowledge Commission that recommended for 
producing more Healthcare Professional including AHPs by improving the quality and orientation 
of service provision towards better meeting th e health needs of the people stipulating that,  „there 
is a dire need to focus on increasing the quantum and quality of human resources for  nursing and 
paramedical/allied health services. The Committee believes that Healthcare can only be improved 
if human resources for nursing and allied health services are developed, nurtured and enhanced in 
a systematic and planned manner. The Committee  hopes that the Department would streamline 
the stewardship and oversight and provide  HRM strategic framework for rational deployment of 
skilled manpower, performance management system, task shifting and associated career 
development pathways for allied and health care professionals. 
1.174 The Committee believes that recent modernisation of healthcare has initiated a team -
based healthcare delivery model as medical teams are usually „action teams‟ due to their dynamic 

38 
 
work conditions, wherein teamwork and collaboration are the pre -requisites for patient safety. 
The Committee is of the view that not only the team approach is in strumental for safe patient 
outcomes but critical for efficient, cost -effective operations. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Department must pay attention to generate the spirit of team work in the health 
sector reflecting inter disciplinary appro ach, requiring a division of labour among the medical, 
nursing and allied and healthcare professionals on equal footing, although the doctors being the 
captain of the team, for better and faster and much more holistic decision-making. 
1.175 The Committee f eels that courses should follow international standards so that they are 
widely accepted and receive worldwide recognition. Course delivery, practical training and 
assessments should be standardised. Standardisation should incorporate the demonstration of 
learning as well. Strategies should be developed to create flexibility in course delivery through 
alternative delivery modes, multiple locations and timings. Students passing out from colleges 
should be in great demand and get good jobs. The educational me thods should produce such 
healthcare professionals as worthy of recruitment in domestic as well as global health care 
sector. In this regard, it is also pertinent to keep them abreast of knowledge and maintain good 
liaison with the industry in search of em ployment. The Committee is of the view that for each 
course, centres of excellence and globally recognized institutions should be identified alongwith 
hospitals with known good practices, which may become possible training sites. 
1.176 The Committee also recommends that the allied and healthcare professionals must  play its 
pivotal role in providing community healthcare services and be the part and parcel  of all the 
healthcare schemes especially, Pradhan Mantri Jan Aarogya Yojana – Ayushman Bharat. The 
Committee also desires that the government should plug policy gaps and  ensure generation of 
adequate and effective human resource for health to provide quality  care at primary, secondary 
and tertiary level of health delivery in the country. The Committee, in this regard, recommends for 
synchronizing and strengthening the allied  health sciences into articulate policies that help in 
capacity building and value realization of allied health professionals in  the health care delivery 
system. 
(Para 5.16, 5.17, 5.18 & 5.19) 
Action Taken 
1.177 In the absence of any central Regulatory Body for Allied and Healthcare Professions, the 
National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professions Act, 2021 has been enacted on 
28.03.2021. The Act incorporates and recommendations contained in 117th Report (on Allied and 
Healthcare Professions Bill, 2018) of Parliamentary Standing Committee. The Act aims to provide 
for regulation and maintenance of standards of education and and services by allied and healthcare 
professions, assessment of institutions, maintenance of a Central Register and State Register and 
creation of a system to improve access, research and development and adoption of latest scientific 
advancement and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
1.178  The Interim Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professions has also been notified on 
23.09.2021, after being set up and operationalization, it will address long standing issue of lack of 
professional and education standards in allied heal thcare. Assessment and rating of allied and 
healthcare institutions and standardization will also improve employment potential of allied and 
healthcare professionals both within and outside the country. 
 

39 
 
Recommendation 
1.179 The Committee has time and again raised concerns over the lack of healthcare 
infrastructure in rural areas and especially the abysmally low number of beds in the country. The 
Committee in its 123rd Report on the Outbreak of Pandemic Covid -19 and its management had 
observed that the total number of Government hospital beds in the country was grossly 
inadequate keeping in view the rising incidence of Covid -19 cases. Data from National Health 
Profile–2019 states that there are total 7,13,986 Government hospital beds available in India 
which amounts to 0.55 beds per 1,000 population. This low number of beds in Government 
hospitals in the country especially at the peak of the pandemic had led to a frantic search for 
hospital beds and patients running from one hospital to another. The Commi ttee reiterates its 
recommendation that the Government must increase its investment in public health and take 
appropriate steps to decentralize the health care services/facilities in the country. The Committee 
believes that a meticulous plan of action with adequate financial and human resources would be a 
step in the right direction. 
(Para 5.14) 
Action Taken 
1.180 The observations of the Committee are noted for compliance. It is submitted that 
Government has recently sanctioned ECRP -Phase II to upgrade heal th infrastructure for 
management of COVID -19. Further, PM -ASBY has been approved by Cabinet for strengthening 
of public health infrastructure with primary focus on public health labs, and infectious disease 
blocks in all the districts of the country. 
Recommendation 
1.181 The Committee has also taken into consideration the output -outcome framework for 
schemes of Department of Health and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare) 
which envelops financial outlay, targets sets for outputs and outcome during2021 -22. The 
Committee hopes that the financial outlay earmarked for various schemes would create the 
enabling environment and bring forth catalectic change in the basic infrastructure for medical 
education and healthcare delivery besides car rying out bio -medical and health research. The 
Committee is of the considered view that the budgetary allocation to the Centre and Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes would definitely enhance the operational and professional efficiency of 
various hospitals in the treatment of communicable and non -communicable diseases. The 
Committee believes that all the projects undertaken during 2021 -22 would be completed without 
time and cost overrun. The Committee recommends the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
to streng then the monitoring mechanism to oversee the execution of research projects and to 
ensure that physical targets set during the year must be achieved. The Committee also 
recommends the department to undertake annual performance evaluation of each scheme and  
programme through cost benefit analysis and SWOT analysis. The Committee desires that the 
department should formulate output -outcome frame work for remaining years of 15 th Finance 
Commission in order to have a holistic overview of the schemes under the de partment. The 
Committee, while taking into account the financial and the physical achievement under various 
schemes of the department, recommends the following organizational interventions for 
improvements:- 
(i) Advance planning to be made for completion of va rious formalities so that the process of 
sanctioning and release of funds for the various projects be started in the beginning of the next 
financial year. 

40 
 
(ii) More workshops and review meetings to be organized for addressing the issues in the 
implementation of the schemes. 
(iii) More field visits to be organized for onsite appraisal of progress of implementation of the 
schemes. 
(iv) Dashboard for online monitoring of schemes and programmes. 
(Para 5.15) 
Action Taken 
1.182 The observations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation 
1.183 Aggregate human resource for health density in India is close to the lower threshold  of 23 
and the distribution of health workforce across States is also lop -sided. Since the  Doctor/Nurse-
midwives ratio is also  inadequate, the Committee recommends the Department to reverse this 
trend by improving the ratio of doctor, as ratio of nurses to  population is low as compared to the 
norm set by the World Health Organisation. The  Committee also feels that State-wise variation in 
availability of doctors/nurses must be  adequately addressed. The Committee appreciates that the 
Government has initiated several programmes to augment the supply of healthcare professionals 
including doctors  and nurses which encompasses Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana 
(PMSSY) under which setting up of 22 AIIMS and up gradation of 75 government medical 
colleges have been sanctioned. Further setting up of 157 medical colleges in States have been 
approved in three phases, of which, 47 are functional. T he Committee recommends the  
Department to step up concerted efforts in this direction with a holistic and integrated approach. 
(Para 5.24) 
Action Taken 
 
1.184 The doctor-population ratio as per WHO recommendation is 1:1000. There are 13,01,319  
allopathic doctors registered with the State Medical Councils and the National Medical 
Commission (NMC) as on November, 2021 in the country. The doctor -population ratio is 1:834 
in the country assuming 80% availability of registered allopathic doctors and  5.65 lakh AYUSH 
doctors. Further, the Government has taken several steps to further increase the availability of 
doctors in the country. The numbers of PG seats have increased by 78% from 31,185 seats 
before 2014 to 55,595 seats including DNB and CPS seat s. The number of UG seats have 
increased from 51,348 before 2014 to 88,120 seats as of date which is an increase of 72%. 
Further, the Medical Education Division is administering a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for 
Establishment of new medical colleges attache d with district/referral hospitals. Under three 
phases of this scheme, 157 new medical colleges have been approved in the Country. As on date, 
70 medical colleges have become functional. As per the scheme guidelines, the State/UT 
Government is the implemen ting agency and the planning, execution and commissioning of the 
project is to be done by the State Government. However, frequent review meetings with the 
States/UTs concerned, are being conducted at various levels to monitor the progress in the 
remaining projects so that these colleges become operational as soon as possible. 
 
 The total  health workforce captured as part of the National Health Workforce Account 
submission for WHO in 2020 indicated the availability of approximately active stock of 

41 
 
8.1 million qualified workers, (excluding ASHAs, leading to a ratio of 49.8 HRH/10,000 
vis-à-vis the WHO norm of 44.1/10,000. This has already surpassed the WHO norm. 
 India proposed that the list of 57 countries with HRH crisis, should be revised and India 
must be removed from the list, to enable recruitment of health workers from India by other 
countries, especially considering the fact that India is at par with WHO norms for 
healthcare workforce and has annual production capacity of around 85,000 doctors, 0.3 
million nurses and midwives and 0.39 million pharmacists and other allied and healthcare 
professionals. 
 Accordingly, the revised list has been released (the Health Workforce Support and 
Safeguard List,2020) comprising of 47 countries and India has been removed  from the 
same. It is also pertinent to indicate that there is no reference to a one per 1000 ratio of 
doctors rather the countries with health workforce shortages are identified based on the 
UHC Service Coverage Index that is lower than 50 and density of doctors, nurses and 
midwives that is below than the global median.  
 It is also critical to factor in AYUSH practitioner (0.56 million), Allied and healthcare 
professionals (~1.3 million) and Community health workers such as ASHAs (~1 million) 
who have potential contribution in the system in rural as well as hard to reach areas of the 
country, which cannot be ignored.  
 Human resources for health availability is more a case of gross mal -distribution in India 
with dense concentration of workforce in Urban areas and poor concentration in rural areas 
causing challenges of inequity and inaccessibility of services and may not be related to the 
case of not having adequate number of practitioners in the system.  
 Several concerted efforts have been done in the recent past, including major regulatory 
reform for several unregulated allied and healthcare workers- the National Commission for 
Allied and Healthcare Professions Act, 2021, which also provides for mechanisms of task -
shifting and sharing across professions.  
 Continuing with the reforms the National Nursing and Midwifery Commission Bill is also 
being introduced in the Parliament. 
 In the light of ongoing pandemic, the Government has also reconstituted Empowered 
Groups (EG), the EG -3 with a mandate to oversee augmen tation of human resources and 
capacity building has two subgroups. The subgroups in the report have also defined 
facility based specific roles of professionals enabling task shifting and task sharing across 
different professions to ensure better care deliv ery. This has not only helped in mitigating 
the surge during pandemic, but will also help in ensuring services through 
multidisciplinary team based approach.  
 In addition, a Committee has been set up to look into the skewed distribution of nurses 
between t he rural and urban area and appropriate action will be taken upon receipt of 
their Report.  
Recommendation 
1.185 The Committee believes that pandemic Covid -19 transformed the healthcare crisis into 
economic and social crisis but at the same time opened the  golden opportunity to focus on long 
term healthcare priorities by keeping the health infrastructure agile in order to respond the future 
pandemic. In this regard, the department should utilise technology enabled platforms as an 
alternative distribution channel for remote delivery of health care services to address India‟s last 
mile healthcare and delivery challenge. The Committee recommends that concept of tele -medicine 
and National Health Digital Mission must reach to the grass root level i.e. urban slum,  tribal 
areas and rural areas. 
(Para 5.26) 

42 
 
Action Taken 
1.186 The pandemic management across the country has focused on data driven insights for case 
trajectory management and identification of areas for priority action duly analyzing  district wise 
data as available in COVID-19 India Portal, RT-PCR app, Facility App etc. 
1.187 Telemedicine services are provided through e -sanjeevani telemedicine application across 
the country with specific focus on remote and rural areas.   
 
Recommendation 
1.188 The Committee believes that all progressive legislation undertaken by the Government 
aims at focusing integrated Health and Well -being and that is the guiding philosophy of the 
Budget 2021-22. The Committee has already accorded the adoption of an inclusive and integrated 
health care policy. The Committee believes that AYUSH and its holistic approach to promoting 
preventive and holistic health care must also be strengthened. The Committee, in this regard, 
impress upon the Government to expedite the process of pi loting the Yoga and the Naturopathy 
Bill, to give further impetus to the integrated and holistic approach to the Health and Well-being. 
(Para 5.34) 
Action Taken 
1.189 The matter relating to bringing of legislation for regulation ofYoga and Naturopathy is 
actively being considered. 
  

43 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.1 The Committee has been given to understand that earlier the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare comprised of Department of Health and Department of Family Welfare. Both the 
departments were merged and renamed as Department of Health & Family Welfare vide Cabinet 
Secretariat Notification dated 1 stMarch, 2005 under Government of India (Allocation of Business 
Rules, 1961). It has been pleaded that the merger of the two Departments into one was made 
primarily to facilitate the smooth functioning of the Ministry and to avoid duplication of work. 
The integration of the two depar tments facilitated the integration of the Health and Family 
Welfare aspects into the policy making. The Committee, however, feels that the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare has been entrusted with vast role and responsibilities of implementing 
a large number of Schemes. The Committee, therefore, envisages that there is the need to look into 
the organizational structure of the Department and its scientific and logical organization to have 
focussed and effective implementation of scores of schemes, prog ramme and national initiatives. 
A clue may be taken from the organizational structure of large Ministries like the Ministry of 
Home Affairs and Ministry of Industry. The Committee, in this connection, recommends the 
Ministry to revisit its organizational s tructure and explore the possibility of division of its work 
for effective and result oriented working. The Committee recommends that the Government may 
consider to constitute an Expert Group for detailed assessment of the organisation of the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare and to suggest measures for the purpose. 
(Para 1.1) 
Action Taken 
2.2 Recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee is noted. 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.3 The Committee expresses its serious displeasure over the fact that even after  its persistent 
recommendations in its previous Reports, the budget allocated to the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare has not been as per its projected demand. The Committee notes that the projected 
demands of the Department of Health and Family Wel fare was Rs. 1,21,889.55 crores in BE 
2021-22, whereas it has been allocated Rs. 71,268.77 which is only 58.48 percent of its projected 
demand, leading to a shortfall of Rs. 50,620.78 crores. Moreover, the earmarked allocation is 
also not inconsonance with  the proposal of Rs. 5,97,906.56 Crore submitted to the 15th Finance 
Commission for the period 2021-22 to 2025-26 for the health sector. The Committee believes that 
such a huge shortfall in budgetary allocation will hamper the scaling up of various healthc are 
Schemes and robust implementation of the Ministry's initiatives and programs. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to address the shortfall of funds and seek additional funds from the 
Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. 
(Para 2.9) 
 
 
 

44 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.4 There has been a consistent effort in increasing the Budgetary outlay of the Department 
of Health and Family Welfare. Besides the approved budgetary of the Department of Health & 
Family Welfare outlay the following interventions has been approved to st rengthen public health 
care delivery system:   
(i) Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Infrastructure Mission (PM -ABIM) with an outlay of 
Rs.64,180 crores over 6 years has been launched on 25 th October-2021. The scheme would 
develop capacities of primary, secondary, and tertiary care health systems, strengthen 
existing national institutions, and create new institutions, to cater to detection and cure of 
new and emerging diseases. 
(ii) Fifteenth Finance Commission have recommended grants amounting to Rs.70,051 crore to 
health sector.  
(iii) Financial support of Rs.35,000 crore has been provisioned towards support for COVID -19 
Vaccination in 2021-22 B.E. 
(iv) Cabinet has approved Rs.23,123.00 Crore towards ―India COVID-19 Emergency Response 
and Health Systems Preparedness Package(ER&HSPP)-II‖ for the FY 2021-22. 
2.5 However, in order to broaden the fiscal space the Ministry has sought additional funding 
in the RE of F.Y. 2021-22. 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.6 The Committee feels that healthcare sector is in urgent need of massive investment. The 
Covid pandemic clearly exposed the fragility and inadequacy of healthcare infrastructure. The 
Committee strongly believes that the healthcare infrastructure should be cap able of not only 
providing smooth, accessible and affordable healthcare services to its citizens but also aim 
towards financial protection against sudden medical emergencies. This can only be made possible 
with strengthening of the public sector infrastruc ture coupled with achievement of human 
resource for health. The Committee, therefore, strongly advocates for a substantial increase in the 
health budget and strongly recommends the Government to increase its health expenditure to 2.5 
% of GDP in the next two years and to 5% by 2025. 
(Para 2.10) 
Action Taken 
2.7 There has been a consistent effort in increasing the Budgetary outlay of the Department 
of Health and Family Welfare. Besides the approved budgetary of the Department of Health &  
Family Welfare outlay the following interventions has been approved to strengthen public health 
care delivery system:   
(i) Pradhan MantriAyushman Bharat Infrastructure Mission (PM -ABIM) with an outlay of 
Rs.64,180 crores over 6 years has been launched on 25 th October-2021. The scheme 
would develop capacities of primary, secondary, and tertiary care health systems, 
strengthen existing national institutions, and create new institutions, to cater to detection 
and cure of new and emerging diseases. 
(ii) Fifteenth Finance Commission have recommended grants amounting to Rs.70,051 crore 
to health sector.  

45 
 
(iii) Financial support of Rs.35,000 crore has been provisioned towards support for COVID-19 
Vaccination in 2021-22 B.E..  
(iv) Cabinet has approved Rs.23,123.00  crore towards ―India COVID -19 Emergency 
Response and Health Systems Preparedness Package(ER&HSPP)-II‖ for the FY 2021-22. 
2.8 However, in order to manage the fiscal space the Ministry has sought additional funding in 
the RE of F.Y. 2021-22. 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.9 Under RSBY and Ayushman Bharat -PMJAY, Rs. 2350.46 crore was the actual 
expenditure, out of the actual allocation of Rs. 6429.00 crore, which is just 36.5 percentage of the 
total allocated funds. Under PMSSY, out of the actual allocation of Rs. 6020 crore, the actual 
expenditure was Rs. 4163.98 which is 69.16 percentage of the total allocated funds. Similarly 
under Family Welfare Scheme, the utilization was just 54.09 % of the total allocated funds. The 
Committee notes that only National R ural Urban Health Mission has shown a utilization trend of 
more than 100 percent. 
(Para 2.22) 
Action Taken 
2.10 AB–PMJAY Scheme was allocated Rs. 6400.00 crore as Budget Estimate for the Fiscal 
Year 2020-21. However, Final Estimate was revised to Rs. 3100.00 crore. Out of this Rs. 3100 
crore, Rs. 2680.57 crore was physically transferred into designated escrow bank account for the 
implementation of AB –PMJAY Scheme. Of this amount, Rs. 2652.85 crore has been actually 
utilized for implementation of AB-PMJAY. 
 2.11 The decline in utilization of funds under AB -PMJAY was largely due to the onset of 
COVID-19 which led to: 
 A 30% decline in the number of authorized hospital admissions during the period from 
March‘20 to August‘20 
 Potential shortfall of 1.20 Crore  Ayushman cards due to interruption in beneficiary 
enrollment activities 
 The performance of 79% empanelled private hospitals were negatively impacted  during 
the period from Apr‘20 to Jun‘20. 
2.12 However, going forward the momentum under AB -PMJAY is expected to pick-up leading 
to higher utilization of allocated funds. 
2.13 Similarly, there was lesser utilization of funds under RSBY due to non -receipt of 
proposals from State Governments with all the prescribed documents. 
2.14 The observation of the committee  is noted. In order to ensure best possible way to utilise 
the budgetary outlay of Department of Health & Family Welfare and keeping in view of felt need 
of the States/UTs, the savings of Ayushman Bharat -PMJAY, PMSSY has been utilised under 
National Health Mission. Accordingly, the utilisation of National Rural Urban Health Mission has 
shown a utilization trend of more than 100 percent. 
 

46 
 
Recommendation 
2.15 The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to take effective measures to fill the 
vacant 300 posts under Central Staffing Scheme/Central Secretariat Services/Central   Secretariat 
Stenographer Services/Central Secretariat Clerical Services in the Minis try of Health and Family 
Welfare. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to fill the vacant 55 posts in other 
Officers/Staff (Indian Statistical Service, Indian Economic Services, Sub -ordinate Statistical 
Services etc.) 
(Para 2.31) 
Action Taken 
2.16 The posts under Central Staffing Scheme and those belonging to Central Secretariat 
Service (CSS), Central Secretariat Stenographer Service (CSSS), Central Secretariat Clerical 
Service (CSCS), Indian Statistical Services (ISS), Indian Economic Service (IES,  Subordinate 
Statistical Service (SSS) are required to be filled by the respective Cadre Controlling Authorities 
i.e. Department of Personnel and Training (DoP&T), Department of Economic Affiars,   and  
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation etc.  
This Ministry has been regularly taking up the matter with the Appropriate Authorities  to fill the 
vacancies.  
HEALTH SECTOR 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS) 
Recommendations/Observations  
2.17 The Committee is of the view that all ongoing and new projects/initiatives under CGHS 
must be completed within originally stipulated time and at the approved cost. In this connection, 
the Committee recommends that construction of CGHS buildings at various places viz. Vasant 
Vihar, Vasant kunj, Alaknanada and Rohini–Sector16 be completed in time so as to avoid cost 
overrun. The Committee also recommends that the Department of Expenditure must give approval 
to opening of 16 New Wellness Centres for covering large number of beneficiaries under CGHS 
Scheme. The Committee further recommends for operationalization of all sanctioned Ayurvedic 
and Homeopathic units under CGHS. 
(Para 3.8) 
Action Taken 
2.18 Construction of CGHS buildings at Vasant Vihar, Vasant kunj, Alaknanada and Rohini –
Sector16 is completed and   Wellness Centres shall be shifted to new buildings after receipt of 
Completion certificate from concerned authorities.  
2.19 Approval of Department of Expenditure has been received  for   creation of 64 posts for 16 
new Wellness Centres. Instructions have been issued to concerned Additional Directors for taking 
further necessary action to make these Wellness Centres functional at the earliest.  
2.20 The  new Ayurvedic and Homeopthy Units shall be made operational after recruitment of 
staff is completed and the recruited manpower is in place. 

47 
 
Recommendation 
2.21 The Committee observes that against the sanctioned strength of 368, 126 posts are lying 
vacant thus, depriving the beneficiaries of CGHS benefit of AYUSH treatment. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Department to approach the cadre controlling authority i.e. the 
Ministry of AYUSH to expedite the process of filling up of the vacant AYUSH posts in CGHS 
without delay. 
(Para 3.14) 
Action Taken 
2.22 Ministry of AYUSH has initiated steps for recruitment of Ayurvedic and Homeopathy 
Medical Officers through UPSC and written examination for the same was conducted in 
December 2020.As regards the para medical staff,  action has been initiated for recruitment 
through SSC. 
 
Recommendation 
2.23 The Committee observes with concern the inadequate allocation of capital outlay to SJH 
& VMMC. Against the allocation of Rs. 191.26 crore in RE 2020 -21 an amount to the tune of 
Rs.110.14 crore has  been earmarked in BE2021 -22 against the projected demand of Rs. 343.87 
crore in BE 2021 -22 which is not sufficient to meet the originally conceived project scheme. The 
fund is required for expansion of SIC, Dwarka Housing Project, Additional infrastructur e for 
VMMC. Moreover, the approval of Estimate amounting toRs.187.60 crores is still pending with 
MOHFW which is required for construction of lecture theatre complex, auditorium, boys hostel 
building. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for alloc ation of adequate funds under 
the capital head for completion of projects within set time frame. 
(Para 3.25) 
Action Taken 
2.24 The funds to the tune of Rs.30 Crore were allocated in B.E. 2020 -21 which was duly 
utilized during the financial year 2020 -21 and total amount of Rs.30 Crore was booked under the 
head ―Machinery & Equipment‖ till 31.03.2021. 
2.25 For the financial year 2021 -22, funds for Rs.40 Crores were demanded under the Head 
―Machinery & Equipment‖. Keeping the directives from DGHS to look into the quality of 
equipment, hospital demanded for an additional fund of 50% of demanded fund.  However, only 
30 crores have been sanctioned for the financial year 2021-22. 
2.26 The allotted Budget for F.Y.2021 -22 under capital is Rs.110.14 Cr. of which Rs.50 .00 Cr. 
for Expansion of SIC, Rs.27.00 cr. for Major Works for CPWD, Rs.30.00 for Procurement of 
M&E, Rs.0.14 cr. for procurement of Motor vehicles and Rs.3.00 Cr. for Housing – Maintenance 
of Quarters. No budget allocated for Dwarka Housing project though  this hospital demanded 
Rs.40.00 Cr. However, Rs.30.00 cr. will be required for the above project, if the Revised lay out 
plan is approved by the competent authority in Ministry. The proposal of hospital received in 
Ministry on 22.03.21 which is under consideration. 
2.27 After the receipt of proposal from hospital on 22 -10-19, the additional infrastructure 
project of VMMC is under consideration in Ministry for sanctioning of the project. Since in terms 

48 
 
of Department of Expenditure OM dated 04 -06-2020 an in -principle approval was required to be 
obtained from DoE in view of prudent utilization of public fund due to pandemic, the proposal 
after the approval of competent authority in the Ministry, has been referred to Ministry of Finance 
in the month of February , 2021 for their in -principle approval/concurrence. The response of 
Ministry of Finance is awaited. On receipt of their approval, further action would be taken as early 
as possible in accordance with rules and procedure. If the project is approved Rs.30.00  will be 
required in this FY. 
2.28 Total fund allocated under capital head is Rs.176.11 Cr for the F.Y. 2020 -21 of which 
Rs.175.82 Cr. has been utilized by this hospital. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.29 The Committee is perturbed to observe that adequate budgetary allocation has not been 
earmarked for Kalawati Saran Children‟s Hospital resulting into procrastination in taking off the 
project for creation of 30 bedded outborn neonatal units despite finalization of site and map. 
Moreover, the Comprehensive Redevelopme nt Project is yet to see the light of the day. The 
Committee further notes with concern that many services viz. separate ENT and eye ward, 
Pediatric Haemodialysis facility are yet to be operationalised in the hospital due to inadequate 
infrastructure facilities. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the department to pursue 
the matter with the Department of Finance for adequate allocation of capital outlay for ongoing 
projects as well as the projects likely to be under taken by the Kalawati Saran Children‟s Hospital 
Management. 
(Para 3.55) 
Action Taken  
2.30 The proposal for seeking financial sanction amounting to Rs.2,18,44,200/ -  (Rs. Two crore 
Eighteen lakh forty four thousand & two hundred only) during current FY 2021 -22 is under 
consideration in  Dte. GHS for placement of funds at disposal of C.P.W.D. vide letter no. 
KSCH/CPWD/20-21/575 dated 17.02.2021 in the matter of creation of 30 -bedded Out born 
Nursery. On receipt of the above proposal from Dte. GHS, the same will be considered in 
accordance with set procedure at the earliest.   
2.31  E.NT. & Eye ward has already been inaugurated by the Director, LHMC, However, the 
area is presently under Red Zone for Covid Patients.  The Haemodialysis Facility has also been 
operationalized & started w.e.f. 01.05.2021. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.32 The Committee has been apprised that the recruitment to various positions is done on need 
basis keeping in view the range of additional services and facilities planned to be added in the 
hospitals. The incumbency position at various AIIMS is monitored regu larly and vacancies are 
advertised from time to time depending on their requirement. However, as high standards have to 
be maintained in selection, keeping in view the stature of these Institutes of National Importance, 
all the advertised positions could n ot be filled up. Various steps have been taken to fill up the 
vacant posts in these AIIMS, however, vacancy positions hows that efforts were not successful to 
achieve the set objectives of filling up of vacant posts. The Committee is of the opinion that a 

49 
 
Centralized Recruitment Process would yield speedy and better outcome. The Committee also 
feels that adoption of recruitment rules for various posts of AIIMS, New Delhi and for new AIIMS 
would bring forth uniformity in recruitment process for all AIIMS and  have simultaneous 
recruitment for all AIIMS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that these options may be 
explored in earnest to fill up the vacancies in AIIMS. 
(Para 3.76) 
Action Taken 
2.33    It is  stated  in this regard that AIIMS Delhi is already conducting centralised recruitment  
for nursing cadre for all the AIIMS. However, t he observations / recommendation of the Hon‘ble 
Committee have been noted for being examined in terms of their feasibility for imp lementation in 
recruitment of other posts also.  Also, the RRs for various posts of AIIMS Delhi have been 
adopted for new AIIMS as well which ensures uniformity across all the AIIMS.  
 
Recommendation 
 
2.34 The Committee recommends the Department to undertake specific campaigns to achieve 
the targets of 95:95:95 by 2025 and ending AIDS epidemic by 2030. New age communication 
interventions must be developed for virtual and hidden population. The traditional approach of 
mass-media, IPC may continue, how ever, emphasis should be given on social media and 
innovative engagement to identify HRG and linking them to HIV services. In addition to that, 
youth involvement is required to be strengthened in the priority districts. NACO should continue 
to lodge partnership with key Departments/Ministries of Government of India through entering in 
MoU in order to garner support for HIV/AIDS related activities and services in order to reach out 
to the large number of employees and associated communities with information on HIV/AIDS and 
services under the national programme. 
(Para 3.86) 
Action Taken  
2.35 National AIDS Control Organization, under the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare, is continuing the concerted efforts to achieve the objective of NACP. 
 
2.36 The initiatives of (i) new generation communication strategy, (ii) the virtual approach for 
reaching the missing million, (iii) promoting integrated service delivery through one -stop centres 
,and (iv) provision of a comprehensive package of services (Sampoorna Su raksha) to reach the 
last mile has been duly incorporated in the next phase of NACP for FY 2021 -22 to FY 2025 -26 
while continuing and augmenting the behavior change through social media mediums and 
National Toll -Free AIDS Helpline 1097. Community consultat ions on the new initiatives have 
been started. A white paper on Virtual interventions has been prepared. 
 
2.37 Youth continues to be a key focus under the NACP and are being reached through 
Adolescence Education Programme, Red Ribbon Club, Out  of School Youth Programme and 
through age –appropriate social media-based behaviour change. 
 
2.38 The programme has identified 299 high and moderate priority districts in the context of 
the HIV/AIDS epidemic across the country. 
 
2.39 Through advocacy, mainstreaming and MoUs (18) with key ministries and departments, 

50 
 
social protection benefits are being made available to appropriate vulnerable populations. 
 
Recommendation 
2.40 The Committee observes that the incidence of pandemic COVID -19 has highlighted the 
need for zoonotic diseases awareness in public, private and government forums, man -animal 
interactions and need for having multi -disciplinary One Health approach. Since ISCP is the only 
Central sector scheme which has been addressing intersectoral coordination for prevention and 
control of zoonotic diseases since 2011, the Committee recommends that ISCP be expanded with a 
multidisciplinary approach and a broader objective to respond to zoonoses and contribute to 
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development”. The Committee feels that ISCP should aim at eradication 
poverty to achieve sustainable development. The program needs to be strengthened to have a 
more pragmatic approach in institutionalization of One Health and response to Zoonoses under 
“National One Health Program for Prevention and Control of Zoonoses”. The Committee 
recommends the Department to undertake following activities to achieve the object ive of the 
program: - 
(i) Institutionalization of One Health Structure for Zoonoses at National, State and District 
Level through Constitution of Multi -stakeholder and multidisciplinary Steering committees, 
Policy documents, Standard Guidelines and SOPs to address priority zoonosis. 
(ii) Integrated Capacity building program on Zoonosis through Multi disciplinary Regional 
Network of One Health Institutes and Partner organizations 
(iii) Integrated Surveillance program on Zoonoses by establishing of Sentinel Surveillance site 
for zoonosis and Integrated Web/Digital portal with linkages to IDSP/IHIP 
(iv) Integrated Community Outreach Program for Prevention and Control of Zoonoses with 
One Health approach at grass root level 
(v) Advocacy and Risk Communication activities 
(vi) Operational Research 
(Para 3.101) 
Action Taken 
2.41 Observation from I to VI are already included implementation of ISC programme renamed 
as National One Health Program for Prevention and Control of Zoonoses‖ Further the 
observations are also included as separate comp onents of approved SFC of programme for FY 
2021-22 to FY 2025-26 
2.42 ATN for observations are as under:  
 For Institutionalization of One health Structure for Zoonoses at National level, standing 
committee on zoonosis is already functioning. At state and district level zoonosis 
committee formed in 26 states out of 35 states. Follow up being made with other states.  
 For Integrated Capacity building program on Zoonosis through Multidisciplinary approach 
joint orientation workshop for medical and veterinary p rofessional are organized with 
IVRI Uttar Pradesh. Till date 3 National level workshop are already held. State is being 
advocated to replicate the same through National level trainers. 

51 
 
 Integrated Surveillance program on Zoonoses by establishing of Sentinel  Surveillance site 
for Zoonosis and Integrated Web /Digital portal with linkages to IDSP/IHIP already 
approved under SFC proposal for FY 2021-26 and implementation under progress. 
 IV to VI- Operational guidelines for Community Outreach Program, Operational  Research 
already developed. For Advocacy and Risk Communication activities IEC prototype on 
Zoonosis developed and disseminated to states 
Recommendation 
2.43 The Committee has come across the reported decision of the Government that people aged 
above 60 years and those of 45 years and plus with other serious illness (co -morbidities) will be 
allowed to self register and choose the place where they want to get vaccinated for Covid -19 from 
1st March, 2021. The Committee has come across that Government has app roved vaccination by 
the identified private hospitals with effect from1 st march, 2021 and capped the maximum cost of 
each dose at Rs. 250/ -. The Committee hopes that the move would accelerate the vaccination 
drive. In this regard, an updated mobile applica tion for the vaccination drive and Covid platform 
with eligible users to pick a different centre to be administered the second dose of vaccine. The 
Committee welcomes the move of the Government as the decision would speed up the process of 
vaccination driv e. The Committee, however, recommends the Department to chalk out a time 
schedule for completion of the vaccination drive so that people could feel secured and devote their 
time and energy to economic activities for accelerating much needed GDP. 
(Para 3.138) 
Action Taken  
2.44 Now, the Government of India has approved free vaccination for all the population aged 
18 years and above at Government Covid Vaccination Centre (CVC) and those who can afford 
can avail the vaccination service at private CVCs. 
2.45 MoHFW has taken various steps to increase pace of vaccination to cover all eligible 18+ 
population of India.  
2.46 MoHFW launched ―Har Ghar Dastak‖ campaign to saturate vaccination coverage of all 
left-outs and drop-outs for 1st and 2nd dose of Covid 19 vaccine. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.47 The Committee finds that Rs. 30.00 crore was re -appropriated for National Digital Health 
Mission from the savings within the Demand No. 42 – Department of Health and Family Welfare 
during 2020-21 and an amount to the tune of th e Rs. 30.00 crore has been appropriated in BE 
2021-22 for implementation of the Mission during the year. The Committee hopes that the 
earmarked amount would be sufficient for the implementation of the scheme as per National 
Digital Health Blueprint and the phased wise progress of the Mission would not be derailed on its 
timeline for want of funds. 
(Para 3.159) 
 

52 
 
Action Taken  
2.48 INR 30 crore was re -appropriated for implementation of 1st phase of National Digital 
Health Mission during the year 2020 -21. Further, vide letter dated 9th September 2021, INR 15 
crore was sanctioned for implementation of National Digital Health Mission during the year 2021-
22. 
NATIONAL DIGITAL HEALTH MISSION (NDHM) 
Recommendation 
 
2.49 The Committee is of the view that while implementing the National Digital Health Mission 
through cloud infrastructure under 24x7 surveillance, the security, confidentiality and privacy of 
health related personal information must be protected. In this regard, the Committee recommends 
the Department to make public aware of Health Data Management Policy for making the Mission 
successful. The Committee also recommends that transfer of data should take place only with the 
written and express consent of the individual concerned. 
(Para 3.162) 
Action Taken 
 
2.50 The Health Data Management Policy for ABDM has been published on the ABDM 
website and is available publicly. This policy was prepared after wide publicity and extensive 
public and stakeholder consultation. As part of this consultation, 910 comments and 6983 emails 
were received. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.51 The Committee appreciates the exemplary leadership of AIIMS, New Delhi for treatment 
of Covid-19 patients, preparation of National Guidelines for the treatment of Covid -19, imparting 
education a nd training on an online platform and operationalising the helpline for medical 
personnel and offering tele -consultation and participating in vaccination drive for frontline 
healthcare workers. The Committee takes note that the institute was allocated Rs. 100.00 crore 
under GiA general for Covid -19. The Committee hopes that the existing Covid infrastructure 
would be utilized for revitalizing the functioning of the AIIMS, New Delhi. 
(Para 3.191) 
Action Taken 
2.52 Information mentioned is sufficient & there is no further update or additional information 
on the same. 
 
Recommendation 
 
2.53 The Committee notes that auto immune rheumatic diseases are expected to pose a 
formidable health related challenge and there is a need to evolve a specialized treatment & 

53 
 
teaching in rheumatology. The Committee strongly recommends PGIMER, Chandigarh to start a 
separate Department of Rheumatology and all the rheumatologic and immunological related 
services for patients can be dealt by this Department. 
(Para 3.204) 
Action Taken 
2.54 The proposal for creation of Department of Clinical Rheumatology and Immunology 
super-specialty from the Internal Medicine was deliberated in the Standing Academic Committee 
meeting held on 03.04.2021 in which the Chairperson and other members Committ ee meeting 
held on 03.04.2021 in which the Chairperson and other members advised for creation of 
Department of Clinical Rheumatology and Immunology super - specialty from Internal Medicine 
after due deliberations by the Department of Internal Medicine. Acco rdingly, the matter has been 
consulted with Internal Medicine Department and it is emerged that the majority of faculty 
members has expressed that a separate Department of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology 
should not be created and the Department of Internal Medicine should not split and remain united. 
The facts mentioned were patient care, training of residents, growth of Internal Medicine and 
Rheumatology, number of faculty members, student teacher ratio and COVID 19 pandemic. 
Therefore, subspecialty o f Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology should continue to be 
developed as a part of Internal Medicine as is being done for many years and flourish under its 
umbrella. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.55 The Committee notes that utilization under the Flexib le Pool for Communicable Disease 
Control Programme has been satisfactory; however, the decrease in allocation of funds under the 
head is a matter of concern. In 2019 -20, funds to the tune of Rs. 3357.44 crores were spent which 
was subsequently reduced to R s.2178 crores in BE 2020 -21 and Rs. 2110.14 crores in RE 2020 -
21. In BE 2021 -22, the funds to the tune of Rs. 2178 crores have been allocated under the head. 
The Committee however is not convinced with the submission of the Ministry that the funds 
allocated are sufficient for the year 2021-22. 
(Para 4.50) 
Action Taken  
 
2.56 Under the scheme of National Health Mission (NHM), for better monitoring and 
implementation of the scheme many core activities such as Human Resources, Procurement of 
Drugs and Supplies, Information, Education and Communication (IEC), etc. which were earli er 
covered under Flexible Pool for Communicable Disease Control Programme has been rationalized 
and brought into Flexible pool of Health System Strengthening under NRHM.  Owing to this, no 
additionality has been sought underFlexible Pool for Communicable D isease Control Programme. 
Therefore, the funds allocated under Flexible Pool for Communicable Disease Control 
Programme are sufficient for the F.Y. 2021-22. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.57 The Committee is anguished to find that in the FY 2020 -21, the Ministry could not fully 
utilise the Budget allocated under the head and funds to the tune of Rs. 313.49 crore remained 

54 
 
unspent. Here, the Committee would also like to invite attention to its o bservation made in its 
118th Report, when out of Rs. 708 crore allocated under the head in 2019 -20, only Rs. 380.86 
crore were utilized. The Committee had desired the Ministry to ensure proper utilization of funds; 
however, the Ministry has failed to do th e same. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
the Ministry to judiciously utilize the allocated funds by upholding the principles of fiscal 
discipline and sound financial management. 
(Para 4.54) 
Action Taken  
2.58 Under the scheme of National Health Mission (NHM), for better monitoring and 
implementation of the scheme many core activities such as Human Resources, Procurement of 
Drugs and Supplies, Information, Education and Communication (IEC), etc. which were earlier 
covered under Disease Cont rol Programme (Communicable and Non -Communicable) have been 
rationalized and brought into Flexible pool of Health System Strengthening under NRHM.  Owing 
to shifting of few core activities from Flexible Pool for Communicable Disease Control 
Programme and F lexible Pool for Non Communicable Disease Control Programme, no 
additionality was sought during FY 2020-21. 
2.59 Secondly, during the F.Y. 2020 -21 due to ongoing COVID Pandemic many activities 
covered under the pool such as Mobile Ophthalmic Units, Distric t Counselling Centres, School 
Programmes under National Tobacco Control Programme, District NCD cells, etc. were not 
functional for a longer period of time. On the other hand, under the pool of Health System 
Strengthening under NRHM, State needs more funds  for ongoing activities such as salary of 
Health Human Resources, ASHA costs, Civil Works, Untied Funds, Referral Transport, 
Procurement of Drugs and Equipments, Mobile Medical Units, etc.  The funds were re -
appropriated from Flexible Pool of Non Communica ble Disease control programme to Health 
System Strengthening under NRHM keeping in view of approvals accorded in their State 
Programme Implementation Plan (PIP).  
2.60 Also, Utilisation of the fund depends on various factors and most of the factors are related 
to States/UTs. Some of those factors are like submission of Utilization Certificate(UCs), Audited 
financial Statement and refund of the interest accrued on the grant released by the States/UT. The 
Ministry has written several times and followed up with States/UTs to submit UCs and other 
documents on time. Meetings with State Authorities at various level including with Secretary 
(Health and FW), Govt. of India and St ate Authorities was organized to sensitize the concerned 
States to submit all required documents for further release. 
2.61 It is pertinent to mention that without these documents release of further grant is not 
permissible. 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.62 The Committee notes the different initiatives being carried under National Family 
Planning (FP) Programme for population Stabilization which has resulted in a considerable 
decline in India's total fertility over the last few decades; from 3.2 in 1999 to 2.2 in 2018. 
However, the Committee is of the view that an over arching body like JSK would have led to a 
more coordinated and targeted response towards Population stabilization. The Committee 
observes that though many States have witnessed an increase in the use of modern contraceptives, 

55 
 
the Ministry is required to make more concerted efforts and conduct awareness campaign about 
family planning especially in areas and  States with high level of Total Fertility Rate(TFR). 
(Para 4.62) 
Action Taken 
2.63 The Department of Health and Family Welfare agrees with the concerns of the Committee  
for making more concerted efforts and conduct awareness campaign about family planning 
especially in areas and States with high level of Total Fertility Rate (TFR).  
2.64 Under the National Family Planning Program, several new schemes and initiatives are 
being implemented with focus on Districts with high fertility, in order to ensure universal access 
to contraceptive services:  
 Mission Parivar Vikas (MPV)  implemented in 14 6 high fertility Districts aims to 
improve uptake of family planning services. Inthese Districts, the Government is 
conducting 04 Mission Parivar Vikas campaigns in a year. These campaigns involve 
extensive mobilization activities including promotion of ma le participation and assured 
family planning services. 
 The basket of choice for contraceptives have also been expanded through introduction of 
new contraceptives like Centchroman (Chhaya) and Injectable MPA (Antara programme). 
 The ongoing Home Delivery of Contraceptive (HDC) schemes and Ensuring spacing at 
births scheme (ESB) are focused towards ensuring availability of quality contraceptives at 
the doorsteps of the couples and increasing awareness about the benefit of spacing 
between children through frontline functionaries (ASHA). 
 Family Planning -Logistics Management Information System (FP -LMIS) is being 
implemented to streamline supply chain management of family planning commodities and 
ensure last mile availability of contraceptives.  
 Regular reviews of the States/UTs performances, continuous IEC and demand generation 
activities have helped in building a momentum towards attaining the stipulated goals. 
 Holistic mass media Campaigns focusing on increasing spousal communication, use of 
spacing methods, expanded basket of choice, etc. are also being carried out throughout the 
year for increasing uptake of family planning methods. 
  1st phase of NFHS-5 survey also indicates a substantial increase in use of spacing method 
and decline in unmet need for spacing across the States/UTs.   
 
Recommendations/Observation 
 
2.65 The Committee notes that the total allocation under NUHM comprising two  components, 
“Other Health System for activities covered under NUHM” and “AB -HWCs” has been Rs. 1000 
crores in BE 2021 -22 which is merely a Rs. 50 crore increase from BE2020 -21 under the first 
component. The Committee is of the strong view that the allocat ion for NUHM should be 
increased considering the range of out reach services that the program aims to conduct. 
(Para 4.68) 
 
 

56 
 
Action Taken 
2.66 Continuous hand holding/ orientation and support is being provided to the States/ UTs for 
planning and execution of the activities under the program including for operationalization off 
facilities, planning for outreach services etc. The NUHM envisages health service delivery at 
both the facility and community levels through outreach services. Financial and technical  
support is provided to the States to plan and budget these activities in their annual Program 
Implementation Plan (PIP). Sufficient funds are made available to the State/UT and with 
shortfall of funds under the programme, Video Conferences/ Orientation se ssions are also 
planned with the State officials including Program Nodal Officers and the Finance Managers of 
the States, etc. 
2.67 Under NUHM flexi -pool, funds are released as a pool and the States can utilize these 
funds for the approved activities inclu ding outreach services. Out of the total funds allocated, 
absorption capacity of the states is showing an increasing trend over the years. Upon further 
improvement in the implementation of the approved activities and utilization of funds, additional 
funds can be allocated to the States/UTs under the program and shortfall in funds would not 
come in way of implementation of the programme. 
 
Recommendation 
  
2.68 The Committee also notes that existing Urban – Primary Health Centre (UPHCs) are 
being strengthened as Health and Wellness Centres (HWCs) under Ayushman Bharat and Urban -
Community Health Centres (U-CHCs) are being constructed for providing in patient services. The 
Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to expedite the operationalization of all the 52 46 
UPHCs and the newly approved 86 U -CHCs. The Committee believes that such a decentralized 
network of UPHCs, U -CHCs and referral hospitals would enhance the quality of healthcare 
services. However, the Committee is apprehensive that inadequate budgetary a llocation may 
impact the functioning of these health centres. The Committee therefore, strongly urges the 
Ministry for timely release of funds for expediting the construction and full operationalization of 
such centers. The Committee also advocates increas ing the number of AB -HWCs, U-CHCs and 
referral hospitals. 
(Para 4.69) 
Action Taken 
2.69 The Ministry is actively engaging with the States for operationalization of the approved 
UPHCs and UCHCs in the States/UTs. Out of 5246 UPHCs, 4889 UPHCs have been made  
operational and construction of 38 new UCHCs has been completed out of 86 new approved 
UCHCs. Efforts are being made for operationalizing the remaining UPHCs and UCHCs by 
regular follow up and guidance to the States/UTs. 
2.70 As regards timely release of funds, the Ministry is making all possible efforts to improve 
the utilization of funds under NUHM. The Ministry is in regular contact with States/UTs and is 
monitoring progress of NUHM expenditure on a regular basis. States with low expenditure are 
being s upported through state visits and financial training is also being provided to these 
States/UTs to expedite expenditure bookings. 
 

57 
 
2.71 Besides the above, Video Conferences were held with the Program Nodal Officers and the 
Finance Managers to monitor the f inancial progress of expenditures under NUHM from time to 
time. Besides holding video discussions, Training/ Capacity Building workshops had been 
organized both for the state level and for the field level staff or orientation on the implementation 
of NUHM programme activities. 
 
Recommendation 
2.72 The Committee also recommends the Ministry to examine the project proposals of the 
remaining States and expedite the signing of MoUs so that the funds are released to the concerned 
States. The Committee, at the sa me time, recommends the Department to impress upon the State 
Governments to submit their Utilization Certificates in respect of earlier instalment of released 
funds. 
(Para 4.77) 
Action Taken  
 
2.73 States/ UTs are regularly requested through correspondence  as well as during virtual 
meetings for furnishing of Utilisation Certificates as well as physical progress reports in respect of 
Grants-in-Aid released earlier. On receipt of these documents, the requests for release of funds are 
processed. 
 
2.74 The effo rts to persuade the uncovered State/UTs viz. West Bengal, Chandigarh and 
Lakshadweep for implementation of this scheme are continuing. 
 
Recommendation 
2.75 The Committee also notes the submission of the Ministry that due to non -receipt of claims 
from State  Governments the allocated budget could not be utilised. The Committee is not 
convinced with the submission of the Ministry and strongly recommends that a prudent fiscal 
analysis and a fiscal roadmap must be devised for allocating the financial resources. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure the utilisation of funds at different levels so that 
higher budgetary allocation is made in ensuing financial year onwards. 
(Para 4.91) 
Action Taken  
2.76 Corrective measures are being taken by the Ministry to pace the expenditure of the 
programme. Low utilization of funds are due to the Pandemic COVID -19, states informed that 
they are not able to focus on the programme due to Pandemic. The following are the corrective 
measure taken by the Ministry: 
(i) Regular review meetings with the States/UTs through video conferencing/meetings. 
(ii) Regular follow up with the States/UTs officials to submit the re-imbursement claims. 

58 
 
(iii) In the last financial year, Budget is reduced due to low utilization because of 
Pandemic COVID- 19. It may be noted that the Revised estimates are fully utilized in the 
last Financial year 2020-21. The details are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Status of current Financial year 2021 -22: Budget approved(BE) for Trauma 
Programme in FY 2021 -22 is Rs. 46 crore. Funds utilized till 18.07.2021 is Rs. 27 crore 
(58.69%) and the proposal of Rs. 5.24 crore are in pipeline will be released shortly. 
2.77 States are submitting the claims for re -imbursement payments and Ministry ensured that 
the budget approve will be fully utilized in the current Financial Year. 
National Programme for Health Care for the Elderly 
2.78 The Committee notes that funds to the tune of Rs.105 crore was allocated in 2018 -19, 
2019-20 and 2020 -21 under the National Programme for Health care for the Elderly, however, 
the actual expenditure was Rs. 74.71 crore, Rs. 9.92 crore and Rs. 0.72 crore in2018 -19, 2019-20 
and 2020-21, respectively. The Committee expresses its deep concern over the steep downtrend in 
the utilisation of funds from 2018 to 2020. Taking note of the findings of Longitudinal Ageing 
Study in India specifying that about one out of the two people above 60 years o f age suffers from 
some chronic disease, the Committee recommends the Ministry to make concerted efforts 
inproviding comprehensive and dedicated health care facilities for the elderly by prudently 
utilizing the allocated outlay. The Ministry should also ai m towards expanding the National 
Programme for Health Care for the Elderly to other all the districts of all the States/UTs. The 
Committee recommends the Department to ensure adequate utilisation of funds under the Scheme. 
(Para 4.107) 
Action Taken 
2.79 During the current financial year, Rs. 24.28 Crore has so far been incurred as on date 
against the allocation of Rs. 105.00 crore making the achievement of 23.130%. Further, release of 
Rs. 29.12 crore is under process which will enhance the actual expendit ure to Rs. 53.40 crore and 
Financial Achievement percentage to 50.86%. 
2.80 In report, the actual expenditure for the FY 2020 -21 has been quoted as Rs.0.72 Crore, 
whereas the actual expenditure incurred was Rs.14.35 Crore against the allocation of Rs.15 Cr ore 
at RE Stage. 
 
Recommendation 
2.81 The Committee also notes the high rate of underutilisation under National Tobacco 
Control Programme & Drug De -addiction Programme and National Programme for Control of 
Sr.no Trauma Program Burn program 
BE 20-21 Rs. 55 Cr Rs.37.50 Cr 
RE 20-21 Rs. 15 Cr Rs. 5 Cr 
Expenditure20-21  Rs.15 Cr Rs 4.82 Cr 

59 
 
Blindness. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to assess the reason for this gross 
underutilisation and ensure better financial prudence while allocating the budget. 
(Para 4.108) 
Action Taken 
2.82 The actual expenditure in respect of Tobacco Control and DDAP for the year 2018 -19 to 
2020-21 is given as below; 
 
2.83 Funds are spent judiciously under the scheme (NPTCDAT) with strict compliance to 
provisions of GFR, 2017. The expenditure for the last 03 years (2018 -19 to 2020-21) ranges from 
79% to 92%. Funds under the scheme is released to the institutes and agencies as per the needs 
and requirement. Therefore, there is no gross underutilization of the funds, only marginal savings 
are there under the scheme, which were surrendered within the stipulated period of time.  
Recommendation 
2.84 The Committee is also of the opinion that a part of the extra tax levied on tobacco and 
alcohol can be used for tobacco related cancer research. The Committee therefore, recommends 
the Ministry that a corpus fund should be created from the tax  levied on tobacco and alcohol for 
carrying out research in tobacco related diseases and tobacco related cancer. 
(Para 4.109) 
Action Taken 
 
2.85 Public Health is a State subject and the primary responsibility of implementation of the 
activities under the scheme lies with the States. Central Government is providing sufficient 
resources for carrying out NPTCDAT activities. Therefore, there is no such proposal for creation 
of corpus fund at present. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.86 The Committee acknowledges the apprehension of the students, who sought admission to 
MBBS course through NEET exam conducted in September, 2020. The Committee also notes the 
strategy of the Department wherein the course duration of the first year MBBS curr iculum has 
been condensed to 11 months from 12 months. The Committee recommends the Department to 
strike a balance between the students concern and the need for covering the learning loss due to 
outbreak of pandemic Covid -19. The Committee further recommen ds the Department to take 
Name of 
Programme 
National Programme for Tobacco Control and Drug Addiction Treatment  
(Expenditure Details) 
Rs. In crore 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
BE  RE  Exp. BE  RE  Exp. BE  RE  Exp.    
Total 65.00 67.00 61.83  
(92%) 
65.00 65.00 51.03 
(79%) 
65.00 63.00 56.64 
(90%) 

60 
 
effective measures to allay the concerns of the students causing stress and mental agony due to 
additional hours of learning but without compromising on the quality of education imparted and 
the learning loss. 
(Para 4.123) 
Action Taken 
2.87 Recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
 
Winning over Saliency Bias 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.88 The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion in the Economic Survey 2020 -21 that 
the healthcare policy should not become a victim of „Saliency Bias‟ involving over -weighing the 
recent phenomena i.e. pandemic Covid -19. The Committee strongly believes  that the budgeting 
process must cruise ahead the pandemic Covid-19 impasse and address the other rising challenge 
of communicable and non-communicable diseases. 
(Para 5.20) 
Action Taken 
 
2.89 The observations of the Committee are noted. National Health Mission and ongoing 
National Programmes dealing with communicable and non -communicable diseases are being 
monitored accordingly. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.90 The Committee is of the view that the Department should revisit the criterion/formulae for 
selection of sites for establishing AIIMS like institutions in order to strengthen the tertiary 
healthcare infrastructure and to mi nimize the existing trend of 4.16  per cent population slipping 
into poverty because of catastrophic health infrastructure since the Government expenditure is 
hardly 27 per cent while out of pocket expenditure is approximately 73% therefore, there is the 
need to enhance Government expenditure on the tertiary healthcare. In this regard, the Ministry 
should consider the geographical spread and population density as the main criterion to set up a 
healthcare centre or the AIIMS like institution. The Committee, i n this regard, recommends for 
establishing of AIIMS in Silchar, the North East which is a very populous city and bigger than the 
4-5 state capitals of smaller states. The Committee had already recommended for establishing 
AIIMS in Kosi region of Bihar. Ker ala is a state which has been demanding establishment of 
AIIMS. The Committee came across that AIIMS Madurai, JICA as the implementing agency, 
construction work has not been started. The Committee also recommends that in all AIIMS like 
institutions full fledged facilities must be given for not only reducing out of the pocket expenditure 
and thus preventing the common masses slipping into the wave of poverty but also reducing the 
patient load in AIIMS New Delhi. Reportedly, AIIMS, Bhopal is yet to start the heart surgery and 
many of the facilities even in six AIIMS has notcommencedleaveapartother16 AIIMS.  
(Para 5.25) 
 

61 
 
Action Taken 
2.91 As per the latest available National Health Accounts Estimates for India 2017 -18, the Out-
Of-Pocket Expenditure (OOPE) as percentage of Total Health Expenditure (THE) continues to 
show a declining trend. It has decreased from 64.2% in the year 2013 -14 to 48.8% in the year 
2017-18. 
2.92 The objective of the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) is to correct 
regional imbalances in the availability of affordable/ reliable tertiary healthcare services and also 
to augment facilities for quality medical education in the country. PMSSY has two components - 
Setting up of new AIIMS; at least one in each State and up -gradation of existing Government 
Medical Colleges (GMCs). Under PMSSY, the Govt. plans to set up one AIIMS in each State.  So 
far, setting up of 22 new AIIMS and upgradation of 75 existing Government Medical Colleges in 
the country has been sanctioned under the sc heme. Setting up of new AIIMS in different parts of 
the country has been approved in pursuance of above mentioned objectives of PMSSY. 
2.93 As regards observations of the Committee in respect of AIIMS in some of the States, 
following is submitted for consideration:  
(i) Hon‘ble Finance Minister during his budget speech for the year 2015 -16 announced 
establishment of a new AIIMS in the State of Assam.    The Union Cabinet has already 
approved one AIIMS for Assam at Guwahati on 24 -5-2017. The construction work at  the 
AIIMS Site is in progress and in the meanwhile MBBS classes of the Institute have been 
started from a temporary campus.  Also, in order to further augment tertiary health care 
facilities in the State, the Union Government has undertaken upgradation of  Guwahati 
Medical College, Guwahati  and Assam Medical College, Dibrugarh in Phase -III of 
Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY): 
 
(ii) As regards establishing a new AIIMS in Kosi, Bihar, it is submitted that Government of 
India has already established a new AIIMS at Patna, Bihar under Phase I of PMSSY and 
the same is functional.  Hon‘ble Finance Minister, during his budget speech for the year 
2015-16  also announced a second AIIMS for the State of Bihar.  The State Government 
identified the site at Darbhanga and accordingly the proposal for establishment of a second 
AIIMS in Bihar at Darbhanga was approved by Union Cabinet on 15 -9-2020.  However, 
the State Government is yet to hand over the encumbrance free site for the AIIMS project 
at Darbhanga. Apart from above, medical colleges at Muzaffarpur, Darbhanga,  Bhagalpur, 
Gaya and two Medical Colleges at Patna i.e. Patna Medical College and Hospital and 
IGIMS Patna have been covered under various phases  of PMSSY for upgradation with 
Super Speciality Blocks. 
(iii) Kerala has been requesting for establishment of a new AIIMS in the State and the same 
was referred to the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for their ―in principle‖ 
approval as there has been no announcement for an AIIMS in Kerala in any of the budget 
speeches.  The ―in principle‖ from Department of Expenditure is awaited and same is 
being pursued. However, upgradation of Govt. Medical Colleges in Kerala has been 
undertaken under PMMSY and this includes Trivandrum Medical College, Kozhikode 
Medical College, Alapzuha Govt. Medical College and Shree Chitra Tirunal Institute of 
Medical Sciences at Trivandrum.  
(iv) Union Cabinet approved establishment of a new AIIMS at Thoppur in Madurai District at 
a cost of Rs 1,264 Crore on 17.12.2018. However, ‗In -principle‘ approval of the Cabinet 
was also sought for allowing escalation over and above the 20% ceiling, and for allowing 
time over run, in case of availing loan from Japan International Cooperation Agency 

62 
 
(JICA). After a comprehensive preparatory exerc ise conducted by JICA team, including 
survey mission and multiple interactions with the officers of MoHFW,  Loan Agreement 
has been signed between Government of Japan and Government of India on 26th March, 
2021.  The total revised cost of AIIMS Madurai project is Rs. 1977.8 crore as estimated by 
JICA. The tendering process for hiring the Project Management Consultant (PMC) has 
already been started by Project Management Unit (PMU) of AIIMS, Madurai as per the 
JICA Procurement Guideline 
 
2.94 The Ministry wou ld also like to submit that all eighteen (18) sanctioned Specialties in 
functional six AIIMS i.e. Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur and Rishikesh are 
functional. Out of 17 super specialities, the functionality status is as follows – Bhopal (14), 
Bhubaneswar (17), Jodhpur (15), Patna (13), Raipur (14), and Rishikesh (17). It is also pertinent 
to point out that heart surgery is currently being performed at AIIMS, Bhopal.  
 
Recommendation 
2.95    The Committees observes that there is lack of co-ordination and collaboration between 
public healthcare managers and people‟s representative on the modus operandi of public 
healthcare institutions. The Committee understands that the delivery of health care facilities, at 
the ground level, that in fact  constitutes the legitimate expectation of the people from the 
responsive and responsible Government in the democratic set up, lack the vigour and agility on 
the part of the healthcare managers and the people‟s representative faced the consequences due 
to leader and follower continuum in a democratic country. People‟s representative being the 
vehicle of people‟s expectation has to face the outcry of public in view of inadequacy of readily 
available healthcare facilities. The Committee, therefore, strongly r ecommends for better co -
ordination and information sharing mechanism having linkage at the district, state and national 
level amongst the policy makers and implementing authorities of cherished healthcare 
programmes with the people‟s representative and all  other stakeholders to ensure cent percent 
successful implementation of the flagship health programme. 
(Para 5.29) 
Action Taken 
2.96 Governing Body of the District Health Society under NHM chaired by District 
Collector/DM/CEO Zilla Parishad has representation from other sectors apart from health to 
ensure inter -sectoral convergence like WCD, education, water and sanitation etc and also 
representation from PRIs and NGOs so as to address the social determinants of health.  
2.97 It is imperative that panchayats are involved while making village health plans and same 
is ensured through their representation in Village Health Sanitation and Nu trition Committees 
(VHSNCs) in rural areas, Mahila Arogya Samitis in urban areas and Jan Aarogya Samitis (JAS) at 
SC & PHC level. JAS at the SC level also has representation from Women Self Help Groups, thus 
ensuring better coordination and information sha ring within the community on one hand and 
health care professionals including front line workers (ASHA, ANM and AWW) on the other 
hand. 
 
 
 

63 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendations/Observations 
3.1 The Committee also takes cognizance of the financial hardships caused by catastrophic 
health illness that drives the population especially the marginalized section to poverty. The 
Committee also believes that India being a welfare state has to make constant efforts to promote 
the economic and social well being of its citizens and make every effort to reduce OOPE. The 
Committee is of the strong view that the aim of the Government must be to provide healthcare 
services as a public good and the State must protect its citizens especially the poor from the 
significant financial hardship caused due to high OOPE. 
(Para 2.16) 
Action Taken 
3.2 To ameliorate the financial hardship associated with high out of pocket expend iture 
especially for the vulnerable groups, the Government has also launched Ayushman Bharat which 
aims to holistically address health (covering prevention, promotion and ambulatory care), at 
primary, secondary and tertiary level by adopting a continuum of care approach. It has two 
components i.e.   Ayushman Bharat – Health and Wellness Centres (AB -HWCs) and Ayushman 
Bharat - Pradhan Mantri Jan ArogyaYojana (AB-PMJAY). AB-HWCs provides Comprehensive 
Primary Health Care (CPHC), by expanding and strengthening the existing Reproductive & 
Child Health (R CH) services and Communicable Diseases services and by including services 
related to Non -Communicable Diseases (NCD) such as, Hypertension, Diabetes and common 
cancers of Oral, Breast and Cervix.  
3.3 AB-PMJAY provides health insurance coverage up to Rs. 5 .00 lakh per family per year to 
around 10.74 crore poor and vulnerable families (nearly 50 crore individuals) identified based on 
Socio Economic Caste Census (SECC) data.  
3.4 Thus, Comprehensive primary health care along with government funded secondary a nd 
tertiary care will lead to reduced OOPE. 
Further Recommendations 
3.5 The Committee understands that Ayushman Bharat aims to provide free access to 
health insurance coverage for the poor and improve accessibility of health services in the 
country. However, the Committee notes that there are administrative and implementation 
related loopholes under the scheme that need to be addressed  so as to provide universal 
coverage to the poor and the needy . The Committee, in this connection, wishes to flag the 
constraints related to non-updation of the list of beneficiaries, fraud ulent practices at 
empanelled hospitals, incomplete operationalization of the Health and Wellness Centres .  
The Committee desires the Ministry to address these issues besides giving imp etus to 
increasing the pace of implementation of the Scheme for the overall well being and good 
health of the economically weaker sections of the society. 

64 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.6 The Committee notes the observations of the Ministry that State Pub lic Health expenditure 
as percentage of total expenditure (as per 2018 -19 Actual) of Meghalaya, NCT of Delhi and 
Puducherry was 9.1%, 13.7% and 8.6% respectively which is more than the envisaged National 
Health Policy's target of health expenditure to 8 pe rcent of the State's budget. However the 
Committee is dismayed to note that most States have not allocated the stipulated percentage of 
their budget to the health sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that all the 
States and UTs must spend at least 8 percent of their total budget for the health sector as 
envisaged in the National Health Policy. 
(Para 2.17) 
Action Taken 
3.7 Under NHM there has been a consistent effort to increase the financing at the State level. 
Moreover, under NHM using the  conditionality framework, a proportion of approved NHM 
budgets going to states are tied to certain conditionalities based on performance in the health 
sector. This is expected to incentivize the States to use the NHM money effectively and 
efficiently. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.8 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the existing inter -state disparity on 
health infrastructure and the poor health indicators. The Committee believes that adequate 
budget allocation to health sector is concomitant to ensure robust implementation  of health 
sector reforms in the States. Financially poor States lack adequate resources which result in 
poor healthcare delivery system. The Committee desires that the States must be incentivized 
for better performance on health matrix so as to ensure ach ievement of improved health 
outcomes. The Ministry must support and encourage the States/UTs so that they spend at-
least 8% of the total budget in the health sector and ensure that implementation of different 
Health Schemes are not hindered due to lack of funds. 
Recommendation 
3.9 The Committee also notes that the Department of Health and Family Welfare had made a 
proposal of Rs. 5,97,906.56  Crores to the 15th Finance Commission for the period 2021 -22 to 
2025-26 for the Health sector. However, the total grants in aid for the period is Rs. 1,06,606 
crore that is 10.3 percent of the total grants -in-aid recommended by the 15th Finance 
Commission. The Committee also observes that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has 
been given Rs 13,192 crore as FC Grants for health in BE 2021 -22. This grant is just 2 percent of 
the Ministry's proposed demand of Rs. 5,97,906.56 Crore and approximately 12%  of the 
recommended FC grant of Rs. 1,06,606 crore. The Committee understands that the FC grant is 
for the period of 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 for the health sector. Nevertheless, the Committee strongly 
recommends the Government to consider the proposal of Rs. 5, 97,906.56 crores made by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to the 15th Finance Commission and provide appropriate 
budgetary funds under various heads as proposed by the Ministry. 
(Para 2.18) 

65 
 
Action Taken  
3.10 The National Health Policy (NHP), 2017  envisages raising public health expenditure to 
2.5% of the GDP in a time bound manner. Department of Health & Family Welfare have been 
making consistent efforts to increase public health spending. The budget allocation for 
Department of Health & Family Welfare (DoHFW) has increased by 50.5% from Rs. 47,353 crore 
in 2017-18 (BE) to Rs. 71,269 crore in 2021-22 (BE). 
3.11 The other major initiative, announced in the current year budget (2021 -22) is Pradhan 
Mantri (PM-ABHIM),a new Centrally Sponsored Scheme, w ith an outlay of about  Rs. 64,180 
crores. The main focus of the program is to strengthen the health system and institutions for all the 
levels of the care as well as preparing the health system in responding promptly and effectively to 
the current and future pandemics by: 
1. Support for 17,788 rural  and 11,024 urban Health and Wellness Centres  
2. Setting up of Integrated Public Health Labs in all districts and 3382 Block Public Health 
Units in 11 states; 
3. Establishing Critical Care Hospital Blocks in 602 districts and 12 Central Institutions; 
4. Strengthening of the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), its 5 regional branches 
and 20 metropolitan health surveillance units; 
5. Expansion of the Integrated Health Information Portal to all States/UTs to connec t all public 
health labs; 
6. Operationalisation of 17 new Public Health Units and strengthening of 33 existing Public 
Health Units at Points of Entry, that is at 32 Airports, 11 Seaports and 7 land crossings; 
7. Setting up of 15 Health Emergency Operation Centres and 2 mobile hospitals; and 
8. Setting up of a national institution for One Health, a Regional Research Platform for WHO 
South East Asia Region, 9 Bio -Safety Level III laboratories and 4 regional National 
Institutes for Virology. 
3.12 This will develop capa cities of primary, secondary, and tertiary care Health Systems, 
strengthen existing national institutions, and create new institutions, to cater to detection and cure 
of new and emerging diseases. This will be in addition to the National Health Mission. 
3.13 First wave of COVID 19 Pandemic, the Ministry has supported the efforts of the 
States/UTs for an amount of Rs.15,000 crore under ‗India COVID 19 Emergency Response and 
Health System Preparedness package‘.   For second wave a new package of Rs. 23,123 Cro re has 
been approved under the India COVID -19 Emergency Response & Health System Preparedness 
Package: Phase-II (ECRP-II) for FY 2021-22 has also been approved by the Cabinet. 
Further Recommendations 
3.14 The Committee finds that the Ministry has not taken  any note of the 
recommendation of the Committee to consider the proposal of Rs. 5,97,906.56 crores made 
to the 15 th Finance Commission.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation 
and expects the Ministry to vigorously pursue its budgetary re quirements suggested by the 
Finance Commission.   
 
 

66 
 
Recommendation 
3.15 The Committee observes that under NRHM, out of the projected demand of Rs. 62,361.50 
crore , only Rs. 27,039 crore were allotted which is just 43.35 % of the projected demands. Under 
NUHM, only 57.57 % of the project demands were allocated. Under human Resource for Health 
and Medical Education, out of Rs. 11,495 crore only Rs. 4686 crore were all ocated which is just 
40.76 % of the projected demand. Similarly under RSBY and AB -PMJAY, out of the total 
projected demand of Rs. 8894 crore, only Rs. 6429 crore were allocated which is 72.28 % of the 
projected demand. In all the Schemes except PMSSY, the actual allocation is less than the 
projected demand. The Committee believes that shortfall of funds adversely affect the smooth 
implementation of Schemes and Programmes. 
(Para 2.21) 
Action Taken 
3.16 With regard to the observations made by the Hon‘ble DRPS C with reference to AB -
PMJAY Year wise BE, RE and Utilization of funds details are mentioned below:- 
                                                                 (Rs. in crore) 
Financial Year BE RE Total 
Expenditure 
2018-19 2400.00 2160.00 1965.25 
2019-20 6400.00 3200.00 3129.33 
2020-21 6400.00 3100.00 2652.85 
3.17 In RSBY, out of the total allocated amount of Rs. 29 crore, an expenditure of Rs. 
46,32,366/- was made during 2020-21. 
3.18 There has been a consistent effort in increasing the Budgetary outlay of the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare. It may be noted that the budgetary outlay under NHM has been 
increased from Rs. 27,989.00 crore in 2020-22 to Rs.31,100 crore in 2021-22. NHM is a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme and with the incr ease in Central outlay the proportionate share of the State 
would also increase. Apart from the increase in Budgetary outlay under NHM, in order to 
strengthen health care delivery system across the country, the  following interventions have been 
undertaken: 
(i) Pradhan MantriAyushman Bharat Infrastructure Mission (PM ABHIM)with an outlay of 
Rs.64,180 crores for5 years has been launched on 25th October -2021. The scheme would 
develop capacities of primary, secondary, and tertiary care health systems, strength en 
existing national institutions, and create new institutions, to cater to detection and cure of 
new and emerging diseases. 
(ii) Fifteenth Finance Commission have recommended grants amounting to Rs.70,051 crore to 
health sector.  
(iii) Financial support of Rs.35,000 crore has been provisioned towards support for COVID -19 
Vaccination in 2021-22 B.E..  

67 
 
(iv) Cabinet has approved Rs.23,123.00 crore towards ―India COVID-19 Emergency Response 
and Health Systems Preparedness Package(ER&HSPP)-II‖ for the FY 2021-22. 
3.19 However, in order to broaden the fiscal space the Ministry has sought additional funding 
under NHM towards the RE of F.Y. 2021-22. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.20 The Committee is anguished to find that against total allocated amount of Rs. 29.00 
crores in 2020 -21 under RSBY, the actual expenditure is to the tune of Rs. 46, 32 ,366 only. 
The Committee has been consistently emphasizing upon increasing the budgetary outlay of 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfa re on various schemes . The Committee believes 
that the Ministry must follow a sound budgetary management policy wherein schemes with 
poor utilization trends are closely monitored. The Committee is of the considered view that 
the Ministry must make efforts to ensure that the funds allocated are utilized  optimally to 
make the Scheme result oriented and achieve the Mission and objective of the Scheme. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to frame guidelines on financial prudence in 
consultations with Sta tes and track the utilization under the Schemes so that utilization of 
funds is commensurate with the projected requirement and under -utilization of funds is 
avoided. The argument of the Ministry that increased outlay  would lead to  increase in 
proportionate share of the States does not look sound and convincing.  
Recommendation 
3.21 The Committee takes a serious view over the fact that 4955 Utilization Certificate 
involving an amount of Rs. 8,497.92 crore are pending as on 02.02.2021, mainly because the UCs  
module of PFMS is still under development in PFMS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the PFMS must be developed at the earliest for ensuring the timely liquidation of pending UCs. 
(Para 2.27) 
Action Taken  
3.22 Keeping in view of Provisions of GFR -2017, the States/UTs have submitted their Annual 
Audited Utilisation Certificates on regular basis and accordingly the grants in aid of previous 
financial years are settled under NHM.   
 Present Status of  Pending UCs and Unspent Balances 
     (In crore of Rupees) 
S.No Name of Scheme/ 
Item 
As on 31st March 
2021 
As on 30th September 2021 
Unspent 
Balances 
Pending 
Ucs 
Total 
releases in 
FY 2021 
Unspent 
Balances 
Pending 
Ucs 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1 Other Autonomous Bodies           
  1.01- Support from Gross 
Budgetary Support (GBS) 
8.30 0.00 28.22 8.17 0.00 

68 
 
2 Regional Institute of 
Paramadical and Nursing 
Sciences, Aizawl 
12.99 0.00 43.00 9.58 0.00 
3 Human Resources for Health & 
Medical Education 
          
  3.01- Establishment of New 
Medical Colleges and Increase 
of Seats in existing Government 
Medical Colleges (PMSSN) 
0.00 15077.82 5386.00 0.00 17342.54 
4 National AIDS & STD Control 
Programme 
571.34 0.00 1288.15 591.18 22.30 
5 All Indian Institute of Medical 
Science 
          
  5.01- Repayment of Principal 
from HEFA Loan 
12.18 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
  5.02- Support from Gross 
Budgetary Support (GBS) 
6.10 0.00 3420.68 4.20 0.00 
  Total 610.91 15077.82 10166.05 613.13 17364.84 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.23 The Committee expresses its displeasure over Ministry’s failure to  ensure timely 
liquidation of the pending UCs. The fact that Utilization certificates for funds amounting to 
Rs. 17342.54 crore and Rs. 22.30 crore are pending under Human Resources for Health and 
Medical Education and  National AIDS & STD Control Programme respectively  speaks 
volume of poor management and monitoring of allocated funds . The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry must start monitoring of UCs through the 
PFMS module and integrate the remaining institutes with PFMS.  
Recommendations 
3.24 The Committee expresses its concern that budgetary provision to the tune of Rs. 1748.03 
crore in BE 2021 -22 against the projected demand of Rs. 1944.00 crore is inadequate for CGHS 
keeping in view the requirement of funds on various heads viz. Salary and wages, expenditure on 
proposed wellness centers, medical treatment, payment against the procurement of medicines 
through ALCs and procurement of life saving medicines, expenditure on sanitation/ cleanliness of 
premises. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the additional funds as per the requirement 
must be allocated to CGHS at the RE 2021-22 supplementary demands. 
(Para 3.6) 
Action Taken 
3.25 Recommendations of Hon‘ble Committee are noted and demand for allocation of 
Additional funds as per the requirement shall be submitted at the RE 2021 -22 Supplementary 
demands. 
 

69 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.26 The Committee notes that the projected demand of Rs. 1944.00 crore was made in 
BE 2021 -22, however, funds to the tune of Rs. 1713.00 crore were allocated at RE stage 
2021-22. The Committee notes that the Ministry did not increase the fund allocation at RE 
stage rather the funds were slashed at the RE stage. The Committee, therefore, is of the view 
that the Ministry must make an assessment of the funds allocated and work towards 
improving the absorption capacity under the Scheme. 
Recommendation 
3.27 The Committee expresses its anguish over the continuing vacancy position under CGHS. 
In Gazetted Officers category, a total of 484 posts are vacant against the sanctioned strength of 
1968 officers. Vacancy of 1390 posts out of 4773 sanctioned posts in non -gazzetted category is a 
matter of grave concern. The Committee observes that a number of ad-hoc measures viz. filling up 
the posts on the contract basis, enhancing the superannuation age or re -employment of retired 
employees, are being taken, as a stop gap man agement, for ensuring the functional status of the 
scheme. The Committee, is of the considered view that urgent and concrete measures are required 
to be undertaken for filling up of the vacant posts in Gazetted and Non -Gazetted Officers 
Category, for prope r working of the scheme and continuation of assured healthcare services to 
the beneficiaries of the scheme. 
(Para 3.11) 
Action Taken 
3.28 The following steps have been taken by CHS Division of MoHFW to fill the vacancies of 
CHS doctors:- 
(i) Every year on the basis of vacancies projected by the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare w.r.t. GDMO and Non -Teaching sub-Cadres, Union Public Service Commission 
(UPSC) conducts Combined Medical Services Examination (CMSE) for recruitment of 
Medical Officers of GDMO Sub-cadre of Central Health Service. A proposal to fill up 349 
vacant posts of Medical Officers in GDMO sub -cadre has been submitted to UPSC for 
CMSE-2021.  
(ii) Pending recommendations from UPSC, concerned units are permitted to make contrac tual 
appointments against the vacant posts for a period of one year or till the regular candidate 
joins, whichever is earlier as a stop -gap arrangement in public interest to overcome the 
shortage of doctors in the concerned specialty. 
(iii) The age of supe rannuation of CHS Officers has been enhanced to 65 years to overcome 
the shortage of senior doctors. It has been decided that CHS officers has to exercise option 
beyond 62 years of age to continue in service upto 65 years of age. CHS Officers holding 
the administrative posts on exercising their option to continue beyond 62 years of age will 
be shifted to non-administrative posts in order to ensure exposure of administrative post to 
younger generation of doctors in CHS. 

70 
 
(iv) The period of study leave for CHS  doctors has been increased to 36 months as against 24 
months for other central government employees, as an incentive measure to reduce 
attrition rate of doctors.  
3.29 Regarding the non -Gazetted staff Staff Selection Commission has been approached for 
filling up vacant posts. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.30 The Committee  observes that despite steps taken by the Department to fi ll up 
vacancies of CHS doctors, a large number of posts of Medical Officers in GDMO and non -
gazetted staff are still lying vacant in CGHS; thus hampering its functioning to the expected 
level. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Department to take up the matter 
with UPSC and SSC so as to expedite the recruitment process for the  vacant 349 posts of 
Medical Officer in GDMO sub cadre and all vacant posts from Gazetted staff respectively 
for the smooth implementation of the scheme and continuation of assured healthcare 
services to the beneficiaries of the scheme.   
Recommendation 
3.31 The Committee believes that the supply chain of medicines to CGHS dispensary should be 
smooth and uninterrupted. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare and Ministry of AYUSH to make efforts to establish a robust mechanism for easy 
accessibility and delivery of medicines at all the CGHS dispensaries. 
(Para 3.20) 
Action Taken  
3.32 AYUSH medicines are being procured in CGHS as per the CGHS Procurement Guidelines 
and the Guidelines issued by Ministry of AYUSH from time to time.  
1. 221 and 125  Generic Ayurveda & Unani medicines are being procured directly from 
Indian Medicine Pharmaceuticals Corporation Limited (IMPCL), a Govt. of India 
Enterprise under Ministry of AYUSH. 213 Siddha Generic/ Sastric medicines are procured 
under R.C from State G ovt. Co -operative societies (IMCOPS & TAMPCOL) . 1017 
Homoeopathic formulary medicines are procured through open tender. Non -IMPCL 
Generic, Patent & Proprietary Ayurveda and Unani medicines are procured through open 
tender. 129 Siddha Patent & Proprietary medicines are procured through open tender.  
2. New tenders to procure Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha & Homoeopathy medicines are already 
in the pipeline. Under Sidha  the formulary is being revised . Pending revision of 
formulary the existing Rate Contract  is b eing extended as an interim measure. Due to 
cancellation of  the earlier CGHS Homoeopathic tender, the Rate Contract of other 
organization like ESIC is adopted as an interim measure  and regular supply is being made 
at all the Wellness Centres. If, any pre scribed Ayurveda, Unani & Homoeopathic 
medicines are not available in the Wellness Centre (s)as well as in the main stores, the 
same will be purchased through Authorized Local Chemist (ALC) as in Allopathic system.  
Medicines which are not readily availabl e are procured locally and supplied. Once, the 
tender process is completed, the availability of Ayush Medicines shall further improve. 

71 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.33 The Committee desires that all generic AYUSH Medicine must be made available  to 
the beneficiary at CGHS dispensary. The Committee finds that the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare has not furnished any information on the assured supply of allopathic 
medicines to the CGHS dispensary. The Committee  would like the Ministry to take effective 
measures for ensuring a continuous supply of allopathic medicines and develop a robust 
mechanism for delivery of medicines to all the CGHS dispensary.  
Recommendation 
3.34 Requisite manpower is the first and the foremost requirement for deliveri ng healthcare 
services by reputed hospital like SJH & VMMC. The Committee is however, at loss to assess the 
efficacy of working of the hospital without adequate manpower. It takes a glance at the vacancy 
position in some cadres which reflects huge gap in t he sanctioned strength and the filled up 
position. For example, in Group – A in Medical category, against the sanctioned strength of 585 
posts, a total of 147 posts stand vacant. Similarly, against the sanctioned strength of 2563 posts in 
Group– B, Non-Gazetted Nursing, 581 posts are vacant and against the sanctioned strength of 
1039 posts in Group – C, a total of 293 posts are lying vacant. Overall, against the sanctioned 
strength of 5482 posts in various cadres, only 4186 posts are filled up. The Committe e, therefore, 
recommends that urgent steps have to be taken for filling up of the vacant posts for ensuring a 
smooth running of SJH &VMMC. 
(Para 3.27) 
Action Taken 
3.35 As regards to the manpower it is informed that this hospital is making continuous efforts to 
fill up the po sts on regular basis.   The data of the manpower position taken into account pertains 
to 01.01.2021.  The reasons for non -filling up of the posts are due to outdated RRs or delay in 
notification of new/amended RRs and in some cases due to non -availability of candidates as per 
the requisite RRs.  The same has been mentioned against each: 
 Sl. 
No. 
Group Sanctio
ned 
Strengt
h 
Laps
ed 
posts 
Live 
posts 
(Sanctio
ned – 
Lapsed) 
Inpositi
on 
Strengt
h 
Vacant 
posts 
Remarks 
 
1 
Group 
A 
Medical 
585 0 585 438 147 Amongst the 147 vacant 
posts, 46 posts were filled up 
on contract basis.  
Continuous Efforts are being 
made to fill up the remaining 
posts on contract basis. 
2 Group 
A Non-
Medical 
53 7 46 27 19 Proposal for seeking 
approval for filling up the 
vacant posts is already in 
progress and when the 
approval is finalized, the 
same shall be filled 
accordingly. 

72 
 
3 Group 
B 
Gazette
d 
54 0 54 24 30 The matter is in progress to 
change the nomenclature of 
the post or level of the posts.  
Subsequent to this, the RRs 
shall be framed accordingly.  
Wherever, RRs are notified, 
the said posts shall be filled 
up. 
4 Group 
B Non-
Gazette
d 
Technic
al 
222 2 220 154 66 Amongst the vacant posts, 
some posts have been 
advertised where RRs have 
been notified/available, 
scrutiny under process, shall 
be filled after due formalities 
of selection of candidate(s) 
after written exam, and due 
verification of documents 
and subsequent joining. DPC 
for few posts shall be filled 
up shortly.  Amongst them, 
correspondence with 
Dte.G.H.S./MOHFW is in 
progress to change the 
nomenclature of the post or 
level of the posts in regards 
to some posts. 
Amongst the vacant posts, 
some posts have deemed to 
have been lapsed in 
pursuance of OM dated April 
2017 and accordingly, the 
lapsed posts, live sanctioned 
posts, inposition and vacant 
posts have been separately 
mentioned.  Amongst them, 
some posts have been filled 
up on outsourced basis 
against the regular vacant 
post. 
As regards to 
1) In Group B N on-Gaz, 
Paramedical (Sanc -38, 
Inposition-32, Vacant -06) 
and Ministerial (Sanc -52, 
Inposition-47, Vacant -05); 
and 
2) In Group C Paramedical 
(Sanc-145, Inposition -106, 
Vacant-39) and Ministerial 
(Sanc-73, Inposition - 51, 

73 
 
Vacant-10) 
It is informed that the said 
data is not separate and both 
are paramedical posts.  
Accordingly, the data have 
been clubbed up and shown 
against the paramedical posts 
in each Group B and Group 
C. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.36 The Committee  is constrained to highlight a huge gap between the sanctioned 
strength (905) and the in -position strength (643) as 262 posts in different cadres are lying 
vacant in SJH and VMC. The Committee observes that the Institute is yet to 
formulate/amend the recruitment rules for some categories of Posts and approval for filling 
up some vacant posts are yet to be finalized. The Committee is anguished over the slow pace 
of recruitment process in such a reputed Institute and, therefore, strongly recommends the 
Institute to expedite the recruitment process and fill up the vacant posts so that the Institute 
can function at its full capacity.  
Recommendation 
3.37 The Committee, while taking note of the key concern areas of SJH relating to inadequate 
manpower leading to overstressing of existing human resources, inadequate hostel facilities, 
haphazard development of SJH surface parking and lack of referral policy le ading to loss of 
valuable hours, recommends provision for adequate manpower, immediate approval of DPR 
hostel facilities for resident doctors (782) and nurses (1004),and provision for stack parking in 
newer blocks etc. to remove some of the stumbling block s for ensuring proper working of the 
hospital. The Committee also recommends that Medical Superintendent of the hospital may be 
vested with the power to hire staff/faculty on contract as per the situational requirement of the 
Hospital. The Department may a lso consider to extend higher remuneration/incentives with 
higher qualifications eg DM/MCH etc. for ensuring adequate manpower in the hospital. 
(Para 3.29) 
Action Taken 
3.38 It may be informed that DPR hostel facilities for Resident doctors (742) and Nurses (1004) 
received on 01.04.2017 in Ministry for approval. Further, Ministry had approved open tender 
process for basement Stack Parking in the newer blocks on 24th May 2017 where after HSCC(I) 
Ltd floated the necessary tender inviting Expression of Interes t for the two -level car parking 
system on turnkey basis at the basements of Emergency and Super Speciality Block.  Subsequent 
to the evaluation two firms were found responsive but proposed technologies for Stack Parking 
were different in their cases. It wa s decided that electromechanical system was better than the 
Hydraulic system. Therefore, bid of Ram Ratna Infrastructure Pvt.Ltd‘s proposals was submitted 
for approval of appropriate authority. 
 

74 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.39   The Committee observes that most issues in Safdurjung Hospital and Vardhman 
Mahavir Medical College could have been resolved under a coordinated approach of the 
serving agencies. The Committee notes that the hostel facilities and stack parking around 
newer blocks are yet to start and the Ministry must avoid further procedural delays. The 
Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to work out the proposals on redevelopment 
of staff colony and hostel facilities and ensure the completion of all the pending projects. The 
Committee also reiterates its recommendation that the Medical Superintendent of the 
hospital may be vested with the power to hire staff/faculty on contract as per the situational 
requirement of the Hospital. 
Recommendation 
3.40 The Committee has been given to  understand that the construction project for New Boys 
and Girls Hostel in VMMC has been approved but is pending due to lack of fund. It has been 
estimated that Hostel facility for Junior residents (Non PG) -590, Senior residents – 810, 
Postgraduate students - 975 is required on urgent basis, as at present, Hostel facility is available 
only for 300 residents. The Committee also takes note with concern that adequate fund has not 
been earmarked for construction of Auditorium and Lecture Theatres. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends that requisite fund may be allocated to VMMC for construction of adequate hostel 
facilities for Undergraduate students and Postgraduate students, Auditorium and Lecture 
Theatres. 
(Para 3.31) 
Action Taken 
3.41 Dwarka Project: The construction of Project was not started as CPWD stated that the 
Layout Plans as approved in 2015 were not in consonance with Unified Building Bye -laws for 
Delhi 2019 and hence needed to be revised. Accordingly, CPWD has submitted a revi sed layout 
Plans which has been submitted to MoHFW on 22.03.2021 by hospital for approval. The proposal 
is under active consideration in Ministry in consultation with Central Design Bureau and Dte. 
GHS.  
3.42 In above connection it is also informed that no  budget has been allocated for Dwarka 
Project in Financial Year 2021 -22. However, SJH had projected Rs.40 Crore for this project for 
Financial Year 2021-22. 
Additional Infrastructure Project:- 
3.43 As stated above, the additional infrastructure project of VMMC of Estimated amount of 
Rs. 187.60 cr. is under consideration in Ministry for sanctioning of the project. Since in terms of 
Department of Expenditure OM No. 42(02)/PFC -I /2014 dated 04 -06-2020, an in -principle 
approval was required to be obtained from DoE in view of prudent utilization of public fund due 
to pandemic, the proposal after the approval of competent authority in the Ministry, has been 
referred to Ministry of Finance in the month of February, 2021 for their in -principle 
approval/concurrence. The response of Ministry of Finance is awaited. On receipt of their 
approval, further action would be taken as early as possible in accordance with rules and 
procedure. 

75 
 
3.44 For this project SJH had projected Rs.70 Crore will be required for this project i n current 
Financial Year. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.45 The Committee expresses its anguish over delay in approval of Layout Plans for the 
infrastructure project in VMMC . The Committee calls upon the Ministry to expedite the 
process of granting  necessary approvals to the project on construction of proposed 
accommodation facilities. The Ministry must fix accountability for undue delays  in 
completion of projects and ensure timely execution of all projects. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to follow up the pending proposals with the Ministry of Finance 
and ensure that adequate funds are earmarked for additional infrastructure projects. 
Recommendation 
3.46 The Committee takes note of the various construction projects at Atal Bihari V ajpayee 
Institute of Medical Sciences (ABVIMS) and Dr. RML Hospital. The Committee feels that effective 
monitoring mechanism to oversee the progress of the ongoing projects is required for ensuring 
timely completion of the project and without cost overruns. The Committee also takes into account 
that creation of Infrastructure for MBBS College and construction G+16 storey Super Specialty 
Block is required to house the existing Super Specialties as well as opening of new Super 
Specialties like Medical and Sur gical Oncology, Nuclear Medicine, Radio Therapy, Organ 
Transplant Medicine (Renal, Live, Cardiac) &Pediatric Cardiology, etc. The Committee 
recommends that the RML management should chalk out specific course of action to implement 
the project in order to increase the additional 509 beds in the hospital. 
(Para 3.40) 
Action Taken 
3.47 A Redevelopment Committee is already in place to look after all such work and also to 
monitor the progress of construction of infrastructure projects of ABVIMS & Dr. RML Hospital. 
The Committee holds periodic meetings for the purpose. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.48 The Committee is shocked to note the evasive reply of the Ministry on the progress of 
infrastructure projects in ABVIMS and Dr. RML Hospital. The Com mittee finds that the 
scheduled date of completion of the two infrastructure Projects, undertaken by the Atal 
Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Medical Sciences (ABVIMS) and Dr. RML Hospital was 
14.09.2019, however, the date has now been extended to 14.03.2022. The Committee, taking 
note of the p oor record of the Institute , recommends the Ministry to ensure that the 
construction activities are completed in the extended deadline without any further time and 
cost over-runs.  
 
 
 

76 
 
LADYHARDINGE MEDICALCOLLEGE (LHMC) &SMT.S.K.HOSPITAL 
Recommendation 
3.49 By going through the above submission, the Committee feels that allocation of capital 
outlay to the tune of Rs. 68.02 crore in BE 2021 -22 would not suffice for the intended purpose 
keeping in view stopping of the HEFA funding to meet the expenditure on procurement of 
machinery and equipments for making new blocks constructed under CRP project. The 
Committee,  therefore, recommends for favorably considering the projected demand of Rs.147.01 
crore at the RE 2021-22 for the intended purpose. 
(Para 3.48) 
Action Taken 
3.50 The HEFA loan sanctioned to LHMC was for an amount of Rs.464 crores in lieu of 
payments made to HSCC (I) Ltd. in view of works conducted under the Comprehensive 
Redevelopment Plan of LHMC Phase -1.  This amount was to be returned by LHMC towards 
HEFA by way of instalments which included return of loan amount as well as interest amount in 
half yearly (two instalments of 23.2 crore) and quarterly instalments (11 crores each= approx. 42 
crores) respectively.  These instalments cumulatively amount to approx. Rs. 90 crores annually.  
The procurement of machinery & equipment is over and above the stated amount.  To enable 
functioning of the Oncology Block, equipment needs to be procured through HITES the cost of 
which is 55 crores.  Further the Academic Block requir es clinical skill lab., the cost of which is 
approx. 25 crores.  Also, the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) amount for the newly 
commissioned buildings also needs to be taken care of, by including that amount for FY 2021 -22 
which will be close to 20 crores.  Hence, total amount required in lieu is approx. 190 crores. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.51 The Committee  desires the Ministry to assess the actual requirement of funds  for 
LHMC and S.K. Hospital and take urgent corrective measures to mitigate financial liability 
under the Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan of LHMC phase -I; alongwith incurred 
expenditure on procurement of Machinery and equipment, setting up of clinical skill lab and 
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) .  The Committee expects the Ministry to furnish a 
status note on the project within one month of presentation of this report to Parliament. 
Recommendation 
3.52 The Committee takes notes with concern the vacancy position of 70 faculties and 804 non -
faculty posts in LHMC. The Committee has been given to understand that the recruitment of 
faculty/assistant professor is done at the level of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and even 
for appointing assistant professors on contract basis approval of the Ministry is required. Th e 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to expedite the process for recruitment of 
faculty and non -faculty at the institute for effective working of the institute. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibility  to delegate administrative autonomy to 
the institute for recruitment of non -faculty members and appointment of assistant professors on 
contract basis. 
(Para 3.50) 

77 
 
Action Taken 
3.53 Vacancy position off faculty and non faculty staff against the sanctioned strength. 
Table18 
Name of the Post Sanctioned Strength Vacant post 
Faculty 341 70 
Non-Faculty 2427 804 
3.54 So far as recruitment against vacant posts is concerned, all the Direct Recruited Gazetted 
posts (faculty and non -faculty) are filled up through Union Public Service Commission(UPSC). 
Keeping in view the shortage of faculties, recruitment of Assistant Prof essors has been done on 
Contract basis and that too on year to year basis. Vacancy position is under observation of the 
cadre controlling authority. 
3.55 At present, the staff positioning in the Institution may be enumerated as per below table: - 
.SN. Posts Sanctioned 
Strength 
In 
position 
Vacant 
posts 
Remarks 
1.  Faculty (Medical College) 310 +1 283 
 
27 1 Director 
2.  Non-Faculty 12 09 03 ----- 
3.  Cadre posts 03 03 00 ----- 
4.  Other Gr. B Gazetted 08 06 02 ----- 
5.  Scientific 02 02 00 ----- 
6.  Non-technical 228 124@ 104 ----- 
7.  Technical 294 181* 113 ----- 
8.  Other Gr. C posts 671 417 254 ----- 
9.  Nursing Cadre 802 683$ 119 ----- 
10.  Nursing (Nursing 
College) 
32 11 21 ----- 
11.  Senior Residents 314 263 51 ----- 
12.  Non-PG Junior Residents 74 73 01 ----- 
 Total 2751 2055 695 ----- 
@ 5 personnel are on Contract basis 
* 78 personnel are on Contract basis 
$ 106 personnel are on Contract basis 
3.56 This Institution has been in the process of recruitment against the vacant posts incessantly 
and from time to time. In order to recruit manpower against the vacant posts, this institution has 
advertised 24 Non -technical (11 LDC reported to SSC), 131 Techni cal and 37 other Group C 

78 
 
posts for filling up. Therefore, appointment/ recruitment process is under way for 192 posts. This 
institution has also reported 33 posts of Nursing Officers to Dr.RML Hospital to fill up based on 
Nursing Officer examination conducted by AIIMS, New Delhi in 2020.  
3.57 In order to improve patient care in the Institute, 10 Faculty posts have been created in 
PMR Department, 46 Faculty posts in Paediatric Nephrology, 2 Faculty posts and 4 Senior 
Residents posts in the Department of Oph thalmology. Department of Neurology has been 
established with 32 posts in Department. Department of Plastic Surgery has been created to cater 
the super -speciality facility to the patients. Recruitment Rules for 49 posts in the Institute have 
been framed/ a mended and there are around 50RRs being processed. It may also be noted that 
around 507 vacancies (arose as and when) were filled up in past few years from time to time. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.58 The Committee expresses its concern over the vacant position s of 70 faculty and 804 
non faculty posts continuing in LHMC. The Committee is of the considered view that delay 
in seeking administrative approval or any other procedural delays slow s down the pace of 
recruitment process. The Comm ittee underlines the need to fill up the vacant posts on a 
regular basis and within a specified period of time. The Committee also reiterates its 
recommendation that the Ministry may delegate administrative autonomy to the Institute 
for recruitment of non -faculty members and appointment of Assistant Professors on a 
contract basis. The Institute must also take measures to fill up the vacant posts on 
permanent basis to ensure continuity and smooth functioning of the institute. 
KALAWATI SARAN CHILDEN'S HOSPITAL 
Recommendation 
3.59 The Committee observes that in KSCH against the total sanctioned strength of 773 posts in 
various cadres, the in -position strength is 672 and 101 posts stand vacant. The Committee 
understands that inadequate human resources must be adversely affecting the working of KSCH 
due to patient care load. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the recruitment process for 
filling up the vacant posts in KSCH must be expeditiously completed. 
(Para 3.56) 
Vacancy position of KSCH (February) 2021 
Table20 
S.NO. Name of the Cadre Sanctioned 
Strength 
In-position 
Strength 
Vacant 
Posts 
1. Group–A 16 09 07 
2. Group–B 474 437 37 
3. Group–C 199 154 45 
4. Group– C,MTS 84 72 12 
Grand Total 773 672 101 

79 
 
Action Taken 
3.60 As per available records, latest vacancy-position of KSCH is given below: 
VACANCY-POSITION 
Sl. No. Name of the Cadre  Sanctioned 
Strength  
In-position 
strength  
Vacant 
posts  
1. Group-A 16 10 06 
2. Group-B 474 432 42 
3. Group-C 199 154 45 
4, Group-C ―MTS‖ 84 70 14 
GRAND TOTAL 773 666 107 
 Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.61 The Committee wonders that KSCH has not responded to the recommendation of the 
Committee over vacancy positions and status of the recruitment process to fill up the vacant 
posts. The Committee observes that against the total sanctioned strength of 773 posts in 
various cadres, the in-position strength has further decreased to 666 and thus 107 posts still 
remain vacant. The Committee , therefore, would  like the Institute to expedite the 
recruitment process for filling up the vacant posts. 
Recommendation 
 
3.62 The Committee recommends that Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) 
has been successful in correcting regional imbalances in the availability of affordable/reliable 
tertiary health care services and to augment facilities for quality medical education in the 
country. The Committee is of the view that robust mechanism must be put in place for effective 
utilization of funds earmarked to various Institutes under PMSSY to ac hieve the set objectives. 
Timely completion of the projects and availability of adequate manpower is concomitant to 
achievement of the core objective of PMSSY. The Committee hopes that concrete steps would be 
taken to expedite the work and construction pro jects. The Monitoring mechanism to oversee the 
progress of the construction projects also needs to be strengthened. 
(Para 3.75) 
Action Taken 
STATUS OF FILLED UP POSITION FOR VARIOUS POSTS FOR FIRST SIX AIIMS 
 
Table25 
 
Sl.No. AIIMS No. of posts created No. of Posts filled up (Regular + 
contractual) 
Project Cell 
posts 
Faculty 
posts 
Non-Faculty 
posts 
Project Cell 
posts 
Faculty  
posts 
Non-Faculty 
posts 
1 Bhopal% 
(As on 
05.01.2021) 
8 305 3776 8 168 1976 

80 
 
2 Bhubaneswar 
(As on 
28.12.2020) 
8 30 3776 5 195 1311 
3 Jodhpur 
(As on 
30.12.2020) 
8 305 3776 4 186 2726# 
4 Patna 
(As on 
31.12.2020) 
8 305 3776 2 136 1131 
5 Raipur 
(As on 
30.12.2020) 
8 305 3776 5 159 2293 
6 Rishikesh 
(As on 
31.12.2020) 
8 305 3776 5 247@@ 2949## 
Total: 48 1830 22656 29 1091 12386 
#Including Outsourced staff.  
@@ 9 Faculty posts filled on contractual basis.  
## 1229 working on ad-hoc basis.  
% includes 459 outsourced posts. 
 
3.63 Requirement of funds for operationalization and maintenance of various services of 
functional / partially functional AIIMS are released as Grants -in- Aid to Institutes out of Revenue 
Budget of PMSSY. Fund requirement for these purposes are discussed and approved by the 
Standing Finance Committees of respective Institutes, keeping in view overall budgetary 
allocation of PMSSY. Funds   are released through Budgetary Grants under GiA (General), GiA 
(Capital) and GiA (Salaries) ,  after scrutinizing the balance availability and 
expenditure/utilization pattern in the past.  All Grants -in-Aid (GiA) releases to funct ional / 
partially functional AIIMS are governed through Rule 230(7) of General Financial Rules (GFR) 
2017 which elucidate   just in time release principle which in effect restricts availability of  cash 
balance i.e. GiA at all AIIMS to mere three months.  All release proposals are scrutinized and 
examined by Internal Finance Division (IFD) of the Ministry ensuring strict adherence to GFR. 
Funds are released through PFMS platform which is quicker and easy to monitor.  
3.64 Details of monitoring mechanism for  timely completion of projects have been provided in 
reply to para 3.69  of the 126 th Report of the Committee . As regards manpower, requirement of 
manpower projected by various Institutes depending upon progress of the project, are examined in 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and taken up with Ministry of Finance for approval. It is 
also pertinent to mention that during review of projects, there is special emphasis on 
synchronization of progress in civil works, procurement of equipment and hiring of m anpower so 
that delivery of services is not delayed due to slow progress in any of the critical activities.   
3.65 Funds for civil works and equipment procurement, which are part of setting up of new 
projects, are released by the Ministry to the EA or PSA out of the allocation under Capital Head of 
PMSSY.   
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.66 The Committee expresses its displeasure at the existing gap between the sanctioned 
strength and the in -position strength of the AIIMS like Institutions. The Committee opines 
that such a wide gap would impact the day to day functioning of the Institutes. The 

81 
 
Committee, therefore, strongly desires the Ministry to take suitable measures to address the 
issue of shortfall of manpower in Project Cell, Faculty and Non faculty in these Institutes. 
The Committee  further recommends for expediting the recruitment process so that the 
AIIMS like Institutes excel in their envisaged goal and mission.  
 
OTHER HOSPITALS/ INSTITUTIONS 
DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SECTOR 
Recommendation 
3.67 The Committee recommends the Department to make concerted efforts to upgrade the 
education standard of nursing in the country to global standard and fill up vacant posts of various 
cadres of Nursing in various hospitals in  the country so as to enhance the Nurse patient ratio in 
general. The present nurse patient ratio in the country is 1.7 nurses per 1000 population, is 
indicative of the shortage of nurses in the country. The Committee also desires that the issue of 
skewed distribution of nurses between rural and urban are needs to be addressed, suitably as per 
the recommendation of the Committee of Experts constituted under the chairpersonship of Dr. 
Bimla Kapoor. 
(Para 3.115) 
Action Taken 
3.68 Health being a State subject, vacant posts of various cadres of Nursing in various hospitals 
of the Country are filled up by the respective State Governments. The Committee set up by this 
Ministry to look into skewed distribution of nurses between rural and urban area has begun their 
work and appropriate action will be taken upon receipt of their Report. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.69 The Committee , in 126 th Report, had highlighted the shortage of nurses in the 
country which remains a grave concern; however the response of the Ministry, thereto, in its 
ATNs, is not tenable. The recruitment rules may vary from States to States but the Union 
Government must play a guid ing role in ensuring that the nurse and patient ratio in the 
country is improved. The Committee observes that while the nursing sector is in need of 
reforms, the issues like poor career progression, low remuneration, high workload etc 
plague the sector. Th e Ministry in consultation with the States must make efforts to ensure 
that the working conditions of the nurses are improved and the profession gets the respect it 
deserves. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to take appropriate action on the 
recommendations of the Committee of Experts constituted under the chairpersonship of Dr. 
Bimla Kapoor. 
 
 

82 
 
COVID-19 VACCINATION FOR HEALTH CARE WORKERS AND FRONTLINE 
WORKERS – NHM 
Recommendation 
3.70 The Committee fails to understand the rationale behind making provision for Rs. 35000.00 
crore for Covid-19 vaccination in Demand for Grants No. 40 transfer to the States during 2021 -
22. The Committee feels that the devolution of funds to States should have appropriately been 
through the Ministry of Health and Family  Welfare, being the Nodal Ministry involved in the 
implementation of the Covid -19 Vaccination Programmes. Even the release of fund to the States 
could have been better monitored by the Nodal Ministry keeping in view the progress of 
programme for Covid-19 Vaccination. 
(Para 3.142) 
Action Taken 
3.71 In the current financial year i.e. 2021 -22, INR 35,000 crore has been budgeted for 
procurement of COVID -19 Vaccin e. As on 27 th November 2021, an expenditure of INR 
19,675.46 crore has been incurred against this allocation which has been utilized for procurement 
of COVID -19 vaccine for free of cost supply to State/UTs. No separate expenses have been 
allocated for fuel. 
3.72 Further, an additional budget of Rs.4500 crore from Ministry of Finance has been sought 
for ensuring uninterrupted supply of vaccines and to protect the country. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.73 The Committee observes that out of Rs. 35,000 crores  earmarked in 2021 -22 for 
procurement of COVID vaccine, an expenditure of Rs. 19,675.46 crores has been incurred as 
on 27th November, 2021 and funds to the tune of Rs. 15324.54 crores remain unspent  despite 
due and cry for vaccine doses . The Committee takes into account the concerns regarding 
issues of shortage of vaccines , raised by many States in the past few months rather some 
States claiming downsizing of the vaccines supply. Although, the Committee notes that the 
supply of vaccine doses to States is calculated on a formula that weighs all the factors like 
population, efficiency, active case -load, etc. the Committee recommends that vaccine equity 
must be ensured for mitigation of Covid -19 on ground level.  The Committee also desires 
strict monitoring over proper utilization of the funds budgeted for procurement of Covid -19 
vaccine doses. With the threat of Omicorn variant looming large and the rising concerns 
around omicron variant escaping immunity, calls of administering the booster doses of 
vaccines have drawn the attention of all. Moreover, with the start of vaccination programme 
for children between the age group of 15 -18 years, the Ministry must accordingly assess the 
additional budgetary requirements to ensure uninterrupted procurement and supply of  
vaccines to all the sections of the country.  The Committee also desires that issue of 
administering booster dose/precaution dose to all must be estimated without delay and 
adequate availability of vaccines must be ensured.  
 
 

83 
 
STATUS OF ON-GOING PROJECTS TAKEN BY AIIMS, NEW DELHI 
Recommendation 
3.74 The Committee takes into account the status and timelines of various ongoing projects at 
AIIMS, New Delhi. The Committee desires that the AIIMS management to ensure the completion 
of ongoing projects as per revised schedule of completion as these projects have already been 
considerably delayed. 
(Para 3.182) 
Action Taken 
3.75 The Status of ongoing projects taken by Institute is as below:-  
Sl. 
No. 
Project Sanctioned 
Cost in 
crore  
Date of 
start  
Stipulate
d date of 
completi
on  
Tentative 
Completion 
Date 
Physical 
progress 
achieved 
Expenditure 
upto Aug 2020                
(Rs. in crore) 
1 Surgical 
Block 
100.29 Sep 
2013 
April 
2015 
Aug  2021 95% 
completed 
84.90 
2 Mother & 
Child Block 
290.70 May 
2015 
May 
2017 
July 2021 100%  
completed 
265.00 
3 New Paid 
Ward 
100.00 Dec 
2016 
Aug 
2018 
Aug  2021 95% 
completed 
90.73 
4 Geriatrics 
Block/NCA  
250.00 Feb 
2018 
Feb 2020 Sep 2021 89% 
completed 
166.11 
 TOTAL 740.99     588.80 
Mother & Child Block: – 
● Additional area was planned and built at 7 th& 8th floor to the tune of 12000 Sq Ft approx.  
which are not planned in original proposal. This was done to accommodate the state of art 
facilities of the departments envisaged after start of work.  
● A common ramp with the adjoining Surgical Block was planned later as per site 
requirements and requirements of the Delhi Fire Services Department. The re planning and 
execution thereof took time for execution.  
● The project was approved and envisaged in 201 3 and awarded in 2015. During this period 
due to advancements in the medical fields and new technologies available the perception 
of the planned facilities and planning changed which required modifications and 
alterations in the already executed/underway works. This led to some delay. 
● Construction activities were stopped by the DPCC on different dates on account of air 
pollution mitigation measures announced each year during winter season.  Odd & Even 
system in Vehicles by Delhi Govt., construction activiti es ban from 6PM to 6AM by 
CPCB etc were required to be adhered to by the contractor which required stopping 
/suspension of work. The remobilization thereafter took time leading to hindrance & delay 
thereof 

84 
 
● On account of the changes and additional works the  requirements for medical 
infrastructure viz. OT‘s & MOT, MGPS points, Electrical & IT points at various floors etc 
were re planned and taken up for execution thereafter.  
● One additional facility of IVF in service floor also required some additional and 
subsequent modification work.  
● The equipments and manpower were also revised as per the need of the modified building 
/facility requirements. The work of Gas Manifold and IT works were to be synchronized 
with the changes made requiring some lag time in execution of the civil works thereafter.   
●  Work was held up on account of lockdown for COVID -19 Pandemic from 22.03.2020 
onward leading to major disruption in the work progress would entail a delay of six 
months at the minimum for remobilization of labour which is not sufficient till date  . As 
per the notification of Ministry of Finance order No. F. 18/4/2020 -PPD dated 13.05.2020 
regarding Force Majeure Clause (FMC) the said delay would have to be conceded to the 
contractors executing the work. 
● Again work was held up on account of second w ave of lockdown for COVID -19 
Pandemic from March 2021. 
Surgical Block :- The surgical block vendor suspended the work long back and did not respond 
even after a number of meetings held with him by the AIIMS authorities. Ultimately with no 
option left, the firm had to be expelled from the site. The balance work and additional work as per 
the user department is being taken up separately. The left out work of the main vendor is taken up 
under separate tender by call of tender under risk and cost of the firm.  We are into arbitration 
stage with the main vendor of Surgical Block that is why the work is on stand still mode from last 
2-3 years.   
● Work awarded to new vendor on risk & cost of the main vendor for the balance work in 
the month of Feb  2021.  Again work was held up on account of second wave of lockdown 
for COVID-19 Pandemic from March 2021. 
New Paid Ward: -  First vendor has abandoned  the work and contract has been terminated due to 
slow pace of work and tender were recalled. Arbitration case  The New P aid Ward Site is 
adjoining to the C-II Type Flats of Faculty, the work was never allowed to be executed during late 
hours. The site is very congested having hostel on two sides and Electric Sub Station of one side. 
There was an incident of land Slide durin g execution of work twice. Hindrance was there on site 
for shifting of services. Delay was there on account of finalization of typical layout of floor plan 
and furniture layout. Ban on Construction activities by NGT/ DPCC. Hindrance on account of 
repairing of existing sewer / storm water line. Delay in finalization of Ground Floor & 9 th Floor 
plan. Work was held up on account of lockdown for COVID -19 Pandemic from 22.03.2020 
onward leading to major disruption in the work progress would entail a delay of six  months at the 
minimum for remobilization of labour which is not sufficient till date . As per the notification of 
Ministry of Finance order No. F. 18/4/2020 -PPD dated 13.05.2020 regarding Force Majeure 
Clause (FMC) the said delay would have to be conceded to the contractors executing the work.  
● Again work was held up on account of second wave of lockdown for COVID -19 
Pandemic from March 2021. 
Geriatrics Block  :-  Additional work of  3 level of basement and Service Block with Ground 
Floor has been included on latter stage to have a continuous basement in whole of Masjid Moth 
Campus. Work of additional fire tower for evacuation of patients in case of any untoward 
situation which will connect Surgical Block and Geriatrics Block under the same agreement.   

85 
 
Other delay are on account of Ban on Construction activities by NGT/ DPCC. Work was held up 
on account of lockdown for COVID -19 Pandemic from 22.03.2020 onward leading to major 
disruption in the work progress would entail a delay of six months at the minimum f or 
remobilization of labour which is not sufficient till date . As per the notification of Ministry of 
Finance order No. F. 18/4/2020 -PPD dated 13.05.2020 regarding Force Majeure Clause (FMC) 
the said delay would have to be conceded to the contractors executing the work. 
● Again work was held up on account of second wave of lockdown for COVID -19 
Pandemic from March 2021. 
Further Recommendations/Observations  
3.76 The Committee notes with concern that the pace of completion of construction 
projects at AIIMS Ne w Delhi has been very slow. Almost all the construction projects got 
delayed and the target date of completion for all the four projects has been extended. The 
Committee observes that the delay in the construction work was mainly due to non 
performance by the selected construction agencies and the lockd own imposed during the 
pandemic Covid-19. As per the submission of the Institute, all the projects sh ould have been 
completed by now. H owever, the Committee finds undue delay in completion of projects in 
Surgical Block, New Paid Ward and Geriatrics Block due to variety of reasons as advocated. 
The Committee is assured that the Institute  needs to adopt a stringent monitoring 
mechanism so that any remaining work is completed within the stipulated time limits . The 
Institute must put in place a robust assessment process for selection of the project 
development agency or contractor, taking into consideration its past track record so that 
such unnecessary additional costs and time extensions are minimized in futu re Projects and 
time lines are adhered to.  
REDEVELOPMENT OF RESIDENTIAL COLONIES OF AIIMS (AYURVIGYAN 
NAGAR & WEST ANSARI NAGAR) 
Recommendation 
3.77 The Committee notes the planning for redevelopment of residential colonies of AIIMS, 
New Delhi known as Ay urvigyan Nagar & West Ansari Nagar i.e. construction of 3519 Dwelling 
Units at the cost of Rs.4441.00 crore to be completed within the span of 60 months from the date 
of approval i.e. 13.10.2016. The Committee recommends that the construction of dwelling u nits in 
Ayurvigyan Nagar & West Ansari Nagar must be monitored strictly for ensuring timely 
completion of the residential projects. 
(Para 3.185) 
Action Taken 
3.78 Redevelopment of Residential Colonies of AIIMS (Ayurvigyan Nagar & West Ansari 
Nagar ) –  Status of work is as below:-  
1. 33 KVA cable of ( BSES) – Shifting work completed by BSES, at West Ansari Nagar. 
2. 33 KVA cable (NDMC) - Route has been identified, NDMC has asked AIIMS/ NBCC & 
Contractor ( M/s Sam (India) Buildwell Pvt. Ltd.)  to shif t the cable  under their 

86 
 
supervision. Procurement of cable has been done & shifting completed at West Ansari 
Nagar. 
3. 11 KVA (NDMC) – 2 nos of cable. One cable has been traced and route to be decided and 
another cable is still not traced. Estimate for the  shifting of the both 11 KVA cable will be 
given by NDMC route has been finalized, demand note has been issued NDMC and funds 
will be  deposited soon. Approval conveyed to NBCC to deposit the said money out of 
seed money. 
4. Transplantation of 69 trees has been done within stipulated time at W A Nagar. 
5. 298 Nos  Transplantation of  trees has been done within stipulated time at A V Nagar. 
6. Demolished of 64 Nos of The ― I ― type qtrs completed  along with Surekha Vishram 
Sadan, as required for Phase-I work.  
7. Alternate road for residents of A.V.Nagar is completed , barricading work is also 
completed at both campuses, for phase-I. 
8. Material of D wall is being procured, for both sites. 
9. Sample flats are under construction at both sites. 
3.79 The pace of work is slow, as the final approval from NDMC & SDMC is still awaited for 
West Ansari Nagar & Ayurvigyan Nagar Campus of AIIMS respectively. 
3.80 The construction of 3519 Dwelling Units at the cost of Rs.4441.00 crore to be completed 
within the span of 60 months from the date of approval i.e., 13.10.2016.  
3.81 The tree cutting permission took substantial time for both campus from the forest 
department. Since submission of drawing to NDMC is done for West Ansari Nagar, which are yet 
to forwarded to Delhi Fire Services  & Delhi Urban Art Commission by NDMC   for approval. 
For Ayur Vigyan Nagar layout drawing has been approved by Layout scrutiny Committee & 
building plans has been uploaded online of SDMC portal and approval is under process. 
Excavation work started at site by Contractor (M/s Girdhari Lal Construction Pvt.Ltd ) in 
anticipation of approval. The span of 60 months for construction is from the date of all statutory 
approvals in place. 
Further Recommendations/Observations  
3.82 The Committee notes that the approval of the construction of 3519 dwelling units 
were given by the Cabinet on 13.10.2016 and the units were expected to be completed within 
the span of 60 months. The timeline has already elapsed  and the final approval from NDMC 
and SDMC is still awaited. The Committee is of the opinion that undue delay in the 
construction activities leads to unnecessary costs and time overruns.  Needless to say, factors 
like inflation, abrupt ending of contracts, arbitration cases, disputes etc. contribute to undue 
disruptions in completion of a project. The Committee recommends the Ministry to make a 
proper assessment before the beginning of any project and conduct regular review meeting 
to track the progress of the project. This will ensure timely completion of the ongoing 
projects and also help avoid time and cost overruns. 

87 
 
POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES AND RESEARCH 
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH 
Recommendation 
3.83 The Committee is of the considered view that PGIMER, Satellite Centres at Sangrur, Una 
and Ferozepur be completed without delay in order to cater to the healthcare needs of the patients 
who accounts for more than One Lac admissions every year and close to 3 Million patients in 
OPD annually. The Committee also recommends compl etion of work for Modernization of 
Research Block “A” & “B” and Modernization of Nehru Hospital without further delay. The 
Committee desires development of Sarangpur Campus, PGIMER, Chandigarh at the projected 
cost of Rs. 2500.00 crore to be undertaken on priority basis. 
(Para 3.200) 
Action Taken 
3.84 To expedite the projects regular meetings with implementing agencies are being held by 
the Institute. The present status of these projects is given as under: - 
Sl. 
No. 
Project Present Status Expected date of 
Completion 
1. Setting up of Satellite 
Centre of PGIMER, 
Chandigarh at Sangrur 
(Punjab) 
98% completed. The work 
specialized December, 2021 services 
viz. MOT, MGPS, Kitchen, Laundry, 
BMW have been awarded except 
CSSD, Mortuary and the 
procurement of material in being 
taken up.  
December,2021 
2. Setting up of 
PGIMER, Satellite 
Centre at Una, 
Himachal Pradesh 
Work has been awarded to HITES as 
Executing Agency on 12.05.2021. 
HITES has initiated the process for 
appointment of Design /Architectural 
Consultant. Boundary wall 
construction is in progress.  
August,2024 
3. Setting up of 100 
bedded PGIM ER, 
Satellite Centre at 
Ferozepur, Punjab 
Letter of Acceptance has been issued 
to HITES on 12.06.2021 as 
Executing Agency. Boundary wall 
construction in progress.  
September,2024 
4. Modernization of 
Research Block 'A' & 
'B' and Modernization 
of Nehru Hospital, 
PGIMER, Chandigarh. 
The work is being reviewed to 
workout modalities of execution 
departmentally as per the availability 
of funds. 
 
5.  Development 
Sarangpur Campus, 
PGIMER, Chandigarh 
Land measuring 50.76 acres has been 
allotted to PGIMER vide Estate 
Office, U.T., Chandigarh letter dated 
11.03.2020. The deed of conveyance 
 

88 
 
has been registered on 21.06.2021. 
Further, the Estate office, U.T., 
Chandigarh vide letter No. 
PGI/Estate-II/2021/1006 dated 
05.07.2021 has been requested to 
give the possessi on of the land at the 
earliest. In the meantime, at the 
Institute level the meetings with the 
various stakeholders are being held to 
assess the need of the Institute to 
finalize the facilities to be 
constructed at Sarangpur  
Further Recommendations/Observations  
3.85 The Committee observes that the delay in the Project of "Modernisation of Research 
Block A and B and M odernization of Nehru Hospital", PGIMER  Chandigarh was mainly 
due to the non -performance by the selected construction agency. The Committee, therefore, 
desires that the remaining work which is now planned to be carried out departmentally  
must be monitored closely. For this to happen, stringent monitoring mechanism need to be 
put in  place for timely completion of the work . The Committee, in this connection , 
recommends the Institute to expedite the review process and complete the Modernisation 
Project without further delay. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the status of 
the Satellite Centre of PGIMER, Chandigarh at Sangrur (Punjab).  
Recommendation 
3.86 The Committee expresses its concern over the delay in filling up of 1686 posts in various 
cadres of PGIMER, Chandigarh. The Committee understands that though the recruitment of posts 
is an ongoing process, the provision of in -position strength as per the sanctioned strength would 
definitely improve the working of institute in delivery of healthcare services. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that all ou t efforts must be made for filling up of the vacant posts 
in PGIMER, Chandigarh without further procrastination. 
(Para 3.202) 
Action Taken 
3.87 The Institute has made its best efforts for filling up of vacancies. In this sequence, around 
87 selections have been made to various categories of post. 120 posts of various categories under 
Engineering Wing have been recommended as 'Dying cadre. Therefor e, these posts could not be 
filled up. Approx. 150 number of vacancies of various different categories of promotional posts 
could not be filled up due to various court cases and SLPs filed by the PGI against catch -up rule 
which are pending before the Hon'b le Court. The Institute is filing an application before the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court for vacating the status quo order as on 15.04.2019, so that the lot of 
promotional posts of Ministerial cadre, Nursing Cadre as well as Technical cadre could be filled 
up, keeping in view the patient care services. The vacant posts are being filled by the Institute 
from time to time as per the provisions of recruitment rules for the posts. The recruitment/filling 
up of the post is an ongoing process. The process of filling up of remaining vacant posts will be 
initiated in subsequent recruitment phase. 

89 
 
3.88 Supporting staff i.e. Laboratory Attendant, Hospital Attendant, Medical Record 
Technicians etc. have been outsourced through outsourcing agencies, keeping in view the 
requirement of the Institute and in interest of patient care services.  
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.89 The Committee is perturbed to note that despite the best efforts by Institute to fill up 
the vacant  posts, there still exists a gap in the in -position strength and the sanctioned 
strength in various cadres of PGIMER Chandigarh due to continuing administration 
blockade. The Committee  is of the view that the Institute must address the shortage of 
workforce at all levels and fill up the vacant posts at various levels without further delay.  
The Committee would also like to be updated on  the application filed before the Supreme 
Court and the litigation cases pending in the court  pertaining to filling up of vacant posts 
through promotion.  
 
NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION 
Immunization 
Recommendation 
3.90 The Committee also takes note of the varying vaccination chart given by the Government 
Hospitals and the Private Doctors for children. The Committee, therefore, recommends creation 
of State/Area specific uniform vaccination program. 
(Para 4.23) 
Action Taken 
3.91 Under Universal Immunization Program (UIP), National Immunization Schedule, vaccine 
doses and dosing interval is decided based on the recommendations of National  Technical 
Advisory Group for Immunization (NTAGI). National Immunization Schedule is being followed 
uniformly across the country including some of the private practitioners. This schedule has been 
recommended by NTAGI based on the disease burden and national importance. 
3.92 However, there are many more vaccines which are not part of National Immunizatio n 
Schedule and these vaccines are provided by the private practitioners as per recommendations of 
Indian Academy of Paediatrics (IAP) or pack insert of vaccines. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.93 The Committee is aware of the fact that the National Immunization Schedule, vaccine 
doses and dosing interval is decided based on the recommendations of National Technical 
Advisory Group for Immunization (NTAGI). The Committee is however concerned over 
other vaccines that are not part of th e National Immunization Schedule . The Committee is 
of the view that the vaccines administered outside the Immunization Programme must also 
have uniformity in doses and schedule. Vaccines for diseases that are endemic to a 
geographical area must only be administered in that particular area. The Committee further 

90 
 
recommends that universal coverage be part of the National Immunisation Schedule that 
contains provision of booster doses as precaution dose to all as guard against emerging 
variants of Coronavirus.  
Strengthening of State Drug Regulatory System 
Recommendations/Observations 
3.94 The Committee notes that the Scheme for upgrading and strengthening the States Drug 
Regulatory structures which started in 2015 was scheduled to be implemented during the three 
financial years viz, 2015 -16, 2016 -17 and 2017 -18. However, till 31.01.2021, on ly Rs.544.06 
crores have been released out of a total outlay of Rs.850 crore. The Committee is compelled to 
point out the lackadaisical approach of the Department and especially those State Governments 
that have not yet signed the MoUs even after lapse of almost six years since the commencement of 
the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to follow up with the States 
and make every effort to persuade the States to sign the MoUs. 
(Para 4.76) 
Action Taken 
3.95 States/UTs of Assam, Chhattisgarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu and 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands Administration have signed the Memorandum of Understanding with 
the Central Government under the scheme of Strengthening of State Drug Regulatory System in 
2020 and have also been released Grant-in-aid. However, State of West Bengal is yet to sign the 
MoU in spite of requests vide letters dated 17.09.2019, 09.12.2019, 08.01.2020, 20.02.2020, 
07.07.2020 and DO letter 19.08.2020 from Secretary, HFW.  Likewise,  UTs of Lakshadweep and 
Chandigarh have also not signed the MoU with the Central Government. 
3.96 All the States/UTs, which have received Grants -in-Aid have been requested to furnish 
Utilization Certificate (UCs) along with detailed progress report of the projects undertaken 
through virtual meetings on 03.11.2020, 24.11.2020, 23.12.2020 and 22.01.2021. Accordingly, 
UCs and progress reports have been received from States/UTs and further instalment of grant -in-
aid has also been released to eligible States/UTs. Up to FY 2020 -21, the expenditure under this 
Scheme reached Rs. 581.30 crore. 
3.97 The uncovered State/UTs are being vigorously pursued for implementation of this scheme. 
Further Recommendations/Observations  
3.98 The Committee wonders as to why the State Government of West  Bengal and UTs of 
Lakshadweep and Chandigarh are hesitant in signing the MoU with the Central 
Government under the Scheme of Strengthening of State Drugs Regulatory System despite 
persuasion by the Department of H&FW. The Committee also expresses its displeasure over 
the slow pace of activities under the Scheme of the Ministry which is aimed at upgrading 
and strengthening the States Drug's Regulatory structures. The Committee emphasizes that 
poor testing infrastructure in the country poses a hindrance in e nsuring safety and quality 
of drugs available for consumption.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the 
Department, to coordinate with States/UT Government with a view to put in place a vibrant, 

91 
 
dynamic and effective regulatory regime for safegua rding the public from substandard 
drugs. The States/UTs also need to be persuaded for implementation of the Scheme.  
National Mental Health Programme 
Recommendations/Observations 
3.99 The Committee observes that Rs.50.00 crore was allotted at BE 2018 -19 under the NMHP 
and the same was reduced to Rs. 40 crore in BE 2019 -20 and BE 2020 -21. However to make 
things worse, the actual expenditure was Rs. 2.01 crore, Rs. 2.51 crore and Rs. 9.07crore in 2018-
19, 2019 -20, 2020 -21, respectively. The Committee expres ses its deep concerns over the gross 
under utilization of funds under National Mental Health Programme followed by dwindling trend 
of allocation of funds.The Committee is of the view that a constant under utilization over the years 
under this head clearly points towards the Ministry's inability to comprehend the magnitude of 
mental health burden in the country. Various studies have highlighted the high prevalence of 
mental illness in the country but no substantial progress has been achieved to facilitate a robust 
mechanism for delivery of mental healthcare services. 
(Para 4.82) 
Action Taken 
3.100 The approval for continuation of tertiary care programmers during 2019 -20 provided that 
no new activity could be supported under the programme and further release of funds to already 
supported Institutions will be on reimbursement basis. This Ministry had requested the Institutions 
already supported under NMHP to submit proposals for further release of funds as per the revised 
funding mechanism. However, funds alloc ated under the tertiary care component of NMHP could 
not be utilized due to lack of proposals from States/UTs for release of funds on reimbursement 
basis, despite regular follow up. The actual expenditure was Rs.2.01 Crores, Rs.2.50 Crores and 
Rs. 20.43 Crores in the years 2018-19, 2019-20 & 2020-2021 respectively. 
Further Recommendations/Observations  
3.101 The factors of poor utilization of budget under the Scheme and the lack of proposals 
from the States /UTs jointly contribute to the prevalence of mental health issues in the 
country. Despite reports citing the prevalence of mental health illness among the Indian 
population, the very indifference shown by the States reflects the continuing trivialization of 
the issue. Lack of awa reness about the importance of redressal /treatment of mental health 
issues is one of the major hindrances in implementation of the Scheme.  
3.102 The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to incentivize the Institutes in 
carrying out activities un der the revised funding mechanism and ensure that there is no 
delay in reimbursements to the Institutes. The Committee believes that the need of the hour 
is to launch a awareness campaign based on a systematic understanding of the magnitude of 
mental health burden and assessing the trends and its prevalence for all the States/UTs. The 
States/UTs must cooperate with the Central Government  so that a robust policy aimed 
towards alleviating the burden and mainstreaming the mental health issue can be 
implemented at the ground level.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
follow up the matter with the Institutes and the States/UTs to start different programs and 
submit proposals for release of funds.  

92 
 
Recommendation 
3.103 The Committee points out that Ministry did not launch any specific programs pertaining to 
mental health during Covid -19. According to WHO about 7.5 percent Indians suffer from some 
mental disorder and WHO predicted that by 2020, roughly 20 per cent of Indi a will suffer from 
mental illnesses. The Committee is of the view that unprecedented condition during the pandemic 
would have considerably increased the prevalence of depressive disorders and mental illness in 
the country. The Committee desires the Ministr y to conduct a study to assess the prevalence of 
mental illness, depressive disorders and suicide death rate in the country including the impact of 
the pandemic on the mental health of the population. 
(Para 4.83) 
Action Taken 
3.104 The Ministry has not launched any special Schemes under the National Mental Health 
Programme considering the increase in mental health issues due to COVID -19. However, 
realizing the impact that COVID-19 may have on the mental health of the people the Gover nment 
has taken a number of initiatives to provide psychosocial support during COVID -19. These 
initiatives include.  
a. Setting up of a 24/7 helpline in March,2020 itself, to provide psychosocial support, by 
mental health professionals, to the entire affected  population, divided into different target 
groups viz children adult, elderly, women and healthcare workers.  
b. Issuance of guidelines/advisories on management of mental health issues, catering to 
different segments of the society. 
c. Advocacy through various m edia platforms in the form of creative and audio -visual 
materials on managing stress and anxiety, and promoting an environment of supported and 
care for all.  
d. Issuance of detailed guidelines by the National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences (NIM HANS), Bengaluru -―Mental Health in the times of COVID -19 
Pandemic-Guidance for General Medical and Specialized Mental Health Care Settings.‖ 
e. Online capacity building of health workers by NIMHANS in providing psychosocial 
support and training through (IGOT)-Diksha platform. 
3.105   In addition to the above, the District Mental Health Programme (DMHP) component of 
the National Mental Health Programme (NMHP) has been sanctioned for implementation in 692 
districts for which support is provided to States/UTs through the National Health M ission. 
Facilities made • available under DMHP at the Community Health Centre(CHC) and Primary 
Health Centre(PHC) levels, inter -alia, include outpatient services, assessment, counselling/ 
psycho-social interventions, continuing care and support to persons with severe mental disorders, 
drugs, outreach services, ambulance services etc. In addition to above services there is a 
provision of 10 bedded in-patient facility at the District level. 
Further Recommendations/Observations  
3.106 The Committee has time and again emphasized on the importance of mental health 
and the need of integrating mental health in the health policy of the Government. The 
pandemic brought about a significant increase in the number of people struggling with 
mental health issues. The Co mmittee is of the  considered view that the Ministry needs to 

93 
 
amplify its efforts in delivering mental health services to the masses. The Committee , 
therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry must conduct a study to assess 
the prevalence of mental illness, depressive disorders and suicide death rate in the country 
including the impact of the pandemic on the mental health of the population.  
Recommendation 
3.107 The Committee is appalled at the shortage of mental health professionals in the co untry. 
As per WHO Mental Health Atlas 2017, India has only 1.93 mental health workers and 0·29 
psychiatrists per 100,000 populations, which is much below the global average. The Committee is 
also dismayed to note the lack of a centrally maintained data bas e on the number of clinical 
health professionals working in the field of mental health in the country. The Committee strongly 
recommends the Ministry to create a database on the number mental health professionals in the 
country so as to realistically assess their requirement. 
(Para 4.84) 
Action Taken 
3.108 With a view to augment the availability of trained manpower in the field of mental health 
in the country, the Government is implementing Manpower Development Schemes for 
establishment of Centres of Excellence and strengthening/ establishment of Post Graduate (PG) 
Departments in mental health specialties. Till date, support has been provided for establishment of 
25 Centres of Excellence and strengthening/ establishment of 47 Post Graduate (PG) Departm ents 
in four mental health specialties viz. (i) Psychiatry, (ii) Clinical Psychology, (iii) Psychiatric 
Nursing, and (iv) Psychiatric Social Work, in the country. This Ministry has, from time to time, 
emphasized to the respective State/UT Governments, the need for timely completion of work 
pertaining to the establishment of Centres of Excellence and strengthening/establishment of Post 
Graduate Departments in mental health specialties. The respective States/UTs have also been 
requested to furnish UCs for fun ds released, seek balance funds on reimbursement basis and 
complete the approved projects expeditiously. 
3.109 In addition to the Manpower Development Schemes of NMHP, the Government is also 
augmenting the availability of manpower to deliver mental healthcare services in the underserved 
areas of the country by providing online training courses to various healthcare service providers 
like medical officers, psychologists, social workers and nurses to deliver quality mental healthcare 
services throughou t the country through the Digital Academies established at the three Central 
Mental Health Institutes, namely, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, 
Bengaluru, Lokopriya Gopinath Bordoloi Regional Institute of Mental Health, Tezpur, Assam , 
and Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.110 The Committee recommends the Ministry to pursue the activities pertaining to 
mission of the establishment of Center of Excellence i n mental health specialties in  the 
States/UTs. The poor availability of mental health specialists in the  country is a matter of 
concern, especially, when the pandemic has significantly amplified the mental health issues 
around the world. The Ministry must make constant efforts to bring  about a change in the 
attitude towards mental health issues through awareness generation programmes and giving 
due impetus to effective implementation of Manpower Development Scheme . The 

94 
 
Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to work towards providing  mental health 
care services even at primary and community healthcare level. The Committee believes that 
the Ministry must address the shortage of mental health professionals in the country for 
ensuring availability of mental health care services to the ge neral public. The Committee 
reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry must create a database on the number of 
mental health professionals in the country so as to realistically assess their requirement. 
National Programme  for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, 
Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke 
Recommendation  
3.111 The Committee notes that under the Scheme, an amount to the tune of Rs. 295 crore was 
allotted in 2018 -19 and the same was reduced to Rs. 175 crore in BE 2019 -21 and 2020 -21.  
However, funds to the tune of Rs. 98.18 crore , Rs. 150.02 crore and Rs. 124.57 crore was 
allocated at RE stage in 2018 -19, 2019 -20, 2020 -21, respectively. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Department to expedite the completion of the projects under the Scheme. 
(Para 4.100) 
Action Taken 
3.112 The Department of Health & Family Welfare reviews the progress of the Projects with 
States/UTs from time to time to expedite the completion of projects. However, it is submitted that 
the completion of project ma inly depends on the State/UTs. The Central Government releases the 
funds timely as and when concerned States/UTs raise a demand for the same, subject to 
completion of all formalities and submission of documents viz. utilization certificates and audited 
financial statements. 
Further Recommendations/Observations  
3.113 The Committee is of the view that coordination between the States/UTs and the 
Center is crucial for successful implementation of any  Scheme falling under State lists . For 
this both,  the Central and State Governments need to come forward to share the 
responsibility for completion of the Projects. The Committee also recommends the Ministry 
to persuade States/UTs Government to timely submit all the pending utilization certificates 
and requisite documents so that  additional funds are released for executing the activities 
connected to the project.  
Recommendation  
3.114 The Committee expresses its anguish over the fact that while there has been a 
considerable increase in the number of cancer patients across the country and expenditure 
incurred on cancer treatment is huge, there is absolute laxity on the part of the Depart ment in 
completing the projects. The Committee directs the Department to chalk out a timeframe for the 
completion of all the 19 State cancer Institutes (SCIs) and 20 Tertiary Care Centre (TCCC). The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to explore the pos sibility of increasing the number of  
State funded Cancer Institutes in the country. 
(Para 4.101) 
 

95 
 
Action Taken  
3.115 It is again submitted that the responsibility of completion of projects lies with the 
States/UTs concerned. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare regularly seeks the physical 
and financial progress reports from the concerned centre and also directs them to complete the 
project on time. The Ministry also ensures that there is no delay in the release of funds required, 
for execution of the projects. It is clarified that the State Cancer Institute are not fully "State 
funded". 
3.116 These Institutions are covered under Tertiary Cancer Care Scheme of Department of 
Health & Family Welfare. Support upto Rs. 120 crore is provided to set up a State Cancer 
Institute, for which the ratio of Centre and State funds is 60:40 (in case of North -East States and 
Hill States, it is 90:10). As of now, the focus is on completion of the ongoing projects. As per the 
scheme, the number of State Cancer Institu tes, may be considered to increase after the completion 
of the ongoing projects, subject to the available and approval of funds by the Ministry of Finance. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.117 The Committee is aware that the States are the main imple menting agencies of the 
Center’s policies . For this, the Ministry must ensure that they maintain a regular 
consultations and understanding with the States so that there remains no confusion on the  
directives of the Center to the States. The Ministry must work towards establishing a 
coordination channel between the  Center and the States/UTs so that the ongoing projects 
are timely completed. The Ministry must work in tandem with the States/UTs and chalk out 
a timeframe for the operationalization of all the S CIs/TCCC. The Committee observes that 
since most States lack the institutional framework for public health management and thus 
depend on the Center for capit al as well as technical support, therefore, the Central 
Government must provide technical and logis tical support to the States/UTs Government 
for annual and successful completion of all the 19 State Cancer institute (SCI) and 20 
Tertiary Cancer Care Centre (TCCC).           
 Recommendation 
3.118 The Committee observes that major cancer speciality institutes must also be established 
under PPP model for conducting cancer research. Such institutes can be established as per the 
incidence of most occurring cancer in a particular geographical location. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to period ically update the Cancer Registry and the number of cancer 
cases in the country. 
(Para 4.102) 
Action Taken  
Burden of cancer in India (National Cancer Registry Programme): 
3.119 The National Cancer Registry Programme (NCRP) under ICMR has been in existence  
since 1982 and is now under National Centre for Disease Informatics and Research (ICMR) since 
2011. NCRP functions through Population and Hospital Based Cancer Registries (PBCR and 
HBCR) across different states in India. As of now there are 38 Population Based Cancer Registries 
(PBCRs). More than 236 Hospital Based Cancer Registries have been registered under NCDIR —

96 
 
NCRP. These different registries are at different geographical locations. It deals with various 
cancers sites in the body. 
3.120 The number of cancer cases in the country are periodically updated. As per the "Report of 
National Cancer Registry Programme 2020", the estimated incidence of cancer cases reported in 
India during the last three years is as below: 
Estimated new cancer cases in India -(ICD 10:C00-C97) — 
Both Sexes 
Year 2018 2019 2020 
Estimated 
Incidence (new) of 
cancer cases. 
13,25,232 13,58,415 13,92,179 
Note: ICMR -NCDIR collects information on deaths through Population Based Cancer Registries. The 
numbers are likely to be inadequate due to incomplete recording of cause of death information. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.121 The Committee believes that Research on the trend, incidences of cancer burden, the 
survival rate etc can guide the Ministry's realistic assessment of funds and help in framing a 
futuristic policy for controlling the increasing number of cancer patients in India. The 
Committee further reiterates its recommendation for establishment of Cancer speciality 
Institute under PPP scheme with the mission of undertaking extensive cancer research  
projects. The Committee believes that timely updation of Cancer registry would be followed 
by use of the registry in various research applications.  
Recommendation 
3.122 The Committee in its study v isit to Kolkata in 2018 was informed that the new campus of 
CNCI in Rajarhat will be functional by 2019. The Committee would also like to be updated on the 
Status of CNCI. 
(Para 4.104) 
Action Taken 
3.123 2nd campus of CNCI is a 460 bedded hospital (including 96 beds for ICU, emergency, 
pre/post ICU etc.) with facilities of Radiation Oncology, Medical Oncology, Surgical Oncology, 
head and neck Oncology, Gynae -Oncology, Paediatric Oncology, Radio diagnosis, Nuclear 
medicine, Preventive Oncology, Pall iative Care, Rehabilitation, There is a provision of providing 
comprehensive cancer treatment through various specialized Departments like Blood Bank and 
Transfusion medicine, Diagnostic PET — CT scan, MRI & Molecular Pathology. Construction 
work has been completed. No objection certificate (NoC) obtained from New Kolkata 
Development Authority (NKDA). 
3.124 First phase services have been started in August, 2020 with OPD services, Laboratory, 
Ultra sonography, Basis X ray system, Day care Chemotherapy, Gener al Pharmacy, 
Chemotherapy Pharmacy. OPD & Day Care Chemotherapy services have also been started. Basic 
Radiology and Laboratory equipment has been installed and services have also been started. 

97 
 
3.125 In December, 2020, the Department of Expenditure, Minist ry of Finance, sanctioned total 
208 additional posts in various categories for 2nd campus of CNCI. Formulation and approval of 
Recruitment Rules (RRs) for each category of staff was a pre -requisite before the recruitment 
process could be started. Despite the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, RRs have been finalized for 32 
categories of staff. Recruitment process for 143 posts in 29 categories has begun. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.126 The Committee observes with concern that the operationalization of the new campus 
of CNCI had been delaye d; however, the Committee understands that the outbreak of 
Pandemic Covid -19 has acted as a deterrent factor. The Committee, nevertheless , 
recommends the Institute to expedite the recruitment process and fill up the vacant posts of 
all the categories of the staff so that the Institute is put up in operationalization mode at the 
earliest.  
Human Resources for Health and Medical Education 
A. Establishment of New Medical Colleges and Increase of Seats in existing Governmen t 
Medical Colleges 
Recommendations/Observations 
3.127 The Committee observes that under "Establishment of New Medical Colleges attached 
with District/referral Hospitals" Phase II, funds to the tune of Rs. 524.3 crore and in Phase III 
funds to the tune of Rs.11389 crore have not yet been released. This reflects the lackadaisical 
approach of the Departments' planning towards Human Resource in Health and Medical 
Education. This is the "seed stage" where investment in Health Sector will have flowering 
infrastructure for delivery of health care facilities. The Department must ponder over as how to 
enrich this core component of health sector. 
(Para 4.118) 
Action Taken 
3.128 The Phase -II of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for establishment of new medical 
colleges a ttached with district/referral hospitals was approved on 07.02.2018 with an overall 
project cost of Rs. 6000 Crores. The fund sharing between Centre and the state was 90:10 for 
North-Eastern States and 60:40 for all other States. The Central Share of the p roject cost amounts 
to Rs. 3675 Crores. The total amount has already been released to the State Governments. Also, 
since the State Government is the Implementing Agency, repeated requests through review 
meetings have been made to expedite the completion of  all 24 approved medical colleges under 
this scheme. As of now, a total of 08 colleges out of 24 have applied for letter of permission to 
start the courses from 2021-22 academic session. 
 3.129 Phase-III of the aforementioned Scheme was approved on 28.08.2 019 with a total project 
cost of Rs. 24,370.41 Cr for establishing 75 medical colleges across the country. The fund sharing 
pattern between Centre and State is same as in Phase -II. The Central share of the approved cost 
amounts to Rs. 15499.74 Cr. Out of t his till date, Rs. 6719.11 Crore has already been released. 
Another Rs. 2400 Crore remaining from BE 2021 -22 is proposed to be released during this 
Financial Year. 

98 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.130 The Committee recommends the Ministry to closely monitor the progress of all the 
Medical Colleges in the States that have been approved under  Phase II and III of the 
scheme. The Committee urges the Ministry to sort out all the pending issues with the 
remaining 16 colleges  under Phase II  that have not app lied for letter of permission to start 
the academic courses. The Committee  further recommends the Ministry to continue the 
timely transfer of funds and regular review meetings with the State authorities. The 
Ministry must make concerted efforts to achieve the envisaged vision of expanding tertiary 
care in peripheral areas and making provision and annual appointment of all adequate 
number of doctors/specialist in the newly established medical colleges under Phase II and III 
of the Scheme. 
Recommendations/Observations 
3.131 Under "Upgradation and strengthening of State Government Medical colleges for 
increasing MBBS Seats", out of the Central share of Rs. 3325 crore, Rs. 873.9 crore have not 
been released till date. Under overall outlay for the human resources  for health and medical 
education schemes, out of the total central share of Rs. 32944.98 crore, an amount of Rs. 
18921.46 crore have been  released which is approximately 57 percent of the total allotted funds. 
(Para 4.119) 
Action Taken 
3.132 With the objective of creating 10,000 MBBS seats in Government Colleges in the country, 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is implementing Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Up -
gradation of existing State Government/Central Government medical colleges to increase MBBS 
seats. The funding pattern is 90:10 by Central and State Governments respectively for North 
Eastern States and Special category States and 60:40 for other States with the upper ceiling cost 
pegged at Rs.1.20 crore per seat. 48 Medical Colleges in 15 S tates have been approved under the 
scheme to increase 3325 UG seats. Funds to the tune of Rs.2451.1 Crore have been released to the 
State Governments till date under this Scheme. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.133 The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that the Scheme is aimed at 
creating 10,000 MBBS seats in Government Colleges across the country. The Committee 
believes that the Center along with States needs to make concerted efforts to actively utiliz e 
the existing healthcare resources along with creation of new health infrastructure. The 
different Schemes under "Human Resources for Health and Medical Education"  aim to 
achieve the same. The Committee is of the view that the States must also shoulder th e 
responsibilities along with the Center and expedite the release of their share of funds under 
the Scheme.  
Recommendation 
3.134 The Committee is concerned at the non release of entire earmarked funds for such an 
important scheme that aims to upgrade the medical infrastructure and enhance health workforce 
in the country. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to release the funds to the States 

99 
 
in a timely manner and also monitor the proper utilisation of these funds. The Committee also 
strongly rec ommends the Ministry to monitor the physical progress under the different 
components of the Scheme. The Committee recommends the Ministry to expedite the completion of 
all the sanctioned medical colleges under different phases of the Scheme. 
(Para 4.120) 
Action Taken 
3.135 The Medical Education division is implementing the following three centrally sponsored 
schemes: 
a.  Establishment of new medical colleges attached with district/referral hospitals,  
b.  Up gradation and strengthening of State Govt medica l colleges for increasing 
MBBS Seats, and;  
c.  Up gradation and strengthening of State Govt. medical colleges for increasing PG 
seats. 
 3.136 The latest updated statement on the release of funds under these three schemes may be 
seen as below: 
S No Scheme Phase Approved 
Cost 
Central 
Share 
Released      
till now 
1 CSS for Establishment of 
New Medical Colleges 
attached with District/ 
referral Hospitals 
Phase-I 10962 7541.1 7541.1 
2 Phase-II 6000 3675 3675 
3 Phase-III 24370.41 15499.74 6719.11 
4 Up gradation and 
strengthening of State 
Govt medical colleges for 
increasing MBBS Seats 
  12000 7795 2451.1 
5 Up gradation and 
Strengthening of State 
Govt medical colleges for 
increasing PG seats 
Phase-I 1498.43 1063.03 1049.3578 
6 Phase-II 4800 
  
3024 694.534 
 Total   59630.84 38597.87 22130.2018 
 3.137 The budgetary allocation and expenditure for the last three years may be seen as under:- 
 Scheme Phase FY 2019-20 FY 2020-21 FY 2021-22 
Centrally 
Sponsored 
Scheme 
  BE 
2019-
20 
RE-
2019-20 
Expen
diture 
BE 
2020-
21 
RE 
2020-
21 
Expenditu
re 
BE 
2021
-22 
RE 
2021-
22 
propose
d 
Expenditu
re as on 
22.9.2021 

100 
 
For 
Establishment 
of new govt. 
medical 
colleges 
attached with 
district/referra
l hospitals 
Phase-
I 
  2000   2000    
2000 
     
4686 
     
5386 
33.4      
4800 
  
5800** 
Nil 
Phase-
II 
1184.89 189.30 
Phase-
III 
 3850.91  2210.70 
UG Scheme   1361 1361 761 255.93 - 
 PG Scheme Phase-
I 
 800  800 600 Nil - 
Phase-
II 
60.87 - 
Total   4161 4161 3361* 4686 5386 5386 4800 5800** 2400 
*Rs. 800 Crore diverted towards Covid-19 relief fund. 
**Proposed in the RE 2021-22. 
● As may be seen above, 100% expenditure has been achieved in all years against the 
budgetary allocation that have been provided to the Programme Division.  
● To monitor for physical works, utilization of funds, regular review meeting are held at the 
various level and progress report is sought from the State Government on regular basis.  
● Also, the states have been repeatedly requested to send utilization certifi cates for the 
grants released under these schemes. 
● Funds under the scheme of up gradation and strengthening of State Govt. medical colleges 
for increasing MBBS and PG Seats are released based on the proposals received from 
State Government.  
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.138 The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has increased its release of funds under 
different phases of the three centrally sponsored Schemes. However, funds to the tune of Rs. 
16,467.66 crore still remain unreleased. The Committee is concerned at the pending of 
utilization certificates involving the funds released and recommends the Ministry to strongly 
take up the matter of pending utilization certific ates with the States /UT Government. The 
Committee believes that the Ministry must find out workable strategies to resolve the 
pendency issues so as to release the remaining amount of funds  for assured implementation 
of Scheme within stipulated timeframe . T he Committee also recommends the Ministry to 
devise new monitoring modules for ensuring definite progress of the development activities 
in the Health Sector with objective of upgrading the medical infrastructure and enhance the 
health workforce in the country. 
Recommendation 
3.139 The Committee takes into account the submission of the Ministry that utilization of AB -
PMJAY was adversely impacted with the onset of the COVID -19 pandemic, however, the 
Committee is anguished to find that in BE 2019 -20, funds to the tune of Rs. 6400 crore allotted 
under AB-PMJAY were reduced to Rs. 3200 crore at the RE stage. In the next year i.e. BE 2020 -

101 
 
21, Rs. 6400 crore were allocated which was again reduced to Rs.3100 crore. The Committee is 
also concerned at the gross underu tilisation of funds under the Scheme; since the scheme enters 
its third year of implementation during Financial Year 2021 -22. The Committee hopes that the 
States would develop the required competency for speedy implementation of the Scheme to 
achieve the set targets. 
(Para 4.132) 
Action Taken 
3.140 National Health Authority concurs with the observation made by the Hon‘ble DRPSC. The 
utilization under AB-PMJAY was sub-optimal due to following reasons: 
o There was gradual uptake in the scheme in the initial two  years of implementation as 
States/UTs were putting in place the necessary mechanisms to operationalize the scheme. 
o A few States with nearly 20% of the eligible SECC beneficiary population haven‘t joined the 
scheme. 
o Certain States chose to join the scheme only from 2019 onwards. 
o Demand for services in in three States that account for 30% of the beneficiary base viz. Uttar 
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Bihar was muted in the initial phase. 
o It was expected that the demand under AB -PMJAY would pick up from 2020 onwards. 
However, the onset of COVID -19 had an adverse impact on the functioning of AB -PMJAY 
as evidenced by 
 (i) A 30% decline in the number of authorized hospital admissions during the period 
from March‘20 to August‘20 
 (ii) Potential shortfall of 1.20 Cro re Ayushman cards due to interruption in beneficiary 
enrollment activities 
 (iii) The performance of 79% empanelled private hospitals were negatively impacted   
during the period from Apr‘20 to Jun‘20. 
3.141 In this regard, NHA is undertaking various steps i ncluding measures to foster greater 
participation from SHAs.  
 A capacity development framework has been developed and shared with SHAs regarding 
the deployment of adequate human resources at State and District level. NHA shall ask 
SHAs, yet to fulfil the n orms of the framework to ensure strict compliance with respect to 
the same. 
 The ongoing Aapke Dwar Ayushman campaign has been designed to foster greater 
ownership from the SHAs. SHAs have risen to the occasion by using innovative methods 
including greater involvement of Panchayati Raj institutions, frontline healthcare workers, 
village level entrepreneurs from CSC and UTIITSL to achieve the targets under the 
campaign. 
 A new division called ―Provider Operations‖ has been established at NHA. One of the key 
objectives of this division is to strengthen the District Implementation Units (DIUs) across 
the country. An exercise in this regard has already been carried out in Bihar and 
Jharkhand.   
 
 

102 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.142 The Committee has time and again raised concerns on the different issues that have 
been posing a hurdle in the smooth implementation of the AB-PMJAY. There is also the 
need to increase awareness regarding AB -PMJAY among all the stakeholders, especially, 
the beneficiaries and the empanelled hospitals. The Ministry must also work towards 
strengthening the grievance redressal mechanism under the Scheme. The Committee notes 
that the list of beneficiaries is based on the SECC data which leaves a large group of p eople 
out of the beneficiary list. The Committee , therefore, strongly reiterates its recommendation 
that the Ministry must make efforts to expand and update the beneficiary base. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to develop a foolproof monitoring mecha nism to 
ensure that no eligible person is denied health care services under the Scheme. The 
Committee desires that the Ministry must set up a robust monitoring mechanism and 
conduct periodic audits and inspections so that any fraudulent practices are avoided.  
Recommendation 
3.143 The Committee, in view of lack of sufficient public fund, underlines the need to give 
impetus to Public Private Partnership Model for laying  of long-term health care infrastructure. 
The Committee, in this connection, recommends the department for exploring the setting up of 
Medi-City on Public Private Partnership Model suburbs adjacent to the big cities, for example, 
adjacent to Mumbai, Pune, Kolkata, Patna, Gwalior or other such select cities, so that live ability 
quotient of that area can be enhanced. The Committee feels that provision of Medi -City would 
some extent overcome the problem of deployment of specialist doctors in the rural areas a s the 
suburbs area would facilitate the doctors to get attracted to the Medi -City. The provision for 
Medi-City on the PPP Model can save the golden hour. 
(Para 5.27) 
Action Taken  
 
3.144 The scheme for ‗Promotion of Medical Devices Park‘ is being implement ed in select 
States/UTs which aims to reduce the manufacturing cost, optimize resources, build on economies 
of scale and provide easy access to standard testing and infrastructure facilities across the medical 
devices industry. Also, pharma parks are being operationalized in many States.  
3.145 There is no existing scheme for Medi -city on PPP model, however, States/UTs can 
visualize their own schemes as per their requirement.  
3.146 Under NHM, multi -skilling of existing staff such as doctors, nurses, CHOs, etc is 
undertaken to develop their skills and overcome the problem of shortage of specialists in rural 
areas such as LSAS and EmOC training of MBBS doctors, SBA training of nurses, initiation of 
DNB courses at district hospitals etc. Decentralised empowerment at the district level through 
RKS of the DH has also been given to augment the speciality services by need -based local hiring 
from the private or public institution. Under NHM, flexibility has been in -built for the States to 
deploy or develop partnership with private players and undertake outsourcing of HR services.  
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.147 The Committee emphasizes that setting up Medi -City can help in addressi ng the 
issues related to shortage of doctors in certain areas and strengthen the health 
infrastructure in the country. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that 

103 
 
the Ministry must explore the idea of establishing Medi -city on PPP Model in  the country. 
The Central Government , in coordination with the States , must chalk out a plan for 
establishing Medi-Cities across the country.  
Recommendation 
 
3.148 The Committee also came across the problem of adequate human resources at the rural 
health and wellness centre and the common masses feel impoverished, neglected and 
marginalised as there is no takers for their illness as doctors are averse to their posting in rural 
areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends the department for compulsory postin g of doctors 
passing MBBS in the rural areas for three years and practitioners violating the rule may be de -
registered and prohibited from undergoing medical practices for the de -registered period. The 
Committee, however, recommends that all basic faciliti es must be provided to the doctors posted 
in rural areas viz. marketing centres, quality educational institutions and recreational avenues. 
(Para 5.28) 
 Action Taken 
 
3.149 The issue of compulsory rural service has been left to the State Governments which are 
the principal employer of doctors. However, to encourage doctors working in rural services, the 
regulations of Medical Council of India provide for incentive of marks at the rate of upto 10% 
for each year service in rural / remote / difficult areas of the State and maximum upto30% in 
NEET (PG) for admission to PG medical courses. Further, 50% medical diploma seats are 
reserved for the in -service medical doctors of the State Government who have served in remote 
and/or difficult areas. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.150 The Committee emphasizes that the Ministry along with States must continue 
implementation of incentivising Schemes for encouraging doctors to serve in rural areas. 
The Committee also points out that National Medical Commission has s ucceeded the 
Medical Council of India and, therefore, the use of MCI may be avoided.  
HEALTH MANAGEMENT AND BUDGETING BEYOND PANDEMIC COVID -19 
IMPASSE 
Recommendations/Observations  
3.151 The Committee, keeping in view the incredible role of Corona warriors  during combating 
the vicissitude of corona virus, is of the view that the moment is the golden opportunity to explore 
the possibility of organizing Indian medical services in order to create specialised task force for 
implementation of the flagship progra mme relating to health. The Committee recommends for the 
creation of an All India Medical Services on the lines of All India Civil Services such as IAS, IPS 
and IFS. The Committee feels that Indian Medical Services would provide efficient health care 
managers to enhance the success rate of healthcare projects and make policy programme and 
specific course of action for fighting against lethal disease. 
(Para 5.31) 
 

104 
 
Action Taken 
3.152 It is stated that the matter regarding the creation of Health and Medical Service was 
examined by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The comments of State Governments in the 
matter were also requested.  However, only few states have responded. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.153 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry must work towards 
creation of an All India Medical Services on the lines of All India Civil Services such as IAS, 
IPS and IFS. The Committee recommends the Ministry again to take up the matter with the 
States on priority basis. The Committee is of the considered view that the All India Medical 
Service would enhance the success rate of Healthcare Projects and trigger policy 
formulation and ensure effective implementation of the Scheme at the ground level. 
 
 
  

105 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.1 The Committee has been given to understand that out of sanctioned strength of 4311in 
Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Medical Sciences (ABVIMS) & Dr. RML Hospital, only 2972 
post has been filled on regular basis as on 31.01.2021.Out of 1339 vacant posts,2 52 incumbents 
are working on contract basis. The Committee, therefore, recommends to expedite the process of 
filling up of vacant posts at the earliest to enhance the operational efficiency of the hospital. The 
Committee also recommends for early approval of proposal for cadre review of administrative 
staff which is under the consideration of the Ministry. The Committee desires that for effective 
administration, proposal for revival/creation of additional posts of DeputyDirector, JointDirector 
and Additiona l Director may be considered. The Committee further recommends that Medical 
Superintendent may be given financial power for outsourcing of services, if so required. Keeping 
in view the long pending vacancy position and delay in the recruitment process exem ption may be 
given in case of abolished/deemed abolished posts in the Hospital. 
(Para 3.42) 
Action Taken  
Sl.no. Recommendations of the 
Committee 
Inputs in respect of Dr. R.M.L. Hospital, New Delhi 
i.  Department to expedite the 
process of filling up of 
1139 vacant posts without 
further delay. 
The process to fill up the vacant posts falling under DR 
quota in this Hospital is undergoing. The Question Paper 
Committee will soon meet to finalize the ‗Scheme of 
Examination‘ to fill up the vacant posts classified a s 
Group ‗C‘, Technical Posts falling under DR quota as 
per notified RRs. The requisition for filling up the posts 
classified as Group ‗B‘, Technical and Group ‗A‘, Non -
CHS (e.g. Tutor) falling under DR quota as per notified 
RRs will soon be sent to Staff S election Commission 
and UPSC respectively through M/o Health & Family 
Welfare.  Further, the recruitment process for filling up 
the vacant posts belonging to erstwhile Group ‗D‘ staff 
for which recruitment rules have recently been notified 
will be initiated in due course of time. 

106 
 
     ii.  The Medical 
Superintendent may be 
given financial power for 
outsourcing of services, if 
so required.  
As per letter no. Dated 12 th march, 2021, the approval of 
competent authority extension of a temporary delegation 
of enhanced financial powers as a temporary measure 
for purchase of Stores/Equipment/Services for 
combating the spread of COVID -19 has been extended 
up to 24/06/2021 subj ect to (i) Compliance of relevant 
provisions of GFR 2017, ‗Manual for Procurement of 
Goods 2017‘ and instruction/guidelines issued by 
Ministry of finance from time to time (ii) It may be 
ensured that enhanced powers may be exercised only for 
combating COVID-19. The Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare is further considering to give the financial 
powers for Outsourcing of service to the Medical 
Superintendent/ Director of the three Central 
Government Hospitals as regular measures. 
     iii.  Cadre review proposal of 
administrative staff of Dr. 
RML Hospital, New Delhi. 
As far as the cadre review proposal of administrative 
staff of Dr. RML Hospital is concerned, this Hospital 
has already forwarded the justification/reply on the 
issues raised by M/o Finance t o M/o Health & Family 
Welfare vide this Hospital letter No. 9 -02/2012-RMLH 
(HA I)/2007 dated 01/04/2021 for further necessary 
action in the matter. 
     iv. Proposal for 
revival/creation of 
additional posts of Deputy 
Director. Joint Director and 
Additional Director.  
Proposal for creation of ‗2‘ additional posts of Dy. 
Director (Admn.) in Dr. RMLH has already been taken 
up with the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation 
4.2 The Committee has been given to understand that National Nursing and Midwifery 
Commission Bill, having core focus on quality of Nursing Education is currently under 
consideration of the Government. The Committee recommends that the National Nursing and  
Midwifery Commission Bill for regulation and development and enrichment of Nursing and 
Midwifery service in the country should be brought both the Parliament. 
(Para 3.116) 
Action Taken 
4.3 The public comments on the National Nursing &Midwifery Commission (NNMC) Bill, 
2021 are under examination and the Bill, after due approvals will be introduced in the Parliament 
at the earliest possible. 
Recommendation 
4.4 The Committee expresses its concern over non -receipt of proposals from State 
Governments and under u tilization of funds earmarked to the State Governments for 
establishment of State Organ and Tissue Transplant Organisations (SOTTOs). No proposal was 
received from States during 2019 -20. Similarly, the Revenue Outlay earmarked to the tune of Rs. 
31.65 cror e in BE 2020 -21 was drastically reduced to Rs. 6.0 crore in RE 2020 -21. The 

107 
 
Committee apprehends that if the similar trend continues in the ensuing Financial Year, the 
cherished objective of NOTP for promotion of cadaver organ donation would be defeated. T he 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should persuade the State Governments 
to submit proposals for establishment of SOTTOs and ensure optimal utilization of funds for the 
purpose. The Committee hopes that the revenue outlay to the tune o f Rs. 29.15 crore in BE 2021 -
22 would be spent as per plan and the physical targets set would be achieved, accordingly. 
(Para 3.146) 
Action Taken  
4.5 MoHFW has been regularly persuading State Governments and UT Administrations to 
submit proposals. Ministry  has had several meetings in this regard with ROTTOs and SOTTOs 
on10.06.2021, 02.08.2021, 09.08.2021 when ROTTOs/SOTTOs have been requested to send 
proposal under NOTP namely for s etting up of National/ Regional/State Bio -material centres; 
Financial support for establishing new Organ Transplant/retrieval facilities and strengthening of 
existing Organ Transplant/retrieval facilities; Training to transpl ant experts including surgeons, 
physicians, transplant coordinators, etc.; Financial support for provision of Transplant 
Coordinators to medical colleges and trauma centres; and Financial Assistance to BPL patients for 
post transplant immunosuppressant therapy. 
 4.6 DGHS has also written to States/UTs asking for establishing SOTTO in those states where 
there is no such organization. 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.7 The Committee appreciates FSSAI for acceptance of the recommendations of DRSC on 
Health and Family Welfare on according more deterrent punishment in cases where actual death 
or injury has not taken place but such unsafe food has the potential to cause such eventuality. The 
Committee is, however, worried over the delay in insertion of Section – 59A for giving effect to the 
said deterrent punishment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the insertion of the 
provision in the Act be made without any further delay. 
(Para 3.173) 
Action Taken  
4.8 Section 59 A has been proposed to be added in Food Safety a nd Standards Act, 2006 
which would have the  provision to punish all cases where even if actual death or injury has not 
taken place but such unsafe food has the potential to cause such eventuality. It would be certainly 
a deterrent punishment. The proposal is under examination in the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation 
 
4.9 The Committee understands Mycotoxins found in mould contamination of food grains 
continues to cause various human diseases and include Aflatoxins that have the potential to cause 
cancer, abdominal  pain, vomiting, hepatitis, impaired growth in children and also death after 
acute exposure to high concentrations in food. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
FSSAI to control Aflatoxin contamination in food grains. The Committee further recomme nds the 
FSSAI to improve the quality and safety of the milk and milk products as the adulterated milk with 
Aflatoxin contamination adversely affects the health of the common masses. The Committee hopes 

108 
 
the compliance with Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) s pecification for compounded feeds for 
cattle that will be in force from 1st July, 2021 would ensure the assured quality and food safety in 
food items. 
(Para 3.175) 
Action Taken 
4.10 FSSAI has set limits and standards for different mycotoxins, viz., Aflatox in B1, M1, total 
Aflatoxins, and Patulin, Ochratoxin and Doxynivalenol (DON) in different food product 
categories. FSSAI has put in place an effective surveillance system backed with regulatory 
compliance to ensure that the domestic and imported food produ cts meet the standards fixed by 
FSSAI. The surveillance reports are shared with concerned State Departments to sensitize the 
Designated Officers and Food Safety Officers for conducting regulatory drives and the concerned 
Ministries / Departments at the Cen tre to take up R&D / extension activities through their 
institutional network for finding solutions to the problem. 
4.11 FSSAI had also issued a direction dated 29.01.2020, regarding mandatory compliance of 
the commercial feed intended for cattle with Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) specifications for 
Compounded feeds for Cattle (IS 2052:2009) as amended on the date of enforcement of the 
direction and the product to carry a BIS certification mark on the label. The said direction has 
been enforced from 1st July, 2021. However, considering the difficulties faced in obtaining BIS 
license /certification during the second wave of Covid -19 pandemic, the timeline for the 
compliance with the provision of said direction only for those businesses whose applicatio ns for 
BIS certification/licensing of the product (compounded cattle feed) are currently under process, 
has been  extended till 1st January, 2022. 
(B) Indian Pharmacopeia Commission 
Recommendation 
4.12 The Committee hopes that the allocation of Rs. 23.95 c rore in BE 2021 -22 to Indian 
Pharmacopeia Commission would be optimally utilized for publishing Indian Pharma copeia 
Reference Substances (IPRS), developing Impurity Standards, Skill Development of Drugs 
Analyst, Drugs Inspectors and Stakeholders etc. as p er the set target in output -outcome 
framework 2021- 22 pertaining to Indian Pharmacopeia Commission. The Committee, however, 
wonders whether the other statutory and regulatory bodies would be able to achieve its targets 
with the meagre allocation made during 2021-22. 
(Para 3.178) 
Action Taken 
4.13 The Work Plan for IPC Activities (2021-22) is as follows: 
1. Publication of Indian Pharmacopoeia 2022 new monographs (under categories of Chemical, 
Phytopharmaceutical Ingredients, Biologics), general chapters (Nitrosamines Impurities, 
Elemental Impurities, Phytopharmaceutical Drugs, Essential Oils), revision of existing 
monographs, and monograph up-gradations. 
2. Publication of 6th Edition of National Formulary of India (NFI)-2021.  
3. Publication and printing of Gui dance Manual for Herbs & Herbal Products including 
Phytopharmaceutical Drugs (2nd Edition) - 2021. 

109 
 
4. Development of 60 IP Reference Substances (including 10 Botanical Reference Substances) 
for compliance of IP monographs and replacement of approx 100 old IPRS lot with new lot. 
5. Development of 150 Impurity Standards for compliance of IP Monographs. 
6. Verification/Analysis of New Drugs Substances/Subsequent New Drugs/Fixed Dose 
Combination to be received from CDSCO. 
7. Testing of drug samples received from Central Medical Services Society (CMSS). 
8. Organizing Skill Development & Awareness Programme on drug standardization, ISO/IEC 
17043:2010, advanced analytical techniques, IPRS, and certification course for M. Pharm. 
students. 
9. To get NABL accreditation ass per ISO/IEC 17025: 2017 in the field of 
Phytopharmaceuticals. 
10. To conduct Proficiency Testing (PT) programme for bulk drugs, pharmaceutical preparations, 
microbiological, and phytopharmaceuticals.  
11. Participation in national and international PT programmes.  
12. Expansion of library services by increasing journals and books in the field of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Instrumentation, Pharmacopoeial education, and other related areas. 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF MASTER PLAN OF AIIMS NEW DELHI 
Recommendation 
4.14 The Committee finds that the Master Plan of AIIMS, New Delhi, at the cost of Rs. 515.00 
crore has been approved on 28th February, 2019 for optimizing the infrastructure of the Institute 
for the next 20 years. The Committee recommends the master plan which aims to develop AIIMS 
into a world class Medical University by March, 2024 by consolidating the Teaching, Research 
and Patient Care areas while segregating the residential areas. The Committee believe that the 
objective of the master plan, to augment the space available for patien t care and enhance the 
patients‟ experience and to create adequate and better infrastructure for resident, students & 
scholars of the Institute, would be achieved only by ensuring the completion of the project without 
time and cost overruns for which AIIMS  management need to have effective monitoring and 
control mechanism over the progress of the Master Plan. 
(Para 3.188) 
Action Taken 
4.15 The draft Master Plan has been finalized by AIIMS, New Delhi. The said Master Plan has 
been approved in principle by the Committee of Secretaries under Chairmanship of CEO, NITI 
Aayog, and has also been reviewed by Hon‘ble HFM on 26 th June 2021. As decided in the 
aforementioned meetings, AIIMS has now via MoHFW sought time to make a presentation on the 
draft Master Plan to the Hon‘ble Prime Minister after which AIIMS will approach MoHFW with 
the revised EFC proposal with firmed -up costs by October 2021. As per earlier EFC projections, 
Phase-I of the project was to be completed in 46 months & Phase-II in 70 Months from the date of 
appointment of the Project Management Consultant. As per the draft master plan finalized after 
the detailed deliberations, the Phase -I of the project is now likely to be completed in 2026 & 
Phase-Ii in 2028. The timelines are subject to the evolvi ng COVID situation & statutory 
approvals. 

110 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS –AT A GLANCE 
 The Committee understands that Ayushman Bharat aims to provide free access to 
health insurance coverage for the poor and improve accessibility of health services in the 
country. However, the Committee notes that there are administrative and implementation 
related loopholes under the scheme that need to be addressed so as to provide universal 
coverage to the poor and the needy. The Committee, in this connection, wishes to fl ag the 
constraints related to non -updation of the list of beneficiaries, fraudulent practices at 
empanelled hospitals, incomplete operationalization of the Health and Wellness Centres.  
The Committee desires the Ministry to address these issues besides giv ing impetus to 
increasing the pace of implementation of the Scheme for the overall well being and good 
health of the economically weaker sections of the society. 
(Para 3.5 of 126th Report) 
 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the existing inter-state disparity on 
health infrastructure and the poor health indicators. The Committee believes that adequate 
budget allocation to health sector is concomitant to ensure robust implementation of health 
sector reforms in the States. Financially poor S tates lack adequate resources which result in 
poor healthcare delivery system. The Committee desires that the States must be incentivized 
for better performance on health matrix so as to ensure achievement of improved health 
outcomes. The Ministry must sup port and encourage the States/UTs so that they spend at -
least 8% of the total budget in the health sector and ensure that implementation of different 
Health Schemes are not hindered due to lack of funds. 
(Para 3.8) 
 The Committee finds that the Ministry ha s not taken any note of the 
recommendation of the Committee to consider the proposal of Rs. 5,97,906.56 crores made 
to the 15 th Finance Commission.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation 
and expects the Ministry to vigorously pursue its b udgetary requirements suggested by the 
Finance Commission.   
(Para 3.14) 
 The Committee is anguished to find that against total allocated amount of Rs. 29.00 
crores in 2020 -21 under RSBY, the actual expenditure is to the tune of Rs. 46, 32,366 only. 
The Committee has been consistently emphasizing upon increasing the budgetary outlay of 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on various schemes. The Committee believes 
that the Ministry must follow a sound budgetary management policy wherein schemes with 
poor utilization trends are closely monitored. The Committee is of the considered view that 
the Ministry must make efforts to ensure that the funds allocated are utilized optimally to 
make the Scheme result oriented and achieve the Mission and objective of t he Scheme. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to frame guidelines on financial prudence in 
consultations with States and track the utilization under the Schemes so that utilization of 
funds is commensurate with the projected requirement and under -utilization of funds is 
avoided. The argument of the Ministry that increased outlay would lead to increase in 
proportionate share of the States does not look sound and convincing.  
(Para 3.20) 

111 
 
 The Committee expresses its displeasure over Ministry’s failure  to ensure timely 
liquidation of the pending UCs. The fact that Utilization certificates for funds amounting to 
Rs. 17342.54 crore and Rs. 22.30 crore are pending under Human Resources for Health and 
Medical Education and National AIDS & STD Control Progra mme respectively speaks 
volume of poor management and monitoring of allocated funds. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry must start monitoring of UCs through the 
PFMS module and integrate the remaining institutes with PFMS.  
(Para 3.23) 
 The Committee notes that the projected demand of Rs. 1944.00 crore was made in 
BE 2021 -22, however, funds to the tune of Rs. 1713.00 crore were allocated at RE stage 
2021-22. The Committee notes that the Ministry did not increase the fu nd allocation at RE 
stage rather the funds were slashed at the RE stage. The Committee, therefore, is of the view 
that the Ministry must make an assessment of the funds allocated and work towards 
improving the absorption capacity under the Scheme. 
(Para 3.26) 
 The Committee observes that despite steps taken by the Department to fill up 
vacancies of CHS doctors, a large number of posts of Medical Officers in GDMO and non -
gazetted staff are still lying vacant in CGHS; thus hampering its functioning to the expected  
level. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Department to take up the matter 
with UPSC and SSC so as to expedite the recruitment process for the vacant 349 posts of 
Medical Officer in GDMO sub cadre and all vacant posts from Gazetted staff re spectively 
for the smooth implementation of the scheme and continuation of assured healthcare 
services to the beneficiaries of the scheme.   
(Para 3.30) 
 The Committee desires that all generic AYUSH Medicine must be made available to 
the beneficiary at CGH S dispensary. The Committee finds that the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare has not furnished any information on the assured supply of allopathic 
medicines to the CGHS dispensary. The Committee would like the Ministry to take effective 
measures for en suring a continuous supply of allopathic medicines and develop a robust 
mechanism for delivery of medicines to all the CGHS dispensary.  
(Para 3.33) 
 The Committee is constrained to highlight a huge gap between the sanctioned 
strength (905) and the in -position strength (643) as 262 posts in different cadres are lying 
vacant in SJH and VMC. The Committee observes that the Institute is yet to 
formulate/amend the recruitment rules for some categories of Posts and approval for filling 
up some vacant posts are yet to be finalized. The Committee is anguished over the slow pace 
of recruitment process in such a reputed Institute and, therefore, strongly recommends the 
Institute to expedite the recruitment process and fill up the vacant posts so that the Institute 
can function at its full capacity.  
(Para 3.36) 

112 
 
         The Committee observes that most issues in Safdurjung Hospital and Vardhman 
Mahavir Medical College could have been resolved under a coordinated approach of the 
serving agencies. The Committee notes th at the hostel facilities and stack parking around 
newer blocks are yet to start and the Ministry must avoid further procedural delays. The 
Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to work out the proposals on redevelopment 
of staff colony and hostel facilities and ensure the completion of all the pending projects. The 
Committee also reiterates its recommendation that the Medical Superintendent of the 
hospital may be vested with the power to hire staff/faculty on contract as per the situational 
requirement of the Hospital. 
(Para 3.39) 
 The Committee expresses its anguish over delay in approval of Layout Plans for the 
infrastructure project in VMMC. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to expedite the 
process of granting necessary approvals to the project o n construction of proposed 
accommodation facilities. The Ministry must fix accountability for undue delays in 
completion of projects and ensure timely execution of all projects. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to follow up the pending proposals with the Ministry of Finance 
and ensure that adequate funds are earmarked for additional infrastructure projects. 
(Para 3.45) 
 The Committee is shocked to note the evasive reply of the Ministry on the progress of 
infrastructure projects in ABVIMS and Dr. R ML Hospital. The Committee finds that the 
scheduled date of completion of the two infrastructure Projects, undertaken by the Atal 
Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Medical Sciences (ABVIMS) and Dr. RML Hospital was 
14.09.2019, however, the date has now been ext ended to 14.03.2022. The Committee, taking 
note of the poor record of the Institute, recommends the Ministry to ensure that the 
construction activities are completed in the extended deadline without any further time and 
cost over-runs.  
(Para 3.48) 
LADYHARDINGE MEDICALCOLLEGE (LHMC) &SMT.S.K.HOSPITAL 
 The Committee desires the Ministry to assess the actual requirement of funds for 
LHMC and S.K. Hospital and take urgent corrective measures to mitigate financial liability 
under the Comprehensive Redevelopment  Plan of LHMC phase -I; alongwith incurred 
expenditure on procurement of Machinery and equipment, setting up of clinical skill lab and 
Operation and Maintenance (O&M).  The Committee expects the Ministry to furnish a 
status note on the project within one month of presentation of this report to Parliament. 
(Para 3.51) 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the vacant positions of 70 faculty and 804 
non faculty posts continuing in LHMC. The Committee is of the considered view that delay 
in seeking administr ative approval or any other procedural delays slows down the pace of 
recruitment process. The Committee underlines the need to fill up the vacant posts on a 
regular basis and within a specified period of time. The Committee also reiterates its 
recommendation that the Ministry may delegate administrative autonomy to the Institute 

113 
 
for recruitment of non -faculty members and appointment of Assistant Professors on a 
contract basis. The Institute must also take measures to fill up the vacant posts on 
permanent basis to ensure continuity and smooth functioning of the institute. 
(Para 3.58) 
KALAWATI SARAN CHILDEN'S HOSPITAL 
 The Committee wonders that KSCH has not responded to the recommendation of the 
Committee over vacancy positions and status of the recruitment p rocess to fill up the vacant 
posts. The Committee observes that against the total sanctioned strength of 773 posts in 
various cadres, the in-position strength has further decreased to 666 and thus 107 posts still 
remain vacant. The Committee, therefore, wo uld like the Institute to expedite the 
recruitment process for filling up the vacant posts. 
(Para 3.61) 
 The Committee expresses its displeasure at the existing gap between the sanctioned 
strength and the in -position strength of the AIIMS like Institutions. The Committee opines 
that such a wide gap would impact the day to day functioning of the Institutes. Th e 
Committee, therefore, strongly desires the Ministry to take suitable measures to address the 
issue of shortfall of manpower in Project Cell, Faculty and Non faculty in these Institutes. 
The Committee further recommends for expediting the recruitment proc ess so that the 
AIIMS like Institutes excel in their envisaged goal and mission.  
(Para 3.66) 
OTHER HOSPITALS/ INSTITUTIONS 
DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SECTOR 
 The Committee, in 126 th Report, had highlighted the shortage of nurses in the 
country which remains a grave concern; however the response of the Ministry, thereto, in its 
ATNs, is not tenable. The recruitment rules may vary from States to States but the Union 
Government must pla y a guiding role in ensuring that the nurse and patient ratio in the 
country is improved. The Committee observes that while the nursing sector is in need of 
reforms, the issues like poor career progression, low remuneration, high workload etc 
plague the sector. The Ministry in consultation with the States must make efforts to ensure 
that the working conditions of the nurses are improved and the profession gets the respect it 
deserves. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to take appropriate action on the 
recommendations of the Committee of Experts constituted under the chairpersonship of Dr. 
Bimla Kapoor. 
(Para 3.69) 
COVID-19 VACCINATION FOR HEALTH CARE WORKERS AND FRONTLINE 
WORKERS – NHM 
 The Committee observes that out of Rs. 35,000 crores earmarked in 2021 -22 for 
procurement of COVID vaccine, an expenditure of Rs. 19,675.46 crores has been incurred as 

114 
 
on 27th November, 2021 and funds to the tune of Rs. 15324.54 crores remain unspent despite 
due and cry for vaccine doses. The Committee takes into acco unt the concerns regarding 
issues of shortage of vaccines, raised by many States in the past few months rather some 
States claiming downsizing of the vaccines supply. Although, the Committee notes that the 
supply of vaccine doses to States is calculated on  a formula that weighs all the factors like 
population, efficiency, active case -load, etc. the Committee recommends that vaccine equity 
must be ensured for mitigation of Covid -19 on ground level.  The Committee also desires 
strict monitoring over proper utilization of the funds budgeted for procurement of Covid -19 
vaccine doses. With the threat of Omicorn variant looming large and the rising concerns 
around omicron variant escaping immunity, calls of administering the booster doses of 
vaccines have drawn the attention of all. Moreover, with the start of vaccination programme 
for children between the age group of 15 -18 years, the Ministry must accordingly assess the 
additional budgetary requirements to ensure uninterrupted procurement and supply of 
vaccines t o all the sections of the country. The Committee also desires that issue of 
administering booster dose/precaution dose to all must be estimated without delay and 
adequate availability of vaccines must be ensured.  
(Para 3.73) 
STATUS OF ON-GOING PROJECTS TAKEN BY AIIMS, NEW DELHI 
 The Committee notes with concern that the pace of completion of construction 
projects at AIIMS New Delhi has been very slow. Almost all the construction projects got 
delayed and the target date of completion for all the four projec ts has been extended. The 
Committee observes that the delay in the construction work was mainly due to non 
performance by the selected construction agencies and the lockdown imposed during the 
pandemic Covid-19. As per the submission of the Institute, all the projects should have been 
completed by now. However, the Committee finds undue delay in completion of projects in 
Surgical Block, New Paid Ward and Geriatrics Block due to variety of reasons as advocated. 
The Committee is assured that the Institute nee ds to adopt a stringent monitoring 
mechanism so that any remaining work is completed within the stipulated time limits. The 
Institute must put in place a robust assessment process for selection of the project 
development agency or contractor, taking into c onsideration its past track record so that 
such unnecessary additional costs and time extensions are minimized in future Projects and 
time lines are adhered to.  
(Para 3.76) 
REDEVELOPMENT OF RESIDENTIAL COLONIES OF AIIMS (AYURVIGYAN 
NAGAR & WEST ANSARI NAGAR) 
 The Committee notes that the approval of the construction of 3519 dwelling units 
were given by the Cabinet on 13.10.2016 and the units were expected to be completed within 
the span of 60 months. The timeline has already elapsed and the final approval from NDMC 
and SDMC is still awaited. The Committee is of the opinion that undue delay in the 
construction activities leads to unnecessary costs and time overruns.  Needless to say, factors 
like inflation, abrupt ending of contracts, arbitration cases, disputes etc. contribute to undue 
disruptions in completion of a project. The Committee recommends the Ministry to make a 
proper assessment before the beginning of any project and conduct regular review meeting 

115 
 
to track the progress of the project. This will ensure  timely completion of the ongoing 
projects and also help avoid time and cost overruns. 
(Para 3.82) 
IMPLEMENTATION OF MASTER PLAN OFAIIMS NEW DELHI 
POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES AND RESEARCH 
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH 
 The Committee observes that th e delay in the Project of "Modernisation of Research 
Block A and B and Modernization of Nehru Hospital", PGIMER Chandigarh was mainly 
due to the non -performance by the selected construction agency. The Committee, therefore, 
desires that the remaining work which is now planned to be carried out departmentally 
must be monitored closely. For this to happen, stringent monitoring mechanism need to be 
put in place for timely completion of the work. The Committee, in this connection, 
recommends the Institute to ex pedite the review process and complete the Modernisation 
Project without further delay. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the status of 
the Satellite Centre of PGIMER, Chandigarh at Sangrur (Punjab).  
(Para 3.85) 
 The Committee is perturbed to note that despite the best efforts by Institute to fill up 
the vacant posts, there still exists a gap in the in -position strength and the sanctioned 
strength in various cadres of PGIMER Chandigarh due to continuing administration 
blockade. The Committee is of the view that the Institute must address the shortage of 
workforce at all levels and fill up the vacant posts at various levels without further delay. 
The Committee would also like to be updated on the application filed before the Supreme 
Court and t he litigation cases pending in the court pertaining to filling up of vacant posts 
through promotion.  
(Para 3.89) 
NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION 
Immunization 
 The Committee is aware of the fact that the National Immunization Schedule, vaccine 
doses and dosing int erval is decided based on the recommendations of National Technical 
Advisory Group for Immunization (NTAGI). The Committee is however concerned over 
other vaccines that are not part of the National Immunization Schedule. The Committee is 
of the view that t he vaccines administered outside the Immunization Programme must also 
have uniformity in doses and schedule. Vaccines for diseases that are endemic to a 
geographical area must only be administered in that particular area. The Committee further 
recommends t hat universal coverage be part of the National Immunisation Schedule that 
contains provision of booster doses as precaution dose to all as guard against emerging 
variants of Coronavirus.  
(Para 3.93) 

116 
 
Strengthening of State Drug Regulatory System 
  The Committee wonders as to why the State Government of West Bengal and UTs of 
Lakshadweep and Chandigarh are hesitant in signing the MoU with the Central Government 
under the Scheme of Strengthening of State Drugs Regulatory System despite persuasion by 
the Department of H&FW. The Committee also expresses its displeasure over the slow pace 
of activities under the Scheme of the Ministry which is aimed at upgrading and strengthening 
the States Drug's Regulatory structures. The Committee emphasizes that poor test ing 
infrastructure in the country poses a hindrance in ensuring safety and quality of drugs 
available for consumption.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Department, 
to coordinate with States/UT Government with a view to put in place a vibr ant, dynamic and 
effective regulatory regime for safeguarding the public from substandard drugs. The 
States/UTs also need to be persuaded for implementation of the Scheme. 
(Para 3.98) 
 National Mental Health Programme 
  The factors of poor utilization of b udget under the Scheme and the lack of proposals 
from the States /UTs jointly contribute to the prevalence of mental health issues in the 
country. Despite reports citing the prevalence of mental health illness among the Indian 
population, the very indiffer ence shown by the States reflects the continuing trivialization of 
the issue. Lack of awareness about the importance of redressal /treatment of mental health 
issues is one of the major hindrances in implementation of the Scheme.  
(Para 3.101) 
  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to incentivize the Institutes in 
carrying out activities under the revised funding mechanism and ensure that there is no 
delay in reimbursements to the Institutes. The Committee believes that the need of th e hour 
is to launch a awareness campaign based on a systematic understanding of the magnitude of 
mental health burden and assessing the trends and its prevalence for all the States/UTs. The 
States/UTs must cooperate with the Central Government so that a ro bust policy aimed 
towards alleviating the burden and mainstreaming the mental health issue can be 
implemented at the ground level. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
follow up the matter with the Institutes and the States/UTs to start dif ferent programs and 
submit proposals for release of funds.  
(Para 3.102) 
  The Committee has time and again emphasized on the importance of mental health 
and the need of integrating mental health in the health policy of the Government. The 
pandemic brought  about a significant increase in the number of people struggling with 
mental health issues. The Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry needs to 
amplify its efforts in delivering mental health services to the masses. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry must conduct a study to assess 
the prevalence of mental illness, depressive disorders and suicide death rate in the country 
including the impact of the pandemic on the mental health of the population.  
(Para 3.106) 

117 
 
  The Committee recommends the Ministry to pursue the activities pertaining to 
mission of the establishment of Center of Excellence in mental health specialties in the 
States/UTs. The poor availability of mental health specialists in the country is  a matter of 
concern, especially, when the pandemic has significantly amplified the mental health issues 
around the world. The Ministry must make constant efforts to bring about a change in the 
attitude towards mental health issues through awareness generation programmes and giving 
due impetus to effective implementation of Manpower Development Scheme. The 
Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to work towards providing mental health 
care services even at primary and community healthcare level. The Comm ittee believes that 
the Ministry must address the shortage of mental health professionals in the country for 
ensuring availability of mental health care services to the general public. The Committee 
reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry must crea te a database on the number of 
mental health professionals in the country so as to realistically assess their requirement. 
(Para 3.110) 
National Programme  for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, 
Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke 
  The Committee i s of the view that coordination between the States/UTs and the 
Center is crucial for successful implementation of any Scheme falling under State lists. For 
this both, the Central and State Governments need to come forward to share the 
responsibility for completion of the Projects. The Committee also recommends the Ministry 
to persuade States/UTs Government to timely submit all the pending utilization certificates 
and requisite documents so that additional funds are released for executing the activities 
connected to the project. 
(Para 3.113) 
  The Committee is aware that the States are the main implementing agencies of the 
Center’s policies. For this, the Ministry must ensure that they maintain a regular 
consultations and understanding with the States so that  there remains no confusion on the 
directives of the Center to the States. The Ministry must work towards establishing a 
coordination channel between the Center and the States/UTs so that the ongoing projects 
are timely completed. The Ministry must work in  tandem with the States/UTs and chalk out 
a timeframe for the operationalization of all the SCIs/TCCC. The Committee observes that 
since most States lack the institutional framework for public health management and thus 
depend on the Center for capital as well as technical support, therefore, the Central 
Government must provide technical and logistical support to the States/UTs Government 
for annual and successful completion of all the 19 State Cancer institute (SCI) and 20 
Tertiary Cancer Care Centre (TCCC).     
(Para 3.117) 
 The Committee believes that Research on the trend, incidences of cancer burden, the 
survival rate etc can guide the Ministry's realistic assessment of funds and help in framing a 
futuristic policy for controlling the increasing number of cancer patients in India. The 
Committee further reiterates its recommendation for establishment of Cancer speciality 
Institute under PPP scheme with the mission of undertaking extensive cancer research 

118 
 
projects. The Committee believes that timely updati on of Cancer registry would be followed 
by use of the registry in various research applications.  
(Para 3.121) 
 The Committee observes with concern that the operationalization of the new campus 
of CNCI had been delayed; however, the Committee understands t hat the outbreak of 
Pandemic Covid -19 has acted as a deterrent factor. The Committee, nevertheless, 
recommends the Institute to expedite the recruitment process and fill up the vacant posts of 
all the categories of the staff so that the Institute is put up  in operationalization mode at the 
earliest.  
(Para 3.126) 
Human Resources for Health and Medical Education 
  The Committee recommends the Ministry to closely monitor the progress of all the 
Medical Colleges in the States that have been approved under Phas e II and III of the 
scheme. The Committee urges the Ministry to sort out all the pending issues with the 
remaining 16 colleges under Phase II that have not applied for letter of permission to start 
the academic courses. The Committee further recommends the  Ministry to continue the 
timely transfer of funds and regular review meetings with the State authorities. The 
Ministry must make concerted efforts to achieve the envisaged vision of expanding tertiary 
care in peripheral areas and making provision and annu al appointment of all adequate 
number of doctors/specialist in the newly established medical colleges under Phase II and III 
of the Scheme. 
(Para 3.130) 
  The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that the Scheme is aimed at 
creating 10,000 MBBS seats in Government Colleges across the country. The Committee 
believes that the Center along with States needs to make concerted efforts to actively utiliz e 
the existing healthcare resources along with creation of new health infrastructure. The 
different Schemes under "Human Resources for Health and Medical Education"  aim to 
achieve the same. The Committee is of the view that the States must also shoulder th e 
responsibilities along with the Center and expedite the release of their share of funds under 
the Scheme.  
(Para 3.133) 
  The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has increased its release of funds under 
different phases of the three centrally sponsor ed Schemes. However, funds to the tune of Rs. 
16,467.66 crore still remain unreleased. The Committee is concerned at the pending of 
utilization certificates involving the funds released and recommends the Ministry to strongly 
take up the matter of pending utilization certificates with the States/UT Government. The 
Committee believes that the Ministry must find out workable strategies to resolve the 
pendency issues so as to release the remaining amount of funds for assured implementation 
of Scheme within sti pulated timeframe. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to 
devise new monitoring modules for ensuring definite progress of the development activities 

119 
 
in the Health Sector with objective of upgrading the medical infrastructure and enhance the 
health workforce in the country. 
(Para 3.138) 
 The Committee has time and again raised concerns on the different issues that have 
been posing a hurdle in the smooth implementation of the AB -PMJAY. There is also the 
need to increase awareness regarding AB -PMJAY among all the stakeholders, especially, 
the beneficiaries and the empanelled hospitals. The Ministry must also work towards 
strengthening the grievance redressal mechanism under the Scheme. The Committee notes 
that the list of beneficiaries is based on the SECC data which leaves a large group of p eople 
out of the beneficiary list. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates its recommendation 
that the Ministry must make efforts to expand and update the beneficiary base. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to develop a foolproof monitoring mecha nism to 
ensure that no eligible person is denied health care services under the Scheme. The 
Committee desires that the Ministry must set up a robust monitoring mechanism and 
conduct periodic audits and inspections so that any fraudulent practices are avoided.  
(Para 3.142) 
  The Committee emphasizes that setting up Medi -City can help in addressing the 
issues related to shortage of doctors in certain areas and strengthen the health 
infrastructure in the country. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recom mendation that 
the Ministry must explore the idea of establishing Medi -city on PPP Model in the country. 
The Central Government, in coordination with the States, must chalk out a plan for 
establishing Medi-Cities across the country.  
(Para 3.147) 
 The Comm ittee emphasizes that the Ministry along with States must continue 
implementation of incentivising Schemes for encouraging doctors to serve in rural areas. 
The Committee also points out that National Medical Commission has succeeded the 
Medical Council of India and, therefore, the use of MCI may be avoided.  
(Para 3.150) 
HEALTH MANAGEMENT AND BUDGETING BEYOND PANDEMIC COVID -19 
IMPASSE 
  The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry must work towards 
creation of an All India Medical Services on the lines of All India Civil Services such as IAS, 
IPS and IFS. The Committee recommends the Ministry again to take up the matter with the 
States on priority basis. The Committee is of the considered view that the All India Medical 
Service would enhance  the success rate of Healthcare Projects and trigger policy 
formulation and ensure effective implementation of the Scheme at the ground level. 
(Para 3.153) 
 

120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

121 
 
IV 
 
FOURTH MEETING 
           The Committee met at 2.30 p.m. on Monday, the 21 st February, 2022 in Committee Room 
A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
3. Dr. Santanu Sen 
4. Shri A. D. Singh  
5. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu   
6. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
8. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
9. Shri Arjun Lal Meena 
10. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
11. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
12. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
13. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
14. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Mahesh Tiwari   Joint Secretary  
2. Shri V.S.P. Singh                        Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                Additional Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar                   Deputy Secretary 
 
  

122 
 
2.       *** The Chairman also informed the Members about another agenda for the meeting 
which was to consider and adopt draft 133 rd Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 126th Report on Demands for Grants 2021 -22 
(Demand No. 44) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare). The Committee after a brief discussion adopted the draft 133 rd Report and decided to 
present the Report to the Parliament during the second part of the ongoing budget session. 
3.         ***  
4  *** 
5.         *** 
6.         *** 
7.         *** 
8.         *** 
9.         *** 
10.       *** 
11.       ***   
12.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13.       The Committee then adjourned at 5:00 p.m to meet again at 11:00 am on 22 nd February, 
2022. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** Relates to other matter  
 

123 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
  

124 
 
Annexure-I 
Details of incentives for routine and recurring activities given to ASHAs 
S. 
No. 
Incentives Previous Incentives Revised Incentives 
(September,               2018) 
1 Mobilizing and attending Village Health and Nutrition 
Days or Urban Health and Nutrition 
Days 
Rs.200/ session Rs.200/ session 
2 Conveying and guiding monthly meeting of 
VHSNC/MAS 
Rs.150 Rs.150 
3 Attending monthly meeting at Block 
PHC/UPHC 
Rs.150 Rs.150 
4 a. Line listing of households done at beginning of 
the year and updated every six months 
Rs.100 Rs.300 
b. Maintaining  village health register and 
supporting universal registration of births  and 
deaths to be updated on the monthly basis 
Rs.100 Rs.300 
c. Preparation of due list of children to be 
immunized on monthly basis 
Rs.100 Rs.300 
d. Preparation of list of ANC beneficiaries to  be 
updated on monthly basis 
Rs.100 Rs.300 
e. Preparation of list of eligible couple on monthly 
basis 
Rs.100 Rs.300 
 Total Rs.1000/- Rs.2000/- 
 
  

125 
 
 
1 Undertaking Home Visit for the care of 
the New Born and Post- Partum 
mother[1] -Six Visits in Case of 
Institutional Delivery (Days 3rd, 7th, 
14th, 21st, 28th& 42nd) -Seven visits in 
case of Home Deliveries (Days 1st, 3rd, 
7th, 14th, 21st, 28th& 42nd) 
Rs. 250  
 
 
 
Child Health- NHM- RCH Flexi pool 
2 Undertaking Home Visits of Young 
Child for Strengthening of Health & 
Nutrition of young child through Home
 Visits- (recommended 
schedule- 3rd, 6th, 9th, 12th and 15th 
months) - (Rs.50 x 5 visits) –in 1st phase 
the     programme is proposed to implement 
only in 235 POSHAN 
Abhiyan and Aspirational districts 
Rs. 50/visit with total Rs. 
250/per child for making 05 
visits 
 
3 Undertaking follow up visits to a child 
discharged from facility or Severe Acute 
Malnutrition (SAM) 
management centre 
Rs. 150 only after MUAC is 
equal to nor-more than 125mm 
 
4 Ensuring quarterly follow up of low-
birth-weight babies and newborns 
discharged after treatment from 
Specialized New born Care Units[2] 
Rs. 50/ Quarter-from the 3rd 
month until 1 year of age 
 
5 Child Death Review for reporting child 
death of children under 5 
years of age 
Rs. 50  
Annexure – II 
 
Details of performance-based incentives for a varied set of activities under various 
National Health Programmes 
 Activities Amount in Rs/case Source of Fund 
and 
Fund Linkages 
I Maternal Health 
1 JSY financial package   
a. For ensuring antenatal care for the 
woman 
Rs.300 for Rural areas and 
Rs. 200 for Urban areas 
Maternal Health- 
NRHM-RCH 
Flexi pool b. For facilitating institutional 
delivery 
Rs. 300 for Rural areas and 
Rs. 200 for Urban areas 
2 Reporting Death of women (15 -49 years age group) by 
ASHA to PHC Medical Officer 
Rs. 200 for reporting within 24 hours 
of occurrence of death by 
phone 
HSC/ U-
PHC- Un- 
tied Fund 
II Child Health 

126 
 
6 For mobilizing and ensuring every 
eligible child (1-19 years out-of- school 
and non-enrolled) is 
administered Albendazole. 
Rs. 100/ ASHA/Bi-Annual  
 Intensified Diarrhoea Control 
Fortnight 
  
7 Week-1-ASHA incentive for 
prophylactic distribution of ORS to 
families with under-five 
children 
Rs. 1 per ORS packet for 100 
under five children 
 
 
8 
Week-2- ASHA incentive for facilitating 
growth monitoring of all children in 
village; screening and referral of 
undernourished children to Health centre; 
IYCF counselling to under-five children 
household 
Rs. 100 per ASHA for 
completing at least 80% of 
household 
 
9 MAA (Mother‘s Absolute Affection) 
Programme Promotion of Breastfeeding- 
Quarterly 
mother meeting 
Rs. 100/ASHA/ Quarterly 
meeting 
 
III Immunization 
1 Full   immunization   for   a   child 
under one year 
Rs. 100 Routine Immunization Pool 
2 Complete immunization per child up-to 
two years age (all vaccination received 
between 1st and second year of age after 
completing full immunization after 
one year 
Rs. 75[3] 
3 Mobilizing children for OPV 
immunization under Pulse polio 
Programme 
Rs. 100/day[4] IPPI funds 
4 DPT Booster at 5-6years of age Rs.50  
IV Family Planning 
1 Ensuring spacing of 2 years after 
marriage [5] 
Rs. 500 Family planning – NHM RCH Flexi Pool 
2 Ensuring spacing of 3 years after 
birth of 1st child 5 
Rs. 500 
3 Ensuring a couple to opt for permanent 
limiting method after 2 
children[6] 
Rs. 1000 
4 Counselling, motivating and follow up of 
the cases for         Tubectomy 
Rs. 200 in 11 states with  high 
fertility rates (UP, Bihar, MP, 
Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand,   Odisha,Uttarakhand, 
Assam, Haryana and Gujarat) 
Rs.300 in 146 
MPV Districts Rs. 150 in 
remaining states 

127 
 
 
5 
Counselling, motivating and follow up 
of the cases for Vasectomy/ NSV 
Rs. 300 in 11 states with  high 
fertility rates (UP, Bihar, MP, 
Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand,  Odisha, Uttarakhand, 
Assam, Haryana and Gujarat) 
and 400 in 146 MPV districts  
and Rs. 200 in remaining states 
 
6 Female Postpartum sterilization Rs. 300 in 11 states with  high 
fertility rates (UP, Bihar, MP, 
Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand,   Odisha, Uttarakhand, 
Assam, Haryana and Gujarat) 
and  400 in 146 MPV districts 
6 Social marketing of contraceptives- as home delivery through ASHAs Rs. 1 for a pack of 03 condoms, 
Rs. 1 for a cycle of OCP, Rs. 2 
for a pack of 
ECPs 
7 Escorting or
 facilitating 
beneficiary to the health facility 
for the PPIUCD insertion 
Rs. 150/per case 
8 Escorting or
 facilitating 
beneficiary to the health facility 
for the PAIUCD insertion 
Rs. 150/case 
Mission Parivar Vikas- In selected 146 districts in six states- 
(57 in UP, 37 in Bihar, 14 RJS, 9 in Jharkhand, 02 in Chhattisgarh and 2 in Assam) 
9 Injectable Contraceptive MPA (Antara 
Program) and a non- hormonal weekly 
centchroman pill 
(Chhaya) - Incentive to ASHA 
Rs. 100 per dose Family planning- RCH- NHM Flexi Pool 
10 Mission Parivar Vikas Campaigns 
Block level activities- ASHA to be 
oriented on eligible couple survey for 
estimation of beneficiaries and will be 
expected to conducted eligible couple 
survey- maximum 
four rounds 
Rs. 150/ ASHA/round 
11 Nayi Pahel- an FP kit for newly weds- 
a FP kit would be given to the newly 
wed couple by ASHA (In initial phase 
ASHA may be 
given 2 kits/ ASHA) 
Rs. 100/ASHA/Nayi Pahel        kit 
distribution 
12 Saas Bahu Sammelan- mobilize  Saas 
Bahu for the Sammelan- 
maximum four rounds 
Rs. 100/ per meeting  
13 Updating of EC survey before each 
MPV campaign- 
Note-updating of EC
 survey register 
incentive is already part of 
routine and recurring incentive 
 
Rs.150/ASHA/Quarterly round 

128 
 
V Adolescent Health 
1 Distributing sanitary napkins to 
adolescent girls 
Rs. 1/ pack of 6 sanitary napkins Menstrual hygiene Scheme–RCH
 – 
NHM Flexi pool 
2 Organizing monthly meeting with 
adolescent girls pertaining to 
Menstrual Hygiene 
Rs. 50/meeting VHSNC Funds 
3 Incentive for support to Peer 
Educator (for facilitating selection 
process of peer educators) 
Rs. 100/ Per PE RKSK- NHM Flexi pool 
4 Incentive for
 mobilizing 
adolescents for Adolescent Health 
Day 
Rs. 200/ Per AHD 
V Participatory Learning and Action- (In selected 10 states that have low RMNCH+A indicators – Assam, 
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, MP, Meghalaya, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and UP) 
1 Conducting PLA meetings- 2 meetings per month- 
Note-Incentive is also applicable for 
AFs @Rs.100/- per meeting 
for 10 meetings in a month 
Rs. 100/ASHA/per 
meeting for 02 meetings in a 
month 
 
VI Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme[7] 
 Honorarium and counselling                
charges for being a DOTS provider 
  
RNTCP Funds 
1 For Category I of TB patients (New 
cases of Tuberculosis) 
Rs. 1000 for 42 contacts over six 
or seven months of 
treatment 
2 For Category II of TB patients 
(previously treated TB cases) 
Rs. 1500 for 57 contacts over 
eight to nine months of 
treatment including 24- 
36 injections in intensive 
phase 
3 For treatment and support to drug 
resistant TB patients 
Rs. 5000 for completed course of 
treatment (Rs. 2000 should be 
given at the end on intensive 
phase and Rs. 3000 at the end 
of consolidation phase 
 
4 For notification if suspect referred is 
diagnosed to be TB patient by 
MO/Lab[8] 
Rs.100  
VII  National Leprosy Eradication Programme [9] 
1 Referral and ensuring compliance for 
complete treatment in pauci- bacillary 
cases of Leprosy - for 33 states (except 
Goa, Chandigarh & Puducherry). 
Rs. 250 (for facilitating 
diagnosis of leprosy case)+ Rs. 
400 (for follow up on 
completion of treatment) 
NLEP Funds 

129 
 
2 Referral and ensuring compliance for 
complete treatment in multi- bacillary 
cases of Leprosy- for 33 states (except 
Goa, Chandigarh & 
Puducherry). 
Rs. 250 (for facilitating 
diagnosis of leprosy case)+ Rs. 
600 (for follow up on 
completion of treatment) 
VIII  National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme 
A) Malaria[10]    
1 Preparing blood slides or testing 
through RDT 
Rs. 15/slide or test NVBDCP Funds for Malaria control 
2. Providing complete treatment for 
RDT positive Pf cases 
Rs.75/-per positive cases NVBDCP Funds for Malaria  
control 
3. Providingcompleteradicaltreatmenttopo
sitivePfandPvcasedetectedbybloodslide
,asper drug regime 
4. For referring a case and ensuring 
Complete treatment 
Rs. 300 (not in their 
Updated list) 
(B) Lymphatic Filariasis 
1 For one time line listing of 
lymphoedema and hydrocele cases in 
all are as of non-endemic and 
Endemic districts 
Rs.200 NVBDCP funds for control of Lymphatic 
Filariasis 
2 For annual  Mass Drug 
Administration for cases of 
Lymphatic Filariasis[11] 
Rs. 200/day for 
maximumthreedaystocover50ho
usesand250 persons 
(C) Acute Encephalitis Syndrome/Japanese Encephalitis 
 Referral of AES/JE cases to the 
Nearest CHC/DH/Medical College 
Rs.300percase NVBDCP funds 
(D) Kala Azare limination 
1. Involvement of ASHAs during the 
spray rounds (IRS) for sensitizing the 
community to accept indoor 
spraying[12] 
Rs. 100/- per round during 
Indoor Residual Spray 
i.e.Rs200intotalfortworounds 
NVBDCP funds 
2. ASHA Incentive for referring a 
suspected case and ensuring complete 
treatment. 
Rs.500/per notified case NVBDCP funds 
(E) Dengue and Chikungunya 
1 Incentive for source reduction &IEC 
activities for prevention and control of 
Dengue and Chikungunya in 12 High 
endemic States (Andhra Pradesh, 
Rs. 200/- (1 Rupee 
/Houseformaximum200housesP
M for 05 months- during peak 
transmission season). The 
NVBDCP funds 

130 
 
Assam, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and 
West Bengal) 
incentive should not be exceed 
Rs.1000/ASHA/Year 
(F) National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme 
1 ASHA incentive for salt testing Rs.25 a month for testing 
50 salt samples 
NIDDCP Funds 
IX Incentives under Comprehensive Primary Health Care (CPHC) and Universal NCDs Screening 
1 Maintaining data validation and 
collection of additional information- 
per completed form/family for NHPM–
under Ayushman Bharat 
Rs.5/form/family  
 
NHM funds 
2 Filling up of CBAC forms of every 
individual –onetime activity for 
enumeration of all individuals, filling 
CBAC for all individuals 
30or >30 years of age 
Rs.10/perform/per individual as 
one time incentive 
 
 
 
 
NPCDCS Funds 
3 Follow up of patients diagnosed with 
Hypertension/Diabetes and three 
common cancer for ignition of 
treatment and ensuring 
compliance 
Rs.50/per case/Bi-Annual 
4 Delivery of new service packages 
under CPHC component 
Rs.1000/ASHA/PM 
(linked with activities) 
 
NHM funds 
X. Drinking water and sanitation 
1 Motivating Households to Rs.75perhousehold  
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
2. Construct toilet and promote the 
Use of toilets. 
 
 

131 
 
  
Annexure-III  
State-wise details of incentives provided to the ASHAs (as on 20.07.2021) 
State-wise details of incentives provided to the ASHAs 
 
1. Andhra Pradesh provides balance amount to match the total incentive of Rs.10,00 
2. Arunachal Pradesh-provides 100% top up; 
3. Bihar- Rs.1000/- per ASHA per month linked with functionality of five specified (started in FY 
2019-20); 
4. Chhattisgarh-75% of matching amount of the incentives over and above the incen by an 
ASHA as a top up on an annual basis; 
5. Delhi- Rs. 3000/- PM for functional ASHA (against the 12 core activities perform 
6. Gujarat provides 50% top up; 
7. Haryana- Rs. 4000/month from June-2018 and 50% top-up; 
8. Himachal Pradesh- Rs. 2000/month; 
9. Karnataka-Rs. 4000/month – recently introduced replacing the top up incentive; 
10. Kerala-Rs.5000/month in FY 2020-21; 
11. Odisha-Rs. 1000 /month from state fund launched on April 1st, 2018; 
12. Rajasthan- Rs. 2700/month through ICDS; 
13. Sikkim -Rs. 6000/month; 
14. Telangana provides balance amount to match the total incentive of Rs. 6000/- pm 
15. Tripura provides 100% top up against 08 specified activities and 33% top-up bas tivities; 
16. Uttarakhand- Rs.5000/year and Rs. 1000/month; 
17. Uttar Pradesh- Rs.750/- per ASHA per month linked with functionality of five sp ies 
(started from March 2019); and 
18. West Bengal-Rs. 3000/month. 
 
[1] This incentive is provided only on completion of 45days after birth of the child and should meet the following criteria-birth 
registration, weight-record in the MCP Card, immunization with BCG, first dose of OPV and DPT complete with due entries 
in the MCP card and both mother and new born are safe until 42nd of delivery. 
[2] This incentive will be subsumed with the HBYC incentive subsequently. 
[3] Revised from Rs. 50 to Rs, 75. 
[4] Revised from Rs 75/day to Rs 100/day. 
[5] Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, 
Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, West Bengal & Daman and Diu [6] Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Gujarat, Haryana and Dadar & Nagar Haveli [7] Initially ASHAs were eligible to an incentive of Rs 250 for being DOTS provider to both new and previously  treated TB 
cases. Incentive to ASHA for providing treatment and support Drug resistant TB patients have now  been revised from Rs 2500 
to Rs 5000 for completed course of treatment [8] Provision for Rs100 notification incentive for all care providers including ASHA/Urban A SHA /AWW/  unqualified 
practitioners etc if suspect referred is diagnosed to be TB patient by MO/Lab. 
 [9] Incentives under NLEP for facilitating diagnosis and follow up for completion of treatment for pauci bacillary cases was Rs 
300 before and has now been revised to-Rs 250 and Rs 400 now. 
For facilitating diagnosis and follow up for completion of treatment for multi-bacillary cases were Rs 500 incentive was given to 
ASHA before and has now been revised to-Rs 250 and Rs 600. 
 [10] Incentive for slide preparation was Rs 5 and has been revised to Rs 15. Incentive for providing treatment for RDT 

132 
 
positive Pf cases was Rs 20 before and has been revised to Rs 75. Incentive for providing complete radical  treatment to 
positive Pf and Pv case detected by blood slide, as pe r drug regimen was Rs 50 before. Similarly,  incentive for referring a case 
of malaria and ensuring complete treatment was Rs 200/case and has been revised to Rs 300 now. 
 [11] Incentive has been revised from Rs 100 to Rs 200 per day for maximum three days to cover 50 houses or 250 persons 
 [12] In order to ensure vector control, the role of the ASHA is to mobilize the family for IRS. She does not carry out the DDT 
spray. During the spray rounds her involvement would be for sensitizing the community to accept  indoor spraying and cover 
100% houses and help Kala Azar elimination.  She may be incentivized of total Rs  200/- (Rs.100 for each round) for the two 
rounds of insecticide spray in the affected districts of Uttar Pradesh,  Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal. 
  

133 
 
Annexure – IV 
Automatically included: 
1. Households without shelter 
2. Destitute/ living on alms 
3. Manual scavenger families 
4. Primitive tribal groups 
5. Legally released bonded labour 
  
Deprivation criteria in rural area: 
D1: Only one room with kucha walls and kucha roof 
D2: No adult member between age 16 to 59 
D3: Female headed households with no adult male member between age 16 to 59  
D4: Disabled member and no able-bodied adult member 
D5: SC/ST households 
D7: Landless households deriving major part of their income from manual casual labour 
  
Occupational criteria in urban area: 
1. Rag picker 
2. Beggar 
3. Domestic worker 
4. Street vendor/ Cobbler/hawker / Other service provider working on streets  
5. Construction worker/ Plumber/ Mason/ Labour/ Painter/ Welder/ Security guard/ Coolie and other head-
load worker 
6. Sweeper/ Sanitation worker / Mali 
7. Home-based worker/ Artisan/ Handicrafts worker / Tailor 
8. Transport worker/ Driver/ Conductor/ Helper to drivers and conductors/ Cart puller/ Rickshaw puller  
9. Shop worker/ Assistant/ Peon in small establishment/ Helper/ Delivery assistant / Attendant/ Waiter  
10. Electrician/ Mechanic/ Assembler/ Repair worker 
11. Washer-man/ Chowkidar 
 
 
 