Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2015/Sravana, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
 
 
REPORT NO. 
87
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th August, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th August, 2015)
The Functioning of All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
(Department of Health and Family Welfare)
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT
The Functioning of All India Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
(Department of Health and Family Welfare)
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  11th August, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  11th August, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2015/Sravana, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)—(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 34
Introduction.............................................................................................. 1
I. Historical Background....................................................................... 1—2
II. Aims and Objectives of AIIMS......................................................... 2
III. Governance Structure....................................................................... 2—6
(a) Institute Body
(b) Governing Body
(c) Standing Committees
IV . Activities........................................................................................... 6—9
(a) Education
(b) Medical Research
(c) Patient Care Services
(d) General Administration
(e) Budget and Finance
V . Special Character of AIIMS................................................................ 9—10
VI. Governance........................................................................................ 10—17
(a) Major Concerns and related suggestions
(b) Corruption Cases
(c) Need for decentralization
(d) Valiathan Committee Report
(e) Staff Strength
(f) Recruitment, Reservation and Promotion Policies
VII. Infrastructure...................................................................................... 17—20
(a) Expansion plan for the next decade and status of various expansion projects
(b) Expansion and Decongestion of infrastructure
(c) Expansion needs of AIIMS and Trauma Centre
(d) AIIMS Campus II (Jhajjar, Haryana)
VIII. Academics........................................................................................... 25
IX. Research.............................................................................................. 25—28
X. Patient Care......................................................................................... 28—32
XI. Allied Services..................................................................................... 32—34
(i) Public Relation Cadre Employees of AIIMS
(ii) Physiotherapy Services
(iii) Speech Pathology & Audiology
O
BSERV ATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS  OF  THE  C OMMITTEE .......................................... 35—47
5. M INUTES ........................................................................................................................ 49—90
6. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................ 91—116
(i) Annexure I - Composition of the Committees/Sub-Committees............ 93—102
(ii) Annexure II - List of witnesses....................................................... 103—107
(iii) Annexure III - Communication dated 19 th June, 2015 received from
Department of Health and Family Welfare.................... 108—116

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
%4. Shri Vijay Goel
^5. Dr.Bhushan Lal Jangde
6. Shrimati B. Jayashree
7. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
8. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
&9. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
10. Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem
11. Dr. T.N. Seema
@12. Shri Jairam Ramesh
LOK SABHA
13. Shri Thangso Baite
14. Dr. Subhash Bhamre
15. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chouhan (Nandu Bhaiya)
16. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
17. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
19. Dr. K. Kamaraj
20. Shri Arjunlal Meena
21. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
22. Shri Chirag Paswan
23. Shri M.K. Raghavan
24. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
25. Shri Alok Sanjar
#26. Dr. Mahesh Sharma
27. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
28. Shri Raj Kumar Singh
29. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
30. Shrimati Rita Tarai
31. Shri Manohar Untwal
32. Shri Akshay Yadav
*33. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
% Resigned from the membership of the Committee w.e.f.  2 nd December, 2014.
^ Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f.  19 th December, 2014.
& Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f. 28th November, 2014.
@ Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th November. 2014.
# Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f  9 th November, 2014.
* Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f.  22 nd December, 2014.
** Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f.  22 nd December, 2014.

(ii)
**34. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf present this Eighty Seventh Report of the Committee on the Functioning of All India
Institute of  Medical Sciences (AIIMS).
2. The Committee identified the subject ‘Functioning of All India Institute of Medical
Sciences (AIIMS)’ at its meeting held on 18 th September, 2014. The previous Committee,
during 15 th Lok Sabha, had also identified the subject in 2011 and the Committee continued to
examine the subject till 2013. The then Committee discussed threadbare a host of issues on
the subject and also heard experts/stakeholders. A Sub-Committee was also appointed in 2010-11
and 2011-12. (List of composition of Committees year-wise that examined the subject is at
Annexure I)
3. The present Committee examined the subject, in its sittings held on 18 th September,
2014, 12th November, 2014, 16 th January, 2015 and 3 rd August, 2015 and it also took oral
evidence of representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the AIIMS. A list
of official witnesses and experts/stakeholders heard is at Annexure II. In total, the previous
Committee and the present Committee considered the subject in 4 sittings and the Sub-
Committee examined the subject in 12 sittings.
4. During the finalization of its Report, the Committee relied upon the following
documents/papers:-
(i) Status Note on AIIMS received from Department of Health and Family Welfare;
(ii) Oral Evidences tendered by Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
along with the Director, AIIMS;
(iii) Oral Evidences tendered by Experts/Stakeholders;
(iv) W ritten submissions made by Experts/Stakeholders; and
(v) Replies to the questionnaires received from the Department of Health and Family
Welfare.
5. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held
on 3
rd August, 2015.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
 SATISH CHANDRA MISRA
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
3rd August, 2015 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Sravana 12, 1937 (Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare
Rajya Sabha

ACRONYMS
AIIMS – All India Institute of Medical Sciences
AFC – AIIMS Finance Committee
ACP – Assured Career Progression
CSIR – Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
CRHS – Comprehensive Rural Health Services
CVO – Central Vigilance Officer
CVC – Central Vigilance Commission
DST – Department of Science and Technology
DoPT – Department of  Personnel and Training
DM – Doctor of Medicine
ICMR – Indian Council of Medical Research
IT – Information Technology
IIT – Indian Institute of Technology
IISc – Indian Institute of Science
ICU – Intensive Care Unit
ICDS – Integrated Child Development Services
JIPMER – Jawaharlal Institute of Medical Education & Research
MBBS – Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery
NCR – National Capital Region
OPD – Out Patient Department
PMSSY – Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana
PGIMER – Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research
PET – Positron Emission Tomography
NISTAC – Nationwide Infrastructure Support Technical Assistance Consultants
RTI – Right to Information
TIFR – T ata Institute of Fundamental Research
T.B. – Tuberculosis
UNICEF – United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
UPSC – Union Public Service Commission
VRS – V oluntary Retirement Scheme
WHO – World Health Organization
(iv)

REPORT
INTRODUCTORY
The All India Institute of Medical Sciences is an autonomous institution of national
importance established in 1956 by an Act of Parliament to serve as a nucleus for nurturing
excellence in all aspects of health care.
I . Historical Background
2. As per the information furnished by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, an
‘All India Medical Institute’ was first envisioned by the Advisory Committee on Professional
Education, created to translate the recommendations of the Bhore Committee (1943) that laid
the foundation of the health sector policy and development in modern India. The Advisory
Committee, chaired by Dr. A. L. Mudaliar and whose membership included, among others,
the legendary Dr. B. C. Roy, recommended creation of an ‘All India Medical Institute’ which
‘will not only provide a centre for training of medical teachers, but will combine the
provision of the most up-to-date hospital facilities for the education of medical graduates and
opportunities for comprehensive research without which teaching and training must fail in
their object.’
3. The Ministry further informed that the above resolve made at the cusp of our
Independence, was translated into reality by the first Union Health Minister Rajkumari Amrit
Kaur. The All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) was brought into existence by the
Parliament through Act 26 of 1956. Moving the AIIMS Bill, she articulated the vision of AIIMS
in her address to the Parliament on 18 February, 1956 wherein she stated, “It has been one
of my cherished dreams that for postgraduate study and for the maintenance of high standards
of medical education in our country, we should have an Institute of this nature in India which
would enable our young men and women to have their post-graduate education in their own
country, in their background with the necessary experience that we would like to give them
to do research in the various spheres of medical education.” The Committee has been informed
that the principle impetus for the creation of AIIMS, as an institution of national importance,
was post-graduate education which is further evident from the Objects of the Institute laid
down in Clause 13 of the Act. Clause 14 of the Act lists the Functions of AIIMS for the
attainment of the stated Objects.
The Functions re-affirm the Institute’s commitment to the broad spectrum of health
professional education as also to research and maintenance of well equipped hospitals. Over the
years, as the Institute evolved, it emerged as an apex level hospital, indeed, a benchmark in
healthcare. Thus, the trinity of the mission  of the Institute is:
(1) Education of diverse health professionals
(2) Research in biomedical sciences; and
(3) Patient care at the highest care level;

2
4. Although AIIMS has consistently proved as a leader in advanced patient care, the
unique and unparalleled role of the Institute has been to serve the nation as a fountainhead of
world-class medical education and biomedical research, the core functions of a university.
While addressing its problems, AIIMS should be seen as medical sciences university committed
to excellence in research and education, to which is attached an apex referral hospital that is
expected to provide most advanced healthcare.
II. Aims and Objectives of AIIMS
5. As informed by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the following are the aims
and objectives of AIIMS:-
To develop pattern of teaching in under-graduate and post-graduate medical
education in all its branches so as to demonstrate a high standard of medical education
to all medical colleges and other allied institutions in India.
To bring together in one place educational facilities of the highest order for the
training of personnel in all branches of health activities.
To attain self-sufficiency in post-graduate medical education.
6. The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare during his evidence before the
Committee on 12 th November, 2014 inter-alia  submitted that ever since India Today began
ranking medical institutions, AIIMS has been ranked number one consecutively for about 14
years and quite often, it is number one in all parameters. Teaching and research is conducted
in 52 disciplines. AIIMS is a leader in the field of medical research with over 1600 research
publications by its faculty and researchers in a year. WHO fellows also undergo elective
training in AIIMS. The Institute runs a comprehensive rural health centre at Ballabhgarh in
Haryana and provides health cover to about 7.7 lakh people through the Centre for community
medicine.
III. Governance Structure
7. The Institute is being administered under the provisions of:
The AIIMS Act, 1956;
The AIIMS Rules, 1958; and
The AIIMS Regulations, 1999.
8. The AIIMS governance structure is multi-tiered and consists of the following entities:
(a) The Institute Body
9. As per the information furnished by the Ministry, the Institute Body consists of the
following members:
The Vice-Chancellor of the Delhi University, ex-officio;
The Director General of Health Services, Government of India, ex-officio;

3
The Director of the Institute, ex-officio;
Two representatives of the Central Government, to be nominated by the
Government, one from the Ministry of Finance and one from the Ministry of
Education;
Five persons of whom one shall be a non-medical scientist, representing the
Indian Sciences Congress Association, to be nominated by the Central
Government;
Four representatives of the medical faculties of Indian Universities to be
nominated by the Central Government in the manner prescribed by rules; and
Three members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected from among
themselves by the members of the House of the People and one from among
themselves by the members of the Council of States.
10. From the information furnished to the Committee it is seen that the Minister of Health
and Family Welfare is the President of the Institute.
(b) Governing Body
11. The Governing Body of the Institute is the executive Committee of the Institute and
shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as the Institute may, by regulations
made in this behalf, confer or impose upon it. The Governing Body consists of the following
11 members:
(a) President of the Institute;
(b) Director General of Health Services;
(c) Representative of the Ministry of Finance;
(d) One member elected by the members of the Institute from amongst the three
members of the Parliament elected to the Institute;
(e) Six members to be elected by the members of the Institute from amongst
themselves; and
(f) Director, AIIMS - Member-Secretary.
12. The Minister of Health and Family Welfare, by virtue of being the President of
Institute also is ex-officio Chairman of the Governing Body.
(c) Standing Committees
13. The Standing Committees are constituted from amongst the members of the Institute
Body and are as follows:
Standing Finance Committee;
Academic Committee;

4
Standing Selection Committee;
Standing Estate Committee; and
Hospital Affairs Committee.
14. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide  its O.M. dated 05 th November, 2014
gave an overview of the roles of various committees and meetings of these Committees during
the last four years which is delineated below:
Role of Various Committees/Bodies:-
Institute Body
15. The Institute Body is the supreme body and the same is constituted by the Central
Government and the functions of the Institute body is as under: Section 14 of the AIIMS Act,
1956 provides as under:
With a view to the promotion of the objects specified under section 13, the Institute may:-
(a) Provide for undergraduate and post-graduate teaching in the science of modern
medicine and other allied sciences, including physical and biological sciences;
(b) Provide facilities for research in the various branches of such sciences;
(c) Provide for the teaching of humanities in the under graduate course;
(d) Conduct experiments in new methods of medical education, both under
graduate and post-graduate, in order to arrive at satisfactory standards of
such education;
(e) Prescribe courses and curricula for both undergraduate and postgraduate
studies; and.
(f) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
establish and maintain:-
(i) One or more medical colleges with different departments including a
department of preventive and social medicine sufficiently staffed and
equipped to undertake not only undergraduate medical education but also
post-graduate medical education in different subjects;
(ii) One or more well-equipped hospitals;
(iii) A dental college with such institutional facilities for the practice of
dentistry and for the practical training of students as may be necessary;
(iv) A nursing college sufficiently staffed and equipped for the training of
nurses;
(v) Rural and urban health organizations which will form centers for the
field training of the medical, dental and nursing students of the Institute
as well as for research into community health problems; and

5
(vi) Other institutions for the training of different types of health workers,
such as physiotherapists, occupational therapists and medical technicians
of various kinds;
(g) Train teachers for the different medical colleges in India.
(h) Hold examinations and grant such degrees, diplomas and other academic
distinctions and titles in under graduate and post-graduate medical education as
may be laid down in regulations.
(i) Institute, and appoint persons to, professorships, readerships, lectureships and
post of any description in accordance with regulations.
(j) Receive grants from the Government and gifts donations, bequests and transfers
of properties, both movable and immovable, from donors, benefactors, testators
or transferors, as the case may be.
(k) Deal with any property belonging to, or vested in the Institute in any manner
which is considered necessary for promoting the objects specified in section 13.
(l) Demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed by
regulations.
(m) Construct quarters for its staff and allot such quarters to the staff in
accordance with such regulations as may be made in this behalf.
(n) Borrow money with the prior approval of the Central Government on the
security of the property of the Institute.
(o) Do all such other acts and things as may be necessary to further the objects
specified in Section 13.
Governing Body
16. The Governing Body of the Institute is the executive committee of the Institute and
shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as the Institute may, by regulations
made in this behalf, confer or impose upon it.
Standing Finance Committee
17. The following matters shall be referred to the Standing Finance Committee which shall
consider them and make its recommendations thereon, namely:
(a) Annual accounts showing the receipts and expenditure of the Institute together
with the  audit report thereon;
(b) Budget estimates showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the
Institute;
(c) All proposals for the creation of new post;
(d) All financial matters pertaining to the Institute; and
(e) All matters relating to the invitation and acceptance of tenders.

6
Standing Estate Committee
18. Standing Estate Committee is constituted for the purpose of considering additions and
alterations to buildings belonging to the Institute and other questions relating to their
maintenance and use.
Standing Academic Committee
19. Standing Academic Committee is constituted for the purpose of all Academic Matters.
Standing Selection Committee
20. Standing Selection Committee is constituted for the purpose of selection of Faculty.
Standing Hospital Affairs Committee
21. Standing Academic Committee is constituted for the purpose of all Hospital Matters.
22. The details of the meetings during the last four years are as under:-
(i) Institute Body:
2011-Nil, 16.01.2012, 15.05.2013, 29.09.2013 and 12.05.2014
(ii) Governing Body:
01.03.2011, 16.01.2012, 14.04.2012, 22.10.2012, 19.07.2013, 28.02.2014 and
12.05.2014
(iii) Standing Finance Committee:
04.07.2011, 26.08.2011, 16.03.2012, 28.05.2012, 18.09.2012, 22.08.2013,
27.09.2013 and 22.10.2014
(iv) Standing Estate Committee:
09.09.2011, 20.03.2012, 15.02.2013 and 05.11.2013
(v) Standing Hospital Affairs Committee:
19.06.2011
23. The term of the aforesaid Bodies/Committees is of 5 years.
IV Activities
24. Broadly, the activities of the Institute can be categorized into following:
(a) Education
25. The Institute conducts graduate and post-graduate courses in medicine, dentistry and
nursing. It also conducts super specialty courses in several disciplines.

7
(b) Medical Research
26. As stated in the Status Note furnished by the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, in the field of medical research AIIMS is the leader, having around 600 research
publications by its faculty and researchers in a year. In fact many research projects are
being carried out at AIIMS on topics which are of national importance. The AIIMS faculty
members get research funds from various governmental and international funding agencies
like Department of Science and Technology (DST), CSIR, ICMR, WHO, etc. In addition,
there are many grants from bilateral collaboration programmes such as Indo-US,
Indo-French & Indo-German.
(c) Patient Care Services
27. According to background note received from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
AIIMS receives a large number of patients from all over the country as well as from abroad.
Adequate medical care is provided by doctors, nurses and other staff as per maximum handling
capacity. AIIMS continues to provide best possible medical care/treatment to all patients
attending the main hospital and various centres viz.  Dr. R.P. Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences,
C. N. Center, Dr. B.R.A. Institute-Rotary Cancer Hospital, National Drug Dependence
Treatment Centre, J.P.N. Apex Trauma Centre, Comprehensive Rural Health Services Project
(CRHS), Ballabhgarh.
28. The Institute also provides round the clock emergency services that are manned by
specialized doctors at the level of Sr. Residents and consultants. These emergency services
are equipped with all the diagnostic (including Ultrasound, CT. Scan etc.) and therapeutic
facilities.
(d) General Administration
29. The Ministry has informed that AIIMS has various branches such as Personnel &
Establishment, Security, Estate, Engineering Services, Stores, Budget and Finance, Vigilance,
Horticulture, etc.
(e) Budget and Finance
30. As per information furnished by the Ministry, the Institute is mainly financed from
grants of Government of India under the heads “Plan” and “Non Plan”. In addition, Plan grants
are also received for National Drug Dependence Treatment, VVIP care and College of Nursing
etc. Besides, extramural grants are also received from various external funding agencies like
ICMR, DST, CSIR, WHO, UNICEF, Department of Biotechnology (DBT) etc. for various
research projects. Plan and Non-Plan grants received from the Government of India and other
agencies are further allocated to Super-specialty Centers/Departments/Research Sections as per
their projections/requirements.
31. The status of Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and Actual Expenditure
(AE) during the last five years ( i.e.  2010-11 to 2014-15), as informed by the Ministry vide
letter dated 19th June, 2015 is as below:-

8
The Expenditure during the last five years Plan and Non-Plan is as under:-
(` in Crore)
Year P LAN NON-PLAN TOTAL
B.E. R.E. Expdr. B.E. R.E Expdr. Budget Expdr.
2010-11 400.00 380.00 381.62 400.00 605.00 681.10 985.00 1062.72
2011-12 412.35 412.35 415.79 610.00 650.00 744.80 1062.35 1 160.59
2012-13 474.00 470.00 420.32 650.00 788.70 899.68 1258.70 1320.00
2013-14 550.00 485.00 494.45 790.00 870.00 974.66 1355.00 1469.11
2014-15 550.00 621.00 669.82 815.00 1001.00 1099.08 1622.00 1768.90#
Note:- Excess expenditure adjusted from balances of previous year/out of revenue generation.
#Tentative Expenditure, Accounts 2014-15 under compilation
32. Fund Requirements for AIIMS, New Delhi
As informed by the Ministry, the details of fund requirements during the financial year
2015-16 under Plan were as under:
(` in Crore)
Head Budget Estimate Remarks
2015-16
(proposed)
Grants-in-Aid 202.00 The increase of RE-2014-15 is on account of payment of
(Salaries) annual increment and hike in rates of DA and filling up
of 725 newly created posts of Sister Gd. II.
Grants-in-Aid 195.00 The incr ease RE-2014-15 is due to overall inflation and hike
(General) in rates of spares and accessories, CMC, development
works and computerization of the Institute.
Creation of 928.50+ There is an additional requirement of R.E.2014-15 of
Capital 1000.00 `142.00 crore for construction of National Cancer
Assets Institute at Jhajjar ( `100.00 crore) and purchase of
Machinery and equipments by the Deptt. of Nuclear
Medicine.
         T OTAL 2325.50

9
A separate proposal is being taken up with Ministry of Finance for residential
accommodation for faculty and staff of AIIMS.
33. As per the information furnished to the Committee, the Institute has been allocated
funds of ` 550.00 crore under Plan head for the financial year 2015-16 against the Institute’s
projection of ` 2325.50 crore. The projection included `300.00 crore for National Cancer
Institute, Jhajjar, `120.00 crore for OPD Block at Masjid Moth, `50.00 crore for Paid Ward
and `60.00 crore for acquisition of land. The provision of `1000 crore was made by AIIMS
for transfer of funds to the Ministry of Urban Development on demand at appropriate stage
for transfer of Houses to AIIMS from Central Government Accommodation pool for the East
Kidwai Nagar Housing Project and because large number of Civil Engineering projects are
coming on time.
34. The Committee during the course of the examination of the functioning of AIIMS
deliberated on the various issues plaguing AIIMS and made certain observations/
recommendations in respect of each of these issues after scrutinizing the Status Note/views/
suggestions received and also after hearing the views of various officials of the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, AIIMS. The Committee also took note of the views expressed by
experts/witnesses on the functioning of AIIMS before the previous Committee. The same are
discussed in the succeeding paras.
V. Special Character  of AIIMS
35 The Committee has been informed that in the health sector, no other institution
undergoes such intense scrutiny as AIIMS. The Institute by statute is an autonomous body. Yet
the Institute has to struggle for years to get its plans approved. V aluable man-hours get
invested even in conceiving a project and documenting it. Every initiative gets looped into
proforms, checklists, EFCs, in-principle approvals, statutory clearances, etc. If AIIMS has to
deliver its true potential it has to be unshackled from normal Government processes and its
growth needs to be fast-tracked.
36. The following views were expressed by various experts to deal with the issues stated
above:-
(i) AIIMS should remain publically funded and democratically accountable as
AIIMS serves people unlike IITs and IIMs which serve industry;
(ii) Political interference would diminish/cease if norms are followed. The time
taken for financial decisions can also be decreased through discussions as in
Government departments;
(iii) Intellectual autonomy was the essence of the AIIMS Act and that it was more
important than financial autonomy. Lack of intellectual autonomy rather than
lure of higher salaries was the main reason for senior faculty leaving institutes
of national importance;
(iv) AIIMS should have functional autonomy; however, money should be spent
according to Government of India (GOI) rules. Autonomy should be for the
Institute, not for the individual;

10
(v) CCS (CCA) rules have no place in medical universities. There is no freedom of
expression of views even on research at AIIMS. This is likely to result in
dissatisfaction among the senior faculty, who would leave AIIMS on becoming
eligible for retirement benefits, negating the benefits of Government’s provision
for increasing the age of retirement; and
(vi) AIIMS should have formulated its rules, regulations and code of conduct on
lines of a medical university, and there should be no need to rely on default
Government directives.
37. The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare during the course of
deliberations on AIIMS on 12th November, 2014 stated that the objectives of establishment of
AIIMS in the year 1956 were to develop patterns of teaching in undergraduate and
post-graduate medical education in all its branches, to bring together in one place educational
facilities of the highest order for training of personnel in all important branches of health
activity and to attain self-sufficiency in postgraduate medical education.
VI. Governance
(a) Major Concerns and related suggestions
38. As stated previously in this Report, the AIIMS governance structure includes the
Institute Body, the Governing Body and the five Standing Committees viz. Standing Finance
Committee, Academic Committee, Standing Selection Committee, Estate Committee and the
Hospital Affairs Committee. The Director of the Institute is the Chief Executive Officer of
AIIMS. The Committee also sought the views of various stakeholders and experts on the
working of these entities. The Committee has been given to understand that there are several
shortcomings in the functioning of these entities which are mandated with the governance of
the Institute. Some of the shortcomings pointed out by the Stakeholders are given as under:-
(i) Weak internal governance and excessive external interference is the cause of
poor governance at AIIMS;
(ii) To manage huge faculty of AIIMS, there is need of trained administration to
support Director’s office;
(iii) There is need to strengthen the internal structure of the Institution;
(iv) There is a need to improve the internal administration of the Institute,
formulation of code of conduct and exercise of self-discipline by the faculty to
resurrect the Institute;
(v) The lack of time frames for meetings of executive bodies of AIIMS has led to
centralization of decision making in the hands of the President and Director. In
the absence of meetings, decisions are taken by the Director with the approval
of the President, AIIMS and these decisions are put up in the subsequent
Institute Body/Governing Body meeting for ex-post facto  approval. This has
often led to bureaucratic delays in execution of civil work, purchase and up
gradation of equipment, and timely selection and promotion of faculty and staff;

11
(vi) Nomination of the Health Minister as the President of the Institute was the
cause for delays in holding such meetings and she/he should not serve as the
President of AIIMS;
(vii) There are cases of manipulating the AIIMS examinations and leakage of papers
etc. Attempts of AIIMS to conduct an impartial and thorough review of its
examination system, plug the leaks, and bring the culprits to book, lacked
transparency. There needs to be transparent system in this regard;
(viii) Contract appointments reduce the scope of independent opinion, which may be
a short term convenience for some but causes long term damage to the
individual and the institution as it leads to neglect of quality, equity and fairness.
Contract employees are exploited by their seniors in terms of work and by the
organization, economically. The organization on the other hand has to bear the
cost of repeated recruitment. Contract employment leads to career insecurity for
the individual and unstable workforce for the organization as the contract
employee has to search for new jobs constantly. Contract appointments should
be discouraged as they distort the system goals by negatively affecting security
and career development opportunities of employees;
(ix) AIIMS has very poor financial and personnel management;
(x) An independent agency like UPSC and Staff Selection Board should be entrusted
with recruitment and promotions of faculty and staff, respectively; and
(xi) If regular processes are observed transparently and honestly, many problems
can be avoided. Proper selection, collective decision making by the Committees,
building an organisation culture and observing processes and norms in right
spirit and discussing every violation threadbare in the Governing Body are
necessary to ensure adequate check in the administration processes. Except in
the matter of finance, AIIMS has complete autonomy. Autonomy of the AIIMS
should not mean autonomy from observance of rules and regulations. As
regards autonomy and functional flexibility in creation of posts in the institute,
since creation of posts has financial implications, the processes are permanent
and cannot be avoided but the duration can be shortened by transparent
discussions with respective Government Departments and Ministries.
39. The Secretary during evidence before the Committee on 12 th November, 2014 submitted
that the main Institute bodies were being reconstituted after the General Elections for the 16th
Lok Sabha and all efforts will be made to notify the reconstitution of Institute bodies as soon
as possible, The Director, AIIMS who was also present during evidence before the Committee
on 12 th November, 2014 admitted that every Committee of the Institute should meet in three-
four months but that did not happen in the past. He assured the Committee that the meetings
of the various Institute Committees will be held on regular intervals in future.
(b) Corruption Cases
40. Taking note of the media reports highlighting corruption cases in AIIMS, the Committee
had called for the details of on-going probes into various corruption cases at AIIMS. As per

12
the information furnished by the Department of Health and Family Welfare vide  its
communication dated 24th February, 2015 such corruption cases under investigation include
disproportionate asset cases, procurement of computers and peripherals without following due
procedure, alleged financial irregularities in purchase of surgical gloves and medicines,
construction of engineering works without approval of the statutory bodies, alleged tempering
with selection lists of operation theatre assistants, irregularities in appointment of officials
under sports quota, irregular payments to contractors, irregularities in awarding developmental
works etc.
41. Informing the Committee of the number of Vigilance Cases, the Additional Secretary
during his evidence before the Committee on the 16th January, 2015 submitted that AIIMS has
an institutional strength of 14,850 employees including 600 faculty positions. There are 30
Vigilance Cases and in 3 cases CBI has instituted Preliminary Enquiry Proceedings.
(c) Need for decentralization
42. The Committee has been given to understand that all powers are concentrated in one
person. There are suggestions that rather than giving complete autonomy to the Director or a
few offices, there is a need for decentralization and greater involvement of stakeholders in
decision-making. The following suggestions came up for consideration before the Committee:
(i) Decentralisation of decision-making would provide greater time to the Director
for planning and policy-making;
(ii) Regular faculty meetings should be held for better decision-making;
(iii) Decision by collegiums rather than by the Head of Department would be a
better approach;
(iv) There should be regular meetings of the Institute, Governing bodies and various
existing agencies; and
(v) Lack of communication in the Institute needs to be addressed.
(d) Valiathan Committee Report
43. The Committee considered the Valiathan Committee Report on functioning of AIIMS and
sought action taken on the said report. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide  its
communication dated 25th November, 2014 submitted that a High Powered Committee
constituted for the purpose of implementation of Valiathan Committee recommendations has
classified the recommendations into two categories Part- A & Part- B which is as follows :-
Part- A:  Recommendations not requiring structural changes (31 recommendations).
Part- B: Recommendations requiring structural changes through amendments in AIIMS Act,
Rules and Regulations (7 Recommendations).
44. The High Powered Committee submitted the report on 29.11.2010 which was sent to
AIIMS for comments. AIIMS placed the report of High Powered Committee before the
Institute Body in its meeting held on 16/01/2012 wherein it was decided that the report of the
High Powered Committee be considered on receipt of the report of Department related

13
Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC) on Health & Family Welfare which has taken up
examination of the functioning of AIIMS.
45. Informing the Committee of the updated status of implementation of the Valiathan
Committee recommendations, the Additional Secretary during his evidence before the
Committee on the 16th January, 2015 submitted that the recommendations had been examined
by a high powered committee led by Ms. Sujatha Rao, former Health Secretary. Sixteen
recommendations of the Valiathan Committee have been implemented; 10 recommendations have
been accepted in principle and are in the process of being implemented; and three
recommendations have long-term futuristic implications.
46. The Committee has been given to understand that opinion of the medical world is
divided on the V aliathan Committee Report. Some of the stakeholders had expressed
reservations on the implementability of the recommendations and their relevance for AIIMS.
In brief, the opinions of such stakeholders are the following:
(i) The methodology followed by the Valiathan Committee was flawed, and could
easily have been used to manipulate opinion;
(ii) The Ministry did not analyze the process by which the V aliathan Committee
developed its report;
(iii) Dr. V aliathan himself admitted that none of the other Members of the Committee
attended its proceedings on a regular basis and he submitted report despite Shri
Hota’s (the then Secretary of the Ministry) requests for extension for
accommodating further debate, particularly on statutory aspects;
(iv) Financial dependence on the industry would perforce lead to shift in
accountability to grant providers rather than to the people/Government and the
basic character of the Institute as the highest level provider for equitable
training, public-oriented research and public service would be lost. In handing
over AIIMS to the industry on a platter, the Government would abdicate on its
responsibility to the Nation;
(v) AIIMS as a statutory body enjoys considerable functional autonomy and that the
Valiathan Committee in effect posists a model economy divorced from
accountability to the Government;
(vi) The idea of AIIMS International is rather half-baked. With faculty strength of
just over 500, the Institute would be hard-pressed in terms of manpower to
even carry out its national mandate and that AIIMS International would lead to
distortion of priorities; and
(vii)  Dr. V aliathan’s suggestions on conflict of interest management are quite at
variance with good practices in reputed institutions abroad.
(e) Staff Strength
47. The Committee has been given to understand that there are a large number of vacancies
in the Institute. The Committee sought details of vacancies in various categories in AIIMS. The

14
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide  its O.M. dated 05th November, 2014 gave an
overview of sanctioned/in-position doctors, nurses and supporting staff vis-a-vis  requirements
which is delineated below:
The details of sanctioned, in-position, vacant manpower and actual requirements
thereof, in respect of both faculty and Group A (non-faculty), B, C & D including technical
supporting staff are as under:-
Sanctioned strength and in-position excluding nurses
Group Sanctioned strength in-position
“A” (faculty) 826 594
“A” (non faculty) 347 201
“B” 1193 990
“C” 4773 3953
     T OTAL 6313 5144
Sanctioned strength and in-position of nurses
Group Sanctioned strength in-position
“A” (non faculty) 215 192
“B” 4338 3849
      T OTAL 4553 4041
N.B.: The figures shown against sanctioned strength and in-position vary because the faculty
members, apart from being appointed under the mode of direct recruitment, are also
being promoted to the next higher grade under Assessment  Promotion Scheme without
linkage to vacancies by carrying the sanctioned post on which they have initially been
appointed.
No. of faculty posts under creation : 174
Sanctioned strength and in-position of Senior Residents and unior Residents
Group A Sanctioned strength in-position V acant
Junior Residents 163 129 34*
Senior Resident 758 579 179**
       T OTAL 921 708 213
* Against the above, appointment offers have already been issued to 13 Junior Residents who are likely to join. For the
balance vacant posts recruitment is proposed to be held in November, 2014
**Selection process for filling up the vacant posts of Senior Residents (Non-Acad.) has already been initiated.

15
48. Some of the residents keep on resigning off and on at regular intervals due to various
reasons and wherever waitlisted candidates are available, the vacant positions thus created are
filled from waitlisted candidates. Otherwise, these vacancies (where it is not possible to fill
from waitlist or waitlist not available) are filled in the next session. This process continues.
However, overall there is no shortage of doctors at residents level as of now.
49. On being asked about the filling up of faculty posts, the Director, AIIMS during
evidence before the Committee on 12th November, 2014 informed the Committee that since
February 2013 to May 2014, 120 faculty members have been selected.
50. It has been informed that a total number of 905 non-faculty posts projected for
creation for various areas of the hospital was placed before the Standing Finance Committee
in its meeting held on 22/10/2014 and the SFC decided that creation of non-faculty posts is
to be placed before the Sub-Committee. Apart from this, it was also informed that a total
number of 2235 non-faculty posts (1534 for creation and 701 for outsourcing) which was
approved by the Standing Finance Committee and ratified by Governing Body of the Institute
subject to concurrence of Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure are under process.
51. At its meeting held on 12th November, 2014, the Chairman and other members of the
Committee raised the issue of vacancies that existed in many faculty and non-faculty posts.
From the reply furnished by the Ministry as regards the vacancy position, the Committee took
note of wide gaps between the sanctioned and in-position strength in respect of various
faculty/non-faculty posts. The Chairman expressed that though the AIIMS had got the budget
but still there is shortage of doctors/junior residents/senior residents, when there is a queue of
doctors who want to come to AIIMS to do the junior residency/senior residency.
(f) Recruitment, Reservation and Promotion Policies
52. The Committee has been given to understand that there was no post-graduate
reservation-cum-preference scheme for under-graduates of AIIMS. They are not eligible for PG
seats in States including Delhi except Kerala as they have not done the under-gaduation course
from those States. They are left with three options, viz AIIMS PG seats; All India PG that give
50% seats in all the colleges and PGIMER, Chandigarh. In order to prevent brain drain, there
is a need to adopt a model which favored retention of under-graduate students in AIIMS on
the lines of JIPMER.
53. The Committee has also the following suggestions on record:
(i) Structural changes, both internal and external, cutting down the patient load,
faculty development, and promotion of faculty would help in improving the
functioning of AIIMS;
(ii) In the context to promotion of faculty, merit should be top criteria;
(iii) For direct recruits, there should be transparent selection process with 25%
seats reserved for direct lateral entry to bring in fresh blood and to avoid
stagnation at the faculty level. However, the Additional Secretary during his

16
evidence before the Committee on the 16 th January, 2015 submitted that the
lateral entry has reduced significantly and no lateral inductions have been made
since 2009-10;
(iv)  Contract appointments create distortions in the system since a person does not
have any security, any kind of idealism in his medical practice, and hence all
the appointments should be done on a permanent basis so that there is job
security and career development ensuring whole hearted justice is done to the
job. AIIMS had repeatedly made attempts at making contract appointments of
faculty members. (e.g. Neurosurgery, ENT and Medical Oncology) at times
even when the selection process f or regular appointments at AIIMS was
underway;
(v) The reservation policy of the Government of India should be implemented in
letter and spirit which is unfortunately not being done in the Institute;
(vi) There is violation of the reservation policy. In the faculty at the level of
Assistant Professors, reservation policy was not implemented as per the
Government of India policy. When the reservation policy was accepted, it was
introduced in the form of ‘floating policy’ which has led to huge under-
representation in the recruitment of SC, ST and later on OBC candidates;
(vii) An expert Committee with representatives of Ministry and Department of
Personnel and Training (DoPT) should be set up and the reservation issues
should be resolved once and for all and then a fresh beginning should be made
as per the policies of the Government of India; and
(viii) There is urgent need for issuing administrative guidelines by the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare as to what constitutes discriminatory behavior along
with safeguards for violation of the same on the lines suggested by University
Grants Commission to ensure secure, safe and friendly environment in the
educational institutions.
54. The Committee has been given to understand that shortcomings were noticed regarding
non-adherence of DoPT guidelines for filling up of posts and subsequent to that, a Committee
was constituted with the officials from the DoPT and also from the Ministry of Health who
after examining the issue in detail gave its report. The Committee’s recommendations were
taken up in the Cabinet Secretariat. The Committee in its Report has stated that there was a
difference between the shortfalls of vacancies and the backlog vacancies and that there were
no backlog vacancies in the grades of Associate Professors, Additional Professors and the
Professors in the year 2008. The instructions on reservation were not adhered to in the
Institute since the year 1994 which had resulted in substantive shortfall of reservation. The
loss caused to the reserved vacancies in the past may not be made good immediately as it was
not possible to reserve more than 50 per cent of current vacancies.
55. The Additional Secretary during his evidence before the Committee on the 16th
January, 2015, informed that the norms and provisions, as laid down by the Government of
India regarding reservation of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and OBCs in the

17
appointment of doctors and staff are being followed strictly. He also submitted that there
have been many litigations in the Hon’ble High Court and Hon’ble Supreme Court on the
issue of reservation.
56. Elaborating on the implementation of reservation policy in AIIMS, the Deputy Director
(Administration), AIIMS who was also present during the evidence on 16th January 2015,
submitted that the Institute Body in its meeting held on 11.01.1993 had taken a decision that
AIIMS would adopt the reservation policy for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as
prescribed by the Government and it should be followed for all faculty positions. In 1994 when
the OBC reservation policy was adopted, AIIMS also accepted the OBC reservation. So, in
pursuance of the 1983 and 1994 decisions, AIIMS is in conformity with regard to
appointments to faculty positions for all reserved categories. There had been court cases and
there are two lead judgments pronounced in this regard. The larger purview whether
reservation would be applicable for super-specialty posts had come up for question in the Indra
Sahney Case. In pursuance of it, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had gone for a
review petition as the nine Judge Bench had held that reservations would not be applicable to
super-specialty posts. The Hon’ble Supreme Court while disposing of the petition on
16.01.2014 ordered, “We clarify that it is for the Central Government to take a decision as to
whether there should be reservation for super-specialty posts”. The Government in pursuance
of this decision has constituted an inter-ministerial Committee comprising the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, Department of Personnel and Training and Ministry of Law and
Justice to look at the various implications arising from the decision. The Government has also
decided that the implementation of the decision would be through the Department of Personnel
and Training. In pursuance of the judgment of the Supreme Court a decision is yet to be
notified. The Deputy Director clarified that the notification will be through the Department of
Personnel and Training on the basis of inter-ministerial consultations that are currently taking
place.
57. In reply to a question, the Director, AIIMS who was also present during the evidence
submitted that “since 2009-10, the reservation policy is being followed in letter and spirit.
There is no deviation of even one per cent We have data to prove that. So, I can assure the
Committee about that.”
VII. Infrastructure
58. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide its communication dated 05
th November,
2014 gave an overview of expansion plans for the next decade and status of various existing
expansion projects, detailed status note on Jhajjar Campus indicating daily patient attendance,
various health care facilities available there and scope for its further expansion, adequacy or
otherwise of infrastructure of AIIMS, Department-wise which is delineated below:
(a) Expansion plans for the next decade and status of various existing expansion projects
59. A total of 52 Departments out of which twenty-five are clinical departments including
six super-specialty centres manage practically all types of disease conditions with support from

18
pre-clinical and para-clinical departments. AIIMS also runs a 60-bedded hospital and the
Comprehensive Rural Health Centre (CRHC) at Ballabgarh in Haryana and provides health cover
to about 7.7 lakh people through the Centre for Community Medicine.
60. The Committee has been informed that lately the services at AIIMS are overstretched
due to extremely large number of patients visiting the institution for consultation/treatment,
more particularly the OPDs, leading to prolonged waiting periods and leaving very little time
for doctors to devote time to the patients; the waiting spaces for patients too are
overburdened. This compromises doctors’ efficiency besides reduced patients’ satisfaction
levels.
61. In reply to a query regarding the software connecting all the departments, the Director,
AIIMS during evidence before the Committee on 12th November, 2014 informed the Committee
that the software known as VISTA is open source and has been put in use. AIIMS has also
made its own modules and integrated the same with VISTA. The Director further informed that
AIIMS is working with Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) under Corporate Social Responsibility
and with the help of TCS, it aims to have a robust Electronic Medical Records in place. On
being asked about whether there was any plan to extend the EMR to Government hospitals all
over India, the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare replied that the Department
of Health and Family Welfare was looking at greening of AIIMS and new AIIMS-like
institutions and the ultimate aim is to develop Electronic Health Records. But it will take time
as even in the advanced countries it has taken three decades or more.
(b) Expansion and Decongestion of Infrastructure
62. Since its establishment, there has been a gradual increase in the total patient load in the
OPD. The last decade, in particular, has witnessed quantum jump in work load. So much so
that the present infrastructure and facilities have been rendered inadequate and is under severe
strain. There has also been a waiting list of surgeries and other procedures in various
departments like Cardiology, CTVS, Neuro-surgery, Neurology and Cancer. There has also been
an increase in the number of under-graduate and post-graduate seats in all the departments
subsequent to the implementation of Moily Committee’s recommendations which has also led
to the need of more space and resources for the various departments of the Institute. In view
of increasing demands, there is need to expand infrastructure of the present AIIMS campus.
The space constraints, however, limit the creation of these facilities in the existing AIIMS
campus, hence need to look for additional land to cater to the emerging metropolitan needs for
tertiary care services of Delhi in particular, and the country at large.
63. The Secretary during his evidence before the Committee on the 12 th November, 2014
informed that the Government has also approved a proposal for establishment of a new OPD
at Masjid Moth and expansion of the Hospital at a cost of `573.00 Crore. So, in the future
the AIIMS will add both in terms of facilities and in terms of patient care.
(c) Expansion Needs of AIIMS and Trauma Centre
64. The Committee has been informed that currently, the 200 bedded Trauma centre needs
augmentation to cater to the requirement of Delhi and NCR. After expansion, the integrated

19
Trauma Care Services Centre would be a 750 bed hospital; other hospital facilities envisaged
include:
Comprehensive Digestive Disease Centre - 400 beds
National Transplantation Centre - 200 beds
Follow up and Day Care Centre - 50 beds
Long term Neuro and Spine Rehabilitation Centre - 200 beds
Spinal Surgery Centre - 150 beds
Nephrology and Urology Centre adding - 300 beds
Plastic Surgery Centre - 200 beds
Ultra modern operation theatres - 50, Critical Care Beds - 700 out of 2200 beds
Research centers
Bio-safety level-4 (BSL) Laboratory Regenerative Medicine
Virtual Teaching
Nano Medicine
Bio-medical Engineering
Drug Development
Conference Centre/Auditorium
Residential facilities
Hostel for 600 resident doctors
Hostel for 600 nurses
200 type-V & type-VI accommodation
65. It would thus be possible to add 2200 indoor hospital beds in disciplines not yet fully
developed and catered to by AIIMS.
66. Efficient functioning of these facilities shall call for appropriate residential
accommodation i.e, hostels for resident doctors and nurses as also type V & type-VI quarters
and parking facilities. As regards projects/schemes of AIIMS started during the last ten years,
the date of their initiation, targeted timelines for initiation, targeted timelines for their
completion, their current status, estimated expenditure thereon and time and cost overruns, if
any, the Department of Health and Family Welfare vide  its communication dated the 19th June,
2015 has given the details (Annexure-III).
Additional Land
67. The land requirement for meeting the expansion needs for the AIIMS and Trauma
centre and concomitant infrastructure is assessed at around 20 acres. This would be util ised

20
largely for creating specialised patient care services and rehabilitation along with a focus on
Research Centre.
68. A plot of similar size exists adjoining the Trauma Centre, opposite to erstwhile Kamal
Cinema. If allotted, it would reasonably meet the expansion needs of the AIIMS campus.
69. The expansion plan has been prepared based on maximum permissible FAR and under
the guidance of Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development, incorporating all the suggestions on
the line of New Moti Bagh campus.
70. In addition, the upcoming projects are those which have already been approved and
in various stages of development and those which are on long term plan for the next decade
or two.
On going project:
Convergence Block .
Hostel Block
Dining Block
Surgical Block
Mother and child block
Construction of U.G. multi-level car parking
Out Reach OPD at Badsha Jhajjar
Tunnel Link between AIIMS & JPNTC
Renovation of CT-2 in CNC
Refurbishment and expansion of Private Ward
New OPD Block At Masjid Moth
Expansion of Trauma Centre including Dharamshala
Re-development of Master Plan of AIIMS
Geriatrics Block
OPD at Ballabgarh
Construction of housing and hostel at Ballabgarh
Creation of space for various facilities in existing basement of PC Teaching Block and Ward Block
National Cancer Institute at Jhajjar Campus
National Cardio-vascular Centre at Jhajjar Campus
71. Responding to a query regarding the rural centers attached with AIIMS, the Director
AIIMS, during evidence before the Committee on the 12 th November, 2014, informed the
Committee that as per the existing arrangement only one rural health centre is attached with

21
AIIMS. The new AIIMS-like Institutes will also have one rural health centre each attached with
them. Dwelling further on the issue, the Director explained that normally undergraduates and
interns are sent to the rural health centres, but the Comprehensive Rural Health Services
Project (CRHSP), Ballabhgarh which is attached with AIIMS is different in the sense that the
Senior Residents go to the rural health centre and provide patient care there. The faculty of
community medicine is also stationed at Ballabhagarh, who implement the various health
programmes of Government of India.
72. The Committee has been informed that a plan to take over the Janakpuri
Super-specialty Hospital of the Government of NCT Delhi has been under discussion with the
Delhi Government many times. If this plan comes through the immediate problem of the long
waiting lists in some of the departments can be taken care of.
(d) AIIMS Campus-II (Jhajjar, Haryana)
73. The AIIMS Outreach OPD, Jhajjar has been started since November 2012. The
following medical treatment facilities are available at AIIMS Outreach OPD, Jhajjar, Haryana:
A. Outpatient services:
(i) Medicine
(ii) Surgery
(iii) Orthopedics
(iv) Obstetrics & Gynecology N.L.
(v) ENT
(vi) Ophthalmology N.L.
(vii) Psychiatry
B. Radiology services: Ultrasonography and X-ray
C. Laboratory services
D. Pharmacy services
74. One faculty from each of the departments of AIIMS are recruited to Outreach OPD,
Jhajjar. In addition to this, senior residents and Junior Residents are also posted from these
departments.
75. There is no indoor facility available there.
76. Approximately, 300-350 patients daily visited AIIMS Outreach OPD, Jhajjar. Attendance
of the Daily Patients department-wise is as follows:-
i. Medicine :- 80
ii. Surgery: - 30
iii. Orthopaedics :- 40
iv. Obstetrics and Gynaecology : 30
v. ENT : 20-30

22
vi. Ophthalmology :- 30-35
vii. Psychiatric :- 10-15
viii. Pediatrics: - 40
77. The Badsha/Jhajjar campus of AIIMS is envisioned as a knowledge city of the future
and a crucible of excellence. It would emulate the ambience of world’s best universities, and
would be a symbol of India’s leadership in bio-medical and health sciences. The comfort of
patients and their families would be at the heart of the design of its healthcare areas. The
needs of the students, scholars, residents and scientists would be central to the academic
infrastructure and systems. Nurses, doctors, allied professionals, administrative staff and
support workforce - all members of the T eam AIIMS, shall have their respective space and
opportunities.
78. The entire campus would be developed and operational zed in early 13
th Plan period.
The different centres, facilities and activities in different core domains are visualized as under:
79. In the Public Health and Policy domain, the priority would be to establish a School of
Public Health and initiate an interdepartmental outreach program for the community and,
develop an interdisciplinary system and network for supporting the national programs and
facilities in Haryana and other States.
 Sl.No. Description of Proposed Centres Approx. Proposal cost.
in crores
1. National Cancer Institute (710 beds) `2035.00
2. National Cardio-vascular Centre ( 600 beds) `2400.00
3. General-purpose hospital (500 beds) `400.00
4. National Transplantation Centre (500 beds) `400.00
5. National Centre for Child Health (500 beds) `400.00
6. Digestive Diseases Centre ( 500 beds) `400.00
7. National Institute for Geriatrics ( 200 beds) `160.00
8. Comprehensive Rehabilitation Centre `200.00
9. Centre for Blood Disorders ( 120 beds) `200.00
10. Centre for Laboratory Medicine `200.00
11. National Centre for Nursing Education and Research `I00.00
TOTAL `6,895.00 crores
Concepts to be developed
1. Centre for Renal and Urological Disorders
2. Centre for Diabetes

23
3. School of Public Health
4. National Centre for Allied Health Sciences
5. National Centre for Health Professional Education
6. Centre for ICT-Enabled Education
7. Centre for Studies in Humanities for Health
8. School of Public Health
9. Centre for Health Policy
10. Centre for Global Health
Research Centres and Departments
1. Centre for Genomics and Proteomics
2. Centre for Bio-informatics and Health informatics
3. Centre for Nano-biomedicine
4. Centre for Inter-disciplinary Science and Technology for Child Health (CISTECH)
5. Centre for Translational and Implementation Research
6. Centre for Drug Discovery
7. Centre for Diagnosis and Control of Infectious Disease
8. Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Science
9. Department of Bio-statistics
10. Department of Immunology
11. Department of Molecular Bio-physics
12. Department of Bio-engineering
13. Centre for Affordable Technologies
14. Industry-Biotech Park
15. Clinical Research Centre
16. Bio-repository
17. Animal Research Centre
80. AIIMS Campus II is envisioned as one integrated and harmonious institution with well-
blended institutional, residential and common areas. Reasonable space will be kept for future
expansion. There will be no partitioning of the land for individual centres out of the available
property.
81. In addition, following general facilities would be created:
— Housing, hostels, recreation areas, mini-market, schools, creches, community
centre;
— Convention centre, auditoria, lecture theatres, seminar rooms, hotel, guest
houses, hostels for visiting fellows/trainees;

24
— Education and research resource centre, library;
— Patient dharamshalas, shelters, food courts; and
— Administrative Block.
82. The Badsha/Jhajjar campus will be developed at a fast pace to meet the urgent needs
of AIIMS. Work on all the centres/programs envisaged at this campus should start in the XII
Plan. Some of the tasks would be completed in the XII Plan period itself (e.g. National Cancer
Centre, General Purpose Hospital, Research Centres, Centre for Excellence in Nursing
Education and Research etc.). For the other centres/programs, the project preparatory work,
and as much implementation work as possible, should be achieved as well in the XII Plan
period, while the rest carried over to the next Plan.
83. Shedding light on the development and expansion activities of AIIMS, the Secretary
during evidence on the 12th November, 2014 informed that the Government had approved
establishment of the National Cancer Institute at Jhajjar on 300 acres of land at a cost of
`2035.00 Crore.
84. Responding to a query regarding the Dharmashalas, the Director, AIIMS, who was
also present during evidence before the Committee on the 12 th November, 2014 informed
the Committee that construction of a Dharmashala has been started in the AIIMS Trauma
Centre.
85. The Committee has been given to understand that the load of out-patients is about
11,000 patients including main and all other centres. However, the bed Strength is only 2424
which results in a big waiting list and a number of patients are turned away by AIIMS or are
told to come after a certain period. Every year, almost 35 lakh people visit AIIMS for
treatment. However, AIIMS is not able to provide medical facilities to so many people because
infrastructure and facilities have not been augmented over the years.
86. On being pointed out that there was lack of super-specialty centres in the country
which was leading to over-crowding of AIIMS, the Additional Secretary; Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare during his evidence before the Committee on the 16th January, 2015 submitted
that a few steps have been taken in this regard. For example, the six new AIIMS have come
up in various parts of the country though they are not fully functional yet. The Government
is in the process of setting up more AIIMS, apart from these six new AIIMS. The Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare is also going to upgrade 58 Government medical colleges in the
country with super-specialty facilities. The upgradation of each Medical College would cost
around ` 200.00 crore. It has also been decided that 58 district hospitals in those areas where
there are no medical colleges would be upgraded as Government Medical Colleges. A
redevelopment plan is also being implemented in Safdarjung Hospital and Lady Hardinge
Hospital where super-specialty facilities are coming up. The Ministry has also plans to bring
up super-specialty facilities in Dr. RML Hospital.
87. The Government has also decided to open 20 State Cancer Centres and 50 Tertiary
Cancer Centres across the country. There is funding, support and strengthening for other
institutes all across the country like NIMHANS, JIPMER, PGIMER, etc. There is increasing
realization that tertiary care also has to be improved.

25
VIII. Academics
88. The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare and Director, AIIMS informed
the Committee that as regards education, AIIMS has 52 Departments with the total students/
residents/Ph.D Scholars numbering upto 3102. The Institute conducts various post graduate
and residency programmes in various disciplines, besides the undergraduate courses. The
Institute also provides long term training to defence personnel and those sponsored by the
Government Institutions besides short term training in various departments to Indian nationals
and trainees from oversees and elective training to foreign undergraduates from countries like
Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, U.S.A to name a few.
89. The Committee has been given to understand that AIIMS has done enough to produce
high quality under-graduates that it could shift its focus to strengthen post-graduate educational
programmes across the country, assisting new AIIMS-like institutes under PMSSY . There can
be common pool of faculty and rotation of faculty among these Institutions where some of the
people would predominantly serve at AIIMS but would rotate at some other institutes and vice -
versa to help in creation of strong structure of post-graduate education as well as good quality
tertiary care in the country.AIIMS needs to grow out of a ‘Central elite institution’ mindset to
engage much more with problems at the ground level in the States and to redesign itself for
a much more national role in terms of education. For strengthening under-graduate education
across the country, efforts should be made to utilize IT-enabled common classroom approach
to teach many other colleges across the country. AIIMS and other institutions of national
importance should participate in training of faculty both through distance as well as through
periodic contact programmes.
IX. Research
90. The Committee has been given to understand that significant research needs exclusive
dedication and a lot of reserved time. Most of the faculty in the Institute end up doing research
in the time left after seeing patients and completing their teaching responsibilities. This can
never be a “winning” model for research. The declining time for research among faculty also
implies that research mentorship for the trainees, Post-graduates and Ph.D scholars becomes
a victim. The Research Administration also requires to be strengthened. Faculty who have an
additional responsibility to look after this aspect - are again hindered by the problem of limited
time. There should be a well staffed research facilitation establishment. Besides, the salary
offered to an MD level research officer at AIIMS is so low that very few are attracted towards
research job; high level research recruitments get bogged down in rules and policy.
E-governance model also should be less government-like and more corporate. Interaction with
institutions involved in basic sciences and engineering and also industry should be facilitated.
Health Research is too important to be left only in the hands of doctors. A suitable strategic
tie-up with other institutions - more flexibility in appointing adjunct faculty/scientists to
enhance the spirit of inter-disciplinary and inter-institutional collaboration - is perhaps the best
way forward for meaningful productive research.
91. The Committee has on record that the Institute was rated as the top institution in
Clinical Medicine Research in the country; top health institution in Bio-medical Research; its
Bio-technology Research was classified as having a high impact and high collaboration index

26
and the Institute had a higher research output as compared to other premier scientific
institutions like IIT, IISc and TIFR. The Institute had conducted landmark research of national
importance on malnutrition, iodine deficiency, diarrheal diseases, liver diseases, lead poisoning
in children, T.B., Genomic analysis of Malaria, Stem cell research, Vitamin D status in Indian
context. The Institute research had influenced various National programmes like ICDS,
Universal iodization of Salt, National Blindness Control programme, Flurosis Control
programme, Tobacco Control programme, National Programme on Health Care of Elderly. The
Institute also had WHO Collaborating Centres in the fields of Neo-natology, diaorrheal diseases,
etc. besides International collaboration in Nepal, Bhutan and Bangladesh.
92. The Committee has also been given to understand that AIIMS publishes 1500 to 1600
Research Papers in high index Journals reputed all over the world. Professors participate in
various conferences, which are fully funded by AIIMS. Addl. Professor and Associate
Professor can attend one international conference every two years.
93. The Committee further noted that in the Government funding plan, budgets are mainly
to augment clinical services and funds for research equipments and research, as such, was
only ` 50.00 lakhs few years ago, which was increased to `5.00 Crore.
94. The Committee has got the following suggestions on record relating to promotion of
research in AIIMS, given by various stakeholders:
(i) There exists a lack of inter- disciplinarity as promotions are always made on the
basis of departmental vacancies and departmental positions. While allowing
people to do a certain amount of investigation driven research to satisfy their
natural interests, there should be identification of thrust areas of nationally
relevant problems and setting up of a multi-disciplinary research group
addressing important problems through an inter- disciplinary approach;
(ii) Even within AIIMS the possibility of cross- appointments between two
departments does not exist which actually dampens some of the research
productivity. The possibility of inter-institutional collaboration can be explored
which could include provision of visiting professorship which is absent at
present in AIIMS;
(iii) Industry sponsored research like clinical trials should be discouraged in public
funded institutions as they lead to distortion of priorities, conflict of interest
and unethical practices. Government should ensure that AIIMS receives enough
grants through Government sources to ensure that integrity of public health
goals and public policy is observed;
(iv) There is problem with Research governance due to the manner in which
decisions are taken at AIIMS;
(v) There should be collective decision with regard to the subject and it should be
done in a transparent and open manner so that people are not harassed by way
of pushing of files;
(vi) There should be a middle-level research cadre so that continuity is maintained
in research, non-monetary incentives should be given in the form of recognition
like getting the research work published in journals, peer recognition, etc.

27
provision of secretarial assistance should also be considered as a facilitation
measure;
(vii) There is a need to strengthen research teams and resources and for centralizing
resources;
(viii) It may be useful to set up cross-disciplinary research teams for infectious
diseases, chronic diseases, nutritional science, and health systems etc. in
addition to current department based research teams;
(ix) Public funded institutions in India should not try to follow the West in going
exclusively for private grants, as Western institutions sustain themselves by
selling their intellectual property; however in India that is not possible as we
need to focus on scholarship, patient care, education, research and public
health;
(x) Provision of funds for research alone could not ensure a strong research base
for the country. A strong base of researchers needed to be set up, as the
gestation period in the field of research to fructify is very long ranging from
10 to 15 years. To ensure this, stability in value systems is not enough, there
is a strong urge to adapt to the changing times. In order to ensure cutting
edge research, there is a need to focus more on the biology of disease instead
of just focusing on studying the biology of cells. The concept of Doctor need
not be seen just as a patient healer but also as a health-economist, researcher,
etc. There is an urgent need to treat hospital as one part of medical school
and not as a be-all and end-all focus of a doctor employed there. Therefore,
there is a  (i) need for division of research into Basic Medical Research,
Clinical Research, Translational Research; (ii) need for diverse talent pool
required for each type of research; (iii) formation of a separate eco- system;
(iv) creation of centres which would support department structures which
could be compartmentalized under four heads i.e. (a) Infectious disease
centre; (b) Chronic disease centre; (c) Nutrition centre and (d) Health systems
Research Centre; (v) need for Ministry to distinguish between Hospital
Medical Centres and Academic Medical Centres; (vi) need for setting up
‘Academic Medical Schools’ throughout the country; (vii) setting up of
centralized research resources for each type of research; (viii) need for
making available financial resources for research not only from Government
but also from the Private Sector, etc;
(xi) There is an urgent need for developing a system where besides medical
practitioners, medical scholars are also produced so as to provide path breaking
research in the various fields of human health;
(xii) The system should be streamlined where a researcher has freedom to use
resources without having to revert to his senior for every issue which
destroyed the spirit of conducting research in a conducive atmosphere;
(xiii) The Institute was actually set up to do research in areas of national concern
and research in the nationally and locally relevant issues and to address the

28
concerns and improve the lot of the poor people. 80 per cent of the funds go
to the research which is affecting 20 per cent people and most of the
research is geared to those conditions which are prevailing in the Western
world;
(xiv) Till November, 2003, there were only 12 clauses in the guidelines for grant of
permission to the members of the faculty to attend various scientific
conferences and other assignments in India and abroad. In August, 2005, one
more clause was added which completely changed the spectrum of research in
AIIMS. Clause 13 in the amended guidelines says that the faculty member may
also be permitted to attend meeting related to the research project in India and
abroad which may be funded by private research institutions, private
foundations, private companies in which the concerned faculty member is either
co-investigator or investigator. Then, there is a c lause that the TA/DA will be
provided by the company;
(xv) Delimiting time for research for faculty, research cadre and development of
infrastructure would go a long way in furthering research at AIIMS;
(xvi) The number of papers published should not be seen as the pure indicator, rather
focus should be on relevance and impact on policy, programme and clinical
practice in terms of research; and
(xvii) The quality of research at AIIMS is actually on the decline partly owing to lack
of support system of research as the Research cell at AIIMS is very weak in
terms of understanding the needs of research and needs of collaborative
research wherein the Research cell does not allow appointments to be made in
other medical colleges under this Research Grant.
X. Patient Care
95. The enormous patient care load on the AIIMS hospital has dealt a body blow to the
core character of the Institute as a medical university. It is impossible to deliver quality care
and also to be academic and research institution, no matter how hard its highly committed
faculty tries day after day.
96. As against the original character envisaged, AIIMS is expected to provide care to any
patient walking into its portals, without the need for referral, for minor to the most complex
ailment. Thus it is not being allowed to function as a referral centre. As a result, waiting lists
for admissions/surgeries run into months, even years. AIIMS has thus been rendered as a
general multi-specialty hospital rather a university hospital. Majority of the patients treated at
AIIMS could have received treatment at other hospitals such as medical colleges and
government hospitals in the city and state capitals and other places.
97. The Committee was informed that AIIMS was created as a tertiary care institution.
Today, AIIMS serves as a primary care centre for people living in South Delhi, a secondary
care centre for Delhi-NCR and a tertiary care centre for parts of North, Central and East India.
Until an attempt is made to revert to the professed tertiary care status or at least a secondary
care status, there can be no resolution of the problem. The services are over burdened by the

29
patient care component leaving no time for introspection, forward planning and for that matter
any constructive thinking. The Committee has been given to understand that according to a
study performed by Department of Hospital Administration, AIIMS in 2008, to assess the
satisfaction of patients, it was found that 87.5 % patients were satisfied with the behaviour
of doctors, 57 % patients were satisfied with the behaviour of Nursing staff and 60% patients
were satisfied with the behaviour of Group D staff inspite of the various constraints being
faced by the Institution.
98. On being asked about the mortality rate in AIIMS, the Director, AIIMS during evidence
before the Committee on 12th November, 2014 submitted that in elective work, the mortality
rate is at par with any hospital in the developed countries but in critical care, where AIIMS
gets a lot of referral cases and the patients towards the end of their care are referred to AIIMS
from various corporate hospitals as well as other hospitals, AIIMS might be having a higher
mortality rate.
Average waiting time of patients in getting dates for surgeries, various processes and
tests:
99. The details of average waiting time of patients in getting dates for surgeries, various
process and tests is as under :-
Sl. Name of the Waiting Time
No. Department
12 3 4 5
1. Cardiothoracic 3 months to 4 years
2. For Emergency No waiting
3. Neuro surgery Unit I Unit II
4. Category-IIASAFC 15 days 1 ½ Months
Category -III ASAFC 6 months —
Category-III Routine 16 months 6 months
5. E.N.T. Ear Surgery 3 to 4 years
Head & Neck Cancer One month
Other Benign Conditions 1 to 1½ year
Cochlear implant surgery One year
6. Orthopaedics Unit I Unit II
Hand Cases 4-6 months
Spine Cases 3-6 months 3½ - 6 months
Arthroscopy Cases 1-3 months 4-6 months
Arthroplasty Cases 3-6 months 3-6 months
Paediatric Surgery Cases 7-9 months

30
Oncology Malignant -
3-6 months
Benign: 5-7
months
Old Trauma Cases 4-6 months 5-7 months
Complicated Cases 4-6 months
Infection Cases 3-6 months 3 -6 months
Miscellaneous Cases 5-7 months
7. Cancer Research Radiation Oncology 0-2 weeks
Medical Oncology 1 week
Surgical Oncology 8-12 weeks
Palliative Care Unit 1-2 Days
8. Surgery Cancer 2-3 weeks
For non emergency 6 months
(benign non-life
threatening)
For emergency No waiting
patients (acute life
threatening)
9. Urology Emergency Same day
Semi emergency surgery 48 to 72 hrs.
Routine patients (patients 4-6 weeks
with malignancy, renal failure,
paediatric age group
Routine patients with 4-6 months
benign disease with no
immediate or life
threatening complication
10. Nephrology Living renal transplant 3-4 months
11. Ophthalmology Rou tine 1 week
Squint Surgery 6 months
12 3 4 5

31
The following are some of the suggestions made by some stakeholders on improving the
patient care:-
(i) Satellite OPD centres should be opened to reduce load on the hospital’s OPD.
Provision of preferential treatment for people coming from long distance or
from outstations, at least for part of day’s OPD’s registration.
(ii) Despite all hype about IT, there is no computerization of patient records in
AIIMS compared to other institutions.
(iii) Creation of a few tertiary care centres in Delhi and neighboring States would
be inadequate to decongest AIIMS. A health syst em perspective would call for
a more detailed sector-wise development of primary, secondary and tertiary care
services all over India including the neighbouring States.
(iv) User charges are a barrier to accessing healthcare for most people and
especially for the poor. Further, user charges decrease access for the more
vulnerable sections among the poor, such as women, children, and the
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in India. Studies also show that sick
people are more likely to die when they had to pay user charges. In India, 1
in 3 people who need hospitalization and have to pay out-of-pocket are forced
to borrow money or sell assets to cover the expenses. Over 20 million Indians
are pushed below the poverty line every year because of out-of-pocket spending
on healthcare.
(v) Revision of norms of the faculty as per patient load and creation of the posts
for recruitment of faculty was required; and operational flexibility wherein
Director could take people on contract to ensure effective patient care could
solve the problem of long waiting time in AIIMS.
(vi) Essential medication should be provided free of cost as it will only marginally
increase the overall budget of AIIMS and since there are only a few such
centres in India, it would not burden the exchequer.
(vii) There is a need to improve the manpower, space and infrastructure (including
computerization) situation at AIIMS, and the need for centralized laboratory
services as patients have to often go to external laboratories and radiology
centres, which get business to the tune of ` 1-1.5 crores per day from AIIMS.
(viii) There is a need to expand services, especially with regard to centres and
centralization of laboratories, and to build in staff accountability and norms for
clinical services.
(ix) In a poor country like India wherein, a person has to spend 84% of expenditure
out of his pocket, the concept of user charges add to his medical expenditure
burden. The Government should prepare an action plan to increase the
budgetary allocation of health sector from the present less than one per cent to
2.5-3% of GDP keeping in view the severity of disease burden in India.
(x) In order to restore the status of AIIMS as tertiary care provider as envisaged
by founding fathers of the Institute, screening OPDs in the Institute is the need

32
of the hour in order to segregate the patients on the basis of the seriousness
of their medical condition.
(xi) A 2-tier system of health care (private/general) based on paying capacity should
be done away with as those who pay more tend to monopolize public health
facilities, pushing the non/less-paying patients further to the margins, and
corporatization and outsourcing of health care should be stopped.
(xii) The utility of Government investment decreases if user charges are levied.
Selection of patients should be based on health needs and not paying capacity.
The idea of ‘free health services’ is a myth. While these may be provided free
at the point of delivery, the cost is ultimately borne by the patients. Every
citizen pays direct or indirect taxes to the Government. The Government only
fulfils its obligations towards people by providing them certain services,
including health services. Therefore, the Government should commit more
resources for the healthcare needs of the people to bring about an improvement
in their health status. This would be expedient even in the economic sense as
contributions made by a healthy population to the economic growth of a
country will more than compensate for the investments made by the
Government in securing the health of the people.
100. On b eing asked about how poor patients who are not BPL Card holders, are evaluated
about their financial condition for the purpose of being provided free treatment and medicines,
the Medical Superintendent, AIIMS, during evidence before the Committee on 12
th November,
2014 informed the Committee that there are two modes of such evaluation. One is, through
the Medical Social Service Officers who evaluate the financial condition of a patient on the
recommendation of the treating doctor and thereafter the Hospital Administration approves the
recommendation of the Medical Social Service Officer for free treatment of the patient. The
second mode is that if the treating faculty certifies in the prescribed proforma that the patient
is too poor to afford treatment, the patient is given free medicines and surgical consumables.
101. The Medical Superintendent further informed the Committee that the patients admitted
to the General Ward of AIIMS are given medicines and surgical consumable items free of cost,
out of 250 medicines and 125 surgical consumable items. The Drug Selection Committee has
now recommended more than 500 drugs to be given free of cost to the patients of the General
Ward and the proposal has also been approved by the Director, AIIMS.
XI. Allied Services
(i) Public Relations Cadre Employees of AIIMS
102. Public Relations Cadre Employees of AIIMS, through their written submission, stated
that they are well qualified, with entry level qualification of graduation plus Diploma in
Journalism and Mass Communication, but they have no appropriate promotion avenues and
future prospects. All the existing eight centres of AIIMS and newly created centre at Jhajjar
are required to be manned by professionally skilled public relations officials equipped with

33
adequate paraphernalia and powers to undertake full-fledged functions of public relations and
media relation activity centres to project the image of the Institute. At least 25 Asstt. Public
Relations Officers are needed to handle and supervise the huge workload of RTI related works,
public information system and smooth functioning of OPDs and wards. However , there are
anomalies in pay scale, designations and promotional avenues of PR cadre. They demanded that
their promotion from entry level to first promotion should be on the basis of 50% on merit-
cum-seniority and the 50% on merit-cum-fitness. At least 60% promotions should be on the
basis of limited competitive departmental examination so that professionally qualified employees
may get appropriate career progression which will result in better performance.
(ii) Physiotherapy Services
103. The Physiotherapists’ Forum of AIIMS in their written memorandum, submitted to the
Committee stated that the physiotherapy services were started at AIIMS just after its inception
and since then the physiotherapists were meticulously contributing in the patient care and
management. Their participation and contribution was very well recognized as almost every
clinical department had physiotherapists as its essential part. But they never got due
appreciation. New developments in technology and research in physiotherapy and health care
led to the enhancement and enrichment of the physiotherapy curriculum at graduate and post-
graduate levels which is equivalent to any other professional medical programme. According to
them, the physiotherapists are being treated as mere technicians in spite of the fact that their
education, skills and participation in the health care is no way comparable to any other
technical service at AIIMS.
104. The Forum stated that the entry level qualification for physiotherapists at AIIMS is
Bachelor of Physiotherapy which is a four and a half year professional degree course and it
incorporates even more than BDS in terms of syllabus and clinical responsibilities. Grade Pay
of `4200/- at entry level is not justified at all and they deserve much higher Grade Pay  i.e.
`5400/-  at entry level. For the last fifteen years most of the fresh physiotherapists recruited
at AIIMS were post-graduates and they were working in super-specialty centres which signify
their needs at AIIMS. Despite being involved in intense care management, they had been denied
various allowances like conveyance allowance, non-practicing allowance etc. The
post-graduate qualifications were imparted by the National Institutes and the Central
Universities and they are eligible for the post of Assistant Professors as per the UGC
guidelines. The Forum therefore requested that at these super-specialty centres, the entry level
qualification should be post-graduate degree irrespective scheme for physiotherapy with the
Grade Pay of `6600/-.
105. The Forum in this connection drew the attention of the Committee to the following
observations and recommendations made by it in its thirty-first report on the Para-medical and
Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007, presented to the Parliament on the 21st October,
2008:
“The Committee feels that all the allied health professionals including physiotherapists
and occupational therapists play a crucial role in the field of medicine and physical
rehabilitation. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that their legitimate
interests should be taken care of and their existing pay structure may be revised

34
according to their qualifications and duration of the course they have to put in before
entering into a Government job”. (Para 25.6)
106. The Forum also stated that the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha, in
its 178 th Report, presented to the House on the 19th December, 2008 had recommended as
under:-
“The Committee would specifically like to comment upon the service rules conditions
of the Physiotherapists. The discipline is growing in profile with introduction of new
aids. Disease specific rehabilitation therapies are required accordingly the Government
has introduced new degree courses in Physiotherapy. It is, therefore, required to improve
the Service Conditions and emoluments of the physiotherapists and the AIIMS may also
take a view on allowing them the Non-Practicing Allowances (NP A).”
107. According to the Forum the Recruitment Rules for the Physiotherapists had not been
modified for the last more than forty years, contrary to the DoPT Guidelines and also despite
the recommendations from various Departments/Bodies and Ministries as well. Globally
physiotherapy profession is well established as autonomous and independent health care
profession.
108. It was further submitted that AIIMS administration never involves physiotherapy
professions nor seek their opinions and inputs in the matters relating to their professional
growth, service conditions and promotional avenues. Their biased attitude has been exposed
very recently when the AIIMS Coordination Committee (for revising the recruitment rules for
non-faculty cadres in AIIMS) has out-rightly overlooked the recommendations of the chief of
centres and various HODs regarding modifications in recruitments rules, nature of duties and
pay scales. They are not designated as faculty and are bei ng constantly expl oited by the AIIMS
authorities.
(iii) Speech Pathology and Audiology
109. One of the important areas of the ENT is speech pathology and audiology. The
Committee was given to understand that AIIMS used to run a bachelor’s programme in this
field for more than two decades. Under this programme the Institute used to train professionals
on issues related to communication disorders such as hearing impairment, mental retardation,
voice, fluency and phonological and language disorders. Of late, the Committee has been
informed that it has been discontinued without any cogent reasons.

OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
I. Governance Structure
110. On a perusal of the frequency of meetings of various committees of AIIMS, the
Committee observes that the meetings of some bodies/committees are not being held
regularly which gives a poor reflection on functioning of these important decision
making bodies. The Committee feels that such a state of affairs on the part of an apex
institution like AIIMS which is a role model for all medical institutions in the country
should not be allowed to persist. The Committee recommends that the Annual Action
Plan of AIIMS should prepare an itinerary at the beginning of the year itself to conduct
meetings of these various bodies/committees and ensure adherence to the said itinerary.
The Committee is of the view that even internal governance needs to be strengthened
with regular, pre-notified meetings of the Staff Council whose deliberations should be
available to the Institute Body for review.
111. The Committee recommends that rules, regulations, norms, guidelines and
procedures should be codified for routine governance issues at AIIMS after synergizing
its policy and goals with nations’ needs and public requirements. The Institute should
remain publically funded and democratically accountable. It further desires that the
Government should endeavour to make it the model Institute as originally envisaged as
a (deemed) medical university with laid-down rules and regulations rather than as a
government hospital. The funding should continue to be from Government of India
rather than UGC.
112. The Committee desires that the practice of ex post facto approval of the decisions
made by Director and President of AIIMS for the matters needing approval of the
Institute Body/ Governing Body in its subsequent meetings should be done in very
exceptional cases only. A mechanism should be developed for immediate meetings in the
emergent matters.
113. The Committee feels that the existing model of governance, which has been
governing the Institute for the last 60 years, needs thorough review. One of the main
aspects of governance is participation which requires that faculty of AIIMS must be
participating in the governance like in other institutions of higher education. There
should be equitable representation in the Governing body of AIIMS, so that the faculty
can present its views, opinions and ideas as to how governance can be improved in the
light of their day-to-day experiences in performing their duties.
II. General administration
114. The Committee desires that standard procedures for administrative, vigilance and
financial matters should be put in place immediately and be followed and implemented
in letter and spirit.
35

36
115. The Committee recommends that standard Government of India (GOI) practices
regarding seniority between direct recruits to substantive posts and promotees should be
strictly followed. Since creation of and selection for the positions like Dean, Sub-Dean,
Professor-in-Charge, Head of Departments, etc. has mostly been mired in controversies,
the Committee recommends that the entire Scheme and its procedures should be
reviewed and codified for strict adherence to avoid any charges of favoritism, nepotism,
corruption and avoidable litigation in future.
116. The Committee feels that AIIMS is a premier medical Institute in the country
and it is imperative that all possible measures should be taken to attract, retain and
nurture its talent.
117. The Committee has been informed that a draft Vision Document for AIIMS has
been prepared. The Committee desires that the final Vision Document should be
prepared and implemented at the earliest.
III. Budgetary provisions
118. The Committee observes that availability of tertiary care services is skewed
towards private domain vis-a-vis public sector which leads to high health cost burden on
people, especially the marginalized and poor sections of our society. AIIMS which is an
institution of National Importance and eminence, has made substantial contribution to
correcting the imbalances in availability of affordable and quality tertiary healthcare,
especially to the most deprived and vulnerable sections of our society, which is
acknowledged unequivocally by all. Therefore, it goes without saying that AIIMS needs
to be supported and nurtured with the utmost gravitas and all its financial requirements
should be met by the Government by way of budgetary support to allow it to flourish
and excel further. The Committee is, therefore, constrained to observe that there is a
huge mismatch between the AIIMS’s projected demand of ` 2325.00 crore and allocation
of ` 550.00 crore in BE 2015-16 which is incidentally, the same as it was RE 2013-14.
Given the good track record of AIIMS in utilizing the allocated Plan funds during the
last five years, the Committee is unable to reconcile itself with the reduced quantum
of plan funds for 2015-16. Since a large number of developmental activities are
currently underway at AIIMS and inadequacy of Plan funds may prove to be big factor
in limiting the progress in executing important initiatives like National Cancer
Institute, Jhajjar, new OPD Block at Masjid Moth etc., the Committee lends its full
support for enhanced budgetary support to AIIMS and recommends that the, resource
gap should not be allowed to come in the way of speedy execution of developmental
projects of AIIMS. The Committee simultaneously recommends that the Department of
Health and Family Welfare should oversee the quality of development expenditure to
ensure strict adherence to canons of financial prudence and discipline and fulfillment of
all prescribed conditionalities.
119. The Committee would simultaneously like to advise that there should be a monitoring
mechanism in place to ensure that the balanced pace of expenditure is maintained. and there
is no rush of expenditure in the last quarter so that the budgeted funds are utilized timely
and the targeted outcomes are achieved within the prescribed timelines.

37
IV. Autonomy
120. The Committee observes that AIIMS has played and will continue to playa crucial
role in frontier research in bio-medical sciences, health education and in making quality
health care accessible to patients from the poorer sections of the society at a fraction
of cost of the private and corporate sector hospitals. The AIIMS doctors are comparable
to the best in the world. It has its failures, drawbacks and impediments but it has
substantial achievements too, to its credit. The Committee, therefore, agrees that its
growth needs to be fast-tracked. This will however remain wishful thinking if the
Institute is not granted the requisite functional autonomy in truest Sense. The
Committee accordingly recommends that the question of autonomy in the context of the
Institute needs to be revisited by the Government immediately and powers should be
delegated at the Institute-level to facilitate quick decision-making and optimal growth
as a premier medical university, keeping in view its special character which is possible
only if there are substantial reforms in the IB/GB composition.
121. The Committee is of the opinion that new policies should be designed for
achieving more functional and financial autonomy in an effective manner. Keeping in
mind that AIIMS is a public health institution funded by the Government, no
compromise on accountability front can be made.
V. Valiathan Committee Report
122. The Committee notes that the High Powered Committee has classified the
recommendations of the Valiathan Committee into two categories-Part ‘A’ and Part ‘B’.
Part ‘A’ contains 31 Recommendations not requiring structural changes and Part ‘B’
contains 7 Recommendations which require structural changes through amendments in
AIIMS Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Committee, however,
takes note of the opinion both pro and against on Valiathan Committee Report. The
Committee impresses upon the Department to closely scrutinize all the suggestions
given by the Valiathan Committee before implementing the recommendations further.
VI. Vacancies/Appointments
123. The Committee observes that the essential pre-requisite for quality health care
services is the availability of adequate manpower/specialists and other healthcare
professionals. A cursory reading of the vacancy position vis-a-vis  the sanctioned strength
reveals that there is more to it than meets the eye. What confounds this Committee is
the issue that inspite of providing ample budgetary support, in-position strength in
respect of faculty is 594 against sanctioned strength of 826, that of non-faculty is 201
against sanctioned strength of 347 and similar position exists in the case of Group ‘B’
and ‘C’ staff and Group ‘A’ (non-faculty) and Group ‘B’ staff in respect of nurses.
Similar is the position in respect of Junior and Senior Residents. Moreover, the
Committee has been informed of creation of 2235 non-faculty posts and further
projected 905 non-faculty posts for creation. It is more than evident that on the one
hand the Institute has revealed grand plans for expansion but on the other, it has not
been able to recruit even the sanctioned strength. The Committee, therefore, exhorts

38
the Institute to streamline its recruitment policy so as to ensure that before
approaching the Government for creation of posts, the Institute should at least ensure
that the sanctioned posts are filled up within a targetted timeline. The Committee also
recommends that the Institute should expedite the process of creation of a Personnel
Department to ensure streamlining of procedures and actual process of recruitment for
future appointments.
124. Given the high quality and specialized, skills and expertise of the faculty and
other human resource of the Institute, the Committee is of the view that adequate
incentives should be offered and other steps be taken, to attract new talent and to
check their exodus from the Institute.
125. The Committee also finds that the process of appointment of Director of the
Institute is done at the last moment in a hurry. The Committee is also of the view that
there is a need to relook into the process of appointment of Head of Department( HoD)
of the respective Departments in the Institute. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that in order to ensure timely filling up of the post of Director, the required processes
should be put in motion at least one year before the anticipated vacancies arose. On the
issue of appointment of Head of Department, the Institute should ensure a codified
policy after taking a final call on the matter of rotatory headships.
126. The Committee is of the view that a barrier to accountable administration is the
practice of appointing a serving IAS/IRS/IPS officer as Deputy Director of
Administration who serves at the pleasure of the Health Minister and follows the diktats
of the Minister and Health Secretary, with no accountability to AIIMS as a bird of
passage. This needs to be rectified if efficiency and integrity of the Administration  has
to be ensured. The Committee therefore recommends that a management expert be
recruited by the Institute Body through open selection, with a five year term which is
open to reappointment, subject to objectively conducted performance appraisal.
VII. Assessment Promotion Scheme
127. The Committee feels that the issue of Assessment Promotion Scheme(APS) has
raked its fair share of controversy. The Committee is of the view that the Institute
should have framed guidelines for Assessment Promotion Scheme before going for it.
APS has been badly administered and has not fostered talent. Lateral entry of talent,
a real strength of AIIMS in the 70’s and 80’s has been greatly restricted due to APS.
The scheme definitely needs a review. The Committee, also recommends that the
authorities, concerned should take a realistic assessment of the scheme and frame
guidelines to overcome the lacunae existing in the Assessment Promotion Scheme to put
an end to the controversy the Scheme has generated. The Committee also recommends
that till such guidelines are framed standard Government of India (GOI) practices in
this regard should be strictly followed.
VIII. Rotation of Headships
128. The Committee is of the opinion that rotating headship of the Department will
ensure sharing of fresh, ideas, fresh endeavors and innovative thinking. The

39
Committee, therefore, desires that the matter be given a serious thought by the
authorities and a well-considered decision be arrived at after discussing the pros and
cons with entire array of stakeholders.
IX. Accommodation
129. The Committee has been given to understand that several doctors, senior faculty
members and other staff have not been provided suitable accommodation. The
Committee is also concerned to know that a substantial number of the resident doctors,
both Senior Residents and Junior Residents who are the treating force of AIIMS, are
not getting accommodation and have to reside outside. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should give priority to provide suitable accommodation to all doctors,
faculty members & other staff and solve the problem with a sense of urgency. The
Committee recommends that an early action may be taken in this regard.
X. Infrastructure and Expansion
130. The Committee agrees that there is urgent need to strengthen the health
infrastructure across the country’s medical colleges, State hospitals, Community Health
Centres, Primary Health Centres, etc. This would improve the quality of health care
delivery in the country, thereby reducing the load on a tertiary care institution like
AIIMS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should urgently look
into the issue of strengthening the health care infrastructure across the country so as
to reduce the primary and secondary healthcare burden on the Institute.
131. The Committee notes that a redevelopment plan of AIIMS is under
implementation. The Committee recommends that pace and process of the
redevelopment be expedited so that with capacity building it would bridge the huge gap
in infrastructure and facilities and access to adequate health care.
132. The Committee notes from the information made available to it that of the five
projects (both completed and on-going) of Oversight Committee costing ` 615.87 crore,
four projects have witnessed time overruns and cost escalations while the fifth project
concerning the construction of Houses at A. V . Nagar is yet to be finally approved by
South Delhi Municipal Corporation. Similarly, of the 23 other projects (both completed
and on-going) most of the projects have lagged behind their set targets and thus have
not met time and cost deadlines. The Committee feels that this is a pathetic situation
as such delay does not bode well for an institution of vital importance like AIIMS. The
Committee is very much concerned with these delays and desires them to be addressed
with utmost gravitas and promptitude. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon
various agencies involved in the expansion process of infrastructure in AIIMS to resolve
the clearance issues in a time bound manner as health infrastructure cannot be held
ransom to technical issues like clearances and that too in the national capital of the
country. The Committee also desires that the issue be taken up at the highest level in
the Ministry with counterpart Ministries dealing with agencies involved in
implementation of the infrastructure projects in AIIMS to ensure that there is no
further delay in the schedule laid down for implementation and completion of various

40
projects in AIIMS. The Committee also impresses upon the Ministry to ensure setting
up of an Oversight Committee reporting directly to the Director of the Institute to
ensure strict vigil and monitoring of infrastructure projects to ensure adherence to time
bound completion thereof. The Committee also recommends the Department to ensure
that there is no cost escalations of projects and the work of on-going projects is
executed within the approved cost.
133. The Committee has been given to understand that AIIMS catered to 35 lakh
patients, which is a huge number by any standard. It is thus more than evident that
there is very high burden of clinical services on AIIMS. Given the fact that a
considerable number of patients availing health care facilities at AIIMS belong to the
poor and deprived sections of the society, it is all the more imperative that the health
care infrastructure of AIIMS is augmented to keep the same commensurate with the
health care requirement of the society. The Committee, therefore, endorses the
expansion plans of AIIMS. The Committee would, however recommend that an effective
monitoring mechanism be put in place to ensure that the expansion plans are executed
within a dedicated time-frame.
134. The Committee takes note of the plan to take over the Janakpuri Super-
Speciality Hospital of the Government of NCT, Delhi by AIIMS, which has not
materialized as yet. The Committee recommends the Department to expedite the process
of takeover plan of this super specialty hospital from the Government of NCT, Delhi.
XI. AIIMS Campuses and Satellite Centres
135. The Committee observes that the development of AIIMS Campus II, Jhajjar,
Haryana is an ambitious project and will require not only massive allocation of funds,
but also sustained monitoring. The Committee would therefore like the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare to ensur e that the Development Project concerning AIIMS
Campus II, Jhajjar, Haryana is executed within the initially estimated project costs and
time-frame in order to avoid any time-overruns and cost escalation of the project. The
Committee further recommends that such satellite centers should also be set up in
other parts of the NCR like Meerut, Greater Noida, Gurgaon, Ghaziabad, etc. so that
influx of patients from neighboring states could be absorbed by these campuses.
XII. Other AIIMS Like Institutions
136. The Committee is aware that the main r eason for the high patient load in AIIMS
is the lack of adequate and quality medical facilities in the neighboring States like
Bihar, U.P. and Rajasthan etc. The Committee observes that the primary objective of
Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMMSY) which was launched in 2006, was
to correct the imbalances in availability of affordable, quality tertiary health care. The
Committee takes note of the fact that the Government is setting up six AIIMS like
institutions. The Committee has been given to understand that desired progress has not
taken place in other AIIMS like Institutes. Infrastructure and faculty is not adequate
to run the Institute. Therefore, the Committee recommends that an early action be
taken to ensure that the six Institutes start functioning optimally. This would reduce

41
the load on the AIIMS, Delhi to a large extent. The Committee is also of the view that
the Government should consider setting up of more AIIMS like Institutions in the
health care deficient States like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh.
137. The Committee observes that the expansion of tertiary care institutions is
essential for catering to the healthcare needs of the growing population in the country
and setting up of AIIMS-like institutions and upgradation and strengthening of medical
institutions under PMSSY is a major step towards guaranteeing quality health care to
all. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made towards full-
operationalisation of AIIMS-like institutions on a regular basis.
138. The Committee observes that it is imperative to correct the imbalances in
availability of affordable tertiary level health care in the country. However, this
objective can only be realised if, besides setting up of AIIMS-like Institutions, more
medical institutions/colleges/districts hospitals in different parts of the Country are
upgraded and strengthened through Centrally Sponsored Scheme for capacity expansion.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that more medical institutions/Medical Colleges
of underserved and un-served areas be included under PMSSY for upgradation and
strengthening of the District Hospitals without compromising the quality of services
rendered. The Committee would also like to add that recruiting quality faculty for other
AIIMS-type institutions is already proving difficult. The need of the hour is to create
an All-India cadre linking AIIMS-Delhi, PGIMER and JIPMER as hubs and the new
AIIMSs attached to one of them in periodic rotation between the central hubs and the
“regional” AIIMS. This will be akin to IAS officers rotating during their careers
between their state cadre and central postings.
XIII. Referral Character
139. The Committee notes that apart from being a University by character, AIIMS has
an impeccable position as a tertiary hospital also. It is, therefore, imperative that
highest level of patient care is provided by the Institute. The Committee is however
constrained to note that over the years the tertiary referral status of the Institute has
been almost completely lost and as admitted by the Government before the Committee
“today the Institute serves as primary care centre for people living in South Delhi, a
secondary care centre for Delhi, NCR and as a tertiary care centre for parts of North,
Central and East India”. This is a very unfortunate situation as it not only negatively
impacts the patients who deserve tertiary care on priority but such a mammoth patient
load with even minor ailments also adversely affects the functioning of the Institute and
hampers its academic and research activities. The Committee, therefore, from the
standpoint of the Institute recommends immediate filling up of all the existing vacancies
and restructuring of staff and other resource requirements of the Institute based on the
existing patient load. It also desires immediate investment for creation of requisite
infrastructure including expansion of departments, addition of operation theatres and
other paraphernalia, improvement in the existing infrastructure, etc. The Committee is
of the opinion that the decentralization of medical services is necessary to decongest the
main Hospital by creation of screening OPDs, outreach centres. An efficient and prompt
referral to other health facilities would also go a long way in improving the patient care

42
in the Institute. Single patient friendly registration for all OPDs along with
computerization of patients’ records and reports with sufficient safeguards for ensuring
confidentiality and centralized laboratories services with sample collection at multiple
sites would also be a hugely patient friendly initiative.
140. The Committee would, however, like to add that AIIMS cannot be a tertiary care
institution as long as UG courses are run UGs need exposure to primary and secondary
care too hence general OPDs etc. Either AIIMS discontinues UG programmes and
focuses only on PG plus programmes like PGIMER or transfers UG training to ancillary
centres linked to but not situated in the main campus. Since there are now many good
UG training medical colleges, unlike 1956 when AIIMS was set up, the former may be
the preferred option. On the other hand, if AIIMS has to be a role model-cum-technical
resource for new AIIMS-like institutions, the composite UG+PG character has to be
maintained. A final call on this issue needs to be taken urgently.
XlV. Reservation Policy
141. The Committee notes from the submissions made before it that reservation
provisions have been violated in AIIMS in the past. Though, the Committee takes note
of the submissions made by the Director, AIIMS on 16th January, 2015 that “since 2009-
10 the reservation policy is being followed in its letter and spirit and there is no
deviation of even one per cent”, it nevertheless would like the Ministry to put in place
an institutional mechanism to ensure that a robust database with multi-stage cross
verifications is created for implementing the reservation policy in AIIMS. The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry may also ensure that accountability of
the AIIMS officials is fixed for potential violations of constitutional provisions on
reservation. Action should also be taken against those responsible for violations of the
reservation policy in the past.
142. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare devise an exhaustive plan to wipe out the backlog existing in various categories
of reserved posts including faculty positions and periodically review whether or not the
reservation policy and orders are being implemented in letter and spirit so that the
SC/ST/OBC candidates are not deprived of the rights guaranteed to them by the
Constitution of India.
XV . Procurement
143. The Committee finds that in spite of an elaborate procurement process for
equipments, consumables, materials, medicines, etc, it has come to its notice that
there are loopholes in the procurement process. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Department should build abundant safeguards in the procurement
process to check any instance of malpractice.
XVI. Allied Services
144. The Committee would like to know the exact reasons and cause for the,
discontinuance of the speech pathology and audiology programme at the Institute. The

43
Committee desires that adequate steps should be taken to re-start this programme
without any further delay as there is a huge demand and shortage for speech therapists
and audiologists in the country.
145. The Committee also recommends that service conditions, pay scales and career
opportunities of the public relations personnel, the physiotherapists, occupational
therapists, the Audiologist and Speech therapists should be given a relook so that their
interest, which is intrinsically related with the interest of the Institute and the patients
is not overlooked any further. The Committee further feels that there is an urgent need
to ensure prioritization for accrediting all allied health professionals.
XVII. Research and Development
146. The Committee notes with satisfaction that AIIMS has maintained its position as
a top research Institution in the Country. With a view to ensure that the Institute
continues to remain at the forefront of research and development in health sector not
only in the Country but also in the world, the Committee strongly recommends that the
Ministry should ensure that all requirements of funds for R&D activities in the
Institute should be met on top priority. This would not only ensure that the integrity
of public health goals and public policy is observed but would also eliminate industry
sponsored research like clinical trials and a host of other such activities which
sometimes may lead to distortion of priorities, negligence of public good, conflict of
interest and unethical practices. The Committee would also like to be informed of the
evaluation of impact on national health programmes and innovations in clinical/public
health service delivery that research at AIIMS contributed to.
147. Given the impeccable standing of the Institute in R&D in health sector, the
Committee feels that it is high time for development of professional research cadre in
the Institute along with development of requisite research infrastructure. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should prepare a well defined roadmap for the
purpose within a dedicated time-frame.
148. The Committee is also of the opinion that for better command and control and
monitoring and for maximizing the research inputs, the research team should be
multi-disciplinary and all resources for research should be centralized. It would also be
worthwhile to provide professional secretarial assistance along with non-monetary
incentives including peer recognition to the human resource involved in R&D
activities.
149. The Committee also desires that the ‘research governance should invariably
include collective decision making and the protocols regarding research governance
and manpower development should also be given due consideration in career
progression.
150. The Committee observes that the concept of Research with focus on Nationally
Relevant Health Problems is a sine-qua-non.  AIIMS being a premier Institute and being
expected to play a visionary role to the other medical Institutions, there should be
definite direction for the areas on which research undertaken would help in giving a

44
proper perspective for solving Nationally Relevant Health Problems. There is an urgent
need to consider the Multi-disciplinary research. Besides, making available adequate
time to the faculty for pursuing research is equally important.
151. The Committee also recommends that the regulatory mechanism be strengthened
to ensure that the agenda of the Pharmaceutical companies’ is not imposed on the
research agenda of the Institute.
152. The Committee notes that Dr. Valiathan had advocated funding of research
projects at AIIMS by the private industry including the Pharma Industry. The
Committee has very strong reservations on the AIIMS drawing money from outside the
Government. AIIMS is a public health institution funded by the Government. It is
mandated to provide equitable tertiary healthcare, quality education and carry out
premier research. The Committee apprehends that if industry sponsored research is
allowed a free run in AIIMS and if AIIMS starts taking money from the industry and
other sources, it will create tremendous amount of distortion, conflict of interest and
also cause unethical practices because the corporate sector invests in the multi-
specialty hospitals and institutes that focus on income earning treatment procedures and
products and are more concerned about profitability. The Committee is, therefore, very
clear that the AIIMS should remain a predominantly public funded institution and must
face democratic accountability. Therefore, the Committee is not on the same page with
Dr. Valiathan when he says that AIIMS should welcome funding of research projects by
the industry.
153. The Committee has been given to understand that in the extramural funding
from private entities which the AIIMS is getting at present, a large number of research
projects belong to “drug trials” which is a very notorious commodity, as has been widely
reported in the print and electronic media. In the circumstances, Committee opines that
the Institute while accepting any extramural funds from private entities for research
purposes should be selective and accept funds only for the projects oriented for the
public good at large and ensure that all safeguards are followed while conducting the
research. Besides, the Committee observes that AIIMS is a premier medical research
Institution and there is no reason why AIIMS from its own budget cannot increase the
intramural funding. The Committee therefore recommends that most of the fund
requirements for research, should be met from governmental grants. The Committee
also recommends that every faculty member should get some seed money for research
from within the public fund so that the integrity of public health goals are maintained
and Government’s health policy is promoted.
154. The Committee recommends that there is an urgent need to build a robust
structure which would facilitate Research activities which the Institute seems to lack at
present. If need be, possibilities should be explored for encouraging collaborative
Research between the Institute and other reputed medical institutions in the country
and abroad.
155. The Committee feels that though AIIMS has been able to carry out internationally
comparable research activities, yet a lot remains to be done in translating the research
outcomes into health products. The research should be result oriented and the results

45
should be implementable so that it does not remain confined to laboratory or only on
paper but ameliorates the lot of the common people.
156. The Committee has been given to understand that in accepting several foreign
assignments in the research arena, the faculty are in conflict of interest. All such cases
should be examined and wherever conflict of interest is found to be existing, action
should be taken against the person involved. A robust mechanism should be in place to
address this issue.
XVIII. Patient Care
157. The Committee finds that the average waiting time for patients in getting dates
for surgeries, various processes and tests is too long. The Committee is aware of the
fact that in view of heavy load of patients, the dates for getting surgeries, processes etc.
are unduly delayed. The Committee is of the opinion that a screening wing for each
department should be opened which would, depending on the severity of the disease, put
in place a grading system under which patients having disease of severe nature can be
operated earlier and those who have a less serious complication can be operated later
as straitjacketing of surgeries on first-cum-first serve system does not do justice to the
patient having serious complications. The Committee recommends that the Institute
should devise a screening wing for each Department which, the committee feels, would
be much better and practical than the current system of first-cum-first serve.
158. The Committee also desires that a definite element of priority should be accorded
to the patients coming from outside Delhi as they come to the Institute only after
exhausting all the medical avenues and resources at their place of stay and their plight
is the worst amongst all patients visiting the Institute.
159. As another patient friendly step, the Committee recommends that all essential
medications should be provided free of cost by the Institute to the economically weaker
patients. Moreover, once a patient is admitted in general ward, she/he should not be
compelled for any out of pocket expenditure.
160. The Committee also recommends creation of multiple information desks in the
Institute where qualified social workers are deployed to enable a patient friendly
ambience right from the time a patient enters the Institute to the economically weaker
patients. The Committee feels that these measures would go a long way in making the
Institute truly patient friendly and patient caring.
XIX. S tudents’ Welfare
161. As in case of any university, the students are the backbone of AIIMS and they
have contributed significantly to the reputation of the Institute with their selfless
service and dedication. Students Welfare, therefore, should be the top most priority of
AIIMS as it simultaneously ensures both a better academic environment and a better
patient care. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should
ensure that all facilities for academic pursuits, research activities, infrastructure and
welfare of students should be put in place on war footing. There should be reservation

46
for AIIMS students in post graduate entrance examination as is being done in JIPMER.
It also recommends that the Ph.D candidates should be granted scholarships for the
entire duration of their study period. The Committee further desires that professional
counseling and other sub measures should be put in place to help the students facing
difficulty with their syllabi.
XX. Innovations
162. The Committee notes that professional health education of the pioneering kind
was the fundamental reason for the establishment of the Institute. Several i nnova tions
in education (e.g. rural internship, present phases of MBBS programme, 3 year
postgraduate residency system, new DM/MCh courses) were pioneered at AIIMS before
they became the national norm. Disappointingly, this is not the case now as the
overbearing intrusion by the “service” component of the job profile perhaps does not
allow for time to think freely and come up with new and innovative strategies for
teaching. The Committee is concerned to note that there has been no innovation,
worth mentioning in the Institute for quite some time. The Committee feels that
innovations should be made and adopted in teaching, learning and assessment. It is
necessary to be aware of the things going on in the rest of the world and also
important to select things which are relevant to the country. Besides, the Institute
should be able to come up with its own innovations in the medical field which were the
prime objectives of AIIMS. The Committee would, ther efore, like the Ministry to find
out the impediments coming in the way of innovations and take steps to remove them.
The Institute should also put in place a mechanism to encourage creative thinking and
developing innovative ideas.
XXI. Issue of Corruption
163. The Committee also observes that there are five Committees of AIIMS namely
(i) Standing Finance Committee (ii) Academic Committee (iii) Standing Selection
Committee (iv) Estate Committee and (v) Hospital Affairs Committee and each
Committee has been assigned a designated role. But from the information made
available to the Committee, it has noted that though there are well laid down rules,
norms and procedure even for emergency situations, meetings of these Committees are
not held regularly, required details are not put in the agenda and sufficient time is not
given and sometimes ex-post-facto approvals are taken. This suggests that the
established structures do not seem to function as they should, which means there is a
tendency to squeeze the decision-making process. This results in lack of transparency
and accountability and that is why many violations occur. The Committee is convinced
that if regular processes, norms and procedures are observed transparently and if there
is adherence to norms, then a lot of irregularities can be avoided. Taking into account
all these factors, the Committee recommends that the maximum work should be done
in the AIIMS Committees because collective decision-making is the best antidote to
corruption and nexus. The Committee also recommends that whenever there is a
violation of norms and processes, the violation must be discussed threadbare in the
Governing Body of AIIMS which is the executive body and swift remedial action taken.

47
The Committee is of the considered view that if this recommendation is implemented in
letter and spirit, there will be adequate checks on irregularities and corrupt practices
in AIIMS.
164. The Committee would like to make it abundantly clear that though the
Committee is all for professional autonomy of AIIMS, autonomy should not mean
autonomy of the Director, resulting in freedom from observance of prescribed rules,
regulations and procedures.
165. Taking note of corruption cases in AIIMS highlighted by the media, the
Committee had sought a status note on the probes initiated from 2011 to 2014. The
Committee notes from the information furnished by the Ministry that myriad corruption
cases are under investigation involving AIIMS officials and doctors. The cases include
disproportionate asset cases, procurement of computers and peripherals without
following the purchase procedure, alleged financial irregularities in purchase of surgical
gloves and medicines, construction of engineering works without approval of the
statutory bodies, alleged tempering with selection lists of operation theatre assistants,
irregularities in appointments of officials under sports quota, massive irregular payment
to contractors, irregularities in awarding the work of development of ward and allied
spaces for Department of Pulmonary Medicine, purchase of uniforms for employees, etc.
The Committee is perturbed to note that despite unraveling of corruption cases at
AIIMS at regular intervals, the Ministry has done away with the regular Chief Vigilance
Officer’s post at AIIMS and the role of anti-graft officer of AIIMS has been assigned
to a Joint Secretary and CVO in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Evidently,
the Ministry appears to be non-serious in tackling corruption at AIIMS. The Committee,
therefore, strongly deprecates the non-serious approach of the Ministry towards tackling
such a large number of cases of corruption at AIIMS and recommends that the Ministry
should quickly move towards appointing a regular Chief Vigilance Officer of
unblemished credentials at AIIMS. Needless to emphasize that the Chief Vigilance
Officer is the only instrument available with the Ministry to monitor statutory
compliance of various prescribed procedures and norms. The Committee also
recommends the Ministry to play a proactive role in ensuring expeditious investigations
into all the corruption cases at AIIMS and furnish within three months from the date
of presentation of this Report, an up-to-date status note detailing therein various stages
of cases of investigation, involving corrupt practices and embezzlement of funds and
steps taken to check occurrence of such cases in future.

MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
(2010-11)
The Sub-Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday the 30 th June, 2011 in Room
NO.‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Datta Meghe — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
7. Shri Ashok Argal
8. Shri R. K. Singh Patel
9. Dr. Tarun MandaI
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee. He also
informed them that the Sub-Committee has been constituted to examine various aspects of the
functioning of All India Institute Medical Sciences (AIIMS) which is a premier Medical
Institute in the country. At the commencement of the meeting, the Convenor drew their
attention to Rule 294 (1) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council
of States, which requires that-
“Whenever a member has a personal or specific pecuniary interest (direct or indirect)
in a matter being considered by the Council or a Committee there of he shall declare
the nature of such interest notwithstanding any registration of his interests in the
Register, and shall not participate in any debate taking place in the Council or its
Committees before making such declaration”.
51

52
3. The Sub-Committee then discussed a number of issues pertaining to AIIMS, like-low
frequency of meetings of the various Standing Committees of AIIMS; large scale migration
affecting teaching as well as tertiary care; shortage of faculty; patient services being offered
especially for the poor patients; faculty matters especially with regard to reservation, proper
man-power utilisation by entering into some kind of bond with doctors; adequacy of
infrastructure in view of long waiting period for patients; status of implementation of
recommendations of Valiathan Committee; need for amendments in the existing legislation
pertaining to AIIMS, etc.
4. The Sub-Committee thereafter discussed its further course of action. It decided to
begin with a briefing meeting with the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
along with Director, AIIMS, followed by interaction with the Experts and faculty’s/Doctors’/
Employee’s Associations of AIIMS on the subject and decided to call the Secretary, Department
of Health and Family Welfare along with Director, AIIMS at its next meeting scheduled to be
held on the 11 th July, 2011.
5. The Sub-Committee also directed the Secretariat to seek a detailed status note and
replies to a set of questionnaire on the Functioning of All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS) from the Ministry.
6. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 11.45 A.M.

II
SECOND MEETING
(2010-11)
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday the 11 th July, 2011 in Committee
Room, ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Shri Datta Meghe — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
3. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
4. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
5. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
6. Shrimati Brinda Karat
7. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA .
8. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
9. Shri Ashok Argal
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
11. Shri R. K. Singh Patel
12. Shri N. Kristappa
13. Dr. Tarun Mandal
SECRETARIAT
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives from the Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri K. Chandramouli, Secretary
2. Shri Keshav Desiraju, Addl. Secretary
3. Shri Debashish Panda, Joint Secretary
53

54
Representatives from the All India Institute of Medical Sciences
1. Shri R. C. Deka, Director
2. Shri Vineet Chawdhry, Dy. Director
3. Dr. Nikhil T andon, Professor, AIIMS
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members and apprised them of the agenda
of the meeting  i.e. oral evidence of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
and Director, AIIMS on the functioning of All India Institute Medical Sciences.
3. The Convenor also informed the Members that the Department of Health and Family
Welfare had sought extension of time for three weeks i.e.  upto 21 st July, 2011 for furnishing
the replies to the questionnaire. The Sub-Committee discussed the same and acceded to the
Department’s request for grant of extension of time upto 21 st July, 2011.
4. In the meantime, the Chairman of the Committee also joined the meeting and on  request
from the Convenor chaired it.
5. The Sub-Committee, thereafter, heard the views of Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare & Director, AIIMS and other officers of the Institute on  various aspect of the
functioning of AIIMS. Dr Nikhil Tandon, Professor, AIIMS made a power point presentation
on the subject, inter alia highlighting the following issues:
(i) the vision behind setting up of AIIMS; (ii) the main objectives of AIIMS viz .
patient care, education and research; (iii) bed strength facility; optimal load v/s present
load; (iv) cost to AIIMS; (v) patient satisfaction; (vi) Post Graduation & Residency
Programmes; (vii) holding of various types of training to defence personnel and
candidates sponsored by Government institutions, foreign undergraduates from
countries like Australia, Bangladesh etc; (viii) landmark research of national importance
on malnutrition, iodine deficiency, liver diseases, lead poisoning in children,
tuberculosis, genomic analysis of malaria, stem cell research, vitamin D status in Indian
context.
6. Prof. Tandon also informed the Committee that some National Programmes were
influenced by AIIMS research like Integrated Child Development Schemes (ICDS), universal
iodization of salt, National blindness Control Programme, Fluorosis Control Programme,
Tobacco Control Programme and National Programme on Health Care of Elderly and that
AIIMS was collaborating with WHO in the field like neonatology and diarrhoeal diseases etc.
7. During the course of the discussions, Members raised the following queries;
amendments in the AIIMS Act, rules and regulations, finalization of purchase manual,
accounting manual, grievances of faculty Members, students and employees; problems of
seniority; vacancies and implementation of reservation in faculty posts; autonomy of the
Institute; frequency of meetings of General Body and various Standing Committees of the
Institute; implementation of recommendations of Valiathan Committee; roaster system prevailing
in the Institute; filling up of backlog of vacancies; creation of more posts in view of increasing
doctor-patient ratio; commercialisation of research at AIIMS; clinical trials being conducted in

55
AIIMS; report of Ethics Committee, considerable decline in delivery of health care including
admission of patients, surgeries and number of outdoor patients.
8. The Secretary and the Director clarified the issues raised by the Members. The
Chairman then directed the representative of the Ministry to furnish replies and comments on
the queries not replied orally and two sets of questionnaire handed over during the meetings
within a week’s time.
9. The Sub-Committee then decided to meet again on the 26 th July, 2011 to hear the views
of some experts on the functioning of AIIMS.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Sub-Committee was kept.
11. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. to meet again on the 26 th July, 2011.

III
THIRD MEETING
(2010-11)
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday the 26 th July, 2011 in Committee
Room, ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
5. Shri Ashok Argal
6. Dr. Tarun Mandal
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Smt. Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
1. Dr. Sneh Bhargava, Former Director, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
2. Prof. S. K. Jindal, PGIMER, Chandigarh
3. Dr. KSVK Subba Rao, Director, JIPMER, Puducherry
4. Dr. K. Srinath Reddy, President, Public Health Foundation of India, New Delhi.
2. At the outset, the Sub-Committee voted Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, MP (Lok Sabha) to the
chair in absence of the Convenor. The Members were then apprised of the agenda of the
meeting viz. hearing of views of experts on functioning of All India Institute of Medical
Sciences.
3. Dr. Sneh Bhargava, Former Director, AIIMS informed the Sub-Committee that the main
cause of downslide of the AIIMS from the vision envisaged for it to serve as a role model
56

57
for other medical institutions was weak internal administration and strong external interference.
Elaborating on her conclusions as drawn above, she dwelt upon the lack of training of Director
in administration and governance, and emphasized need for restructuring the administrative set-
up. She also dwelt on the issues such as need to hold the staff Council meetings on regular
basis; lack of code of conduct for doctors; faculty development, implementation of Assessment
Promotion Scheme etc. She also informed the Committee that the problems inherent to the
AIIMS were complex and a high powered Committee viz. Valiathan Committee gave its report
on the working of AIIMS in 2006. Another High powered Committee was formed on the
implementation of Valiathan Committee which gave its report in February, 2010. Two other
Committees viz.  Professor Maheswari Committee on Internal Governance and Javed
Chaudhary’s Committee on ‘How to retain faculty of AIIMS’ gave their report. She felt that
it seemed that even these have been gathering dust due to lack or willingness to implement the
same. With regard to patient care she was of the opinion that there should be a concept of
filtering and screening OPD patients at AIIMS in view of the huge intake of OPD patients and
treatment of Common ailments may be addressed by peripheral units handled by general duty
doctors. She also felt that AIIMS should take measures to reduce the patient intake in the
Institute to focus on research aspect. She concluded by informing that in matters of
recruitment, 25% seats should be reserved for direct lateral entry to promote fresh talent in
the Institute.
4. Prof. S. K. Jindal from PGIMER, Chandigarh informed the Sub-Committee that there
was a gross mismatch between what was required for clinical research and what was
delivered. He opined that due to doctors being highly over burdened in examining patients,
cutting-edge research was the biggest casualty. He felt that the time had come for
decentralization of Medical services through opening Kiosks at the peripheral limits of the city
so as to reduce the pressure of patients converging at a single hospital premises, thereby
reducing pressure on doctors. On the issue of decision making, he was of the view that a
Group of faculty should be set up which could share responsibility of decision making thereby
decreasing the burden of all decision making on the head of the Medical Institution. He was
in favour of setting up of focused research groups which should focus solely on bringing path-
breaking solutions to various ailments plaguing the country.
5. Dr. KSVK Subba Rao, Director, JIPMER, Puducherry, then shared his experiences on
the working of his Institute. He informed the Sub-Committee that he had the pleasure of being
the Director of an Institute, which was declared an institute of national importance in 2008.
This had helped the Institute in getting greater autonomy to utilize funds as well as seek more
funds for Education, Research and Service component, which was not the case earlier. He was
of the view that for any Institute to function in a streamlined manner, there was a need for
provision of different experts, say, one for administering finance, one for administering
accounts etc. so that the Director/Head of the Institute could focus on planning aspect. On the
issue of AIIMS, he was all for cutting down on patient care load and focusing on research.
He also felt that centres of AIIMS could be set up to look after patient care and AIIMS could
focus on research aspects to re-establish itself as an Institute of National eminence.
6. Lastly, Dr. Srinath Reddy of Public Health Foundation of India submitted before the
Sub Committee that the Institute had been primarily set up for setting new standards and acting
as a catalyst for medical education in the country. He felt that there was a need to set up

58
AIIMS like Institutes to foster competition as well as reduce the pressure on AIIMS. He felt
that in order to provide uniformity in standards set by AIIMS, there should be rotation of
faculty from various Medical Institutes to AIIMS and vice-versa so that the knowledge gained
in medical education is disseminated across the length and breath of medical fraternity.
Alternatively, he felt that a common pool of faculty like the Indian Administrative Service (IAS)
in AIIMS and other Institutes could be set up. He was of the view that AIIMS should not opt
out of UG courses and function as an Institute for PG courses and Super specialty disciplines.
In the field of research, he stated that the quality of research was on the decline due to weak
support structure; lack of collaboration in the field of research, red tapism etc. He was of the
view that there was a need to identify thrust areas for National Interest, some of which can
be open ended. He also felt that there should be inter-disciplinary transfer for proper exposure.
He felt that there should be a provision for inviting a visitor on regular basis from outside
countries in various disciplines so as to get feedback of experiences from foreign medical
professionals. On the issue of patient care, he was of the opinion that there was a need to
set up a network of hospitals for reducing the burden on AIIMS. AIIMS should instead focus
on secondary and tertiary care. There was also a need to undertake computerization and
linkage of patient records to access record of patient from all Departments of AIIMS. On the
issue of governance, he was of the view that all the staff council meetings should be recorded.
There was a need for credible selection systems which must be free from all political
interference and emphasis should be on the basis of direct lateral entry and not on the basis
of entitlement.
7. Members raised some queries which were answered by witnesses. The Sub-Committee
directed the witnesses to send written note on any issue which may have remained
unanswered.
8. A Verbatim Record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Sub-Committee adjourned at 4.30 P.M.

I
FIRST -MEETING
(2011-12)
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday the 30 th September, 2011 in Committee
Room’ A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
5. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
6. Shrimati Harsimarat Kaur Badal
7. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
8. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
9. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
1. Ms. K. Sujatha Rao, Former Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
2. Prof. M.s. V aliathan, National Research Professor, Manipal University, Manipal
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed Members to the first meeting of the
reconstituted Sub-Committee and apprised them of the progress made with respect to the
Sub-Committee’s examination of the functioning of All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS). The Convenor, subsequently, informed the Members about the agenda of the meeting
i.e. hearing the views of Ms. K. Sujatha Rao, former Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare and Prof. M.S. Valiathan, National Research Professor, Manipal on the subject.
59

60
3. Thereafter, the Sub-Committee heard views of Ms. K. Sujatha Rao, Former Secretary;
Department of Health and Family Welfare. Ms. Rao gave a brief presentation before the
Sub-Committee inter-alia sharing her experience as a Secretary in the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare especially with respect to various aspects of the functioning of AIIMS. She
stated that there has been a decline in overall working standards of AIIMS during the last
twenty years. She observed that the main reasons behind this were - the large scale
interference of the Ministry into its day-to-day functioning; large scale demoralization in the
AIIMS staff especially senior faculty as a result of work overload due to increase in patient-
load further compounded by non-filling up of vacancies; delayed decision making due to highly
centralised administrative structure; less autonomy and representation to internal governance;
infrastructure constraints like delay in procurement of advanced/modern hi-tech instruments
like CAT-Scan; dilution in the role from a research and teaching Institute to a general Hospital;
huge trust deficit between AIIMS and Government; non-availability of free drug facility to the
in-patients; lack of realistic Budget for the Institute; and, lack of delegation of powers to the
Director of the Institute to appoint doctors/supporting staff on temporary/contractual basis to
ease out workload and carry out patient-care functions and for taking other decisions for
betterment of the Institution. She suggested that in order to provide functional autonomy,
especially in view of more AIIMS like Institutes coming into existence, there should be
decentralization of powers and the Institute needs to be headed by a professional, not
necessarily a doctor. Such professional should have sound knowledge in Human Resources,
hospital management and stock and inventory management. She also touched upon the V aliathan
Committee Report on the subject. During the presentation, Members raised some queries
which were replied to by Ms. Rao.
4. Thereafter, the Sub-Committee heard the views of Prof. MS. Valiathan, National
Research Professor, Manipal University, Manipal. During his presentation, he gave background
of the Valiathan Committee constituted under his Chairmanship in 2006 with three other
members. He dwelt upon various issues related to Valia than Committee Report as well as the
overall functioning of the AIIMS, which included - the terms of reference of Valiathan
Committee; need to make AIIMS truly professional body oriented towards generating
knowledge and technology for which it was originally conceived; lack of personnel policy in
AIIMS; preponderance of Government officers/Government-nominated members and lack of
representatives from Faculty in the Institute Body/other Committees of the Institute; need for
high quality public health oriented research in the Institute; fixing better criteria for nomination
of members to various Committees/Bodies of the Institute; the need for fixing more rigorous
norms for admission to PG courses of the Institute; and, the issue of expansion of AIIMS etc.
Members raised some queries which were replied to by Dr. V aliathan.
5. A Verbatim Record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Sub-Committee adjourned at 5.11 P.M. and decided to meet again on the 13 th
October, 2011.

II
SECOND MEETING
(2011-12)
The Sub-Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday the 13 th October, 2011 in Committee
Room ‘63', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
6. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
7. Shrimati Harsimarat Kaur Badal
8. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
9. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur)
10. Shri Ashok Argal
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
1. Prof. Subrata Sinha, Director, National Brain Research Centre (NBRC)
2. Prof. Pratap Sharan, Department of Psychiatry, AIIMS
3. Prof. Anoop Saraya, Department of Gastro- enterology, AIIMS
2. At the outset, the Convenor of the Sub-Committee informed members about the
agenda of the meeting i.e. , to hear views of Prof. Subrata Sinha, Director, National Brain
Research Centre, Manesar, Haryana; Prof. Pratap Sharan, Departement of Psychiatry, AIIMS
61

62
and Prof. Anoop Saraya, Department of Gastro-enterology, AIIMS on the functioning of
AIIMS.
3. The Sub-Committee first heard views of Prof. Subrata Sinha. Prof. Sinha expostulated
his views on the functioning of AIIMS in light of the V aliathan Committee Report and the High
Powered Committee Report of Ms. Sujatha Rao on the recommendations of the Valiathan
Committee Report which inter-alia  also included a study undertaken by Prof. Sunil Maheswari
of IIM, Ahmedabad. He was of the view that the V aliathan Committee Report was oriented
more towards making the Institute a revenue generating model. According to him, the main
issue concerning AIIMS was intellectual autonomy and corporatization of AIIMS would hit its
intellectual autonomy. He felt that the main problems plaguing the Institute was lack of Faculty
Development due to negative interpretation of rules thereby making the atmosphere restrictive
instead of an enabling one. He was also of the view that the Director of the Institute should
be from amongst the faculty and political appointments for the post of Director should be
avoided. He also shared his views on incentivisation, Government funding of AIIMS and its
impact on the autonomy of AIIMS. The Members raised some queries which were replied to
by the witnesses.
4. The Committee then heard views of Prof. Pratap Sharan and Prof. Anoop Saraya. Prof
Sharan informed the Sub-Committee that the model of AIIMS based on the AIIMS Act passed
by the Parliament in 1956 had worked well for more than 5 decades and was being replicated
to create six more AIIMS like Institutes in the country. Dr. Sharan shared his views on the
Valiathan Committee Report; structural changes in AIIMS as suggested by the Valiathan
Committee and grievance redressal mechanism in the Institute. Prof. Sharan stressed on the
need for maintaining a balance between Research and Patient care at AIIMS which could be
achieved by increasing the number of faculty which would enable the faculty to devote time
for research activities in addition to meeting the needs of the patients. Besides, he also raised
issues like need for a separate Research Cadre for streamlining research; setting up of a corpus
of National Research; need for integration of AIIMS with National Issues; doing away with
Adhoc  interpretation of Rules; need for doing away with Contractual Appointments;
implementation of a rule based governance rather than ad-hocism; transparency in decision
making; increase in the component of research funding; not compromising the concept of
equity at any cost; the financing of care and education at AIIMS. Prof. Anoop Saraya
emphasized that all efforts for commercialization/corporatisation and outsourcing of clinical
care should be stopped; rules and regulations of the institute should be in line with deemed
university status than as a Central Government department status as this would yield greater
academic and research autonomy and less bureaucratic interference; doing away with
incentivization, need for screening OPD based on medical condition to filter out non-serious
patients; need for the audit of AIIMS done by AGCR and CAG; need for strengthening of the
Peripheral Health Institutes, reduction in bureaucratic red-tapism etc. Members sought some
queries from both Prof. Sharan and Prof. Saraya which were answered by the witnesses.
5. A verbatim Record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Sub-Committee adjourned at 12.45 P.M.

III
THIRD MEETING
(2011-12)
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday the 7 th December, 2011 in Room
No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal —  Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
5. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
6. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
1. Prof. Sukhdeo Thorat, Chairman, Indian Council for Social Science Research
2. Shri P.S. Krishnan, Former Member Secretary, National Commission for Backward
Classes
3. Dr L. R. Murmu, Additional Professor, Forum for Rights and Equality, AIIMS.
4. Dr. Debjyoti Karmakar, President and Dr. Bhaumik Shah, Representative, Resident
Doctors’ Association, AIIMS.
5. Shri Harshit Garg, Finance Secretary; Shri Himanshu Kanwat, General Secretary,
Students Union and Ms. Komal Parmar, Student, AIIMS.
6. Shri Rupesh Kumar Tyagi, Chairman and Shri Sanjay Kumar, General Secretary,
Society of Y oung Scientists, AIIMS
63

64
Representatives from Ministry of Health and Family Welfar e and AIIMS
1. Shri Debasis Panda, Joint Secretary
2. Dr. G. K. Rath, Chief of IRCS, AIIMS.
3. Dr. Rakesh Yadav, Sub-Dean, AIIMS
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the members of the Sub-Committee and apprised
them about the agenda of the meeting  i.e. , to hear views of the experts and representatives
of various associations and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and AIIMS on (i) the
implementation of reservation policy in AIIMS; and (ii) the various aspects relating to
functioning of AIIMS.
3. The Sub-Committee first heard views of Prof. L.R. Murmu, on the functioning of
AIIMS with regard to implementation of reservation policy. He pointed out the deficiencies in
the implementation of reservation policy in AIIMS like MBBS and PG level; Sr. Residency and
Post Doctorate level and in Nursing department.
4. Thereafter, the Sub-Committee heard views of Prof. Sukhadeo Thorat, who highlighted
various points for implementation of reservation policy in faculty at the level of Assistant
Professor, Associate Professor and Professor; inadequacies of floating system of reservation as
followed in AIIMS and the resultant deficit in reserved posts; non-implementation of
reservation policy in AIIMS as per Government guidelines; treatment of backlog vacancies as
shortfall being errornous; need for due representation of SC/ST/OBC students, staff and
teachers, on all the committees of AIIMS to safeguard their interests; factors impacting
observance of reservation policy; setting up of expert committee for resolving the problem of
reservation. Further, he felt that there was a need for framing administrative guidelines by
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to address the discrimination related issues inside the
educational institutions throughout the length and breadth of the country.
5. Shri P.S. Krishnan gave a brief overview on reservation policy for backward castes in
the institute. He was of the view of that backlog in all posts must be cleared at AIIMS first
of all and then fresh recruitments should be made. He also highlighted certain cases of
discrimination with students belonging to weaker sections in the Institute. He also advocated
reservation in private medical institutions.
6. Thereafter, the Sub-Committee heard the views of the representatives of Resident
Doctors Association, Students’ Union and Society of Young Scientists in AIIMS. Dr. Karmakar,
highlighted the following points viz . lack of transparency in many matters dealt by
administration at AIIMS; absence of a vision charter, jmasterplan; loopholes in recruitment
procedures and ambiguity in reservation in MBBS, MD; unimpressive leadership in areas of
vital concern like research; growing concern about mishandling of funds in respect to
procurement of equipments; non-percolation of benefit with regard to international collaboration
to MBBS students and difficulty in getting scholarships; contractual appointments; need for
corrective measures to set right perceived corruption in examinations; need for streamlining the
various components of lab and diagnostic services; need for establishment of screening OPDs
to filter out critical ailments. Representatives from Student Union, AIIMS raised issues like lack
of a proper procurement policy; need for regular interface between administration and students;

65
installing CCTV cameras for security purposes and absence of proper reservation mechanism
for Students from AIIMS for Post Graduate seats. Besides, the issue of plagiarism and the role
of Medical Superintendent being made redundant also figured in the discussion.
7. The representatives from the Society of Young Scientists highlighted the disparity in the
duration of fellowship program offered in AIIMS vis-a.-vis  other medical institutes in-as-much
as it was being offered only for six months against that of five years offered by other
institutes.
8. Members sought some queries which were answered by the witnesses. The Convenor
asked the witnesses to furnish their further submissions, if any, in writing to enable the
Committee to examine them holistically.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Sub-Committee was adjourned at 5.30 P.M.

IV
FOURTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday the 14 th December, 2011 in Room
No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Derek O' Brien
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
5. Shri Datta Meghe
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESS
Prof. P.K. Dave, Former Director, AIIMS
Representatives from Faculty Association, AIIMS
1. Dr. Manoj Singh, President
2. Dr. Lalit Dar, General Secretary
3. Dr. B.K. Khaitan, Past President
4. Dr. Vijay Sharma, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed members of the Sub-Committee and apprised
them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. , to hear the views of (i) Prof. P.K. Dave, Former
Director, AIIMS; and (ii) Dr. Manoj Singh, President, Faculty Association, AIIMS along with
his colleagues.
66

67
3. The Sub-Committee first heard the views of Prof. P.K. Dave on the administrative
reforms in AIIMS, Prof. Dave shared his experiences on the working of the Institute. He
highlighted the following points for improvement in the functioning of AIIMS viz. making
AIIMS a referral hospital as the same would reduce the patient load and help the faculty to
devote more time for teaching and research work; need for according complete autonomy to
AIIMS as envisaged in the Bill piloted by Smt. Rajkumari Amrit Kaur in 1956; need to identify
thrust areas in the planned budget of the governing body at the beginning of each year which
would result in increase in the clinical & research facilities and development aspects; proper
implementation of envisioned development plan in various centres, convention centre and other
infrastructural facilities; filling of all the vacant posts; regular holding of meetings of standing
committee, internal meetings (faculty meeting and staff council), etc.
4. Thereafter, the Sub-Committee heard the views of Dr. Manoj Singh and others on
various aspects of the functioning of AIIMS. He pointed out that the issues affecting
functioning of AIIMS are: lack of channels of communication between various sections; lack
of governance in AIIMS; holding up the promotion of 39 faculty members and redressal
mechanism to address their grievances; absence of rules and regulations; lack of proper manual
of administrative procedures, financial procedures, store purchase procedures, vigilance
matters; in-action on recommendations of the various reports including Valiathan Committee,
2006, Committee on Subordinate Legislation on AIIMS regulations, 2008, High Powered
Committee, 2010. He also highlighted some suggestions for improving the functioning of
AIIMS viz. presence of four elected members in Institute body; framing rules & regulations
and office procedure manuals; accountability for administrative malfeasance; improvement in
internal governance at AIIMS; implementing one man one post norm; fixed calendar for the
faculty appointments, recruitment of new faculty members against all existing vacancies at the
Assistant Professor level; preparat ion of Mission Statement and goals; finalization of AIIMS
Master Plan in line with the Mission Statement; broad based research/medical education/ patient
care in the form of consortium with ICMR,DBT ,DST,PGI and other international institutions of
repute, etc.
5. Members raised some queries which were answered by witnesses. The Convenor
directed the witnesses to send further suggestions, if any, which the witnesses would like to
share with the Sub-Committee for improving the functioning of AIIMS within a week’s time.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Sub-Committee was adjourned at 4.05 P.M.

V
FIFTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Sub-Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 28 th February, 2012 in
Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shri Derek O' Brien
6. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
8. Shri Ashok Argal
9. Shrimati Harsimrat Kaur Badal
10. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur)
11. Dr. Monazir Hassan
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
WITNESSES
Shri K.B. Saxena, Former Secretary, Government of India
Ministry of Urban Development
Shri D. Diptivilasa, Additional Secretary
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri Vineet Chawdhary, Deputy Director (AIIMS)
2. Shri Debashish Panda, Joint Secretary
68

69
Ministry of Science and Technology
Dr. M. K. Bhan, Secretary, Department of Biotechnology
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed Members of the Sub-Committee and apprised
them about the agenda of the meeting,  i.e. , to hear the views of (i) Sh. K. B. Saxena, Former
Secretary, Government of India, (ii) Sh. D. Diptivilasa, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Development alongwith representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare and All
India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and (iiii) Dr. M. K. Bhan, Secretary, Department
of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology, on the various aspects relating to
functioning of AIIMS.
3. The Sub-Committee first heard the views of Shri K. B. Saxena, Former Secretary,
Government of India on the functioning of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS).
Shri Saxena stated that during his tenure as the Health Secretary, AIIMS was managed
according to good administrative practices. However, the deterioration of the Institute set in
when a blind eye was turned to all the rules and recruitments in the institution were made
in violation of all rules especially in matters of reservation in the Institute. To compound
this, user charges were introduced on all and sundry irrespective of the economic well-being
of the patient who came to the Institute for treatment. He felt that even though the Institute
was still rated as a best institution, it suffered from basic governance problems. He
submitted that two major kind of problems were facing the Institute (a) poor Personnel
Management and (b) irregular Financial Management. On the Personnel Management front, he
was of the view that the best way to avoid the mess created in the recruitments was to hand
over recruitment of medical doctors to an autonomous body like UPSC and those of medical
staff to SSC, which could objectively handle the recruitments by ensuring filling of seats as
per Government Rules. He was of the view that the established structure was not working
as per the expectations and was leading to lack of transparency and accountability. With
regard to Financial Management, he informed the Committee that in order to ensure proper
accounting procedures, a Selection Committee should be put in place with impetus on well
defined procedures to ensure objective selection of the person who would head the Finance
Department of AIIMS, who could work independently without undue pressure or interference
from the Ministry of Finance or Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. He strongly favoured
the financial autonomy of the institute and objected to any proposal for drawing money
outside the Government for managing the Institute. The Convenor requested the witness to
send further suggestions, if any, which the witness would like to share with the Sub-
Committee for improving the functioning of AIIMS within a week’s time. The Sub-Committee
also directed that a note on action taken against the persons involved in irregularities in
AIIMS should be sought from the Department of Health and Family Welfare. Members raised
some queries which were answered by the witness.
4. Thereafter, the Sub-Committee heard the views of Shri D. Diptivilasa, Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development on the issue of land use change from ‘Residential’
to ‘Institutional or Hospital’ with regard to land available at Masjid Moth Campus of AIIMS in
order to enable AIIMS to carry out its redevelopment plans. Shri Diptivilasa, Additional
Secretary, informed that at a meeting held on 15 th February, 2012, it was suggested that given
the nature of health care facilities proposed at the said land and need for expediting the matter,

70
the change of the land use measuring 12.99 hectare owned by AIIMS at Masjid Moth may be
moved separately and not clubbed with other cases of land use change. In pursuance to this,
the proposal for change of the land use of land measuring 12.99 hectare owned by AIIMS at
Masjid Moth from ‘Residential’ to ‘Public’ and ‘Semi-Public’ (PS-1, Hospital) has been moved
separately and is under active consideration of the Ministry. The Sub-Committee felt that there
has been undue delay in the issue of land usage change, since the proposal was moved in 2005
and nothing has happened till date. The Sub-Committee directed the Ministry to provide
information on the reasons for delay and the names of the persons responsible for this
inord-inate delay along with (i) copies of correspondence between DDA and Ministry of Urban
Development; (ii) Minutes of meetings of the Ministry held in this regard. The Sub- Committee
also sought to know, the other proposals for land use change passed by the Ministry of Urban
Development during the period. The Sub-Committee directed the Ministry of Urban
Development to expedite the matter. The representatives of the Department of Health and
Family Welfare informed that after the notification for land use change is received from the
Ministry of Urban Development, the Department of Health and Family Welfare would move
forward to get the building plans approved from NDMC and construction of 3 new blocks
would be started on the land in consonance with the redevelopment plans of AIIMS. The Sub-
Committee sought to know from the Department of Health and Family Welfare, the steps taken
by it to pursue the matter with the Ministry of Urban Development. Members made some
queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The Convenor directed the witnesses to send
further suggestions, if any, which the witnesses would like to share with the Sub-Committee,
within a week’s time.
(The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 1.00 P.M. to meet again at 2.00 P.M.)
5. The Sub-Committee then heard the views of Dr. M. K. Bhan, Secretary, and
Department of Biotechnology on research aspects pertaining to AIIMS. Dr. Bhan made a
power-point presentation on the importance of research in premier medical institutions
including AIIMS. He was of the view that provision of funds for research alone could not
ensure a strong research base for the country. He informed that a strong base of researchers
needed to be set up, as the gestation period in the field of research to fructify was very long
ranging from 10 to 15 years. To ensure this, stability in value systems was not enough, there
was a strong urge to adapt to the changing times. He dwelt at length on the importance of
research for medical schools. He was of the view that in order to ensure cutting edge
research, there was a need to focus more on the biology of disease instead of just focusing
on studying the biology of cells. The concept of Doctor need not be seen just as a patient
healer but also as a health-economist, researcher etc. There was an urgent need to treat
hospital as one part of medical school and not as a be-all and end-all focus of a doctor
employed there. He further dwelt on the (i) need for division of research into Basic Medical
Research, Clinical Research, Translational Research; (ii) need for diverse talent pool required
for each type of research; (iii) formation of a separate eco-system; (iv) creation of centres
which would support department structures which could be compartmentalized under four
heads i.e. (a) Infectious disease centre; (b) Chronic disease centre; (c) Nutrition centre and
(d) Health Systems Research Centre; (v) need for Ministry to distinguish between Hospital
Medical Centres and Academic Medical Centres; (vi) need for setting up ‘Academic Medical
Schools’ throughout the country; (vii) setting up of centralized research resources for each

71
type of research; (viii) Financial Resources for research not only from Government but also
from the Private Sector etc. The Members then raised certain queries which were replied to
by Dr. Bhan. The Convenor asked him to send further suggestions, if any, which he would
like to share with the Sub-Committee, within a week’s time.
6. The Sub-Committee then took cognizance of a letter received in this Secretariat,
wherein serious allegations were levelled against Deputy Director (Admn.), AIIMS in respect
of major works being carried out in the AIIMS. The Sub-Committee directed the Secretariat
to seek clarifications from the Ministry in the regard.
7. A verbatim Record of the proceedings of the Committee was kept.
8. The Sub-Committee adjourned at 3.35 P.M.

VI
SIXTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Sub-Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 10 th May, 2012 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal —  Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Derek O’ Brien
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
5. Shri Ashok Argal
6. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
7. Shrimati Harsimrat Kaur Badal .
8. Dr. Monazir Hassan
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu,  Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Joint Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint  Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
WITNESSES
Ministry of Personnel and Public Grievances and Pensions,  (Department of
Personnel and Training)
1. Shri Manoj Joshi, Joint Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training
Ministry of Law and Justice  (Department of Legal Affairs)
2. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor, Department of Legal Affairs
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  (Department of Health and Family Welfare)
3. Shri Keshav Desiraju, Special Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
72

73
4. Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
5. Shri Rakesh Y adav, Sub-Dean, AIIMS
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed Members of the Sub-Committee and apprised
them about the agenda of the meeting, i.e. , to hear the views of (i) Shri Manoj Joshi, Joint
Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training, (ii) Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and
Legal Advisor, Department of Legal Affairs, (iiii) Shri Keshav Desiraju, Special Secretary,
Department of Health and Family Welfare along with representatives of the Department and
AIIMS on the issue of implementation of reservation of SCs, STs and OBCs in the All India
Institute of Medical Sciences(AIIMS).
3. The Sub-Committee first heard the views of Manoj Joshi, Joint Secretary, Department
of Personnel and Training on issue. Shri Joshi stated that the Cabinet Secretariat had
constituted a Committee on 11.02.2009 to examine the matter regarding the special recruitment
drive by AIIMS for SCs, STs and OBCs for filling up 92 vacancies in the Grades of Assistant
Professor, Associate Professor, Additional Professor and professor in the Year 2008 with the
representatives from DOPT, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and D/o Legal Affairs. The
Report of the said Committee had been forwarded to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
in 2009, but there had been no communication from the Ministry Of Health and Family on the
action taken by the Ministry on the said Report. Members raised certain queries viz.  the
difference between shortfall. vacancy and backlog reserved vacancies, what is floating
reservation, procedure for de-reserving a reserved post, applicability of DOPT guidelines to
AIIMS in respect of reservation which were partly answered to by the witness. Thereafter, the
Sub-Committee heard the views of Shri Keshav Desiraju, Special Secretary, Department of
Health and Family Welfare on the issue of implementation of reservation policy in AIIMS.
Members raised certain queries like how reserved posts can be excluded from the purview of
reservation, whether Deputy Director (Administration), AIIMS can hold the charge of Chief
Vigilance Officer, period for which a joint secretary of the Ministry can remain on deputation
etc. which were partly answered to by the witness. The Sub-Committee felt that the answers
given by the witnesses of the Department of Personnel and Training and Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare were far from satisfactory. The Sub-Committee therefore decided to call the
Secretaries of (i) Department of Personnel and Training (ii) Department of Legal Affairs and
(iii) Department of Health and Family Welfare on 21 st May 2012 to have a proper perspective
on the issue of implementation of reservation in AIIMS.
4. A verbatim Record of the proceedings of the Sub-Committee was kept.
5. The Sub-Committee adjourned at 4.45 P.M.

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 21st May, 2012 in Committee
Room’ A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — Convenor
LOK SABHA
2. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
3. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
4. Shrimati Harsimrat Kaur Badal
5. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
6. Dr. Monazir Hassan
7. Shri Ratan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
WITNESSES
Ministry of Personnel and Public Grievances and Pensions,  (Department of
Personnel and Training)
1. Shri P.K. Misra, Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training
2. Shri Manoj Joshi, Joint Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training
Ministry of Law and Justice  (Department of Legal Affairs)
1. Dr. B.A. Agrawal, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs
2. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor, Department of Legal Affairs
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare ( Department of Health and Family Welfare)
Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
Shri Rakesh Yadav , Sub-Dean, AIIMS
74

75
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed Members of the Sub-Committee and apprised
them about the agenda of the meeting,  i.e. , to hear the views of Secretaries of Departments
of Personnel and Training and Legal Affairs and Joint Secretary of Department of Health and
Family Welfare along with Sub-Dean of AIIMS on the issue of implementation of reservation
policy in the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS).
3. The Sub-Committee first heard the views of Secretary, Department of Personnel and
Training on the issue. The Secretary, during his deposition, inter alia stated that there
were five backlog reserved vacancies of STs and 5 backlog reserved vacancies of OBCs
in the grade of Assistant Professor in 2005. AIIMS filled up all the above vacancies by
other category candidates which was a violation of the extant reservation rules of
Government of India. He also submitted that recruitment rules pertaining to reservation are
equally applicable for Government as well as autonomous bodies, but the ultimate authority
of implementation of the same is in hands of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
He also stated that each autonomous body has their own governing body which governs
the functioning of institute. He was of the view that in the process of recruitment at
AIIMS, rules of reservation  i.e.  15% SCs, 7.5% STs, 27% OBCs as laid by the
Government in filling of the posts in AIIMS were not followed in principle. He also
highlighted the difference of the shortfall of vacancies and backlog reserved vacancies,
stating that the vacancies which had been filled up by other category candidates fall in the
category of shortfall of vacancies. The backlog reserved vacancies are treated as a
separate group on which ceiling of 50% limit does not apply. He further stated that AIIMS
being an autonomous body, the administration of AIIMS is responsible for taking
appropriate action.
4. During the course of the meeting the members raised a number of queries like -
whether the due process was followed to fill the vacant posts at AIIMS, process of
de-reservation, existence of any variation in rules of recruitment between Government
and autonomous bodies, etc., which were answered by witnesses. The Convenor directed
the witnesses to send further suggestions, if any, which the witnesses would like to
share with the Sub-Committee for improving the functioning of AIIMS within a week’s
time.
5. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs stated that it is the responsibility of the
concerned Ministry to look into any kind of mismanagement and the Ministry of Law and
Justice cannot interfere in such kind of affairs. He also opined that the matter can be taken
to the Cabinet for further course of action or alternatively the matter could be taken up by
aggrieved person, suo-motu  action could be taken by the Court, or the Standing Committee
could highlight the same by way of recommendations, etc.
6. During the course of meeting, the Sub-Committee discussed the following issues,
namely, allocation of business rules, authority of Institute body of AIIMS, seniority benefits for
ad-hoc appointees, process of de-reservation at AIIMS, on going process of recruitment at
AIIMS, etc.

76
7. Members raised some queries which were answered by witnesses. The Convenor
directed the witnesses to send further suggestions, if any, which the witnesses would
like to share with the Sub-Committee for improving the functioning of AIIMS within a
week’s time.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Sub-Committee was kept.
9. The Sub-Committee adjourned at 4.45 
P.M. and decided to meet again on the
31st May, 2012.

VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 31 st May, 2012 in Committee
Room’ A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardhan Dwivedi
LOK SABHA
3. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
4. Shri Ashok Argal
5. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
6. Dr. Monazir Hassan
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
WITNESSES
1. Dr. Seema Rao, Ex-Assistant Professor, Pathology , MAMC
2. Dr. Kameshwar Prasad, HOD, Neurology, AIIMS
3. Dr. S.K. Sharma, HOD, Medicine, AIIMS
4. Dr. H.H. Dash, HOD, Neuro-anaesthesia, AIIMS
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed Members of the Sub-Committee and apprised
them about the agenda of the meeting, i.e. , to hear the views of various witnesses on the
functioning of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS).
3. The Sub-Committee first heard the views of Dr. Seema Rao. She stated that a lot of
ambiguity in the interview procedures for different posts being held at AIIMS right now is
there. She cited some examples where candidates who did not even fulfill the eligibility criteria,
were selected. She also informed that this was demeaning to the Governing body, AIIMS as
77

78
the interviews were conducted by the Selection Committee, AIIMS without consulting the
governing body.
4. Dr. Kameshwar Prasad, HOD, Neurology, AIIMS focused his presentation under four
headings viz. governance, research, patient care and medical education. He suggested the
implementation of Central university model with inclusion of faculty members along with
director in Governing body of an Institution, rotating headships with all perks and facilities
according to government pay scales; conduct of nationally relevant research, balance between
company funded research and internal research done by faculty members; formulation of
stringent rules to accept the investigation reports done at AIIMS only to improvise patient care;
introduction of innovative techniques in medical education system, appointment of the
competent and capable candidate as Dean and not according to the seniority of the candidates,
for improving the functioning of AIIMS.
5. Thereafter, Dr. S.K. Sharma, HoD, Medicine, AIIMS made his presentation,  inter-alia
highlighting the importance of department of medicine in any medical college viz-a-viz the very
poor status of bed strength, faculty strength, lecture theatres in department of medicines at
AIIMS. He also informed the Sub-Committee about the inordinate delay in considering the
proposal for introduction of DM Pulmonary Medicine course in Department of Medicine,
shifting of DOTS center away from the main Department in his absence without consulting
him, refusal for permission to attend Canadian International Health Research on T.B Research,
various administrative issues and grievances, unequal and heavily biased criteria of
appointments of HoDs of various departments, difficulties in purchase of state-of-the art
equipments for the department of medicine, issues related to infrastructure, laboratory
facilities, security and parking issues at AIIMS etc.
6. Dr. H.H. Dash, ex-HOD, Neuro-Anaesthesia, AIIMS, made his presentation under three
headings viz.  education, patient care and governance wherein he stressed the need for
accountability in improving teaching and training programmes, provisions for English to Hindi
translation in teaching at AIIMS; centralization of all services including laboratory services,
accountability of faculty in OPD clinics, auditing of equipments, medicines & patient care
services; enhancement of autonomy & financial powers of chief of center etc. During the
course of the meeting the members raised a number of queries some of which were answered
by witnesses. The Convenor directed the witnesses to send further suggestions, if any, which
the witnesses would like to share with the Sub-Committee for improving the functioning of
AIIMS within a week’s time.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Sub-Committee was kept.
9. The Sub-Committee adjourned at 4.45 P.M.

IX
NINTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 8 th June, 2012 in Committee
Room ‘Main’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — Convenor
LOK SABHA
2. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
3. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
4. Dr. Monazir Hassan
5. Shri Ratan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
WITNESSES
Representatives from Ministry of Urban Development
1. Shri D. Diptivilasa, Additional Secretary
2. Shri G . S. Patnaik, Vice-Chancellor -DDA
3. Shri Ashok Kumar, Commissioner (Plg.), DDA
Representatives from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri P. K. Pradhan, Secretary
2. Shri Keshav Desiraju, Special Secretary, Health and Family Welfare
3. Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary
Representatives from All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
1. Dr. R. C. Deka, Director, AIIMS
2. Shri Vineet Chaudhary, Deputy Director (Admn.),
3. Shri Rakesh Yadav, Sub-Dean (AIIMS)
79

80
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed Members of the Sub-Committee and apprised
them about the agenda of the meeting, i.e. , to hear the views of various witnesses on the
functioning of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS).
3. The Sub-Committee first heard the views of Shri D. Diptivilasa. He informed the
Committee that the issue regarding conversion of land behind AIIMS from ‘residential’ to
public/hospital had been cleared by the Ministry of Urban Development on 15 th May,2012 and
the Ministry is in the process of issuing notification in this regard within 3-4 days.
4. The Sub-Committee then heard the views of Shri P.K. Pradhan, Secretary, Department
of Health and Family Welfare along with Director and Deputy Director(Admn.),AIIMS on
various issues concerning the functioning of AIIMS viz.-delay in taking of charge by the new
Chief Vigilance Officer(CVO) and reasons therefore; steps taken for divesting of charge of
CVO from the present Deputy Director(Admn.); implementation of reservation policy in AIIMS
and steps being taken to fill the backlog vacancies in view of opinion given by Department of
Personnel to treat vacancies in the reserved category as backlog vacancies; allegation of
radiotherapy treatment of dog being conducted in AIIMS; Interviews for various faculty posts
being conducted without the approval of General Body (G.B.) and appointment letters being
issued without G.B. approval; latest position with regard the scientific and technical posts in
AIIMS; roadmap for appointment to all posts remaining vacant in AIIMS; criteria for selection
while conducting interviews to various posts; details of minutes/ agenda of meetings of
Standing Committees, General Body and Institute Body during the last five years; engagement
of persons in contractual positions; allotment of out of turn Government accommodation which
were partly answered to by the witnesses. Members also sought information from the Ministry
on (i) records of all interviews held recently for recruitment of faculty posts Department-wise;
and (ii) rules/practices being followed by AIIMS regarding (a) allotment of accommodation and
(b) allocation/use of cars.
5. The Convenor directed the witnesses to send further suggestions, if any, which the
witnesses would like to share with the Sub-Committee for improving the functioning of AIIMS
along with queries remaining unanswered within a week’s time.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Sub-Committee was kept.
7. The Sub-Committee adjourned at 5.45 P.M.

II
SECOND MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 18 th September, 2014 in Room
No. ‘139’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Shri Vijay Goel
5. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
6. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
7. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
8. Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem
9. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Thangso Baite
11. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
12. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
13. Dr. K. Kamaraj
14. Shri Arjunlal Meena
15. Shri Chirag Paswan
16. Shri M.K. Raghavan
17. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
18. Shri Alok Sanjar
19. Dr. Mahesh Sharma
20. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
21. Shri Raj Kumar Singh
22. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
23. Shrimati Rita Tarai
81

82
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
*                                        *                                        *
*                                        *                                        *
I. Opening Remarks
2 .                                           *                                        *
3. The Chairman sought the views of the Members of the Committee on the subjects
deliberated in the last meeting. After some discussions, it was decided that the following
subjects may be selected by the Committee for examination and report-
( i ) *                                        *                                        *
(ii) W orking of *** and All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
(iii) *                                       *                                       *
(iv) *                                       *                                       *
( v ) *                                        *                                        *
(vi) *                                       *                                       *
4 . *                                        *                                        *
I I . *                                        *                                        *
5 . *                                        *                                        *
6 . *                                        *                                        *
7 . *                                        *                                        *
8 . *                                        *                                        *
9 . *                                        *                                        *
1 0 . *                                        *                                        *
1 1 . *                                        *                                        *
*** Relate to other matters

V
FIFTH MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 12 th November, 2014 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Vijay Goel
4. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
5. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
6. Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem
7. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Thangso Baite
9. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
10. Dr. K. Kamaraj
11. Shri Arjunlal Meena
12. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
13. Shri Chirag Paswan
14. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
15. Shri Alok Sanjar
16. Shrimati Rita Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
83

84
WITNESSES
Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri Lov Verma, Secretary
2. Shri Arun Kumar Panda, Additional Secretary
*                         *                         *
Representatives from all India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
l. Prof. M. C. Mishra, Director
2. Dr. D. K. Sharma, Medical Superintendent
3. Dr. Amit Gupta, Additional Professor
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised
them of the agenda of the meeting, i.e. , to hear the Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare on * * * and (ii) the functioning of All India Institute of Medical
Science (AIIMS).
I I . *                         *                         *
3 . *                         *                         *
4 . *                         *                         *
III. Oral evidence on the functioning of All India Institute of Medical Science
(AIIMS)
5. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare on the functioning of AIIMS. He inter alia submitted that the AIIMS, Delhi was
set up with the mission of providing medical education, research and patient care in the
country. At present AIIMS has a total of 52 Departments out of which twenty-five are clinical
departments including six super-specialty centres that manage practically all types of disease
conditions with support from pre-clinical and para-clinical departments. AIIMS also runs a 60
bedded hospital and the Comprehensive Rural Health Centre at Ballabhgarh in Haryana. Dr. Amit
Gupta, Additional Professor, AIIMS made a power point presentation on AIIMS delineating the
following points  viz.  organizational structure of AIIMS; courses offered in undergraduate and
postgraduate level; training opportunities; Extramural Research and Intramural Research
Projects (2014-15) being undertaken; landmark Research of National importance being
conducted in the field of malnutrition, Diarrhoeal & liver diseases etc.; National Programmes
and Policies influenced by research done at AIIMS like Integrated Child Development Scheme,
Universal iodization of Salt, Hepatitis vaccination Policy; main hospital, centres and outreach of
AIIMS; total Bed strength (2428 out which 2164 for general & 264 for private); increasing
trend of patient load creating difficulties; landmarks made by AIIMS; computerization and
*** Relate to other matters

85
digitisation of current facilties for increasing efficiency and bringing transparency in the
function of AIIMS; ongoing/sanctioned projects in AIIMS, etc.
6. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries namely , insufficient night shelters in AIIMS;
need to expand the campus of AIIMS; lack of facilities at AIIMS like institutions in Bhopal and
Jodhpur; method of social and economic evaluation of person below poverty line who does not
have BPL card; list of medicines being supplied free in AIIMS; need for increasing budgetary
support to AIIMS; quality of research; maintaining Electronic Health Record(EHR); need to set
limit for waiting time of patients; need to appoint patient counselors in the Institute on regular
basis; mortality rate including infant mortality rate in AIIMS; need to conduct regular meetings
of five Committees of AIIMS as well as AIIMS like institutions; lack of residential
accommodation for faculty in AIIMS; reasons for large number of vacancies in faculty and
non-faculty posts in AIIMS, etc. The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare,
Director, AIIMS and other Officers replied to some of the queries raised by Members of the
Committee.
7. The Chairman then raised certain questions regarding the functioning of AIIMS and
sought detailed note thereon for consideration of the Committee within a week on the issues
raised by him and other Members of the Committee which remained unanswered during the
course of the meeting.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 4.10 P.M.

IX
NINTH MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Friday, the 16 th January, 2015 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde
3. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
4. Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem
5. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
7. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Dr. K. Kamaraj
10. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
11. Shri Chirag Paswan
12. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
13. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
14. Shri Raj Kumar Singh
15. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
16. Shri Manohar Untwal
17. Shri Akshay Yadav
18. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
86

87
WITNESSES
Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri Arun Kumar Panda, Additional Secretary
2 . *                         *                         *
3. Shri Ali R. Rizvi, Joint Secretary
4. Prof. M. C. Mishra, Director, AIIMS
5. Shri V . Srinivas, Dy. Director (Admn.), AIIMS
6. Dr. D.K. Sharma, M.S, AIIMS
7 . *                         *                         *
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised
them of the agenda of the meeting, i.e. , to hear the concerned Additional Secretaries,
Department of Health and Family Welfare on (i) the functioning of All India Institute of Medical
Sciences (AIIMS); and *   *   * The Chairman then recalled that in the last meeting held on
the 22 nd December, 2014, Members had sought more time to examine in greater detail the
various issues concerning AIIMS before finalizing the Report. Similarly, subsequent to listening
to representatives of IMA on functioning of CGHS in the meeting of Committee held on 19th
November, 2014, it was decided to hear the Ministry on the issues raised by the IMA
representatives. Accordingly, the Health Secretary had been invited to depose before the
Committee on both the subjects. However, the Secretary had expressed his inability to appear
before the Committee and sought exemption from personal appearance as he has been
scheduled to visit Barabanki District, Uttar Pradesh, during 14-16 January, 2015 as per the
direction of Hon’ble Prime Minister and requested to allow Shri Arun Kumar Panda, Additional
Secretary along with Director (AIIMS) for presentation on AIIMS and *   *   * on his behalf
which had been acceded to. *   *
I I . *                         *                         *
3 . *                         *                         *
4 . *                         *                         *
5 . *                         *                         *
III. Oral evidence on the functioning of All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS)
6. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of Shri Arun Kumar Panda, Additional
Secretary and representatives of AIIMS on the functioning of AIIMS. Shri Panda inter alia
submitted that on the issue of reservation, the Government had constituted an Inter-Ministerial
*** Relate to other matters

88
Committee comprising of the representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare,
Department of Legal Affairs and Department of Personnel and Training to implement the
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 16.1.2014, on the said issue, which would be
implemented by the Department of Personnel and Training (DOPT). On the issue of
Assessment Promotion Scheme, the Committee was informed that lateral entry had reduced. On
the issue of Clinical Trials, it was submitted that all rules and regulations were being adhered
to and regarding procurement, it was informed that all General Financial Rules were being
adhered to. On the issue of plagiarism, it was informed that the Institute was against plagiarism
of any kind and lastly there was no deterioration in functioning of AIIMS and the Institute
adhered to highest standards of care. Dr . V . Srinivas, Deputy Director(Administration), AIIMS
gave a brief history of the genesis and implementation of reservation in AIIMS and informed
that since 2009-10, the reservation policy is being implemented in letter and spirit.
7. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries namely, the number of professors in the
reserved categories since the last 16 years when the Institute has started implementation of
reservation including the Other Backward Classes(OBCs); figures of backlog in reservation;
updated status of corruption in the Institute; measures taken/being taken to address the issue
of long waiting period for surgeries; reports in media of devices purchased by the Institute but
lying idle due to non-installation; procedure for selection of faculty; measures taken to curb
overcrowding in the Institute and need to introduce more super-speciality centres; residential
facilities for the faculty and staff; status of implementation of the V aliathan Committee Report
etc. Shri Panda, Additional Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Director,
AIIMS and other Officers replied to some of the queries raised by Members of the Committee
and assured to furnish written replies of those queries which remained unanswered within a
week’s time.
8. The Chairman then raised certain questions regarding the functioning of AIIMS And
sought detailed note thereon for consideration of the Committee by the first week of
February, 2015.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10 The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M.

XXIV
TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday the 3rd August, 2015 in Room No. ‘67’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde
3. Dr.R. Lakshmanan
4. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
6. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shri Arjunlal Meena
10. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
11. Shrimati Ranjanben Bhatt
12. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
13. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
1. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and briefed them
about the agenda of the meeting i.e.  to consider and adopt the draft 87th Report on the
Functioning of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS).
89

90
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the draft 87 th  Report on the
Functioning of All India Institute of Medical Sciences. Few changes were suggested by
Members for incorporation in the Report. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the
said Report with some modifications. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Report may
be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on a before Tuesday,
the 11 th  August, 2015. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence,
Shri Jairam Ramesh and Dr. T.N. Seema to present the Report in Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Heena
Vijay kumar Gavit and in her absence, Dr.Shrikant Eknath Shinde to lay the Report on the
Table of the Lok Sabha.
4 . *                         *                         *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE -I
COMPOSITION OF THE MAIN COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shrimati B. Jayashree
4. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
& 7. Shri Rasheed Masood
8. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
9. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
10. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
14. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
15. Shrimati Priya Dutt
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
18. Dr. Monazir Hassan
19. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
20. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P. T. Thomas
31. V acant
& V acant vide  disqualification as a member of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) w.r.t. 19 th September, 2013.
93

94
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta , Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

COMPOSITION OF THE MAIN COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
*3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. V acant
9. Shri H. K. Dua
10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
@11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shri Kirti Azad
13. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
14. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
15. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
16. Shrimati Priya Dutt
17. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
18. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
19. Dr. Monazir Hassan
20. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P. T. Thomas
#31. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f . 28 th October, 2012.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee  w.e.f . 9 th January, 2013.
# Nominated as a Member to the Committee w.e.f.  14 th December, 2012.
95

96
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

COMPOSITION OF THE MAIN COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
*2. Shri Janardhan Dwivedi
%3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shri Balbir Punj
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
^8. Shri Rasheed Masood
9. Shrimati B. Jayashree
10. Shri Derek O’Brien
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ashok Argal
&& 12. Shrimati Harsimrat Kaur Badal
@13. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
14. Shrimati Raj Kumari Chauhan
15. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Dr. Monazir Hassan
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
19. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai
20. Shri P. Lingam
21. Shri Datta Meghe
22. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
 23. Dr. Chinta Mohan
24. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
25. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
26. Shri M. K. Raghavan
27. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
30. Shri Ratan Singh
31. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
* Ceased to be a Member w.e.f  27 th January, 2012 and re-nominated to the Committee on 2nd February, 2012.
% Vacant vide  resignation w.e.f . 2 nd April, 2012.
^ Vacant vide resignation w.e.f  9 th March, 2012 and renominated as Member w.e.f. 04 th May, 2012 and Member of
Sub Committee II on CGHS w.e.f.  01 st June, 2012.
&&Ceased to be a member w.e.f  29 th June, 20112.
@ Vacant vide  resignation w.e.f.  30 th April, 2012.
 97

98
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director

COMPOSITION OF THE MAIN COMMITTEE
(2010-11)
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shri Balbir Punj
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
8. Shri Rasheed Masood
9. Shrimati B. Jayashree
10. Shri Derek O’ Brien
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shrimati Harsimrat Kaur Badal
13. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
14. Shrimati Raj Kumari Chauhan
15. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Dr. Monazir Hassan
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
19. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai
20. Shri P. Lingam
21. Shri Datta Meghe
22. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
23. Dr. Chinta Mohan
24. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
25. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
26. Shri M. K. Raghavan
27. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
30. Shri Ratan Singh
31. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
99

100
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director

SUB-COMMITTEE I ON AIIMS HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(2011-12)
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
*2. Shri Janardhan Dwivedi
3. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
4. Shri Derek O’ Brien
5. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
7. Shri Chinta Mohan
8. Shri Ashok Argal
9. Shri Datta Meghe
10. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
11. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai
12. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
13. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh (Ghazipur)
#14. Dr. Monazir Hassan
$15. Shri Ratan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
*Re-nominated w .e.f. 6 th  February, 2012.
#Nominated w .e.f. 31 st January, 2012.
$Nominated w .e.f. 13 th March, 2012.
101

SUB-COMMITTEE I ON AIIMS HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(2010-11)
1. Shri Datta Meghe Convenor
  RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Dr. VijayIaxmi Sadho
5. Shrimati Brinda Karat
6. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
8. Dr. Chinta Mohan
9. Shri Ashok Argal
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
11. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
12. Shri R. K. Singh Patel
13. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai
14. Shri N. Kristappa
15. Dr. Tarun MandaI
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. P. K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
102

ANNEXURE -II
LIST OF WITNESSES
30th June, 2011
Department of Health and Family Welfare
Dr. M. K. Bhan, Secretary, Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology
Dr. K. Srinath Reddy,President, Public Health Foundation of India.
Dr. L. M. Nath, Former Dean, AIIMS
Dr. Ranjit Roy Chaudhury, Former Member Board of Governor, MCI
Dr. M. S. Valiathan, Former Director, Sree Chitra Tirunai Institute of Medical Sciences and
     Technology, Thiruvananthapuram
Ms. K. Sujatha Rao, Former Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Prof. Sunil Maheshwari, IIM, Ahemdabad
11
th July, 2011
Representatives from the Department of Health and Family Welfare
Shri K. Chandramouli,  Secretary
Shri Keshav Desiraju, Addl. Secretary
Shri Debashish Panda, Joint Secretary
Representatives from the All India Institute of Medical Sciences
Shri R. C. Deka, Director
Shri Vineet Chawdhry, Dy. Director
Dr. Nikhil T andon, Professor, AIIMS
26
th July, 2011
Dr. Sneh Bhargava, Former Director, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
Prof. S. K. Jindal, PGIMER, Chandigarh
Dr. K. S. V . K. Subba Rao, Director, JIPMER, Puducherry
Dr. K. Srinath Reddy,President, Public Health Foundation of India, New Delhi.
103

104
30th September, 2011
Ms. K. Sujatha Rao, Former Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Prof. M.S. Valiathan, National Research Professor, Manipal University, Manipal
13th October, 2011
Prof. Subrata Sinha, Director, National Brain Research Centre (NBRC)
Prof. Pratap Sharan, Department of Psychiatry, AIIMS
Prof. Anoop Saraya, Department of Gastro- enterology, AIIMS
7th December, 2011
Prof. Sukhdeo Thorat, Chairman, Indian Council for Social Science Research
Shri P. S. Krishnan, Former Member Secretary, National Commission for Backward Classes
Dr L. R. Murmu, Additional Professor, Forum for Rights and Equality, AIIMS
Dr. Debjyoti Karmakar, President & Dr. Bhaumik Shah, Representative, Resident Doctors’
               Association, AIIMS
Shri Harshit Garg, Finance Secretary; Shri Himanshu Kanwat, General Secretary, Students
                 Union and Ms. Komal Parmar, Student, AIIMS
Shri Rupesh Kumar Tyagi, Chairman and Shri Sanjay Kumar, General Secretary, Society of
                        Y oung Scientists, AIIMS
Representatives from Ministry of Health and Family Welfar e and AIIMS
Shri Debasis Panda, Joint Secretary
Dr. G. K. Rath, Chief of IRCS, AIIMS
Dr. Rakesh Yadav, Sub-Dean, AIIMS
14
th December, 2011
Prof. P. K. Dave, Former Director, AIIMS
Repr esentatives from Faculty Association, AIIMS
Dr. Manoj Singh, President
Dr. Lalit Dar, General Secretary
Dr. B. K. Khaitan, Past President
Dr. Vijay Sharma, Joint Secretary

105
28th February, 2012
Shri K. B. Saxena, Former Secretary, Government of India
Ministry of Urban Development
Shri D. Diptivilasa, Additional Secretary
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Shri Vineet Chawdhary, Deputy Director(AIIMS)
Shri Debashish Panda, Joint Secretary
Ministry of Science and Technology
Dr. M. K. Bhan, Secretary, Department of Biotechnology
10
th May, 2012
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and
Training)
Shri Manoj Joshi, Joint Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor, Department of Legal Affairs
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health and Family Welfare)
Shri Keshav Desiraju, Special Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
Shri Rakesh Yadav , Sub-Dean, AIIMS
21
st May, 2012
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and
Training)
Shri P.K. Misra, Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training
Shri Manoj Joshi, Joint Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
Dr. B.A. Agrawal, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor, Department of Legal Affairs

106
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health and Family Welfare)
Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
Shri Rakesh Yadav , Sub-Dean, AIIMS
31st May, 2012
Dr. Seema Rao, Ex-Assistant Professor, Pathology , MAMC
Dr. Kameshwar Prasad, HOD, Neurology, AIIMS
Dr. S.K Sharma, HOD, Medicine, AIIMS
Dr. H.H. Dash, HOD, Neuro-anaesthesia, AIIMS
08
th June, 2012
Representatives from Ministry of Urban Development
Shri D. Diptivilasa, Additional Secretary
Shri G . S. Patnaik, Vice-Chancellor -DDA
Shri Ashok Kumar, Commissioner (Plg.), DDA
Representatives from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Shri P. K. Pradhan, Secretary
Shri Keshav Desiraju, Special Secretary, Health and Family Welfare
Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary
Representatives from All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
Dr. R.C. Deka, Director, AIIMS
Shri Vineet Chaudhary, Deputy Director (Admn.),
Shri Rakesh Yadav, Sub-Dean (AIIMS)
12
th November, 2014
Department of Health and Family Welfare
Shri Lov Verma, Secretary
Shri Arun Kumar Panda, Additional Secretary

107
Representatives from All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
Prof. M.C. Mishra, Director
Dr. D. K. Sharma, Medical Superintendent
Dr. Amit Gupta, Additional Professor
16th January, 2015
Department of Health and Family Welfare
Shri Arun Kumar Panda, Additional Secretary
Shri Ali R. Rizvi, Joint Secretary
Prof. M. C. Mish ra, Director, AIIMS
Shri V . Srinivas, Dy . Director (Admn.), AIIMS
Dr. D. K. Sharma, M. S., AIIMS

Annexure-III
PARLIAMENT MATTER
URGENT
COMMUNICATION FROM DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE.
H-11013/06/2015 ME-1
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Government of India
(ME- I Section)
Nirman Bhavan New Delhi
Dated  19 June, 2015
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject:  - Functioning of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)-reg.
The undersigned is directed to refer to Rajya Sabha Secretariat OM No. RS 2/2(iii)/
2011-Com (H&FW) dated 29.04.2015 on the above mentioned subject and to enclose herewith
50 copies of the requisite information in English. Hindi version will follow.
(S. N. Sharma)
Under Secretary to Govt. of India
Te1.23061883
Encl:- As above.
Joint Director,
(Ms. Arpana Mendiratta)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament House/Annexe,
New Delhi - 110001
108

The Institute gets grants under the Heads “Plan” and “Non-Plan”
from the Govt. of India, Ministry of Health & family Welfare.
Plan grants are also received for National Drug Dependence
Treatment, separately. Besides, extramural grants are also
received from various external funding agencies such as ICMR,
DST, CSIR, WHO, UNICEF, DBT etc. for various research
projects. Plan and Non-Plan grants received from the
Government of India and other agencies are further allocated to
Super-specialties Centres/Departments/Research Section as per
their projections/requirements”.
The Expenditure during the last five years Plan and
Non-Plan is as under:-
(` in Crore)
Year Plan Non-Plan Total
B.E. R.E. Expdr. B.E. R.E Expdr. Budget Expdr.
2010-11 400.00 380.00 381.62 400.00 605.00 681.10 985.00 1062.72
2011-12 412.35 412.35 415.79 610.00 650.00 744.80 1062.35 1 160.59
2012-13 474.00 470.00 420.32 650.00 788.70 899.63 1258.70 1320.00
2013-14 550.00 485.00 494.45 790.00 870.00 974.66 1355.00 1469.11
2014-15 550.00 621.00 669.82 815.00 1001.00 1099.08 1622.00 1768.90 #
Reply to Questionnaire on functioning of AIIMS
Sr. Queries Reply thereon
1. Budgetary allocations
made for AIIMS,
B.E. and R.E. and
actual expenditure
during each of the
last five years
indicating the
justifications/reasons
for under utilizations/
overspending; if any,
and the projects/
schemes affected
thereby; and
2. The programmes/projects/schemes
initiated during the last 10 years
indicating the date of initiation, the
targeted date for their completion,
the estimated expenditure thereon,
time/cost overruns, if any, the
current status thereof and the likely
date of their completion, in respect
AIIMS.
Note:- Excess expenditure adjusted from balances of previous year/out of revenue generation.
#Tentative Expenditure, Accounts 2014-15 under compilation
109
Status and Expenditure done on different
projects at AIIMS, New Delhi during last 10
years are enclosed at Annexure- A

110
Status and expenditure done on different projects at AIIMS during last 10 years
SI. Name ofFloors/AreaStatus/ParkingAgencyDate of Date of Expected/ PaymentPhysical
No. Project Awarded Cost StartCompletionActual datemade tillProgress
of completiondatework
1     2      3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1
Projects of Oversight Committee
1 ConvergenceG+l0+2 Awarded. All NilNice30.07.131.11.13December`58.89 crCompleted
Block basementsapprovalsProjects2013 including
Area-15730 sq.mt.received. Pvt. ltd.consultancy
Basement -2900 sq.mt.` 50.85 crore. Thro’
Total 18618 sq.mt.HSCC
2 Hostel BlockG+l0+2 Awarded. All 128M/s RBD, 2.04.12 1.12.13 One Block`51.27 cr 50%
basements approvalsReality and completed including completed
Area-8218 sq.mt.received Infrastruct FebruaryconsultancyBalance
Basement - 4935 sq.mt.`72.84 crore.ure Ltd.,2015. work from
Total 31161sq.mt.Thro’ HSCCBalance 5th floor to
March 2016 10th floor
has been
retendered
3 Dining BlockG+2+2 Awarded. All 140 M/S Apex1.03.12 2.04.12October`13.74 cr100%
basements approvalsConstructions 2013 including completed
Area-2634 sq.mt.receivedThro’ HSCCconsultancy
Basement -5672 sq.mt.`12.0 crore
Total 8306 sq.mts.
4 Surgical BlockG+9+3 Awarded. DFS 82 M/S ApexSep. 2013 AprilOctober`23.63 cr Work in
basements approvalConstructions 20152015 includingprogress
Area-12437 sq.mt.received. DUACThro’ HSCCconsultancy 60%
Basement -4404 sq.mt.has approved.completed

111
Total 16841 sq.mt. Plans yet not
released. NDMC
final approval
awaited.
`50.18 crore
5 ConstructionG+l1 Plans`l.57 crMaster Plan
of Houses at Type IV-264submitted to for of A.V .
A.V. NagarhousesMCD.consultancyNagar and
Type V-44 houses Forwarded tothe Type
TypeVI- 44DFS. Estimateddesigns are
houses.cost ` 430to be finally
crore approx.approved
by SDMC.
— — — — — Tenders
expected to
be floated
and awarded
by July 2015.
30 months
time period
thereafter.
Other Projects
1 Covering of Covering of 600 mtrsApprovalM/s Rama March MarchOct.22.50 CroreCompleted
Nallha Phase-I of Nallah fromreceived fromConstructi2005 2007 2008
South Ex to MCD on Co.
Dental college
2 ConstructionM/s KumarJuly 2012 Oct. 201224.11.1212.50 Crore
of out reachInfratech &
OPD at JhajjarConstruction
Pvt. Ltd.

112
3 Construction Work had beenAll approvalsCPWDMarch March March4.40 CroreCompleted
of 8 NOs of got done on are in place2005  2007 2010
lifts for Ward deposit basis
Block
4 ConstructionThree level 450Final450 carsM/s V3S1.11.1131.10.12 30.10.12Payment Completed
of U.G . car parking completionInfratechmade till
Multilevel carreceived from Ltddate
Parking Area 23,129.00 sq.mtr.NOMC and`55.39 cr.
inaugurated including
`55.00 cr.consultancy
completion cost
5 Out reach Single storied Awarded cost 50 cars M/s Kumar November Payment Completed
OPD at building of 4500 sq.mtr.9.50 cr. RevisedInfratech &2012made till
Badsha Jhajjar cost after deviationConstructiondate
`12.00 cr.Pvt. Ltd.`14.57 cr.
6 RenovationSingle storied Awarded costM/s Nice2009 2010 201019.76 CroreCompleted
of RAK OPDbuilding15.84 Cr.Projects
developing of Revised cost Pvt. Ltd.
sampleafter deviation
Collection centre`19.76 cr.
and EHS facility
7 Covering of Pier and slab Awarded.350 carsM/S Rama June 2011May 2012August 2013`27.33 cr.Completed
Nallah Ph-IIstructureApproval of Constr. including
MCD obtained Pvt. Ltd.consultancy
for the covering. Thro’
For `20.4 crore CPWD
Project
Consultants
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1

113
8 Tunnel Link Cut and cover Awarded. Nil M/S Nov. 2011 OctoberMay 2015.`39.00 cr. 98%
betweenmethod and No statutory Valegha2012 including completed
AIIMS &partially onapprovalsConstructionsconsultancy
JPNTC surface.required Thro’
except treeDMRC
cutting whichProject
was obtaind.Consultants
`38.89 crore
9 Renovation of Awarded cost —M/s Kumar8.05.13 7.09.13December`6.15 crore100%
CT-2 in CNC 4.00 Cr. TotalInfratech &2014 including completed
Project costConstructionconsultancy and
`9.00 cr.Pvt. Ltd. operational
10 Private WardG+9+3 BasementAll approval180 cars Era Infra 19.01.15 18.01.17 18.01.17`10.17 croreExcavation
(RevisedArea-1334 sq.mt.receivedEngg. Ltd. including and
proposal)Basement -5059 sq.mt.Estimated costconsultancyshifting of
Total 18403 sq.mts.100 crore.services is
in progress.
11 Mother &G+8+3Approval of 450 cars M/s 11.05.15 10.05.17 10.05.17`14.04 cr. Work
Child BlockBasementsDFS obtained. Ahluwalia including awarded
Area-30771 sq.mt.Approval ofContractsconsultancy and
Basement -15176 sq.mt.DUAC granted.(India)mobilization
Total 45947 sq.mts. Final Plans Ltd.started at
approved bysite.
NDMC.
Estimated cost
180 crore
12 OPD At G+8+3 basements.Approval of958 cars M/s11.05.15 10.05.17 10.05.17`5.49 cr. Work
Masjid Moth DUAC granted. Ahluwalia for awarded
Final PlansContractsconsultancy and

114
approved by(India)mobilization
DFS & NDMC.Ltd.started at
Estimated costsite.
573 crore
13 Trauma G+7Approval of — M/s06.06.14 5th Jan. Jan. 2016`16.68 cr. Work
ExpansionArea-7000 SqmtDFS obtained. Kumar2016 including awarded
Approval ofInfratechconsultancyand 60 %
DUAC granted. &work
Final PlansConstructioncompleted.
NDMC.Ltd.
Agmt amount
-`28.48 crore
14 DharamshalaLG+UG+l0 floorsApproval of — M/s04.08.14March February` 5.49 crore Work in
At Trauma 288 beds in DFS obtained. Kumar2016 2016 includingprogress, 15
Centre dormitory, 90 Approval ofInfratechconsultancy %. CSR
family suites and DUAC granted. &sponsored
4 multipurpose Final PlansConstruction project by
halls. approved byPvt. Ltd.Power Grid
Area- 45886 SqmtsNDMC.for ` 29.0
Agmt. Amountcrore.
`23.46 crore
15 Cafeteria B+G+2Approval of — M/s17.02.15 16.05.16 16.05.16 NIL Tenders
DUAC granted.Lakshmiinvited to be
Final approved Builders awarded in
received fromMarch 2015.
NDMC.Time period
Estimated costis 15 months.
-12.66
1 6 Construction G+l FloorAll approval are M/s S.S.08.03.2014 07.03.2015June 201517.05 Crore Work
of OPD, Hostel in place Total Substantially
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1

115
and Flats atConstruction completed
Ballabgarh India
Pvt. Ltd.
17 Face uplifting Est. Cost M/s The12.01.15 11.07.15 11.07.15` 1.50 crore Under
of gate No.1`4.00 croreCreatorsProgress
improve facade
of AIIMS
18 Hostel No.4G+l0+2 basement.DrawingTenders are
submitted toproposed to
NOMC,recall, being
approved fromsingle bid
DUAC & DFS.received
final approval
received from
NDMC
19.10.14
Est. Cost `
25.00 crore
19 A/A in Guest Final approvalUnder
House received fromtendering
NDMC onstage
18.10.14
20 GeriatricsFinal approvalUnder
Blockreceived fromtender
NDMC onpreparation
19.10.14stage,
approval of
HC recived.
21 EmergencyG+l0DUAC approvalNDMC
cum received 23
rdapproval
diagnosticJanuary 2015.underway.

116
blockDetailed
project
report
under
preparation.
22 National G+7 All approvals 710` 10.00 cr. Two
Cancerreceivedbedspackages
Instituteexcept EIAunder
clearance. EFCtendering.
approved forHospital
`2035.00 crorepackage.
Likely to be
awarded by
June 2015.
To be
completed
by
September
2017.
23 Balance work 5
th to 10th floor Awarded cost M/s Globe11.05.15 10.04.16 10.04.16 Work
of Hostel Block 32.85 Crore Civilawarded
Projects and
Pvt. Ltd.mobilization
started at
site.
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.