 
 
            
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2020/Kartika, 1942 (SAKA) 
 
REPORT NO. 
123 
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
On 
 
"THE OUTBREAK OF PANDEMIC COVID-19 AND ITS 
MANAGEMENT"   
 
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of AYUSH) 
  
 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 21st November, 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 25th November, 2020) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
  
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail :  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2020/Kartika, 1942 (SAKA) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
On 
 
"THE OUTBREAK OF PANDEMIC COVID-19 AND ITS 
MANAGEMENT"   
 
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of AYUSH) 
  
 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 21st November, 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 25th November, 2020) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2021) 
  
  
 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)  -  (ii) 
2.  PREFACE (iii) - (iv) 
3.  ACRONYMS (v) - (vi) 
4.   
Chapter- I       
                 Administrative Management of Lockdown and Unlocking  
Chapter-II   
                 Contingent Plan  
Chapter - III   
                  Managing Medical Research and Development 
Chapter - IV  
                    COVID Management under Ayushman Bharat-PMJAY Scheme  
Chapter - V    
                   COVID Management : AYUSH System 
Chapter - VI  
                   Management of Post-COVID Complications     
Chapter - VII   
                   Combating the Challenges of Pandemic COVID-19 
CHAPTER -VIII   
                 Financing the Health Sector      
 
 
1-16 
 
17-39 
 
40-56 
 
57-67 
 
68-80 
 
81-84 
 
85-98 
 
99-105 
5.  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A 
GLANCE 
106 - 134 
6.  MINUTES 135 - 168 
7.  ANNEXURES 169 - 180 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2019-20) 
1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   -   Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.K. Antony 
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween  
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Vacant 
8. Shri K. Somaprasad  
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Vacant 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
14. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
15. Shrimati Malothu Kavitha 
16. Shri P. K. Kunhalikutty 
17. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
18. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
19. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
20. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
21. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
22. Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
27. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu         Secretary 
2. Shri J. Sundriyal   Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.S.P.Singh   Director 
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                       Additional Director 
5. Shrimati Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
6. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma  Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Ms. Monika Garbyal   Assistant Committee Officer 
8. Shri Parth Gupta    Assistant Research Officer 
 
 (i)
                                        
 Chaudhary Birender Singh, Member resigned from the membership from the Rajya Sabha w.e.f 20th January, 2020 
 Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle, Member resigned from the membership of the Lok Sabha w.e.f 14th September, 2019. 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2020-21) 
  
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.K. Antony     
3. Shrimati Indu Bala Goswami 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh  
8. Shri K. Somaprasad 
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
12. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
13. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
14. Shrimati Maloth Kavitha 
15. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
16. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
17. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
18. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
19. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
20. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
21. Shri K. Navaskani 
22. Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
27. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu        Secretary 
2. Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary  
3. Shri V.S.P Singh    Director 
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                      Additional Director 
5. Shrimati Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
6. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma  Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Ms. Monika Garbyal   Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 (ii) 

 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this One -Hundred Twenty Third Report on t he Outbreak of Pandemic Covid -19 
And its Management.   
 
2. The primary objective behind identifying the subject – “The Outbreak of Pandemic 
COVID-19 And its Management” by the Committee is to assess the response of the Government 
to contain and mitigate the unprecedented outbreak of Pandemic COVID -19. The purpose of the 
report is not to criticise the Government’s course of action in combating the Pandemic but to 
identify the implementation gaps during the course of executing its contingent plan. At the 
outset, the Committee appreciates the Government’s initiatives and management of COVID -19 
in a country of 1.3 billion people. The Committee in its wisdom has attempted to provide policy 
prescription to the Government to utilise the most adverse situation arising due to outbreak of the 
Pandemic in the history of the mankind as an opportunity for transformation of our health 
infrastructure to best global standards. The need of the hour is adequate investment for the 
development of infrastructure of the health sector with the intent of making provision for the best 
healthcare delivery system. There is also a trumpet call for assimilation of latest health 
technology, raising of skilled health cadre into the public health system. Equally important is to 
mainstreaming the AYUSH System and its integration with modern system of medicine for 
proper healthcare of the people of the country.  
3. The Committee, in its meetings held on 13 th and 14th February, 2020, discussed and took 
cognizance of the increasing inc idence of Covid -19.  To assess the preparedness of the 
Government, the Committee heard the views of the Department of Health Research and Ministry 
of AYUSH on 5 th March, 2020.  The Committee, in its meeting held on 4 th August, 2020 heard 
the views of Secre tary, Department of Health and Family Welfare and Secretary, Department of 
Health Research on the subject. 
4. In its meeting held on 7 th September, 2020, the Committee took oral evidence of 
stakeholders viz. Director, AIIMS, President, Public Health Founda tion of India (PHFI) and 
Director, Population Foundation of India.   
5. The Committee, in its meeting held on 16 th October, 2020, again heard the views of 
Secretaries, Department of Health & Family Welfare and Department of Health Research. In the 
same mee ting, CEO, Ayushman Bharat deliberated on Covid Management under Ayushman 
Bharat-PMJAY Scheme.  
6. The Committee also sought the written views of various organizations/associations and 
received submissions from Public Health Foundation of India, Population  Foundation of India, 
FICCI, CII, Patanjali Ayurved Limited, Emami Limited, Dabur India Limited, Indian 
Association of Preventive and Social Medicine, Indian Public Health Association, Indian 
Medical Association, Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy and Ce ntre for Policy Research on 
the subject.  
7. During the finalization of its Report, the Committee relied upon the following 
documents/ papers:- 
(iii) 

 
 
 
(i) Background Note on "Outbreak of pandemic Covid -19 and related Contingent 
and Mitigation Plan" received from Department of Health and Family Welfare; 
(ii) Oral Evidences tendered by Secretaries, Department of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of Health Research, Ministry of AYUSH and CEO, 
Ayushman Bharat; 
(iii) Oral evidences tendered by stakeholders and their written submission;  
(iv) Written submissions of various Organizations/Associations; 
(v) Replies to the questionnaires received from the Department of  Health and 
Family Welfare, Department of Health Research and Ministry of AYUSH; and 
(vi) Other relevant documents pertaining to the subject. 
 
8. The Report is divided into eight chapters, viz: - (i) Chapter 1 deals with Administrative 
Management of Lockdown and Unlocking phases, (ii) Chapter 2 explains the Contingent Pla n, 
(iii) Chapter 3 focuses on Medical Research and Development, (iv) Chapter 4 deals with Covid 
Management under Ayushman Bharat-PMJAY Scheme, (v) Chapter 5 covers issues on COVID 
management under AYUSH system, (vi) Chapter 6 explains the Management of Pos t-COVID 
complications, (vii) Chapter 7 deals with Combating the Challenges of Pandemic Covid -19 and 
(viii) Chapter 8 highlights the financial management of the Health Sector.  
9. The Committee in its meeting held on 17 th November, 2020 considered  the Draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
10. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations  and recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body  of the Report and also reproduced 
at the end of the Report at ‘Observations/Recommendations of the Committee-at a Glance’ . 
11. On behalf of the Committee and on my own behalf, I extend special thanks to 
Secretaries and officers of the (i) Department of Health and Family Welfare (ii) Department of 
Health Research and  (iii) Ministry of AYUSH for their useful inputs on the subject. I also 
acknowledge the contribution of the stakeholders for their deep insight and useful suggestions 
during the course of interactions. I further extend special appreciation to the officers of the 
Committee Section for their useful efforts in assimilating all relevant information and enabling 
the Committee in producing this quality Report.  
     
 
New Delhi 
17th November, 2020 
Kartika 3, 1942 (Saka) 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
Chairman, Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare 
  
(iv)

 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ABHWCs   Ayushman Bharat Health and Wellness Centres  
AB-PMJAY   Ayushman Bharat/Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
ASU&H   Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy  
AYUSH   Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa Riga and Homeopathy  
CCC     COVID Care Center 
CEPI   Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations 
CFR   Case Fatality Rate  
CGRMS   Central Grievance Redressal Management System  
CHC   Community Health Centers  
CHE    Current Health Expenditure  
CII   Confederation of Indian Industry  
CPHC    Comprehensive Health Care  
CSOs   Civil Society Organizations  
CSU    Central Surveillance Unit  
DBT   Department of Bio Technology  
DCH    Dedicated COVID Hospital  
DCHC   Dedicated COVID Health Centre  
DGHS   Director General of Health Services 
DHR   Department of Health Research 
DLE   Direct Lab Empanelment  
DSOs   Disease Surveillance Officer 
DSU    District Surveillance Units  
EUA    Emergency Use Authorization  
GE   Genus Epidemicus  
GERD   Gross domestic expenditure on R&D  
GHE    Government Health Expenditure  
GHSA   Global Health Security Agenda  
GOI    Government of India 
GoM    Group of Ministers 
HBPs    Health Benefit Packages  
HCQ   Hydroxychloroquine  
HEM   Hospital Empanelment Module  
IAPSM   Indian Association of Preventive and Social Medicine  
IAS   Indian Administrative Service  
ICMR   Indian Council of Medical Research  
ICTV   International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses 
IDSP   Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme 
IDSP   Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme 
IDSP   Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme  
iGOT   Integrated Government Online Training  
IHIP    Integrated Health Information Platform  
IHS   Indian Health Service  
IJMR   Indian Journal of Medical Research  
ILI    Influenza Like Illness 
IPHA   Indian Public Health Association  
 
(v) 

 
 
IPHS   Indian Public Health Standard  
IST    Indian Standard Time  
JMG   Joint Monitoring Group 
LMWH    Low Molecular Weight Heparin  
MEA   Ministry of External Affairs 
MERS   Middle East Respiratory Syndrome  
MHA    Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoHFW  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
MRHRUs  Model Rural Health Research Units  
MRUs   Multi Disciplinary Research Units  
MSMEs   Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  
NAFU   National Anti-Fraud Unit  
NARI    National AIDS Research Institute  
NCDC   National Center for Disease Control  
NDMA   National Disaster Management Authority 
NEC   National Executive Committee  
NHA   National Health Authority 
NIV   National Institute of Virology  
PHC   Primary Health Centers  
PHEIC   Public Health Emergency of International Concern 
PM-ASBY  Prime Minister Atma Nirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana  
PMGKY   Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana  
PoE   Points of Entry  
PPE   Personal Protective Equipment  
RRTs   Rapid Response Teams  
SAFUs    State Anti-Fraud Units  
SARI    Severe Acute Respiratory Illness  
SARS   Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome 
SDRF   State Disaster Response Fund  
SHA    State Health Agencies  
SII   Serum Institute of India  
SOP   Standard Operating Procedure  
SOPs   Standard Operating Protocols  
SOR    Objects and Reasons 
SSU    State Surveillance Units  
STI   Science, Technology and Innovation  
STWs   Standard Treatment Workflows  
STGs   Standard Treatment Guidelines 
TDABC   Time Driven Activity Based Costing 
THE   Total Health Expenditure  
TMS    Transaction Management System  
UIS data   UNESCO Institute of Statistics data 
VBM   Vande Bharat Mission  
VHSNC   Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee  
VRDLs   Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories  
VTMs   Viral Transport Media  
WFH    Work From Home 
(vi) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - 1 
ADMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT OF LOCKDOWN AND UNLOCKING 
Outbreak of the Virus 
 
1.1 According to WHO, the outbreak of febrile respiratory illness of unknown etiology in 
December, 2019 originated from Wuhan, Hubei province of China.  The outbreak has been 
epidemiologically linked to the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market involving sale of sea food and 
live animals in mid-December, 2019.  Subsequently, the etiological agent was found to be a novel 
corona virus which was isolated from the Broncho alveolar lavage of three infected individuals. 
WHO named the novel coronavirus "Covid -19", "Co" stands for "corona", "vi" for "virus" and "d" 
for "disease", while "19" was for the year, as the outbreak was first identified on December 31 and 
International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) has named the virus as SARS -CoV-2. 
As on 11 th November 2020, g lobally there have been 50,810,763 confirmed cases of COVID -19, 
including 1,263,844 deaths. 
 
1.2 With regard to the origin of the virus, the Secre tary, Department of Health and Family 
Welfare in the Committee's meeting held on 4th August, 2020 submitted the following: 
 
"There are two strands of evidence present ly available in public domain. The first 
group of studies indicate  that it originated from bats. Therefore, the possibility of 
any external factor resulting in mutation in the nature of virus is ruled out.  That is 
the first strand of evidence.  There is another strand of study with some evidence 
which try to argue that there was genetic manipulation and lab engineering leading 
to creation of a particular kind of virus.  But, they are not conclusive.  This is only 
one assessment.  If you look at only the number of Papers in favour of it originating 
out of bats or number of  Papers saying that it was engineered in a lab, the number 
of Papers which favour bat -origin are far more in number when compared to this. 
But, this is an evolving situation.  People are still writing on it and we are closely 
following it." 
 
1.3 As per the  information submitted by the Ministry, all available evidence for COVID -19 
suggests that the causative virus (SARS -CoV-2) has a zoonotic source. Many crucial 
epidemiological parameters like extent and role played by sub -clinical/asymptomatic infections, 
period of communicability etc. still remain under investigation. The infection is spread through 
droplets or prolonged contact with infected patients. Due to the fast spread of virus to neighboring 
countries, it became critical for all countries to expedite  setting up diagnostics for this new virus. 
Diagnosis helps in early identification of the disease and containment of the disease. 
 
1.4 The Coronavirus disease  COVID-19 is a pandemic which has spread its tentacles in more 
than 215 countries. It is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome Coronavirus 2  (SARS-CoV-
2) that has caused massive panic and public concern across the common masses. Coronaviruses are 
a large family of viruses which are known to cause respiratory infections ranging from the 
common c old to more severe diseases such as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and 
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS). The patients affected with COVID -19 have 
symptoms of fever, cough, breathlessness and other respiratory problem.  
 

2 
 
1.5 The Government of India has adopted inter -sectoral proactive, pre -emptive and graded 
response/policies and priorities by adopting various strategies, the contingent plan during various 
lockdown & unlock phases to combat the COVID -19. The pandemic has forced the world to grasp 
a new normal, with self isolation and social/physical distancing being the global way of life today 
as crucial weapon against the virus.  WHO (under International Health Regulations) has declared 
this outbreak as a “Public Health Emergency of Internat ional Concern” (PHEIC) on 30 th January 
2020 and subsequently declared COVID-19 a pandemic on 11th March, 2020.  
 
Past pandemics and strategies adopted 
 
1.6 India has witnessed widespread illnesses and virus outbreaks in parts of the country, 
including the SARS outbreak between 2002-2004, however, statistics show that since the 1990s, 
they were nowhere as widespread as the COVID -19 that has now reached almost every part of the 
country and almost every country in the world. Prior to outbreak of COVI D-19, most notable viral 
disease outbreaks were Avian influenza (2006-08), H1N1pdm09 Influenza pandemic (2009), Zika 
virus disease (2016-18) and Nipah virus disease (2018, 2019).  
1.7 Avian influenza outbreaks (2006 -08) reported from multiple States (Mahar ashtra, Gujarat, 
Assam, West Bengal etc.) resulted in large number of deaths among poultry. Since then sporadic 
outbreaks are reported mainly due to disease transmitted by the migratory birds. All these 
outbreaks were contained as per the containment plan following One Health approach and in 
coordination with D epartment of Animal Husbandry. Due to prompt containment operations, 
among poultry, no case of avian influenza in humans has been detected in India so far.  
1.8 The Influenza pandemic in 2009 (caused by H1N1pdm09 virus) affected all  parts of the 
country, particularly cities in the States of Maharashtra (Pune, Mumbai), Gujarat (Ahmedabad, 
Surat), Rajasthan (Jaipur, Jodhpur), Delhi, Andhra Pradesh(then) (Hyderabad), Tamil Nadu 
(Chennai), Kerala (Trivandrum, Cochin). In the Influenza pandemic years of 2009-10, there were a 
total of 47840 cases and 2744 deaths reported. Initially , the plan of action involved surveillance at 
points of entry to prevent entry of disease and containment of outbreaks within the community. 
With large outbreaks being reported from these States, a mitigation plan was implemented with 
focus on fatality mitigation. Since then seasonal outbreaks of Influenza A are reported every year. 
Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) is  conducting surveillance for Influenza Like 
Illness (ILI), providing appropriate response and monitoring the outbreak situation.   
1.9 Zika virus disease was declared as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern by 
WHO in February, 2016. In India sporadic cases were reported in 2016 and 2017 from Gujarat 
(Ahmadabad) and Tamil Nadu (Krishnagiri). Large outbreaks were reported in 2018 from Gujarat 
(Ahmadabad), Rajasthan (Jaipur) and Madhya Pradesh (Bhopal, Sehore and Vidisha). Containment 
activities as per the Zika action plan was implemented and all these outbreaks were successfully 
contained. No case has been reported since then.  
1.10 Nipah virus disease outbreaks in 2018 (Kozhikode and Malappuram districts) and 2019 
(Cochin) were localized to thes e districts of the State of Kerala and resulted in 17 deaths 
(laboratory confirmed in 16 deaths; 2018 outbreak)  
S.  
No. 
Viral  
disease outbreak 
Lessons learnt/experiences 
gained 
Utilization  
during COVID-19 
1 Avian influenza Containment strategy, One health Containment strategy 

3 
 
outbreak approach 
2 Influenza pandemic Whole of Government approach, 
System strengthening, 
development of core capacities,  
Managing pandemic 
3 Zika virus disease Containment strategy Containment strategy 
4 Nipah virus disease Containment strategy, One health 
approach 
Containment strategy 
 
1.11 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to SARS Commission Final  Report, released 
in 2006 which had concluded that it was vital to ensure the supply of protective equipment for 
health care workers through stockpiling and domestic production. The Report also suggested that 
a ramp-up of laboratory testing capacity would need to happen swiftly  in the event of a spreading 
Virus. The past, on various occasions, has also highlighted the need to strengthen the things that 
encourage public cooperation  in a fight against pandemics. Unfortunately, many countries 
ignored the precautionary principle and failed to maintain adequate su pplies to protect healthcare 
workers and other precautionary steps that would have been useful in a fight against pandemics.  
That mistake has left them in a bind.  
 
Pro-active steps taken by Central Government  
 
1.12 The Committee has been informed about the various steps taken by the Government prior 
to the first case being reported in India to contain the spread to COVID -19 in the country. The 
Government had been proactive in regulating, restricting and even prohibit ing in -coming 
international passengers traffic through immigration check to contain the spread of COVID -19. 
The Government of India also managed and controlled the visa issuance process and effective 
screening of passengers tested and traced for COVID -19. The Government had taken quick and 
timely measures in anticipation of the potential crises and geared up all its Ministries to tackle the 
problem of COVID -19. On 17th January 2020, Union Health Secretary advised all State/UT 
Authorities to take necessary actions for adequate hospital preparedness to meet with any potential 
emergency. The First Travel Advisory was issued on 17th January and additional advisories 
related to international travel were issued periodically totaling to 21 advisories till date. Tra vel 
restrictions were imposed and existing visas were suspended periodically commensurate with the 
severity and spread of the disease from the countries which reported high number of cases and 
deaths. Progressively, flights in India were restricted. On 18t h January 2020, thermal screening 
was started for all passengers coming from China and Hong Kong at three international airports. 
From 4 th March, thermal screening was initiated for all international flights, and an advisory to 
follow standard health proto col for COVID -19 was issued by Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare (MoHFW). India started thermal screening of travelers/ passengers even before the first 
case was reported in India while as per WHO Situation Report No. 67 dated 27th March, 2020, 
most of the other countries initiated thermal screening in stage II and stage III of the infection in 
their respective countries. Thermal screening was progressively extended to seaports and land 
borders. On 22nd March, 2020, all International flights coming to I ndia were suspended , mass 
transportation services i.e. metro and rail traffic were suspended till 31st March  to contain the 
spread of Covid-19 in the community.  Domestic air traffic was also suspended on 24th March.  
 
 
 

4 
 
Institutional arrangements 
 
1.13 The Ministry, in its Background Note, submitted that under the directions of the Prime 
Minister, a High level Group of Ministers (GoM) was constituted on 3rd February, 2020 under 
the chairmanship of Union Minister of Health & Family Welfare with Ministers from other 
Ministries viz Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), M inistry of 
Home Affairs (MHA), Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers as members, 
to review, monitor and evaluate the preparedness and response measures being taken regarding 
management of COVID -19 in the country. The GoM has since then met 18 times. The 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Govt. of India, under extant provisions of Disaster Management 
Act has constituted 11 Empowered Groups on different aspe cts of COVID-19 management in 
the country to take informed decisions on issues which interalia includes:- 
  
(i) medical emergency planning; 
(ii) availability of hospitals, isolation and quarantine facility, disease surveillance 
and testing; 
(iii) ensuring availability of essential medical equipment; 
(iv) augmenting human resource and capacity building; 
(v) supply chain and logistic management; 
(vi) coordination with private sector; 
(vii) economic and welfare measures; 
(viii) information, communications and public awareness; 
(ix) technology and data management; 
(x) public grievance; and  
(xi) strategic issues related to lockdown. 
 
1.14 As per the information submitted by the Ministry on 4 th August, 2020, a Committee of 
Secretaries under Cabinet Secretary was reviewing the situation regularly . Cabinet Secretary  
has also held 12 video  conferences with States/UTs so far. The Union Minister  and senior 
officers in the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare are constantly reviewing the evolving 
scenario and have held 56 video conferences so far with State Health functio naries. The Joint 
Monitoring Group (JMG) under the Chairmanship of Directorate General of Health Services 
(DGHS) which advises MoHFW on technical matters met 37 times to assess the risk, review 
the preparedness & response mechanisms and finalize technical guidelines.  
 
Inter-Sectoral Co-ordination 
 
1.15 The Ministry , in its background note submitted that the Government was following a 
Whole of Government approach to manage COVID -19. Ministries of Health, External Affairs, 
Civil Aviation, Home Affairs, Shipping, Pharma, Tourism, Textiles, Defence, National Disaster 
Management Authority (NDMA) were coordinating actions beyond health sector.  
 
1.16 From March 21, 2020 onwards, Control Room operations in MHA has been expanded by 
making its function al 24x7 under the supervision of senior officers of the level of Joint 
Secretaries along with the representatives of key Central Ministries. Number  of helplines have 
been increased from 7 to 66, out of which, 15 are dedicated to the people of North Eastern 
Region. Control Room attends to the queries of States/UTs or other Ministries on lockdown 
measures, addresses inter-Ministry and inter-State coordination issues etc. 

5 
 
1.17 The Committee has also been informed of additional steps taken by Central Government 
before imposing lockdown. O n 11th March, 2020, the Union Home Secretary, chairing the 
National Executive Committee (NEC) delegated power under Sec tion 10(2)[(i) & (l)] of Disaster 
Management Act, 2005 to Secretary, MoHFW to enhance preparedness and containment of 
COVID- 19 and other ancillary matters connected thereto. This enable d MoHFW to issue 
advisories on COVID -19 management. With a view to aug ment the availability of funds with the 
State Governments, COVID -19 was declared as notified disaster by Central Govt. on 14.03.2020 
for the purpose of providing assistance under State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) placed at the 
disposal of respective State Governments. This allowed SDRF to be used for setting up quarantine 
facilities, sample collection and screening , setting up additional testing laboratories within the 
Government, cost of consumables , purchase of personal protection equipments (PPE) for 
healthcare, municipal, police and fire authorities , purchase of thermal scanners , ventilators, air 
purifiers, and consumables for Government hospitals , to supplement the State resources for the 
above purposes. 
 
1.18 On an appeal made by the Prime Minister on 19 th March in his address to the Nation, a 
"Janta” curfew was observed throughout the c ountry on 22 nd March, 2020. MHA advised States 
and UTs to observe Janta Curfew across the country on 22nd March,  2020 to promote voluntary 
social distancing as a measure to control Covid -19. All the citizens of the country voluntarily 
observed the Janta Curfew and conveyed their strong determination to deal with this global crisis 
by rising to the occasion in a mature and determined manner. 
 
Phases of Lockdown 
 
Phase 1 (25th March to 14th April) 
 
1.19 The National Executive Committee ( NEC) issued an Order dated 24th March, along with 
the guidelines on the measures to be taken by the Ministries/Departments of Government of India 
and State/UTs Authorities for containment of COVID -19 in the country. Vide this Order , 
lockdown measures were implemented in the country for a period of 21 days with effect from 25th 
March, 2020. Further, for ensuring smooth supply of essential goods in all parts of the country, a 
detailed Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) was issued by MHA on 26.03.2020 to all State / UT 
Governments. Based on the suggestions received from Central Ministries/ State Governments and 
keeping in view the difficulties faced by different  sections of society, Government of India issued 
orders to include exemptions during the lockdown period.  MHA issued an Advisory dated 27 th 
March, 2020,  on the issue of migrant agricultural labourers, industrial workers and other 
unorganized sector workers etc. who were trying to return to their domicile States/UTs. This was 
followed by another order from MHA on 28th March, 2020 for making adequate arrangements for 
migrants.  
 
1.20 Public address systems and all other means of communication were extensively used to 
disseminate precise information on the location of the relief camps , the facilities/the relief package 
under the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana (PMGKY) and measures being taken by the State 
Government/UT Administration.  A number of measures were suggested such as functioning of 
State and District Emergency Operation Centers for flow of information, inter agency 
coordination, community awareness,  proactive pla nning, coordination with NGOs, coordination 
with industry, coordination with neighboring States, to deal with issues relating to migrant workers 

6 
 
and stranded tourists. Police and administration was advised to adopt humane approach in dealing 
with public particularly those who are left adrift by the lockdown, and to interpret the lockdown 
restrictions with compassion and a sense of duty towards the citizens.  NEC issu ed an Order on 
29th March 2020 for effective implementation of the lockdown measures, and to mitigate the 
economic hardship of the migrant workers. Towards the end of the initial period, the rate of growth 
of COVID infections in India had significantly slo wed, from a rate of doubling every three days 
prior to the lockdown to one of doubling every eight days on 18 April.  
 
Relief package under Pradhan Mantri Garib KalyanYojana 
 
1.21 Central Government announced a Rs 1.70 Lakh crore relief package under Pradhan Mantri 
Garib KalyanYojana (PMGKY) for the poor people to help them fight the battle against Corona 
Virus. The package includes: 
 
i. Insurance cover of Rs 50 Lakh per health worker fighting COVID-19. 
ii. Provision of 5 kg wheat or rice and 1 kg of preferred pulses (per family), free of cost, every 
month for the next three months for 80 crore poor people. 
iii. Cash assistance of Rs 500 per month per person for next three months  for 20 crore women 
Jan Dhan account holders. 
iv. 8 crore poor families registered under th e scheme of Ujjwala will get 1 Gas cylinder, per 
family, per month free of cost for the next three months. 
v. MNREGA wage increased Rs 202 a day from Rs 182, which will benefit 13.62 crore 
families. 
vi. An ex-gratia financial assistance of Rs 1,000 per person to 3 crore poor senior citizen, poor 
widows and poor disabled. 
vii. Government will front -load Rs 2,000 to farmers in first week of April under the existing 
PM Kisan Yojana to benefit 8.7 crore farmers. 
viii. Wage-earners earning below Rs 15,000 per month in businesses having less than 100 
workers, would be given 24 percent of their monthly wages into their PF accounts, per 
person, per month for next three months. 
ix. State Governments to use Building and construction w orkers Welfare Fund to provide 
relief to Construction Workers and support to 3.5 crore registered workers. 
  
1.22 PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana which was for the period of thre e months, April - June, 
2020, was  extended till the end of November, 2020 for providing additional foodgrain @ 
5kg/person/month free of cost to all the beneficiaries ( Antodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) and Priority 
Household (PHH)) covered under Targeted Public Distribution System ( TPDS) as per provisions 
of National Food Security Act (NFSA) (including those covered under Direct Benefit Transfer 
DBT). 
 
Phase 2 (15th April to 3rd May) 
 
1.23 Considering the fact that the social distancing measures need to be extended further to 
contain the spread of Covid -19, the NEC issued an Order dated 14 th  April, 2020 giving directions 
to all Ministries/Departments of Government of India, States/UTs Governments and State/UTs 
Authorities that lockdown measures stipulated in MHA guidelines for containment of Covid -19 
epidemic in the country will continue to remain in force up to 03.05.2020. On 16 April, lockdown 

7 
 
areas were classified as "red zone", indicating the presence of infection hotspots, "orange zone" 
indicating some infection, and "green zone" with no infections. MHA also circulated National 
Directives for C OVID 19 management and a SOP for social distancing for offices, workplaces, 
factories and establishments. The government also announced certain rel axations from 20 April, 
allowed opening of agricultural businesses, including dairy, aquaculture and plantati ons, as well as 
shops selling farming supplies. Public works programmes were also allowed to reopen with 
instructions to maintain social distancing. Cargo transportation vehicles, including trucks, trains 
and planes. Banks and government centres were also allowed to function.  
 
1.24 MHA, vide Order dated 29th April, 2020, allowed movement of migrant workers, pilgrims, 
tourists, students and other persons stranded due  to lockdown in various places, with safe social 
distancing norms, standard health protocol, screening, quarantine, periodical check-ups etc.  
 
Phase 3 (4th to 17th May) 
 
1.25 After a comprehensive review of the COVID-19 situation in the country, and as directed by 
NDMA, the NEC issued an Order dated 1st May, 2020 directing the Authorities concerned for 
extending the lockdown for a further period of 02 weeks along with new guidelines for lockdown 
measures with some relaxations.  The country was split into 3 zones: red zone s (Hotspot -130 
districts), orange zones (284 districts) and green zones (319 districts).  Red zones are those with 
high coronavirus cases and a high doubling rate, orange zones are those with comparatively fewer 
cases than red zone and green zones are those  without any cases in the past 21 days. Movement of 
pubic transport (buses) was permitted in green zones with limited capacity to 50 percent. In orange 
zones only private and hired vehicles were allowed . The red zones continued to remain under 
lockdown.  
1.26 Under the new guidelines, a limited number of activities remain ed prohibited throughout 
the country, irrespective of the Zone. The guidelines further prescribed certain measures for well 
being and safety of persons. Movement of individuals, for all non -essential activities, remain ed 
strictly prohibited between 7 pm to 7 am. Certain activities like plying of cycle rickshaws and auto 
rickshaws, running of taxis and cab aggregators,  intra-district and inter -district plying of buses , 
and, barber shops, spas  and saloons continued to remain prohibited . Movement of individuals and 
vehicles was allowed only for permitted activities. In the Orange Zones, all activities were 
permitted except the activities which were prohibited throughout the country in addition t o inter- 
district and intra -district plying of buses. In the Green Zones, all activities were permitted except 
the limited number of activities prohibited throughout the country, irrespective of the Zone. 
However, buses could operate with upto 50% seating capacity and bus depots could operate with 
upto 50% capacity. The Standard Operating Protocols (SOPs) issued by MHA facilitated transit 
arrangement for foreign national(s) in India, release of quarantined persons, movement of stranded 
labour within States/ UTs, sign-on and sign-off of Indian seafarers, pilgrims, tourists, students and 
other persons by road and rail. 
 
Phase 4 (18th May to 31st May)  
1.27 The 4th Phase lockdown Order dated 17th May, 2020 under Disaster Management Act, 2005 
extended the lockdown for a further two week period w.e.f. 18.05.2020 with additional relaxations. 
Unlike the previous phases of lockdowns , States were given a larger say in the demarcation of 

8 
 
Green, Orange and Red zones and the implementation roadmap. Red zones we re further divided 
into containment and buffer zones . The local bodies were given the authority to demarcate 
containment and buffer zones. Only limited activity like travel by air, rail, metro,  functioning of 
schools, colleges, and other educational and tr aining/ coaching institutions; hospitality services, 
including hotels and restaurants; large public gatherings, such as cinema halls, malls, gymnasiums, 
sports complexes etc; social, political, cultural and other kinds of gatherings; and, religious places/  
places of worship for public  were prohibited . Other activities outside containment zone were 
allowed under SOP issued by MHA and MoH&FW. Subsequently, MHA vide order dated 
20.05.2020 allowed domestic air travel of passengers with detailed guidelines for o peration. MHA 
also granted exemption for the conduct of board examination for class X & XII considering the 
academic interest of a large number of students. 
 
1.28 The Government has maintained that the lockdown was implemented to contain Covid -19 
pandemic in the country. Movement of people was restricted during the lockdown  as a strategy to 
contain the corona outbreak . The lockdown was a success in terms of limiting the spread of the 
disease.  
 
1.29 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  has shared the following data on the cases 
and deaths averted during the lockdown period (23rd March to 30th June 2020): 
 
Cases averted 14-29 lakh 
Deaths averted 37,000 – 78,000 
 
1.30 Apart from this, the following positive outcomes of the lockdown periods helped in terms of 
ramping up preparedness –  
 
i Augmentation of Health Infrastructure 
ii Domestic Manufacturing capacities – PPEs, Masks, Ventilators, Sanitizers 
iii National Inventory of Human resources 
iv Capacity Building through dedicated online platform (iGOT) 
v Community participation & Awareness 
vi Behaviour change – Jan Andolan initiated 
1.31 The Indian Public Health Association (IPHA), Indian Association of Preventive and 
Social Medicine (IAPSM) & Indian Association of Epidemiologists have shared the following 
details in its “3rd Joint Statement on COVID -19 Pandemic in India –Public Health Approach for 
COVID-19 Control” on 25th August, 2020:  
(i) Lockdown as a strategy for control should be discontinued and limited restrictions for 
short periods may be imposed in epidemiologically defined clusters only in areas with no 
community transmission after weighing the impact of the same on the livelihood o f the 
target population.  
(ii)  In large cities (Y class) with substantial spread there is no advantage of creating 
containment zones and aggressive testing rather the focus should be to prevent deaths 
from COVID-19 and not on containing the infection.  


9 
 
(iii) In Y class cities with moderate spread Containment zones (CZ) should be revamped with 
clear roadmap and timelines for periodic review by expert committee, with the aim to test 
all suspects, isolate all infected individuals for proper treatment. All CZs  should be de - 
contained in a maximum of 14 days. 
(iv) In small cities and rural townships with mild/limited spread the existing testing and 
cluster containment strategy may be continued. Although a testing strategy attached with 
mandatory isolation, needs to be reviewed in view of social stigma. In small cities stigma 
is a major factor preventing persons from coming forward for testing. 
(v) In rural areas, syndromic surveillance by ASHA and village Nigrani Samiti and periodic 
review at PHC level could be done. 
1.32 The Associations further submitted that the primary purpose of the lockdown was to slow 
down the pandemic and gain time for preparedness to fight it. There is no evidence that any 
useful purpose would be served by weekend or intermittent or night  time lockdown, b anning of 
domestic flights and large sized containment zones.   
1.33 President, Public Health Foundation of India mentioned that the adverse impacts of 
Covid19 were felt globally and India was no exception. The impact of the epidemic itsel f and the 
response to it had multiple effects and some effects were unavoidable. It is debatable whether the 
initial lockdown should have been confined to the megacities and not involved the entire 
country. Threat perception of a raging global pandemic was high at that time due to the news and 
visuals emerging from North America and Europe as well as alarmingly high mortality rates 
predicted for May -June by ‘international experts’. An initial lockdown of only the megacities 
where the virus had entered via i nternational airports might have been a selective first step but it 
is difficult to retrospectively make that judgment. 
1.34 Indian Medical Association submitted that the Government recognized the pandemic 
Covid-19 at the early stage and acted swiftly by a nnouncing Lockdown 1.0 and initiated several 
measures in coordination with the State Governments.  The first phase saw near complete 
shutdown of all services, manufacturing, travel and local movement of people, business, etc. 
Only essential supply was allowed. Each of the subsequent  phases saw progressive levels of 
relaxations and resumption of services and life, along with demarcation of areas viz. red, orange 
and green zones as per the level of COVID-19 cases in communities.  The lockdowns slowed the 
spread of COVID -19 and provided some time for health care systems to be put in place to deal 
with the pandemic. Several lakh cases, and deaths, were averted, especially during the first few 
phases of the lockdown.  
1.35 The WHO Representative to India, appreciated the response of the Government of India to 
pandemic COVID-19 describing the Lockdown Measures as "ti mely, comprehensive and robust".  
WHO has, however, cautioned that lockdowns alone would not eliminate corona virus and India 
must take necessary measures to prevent a second and third wave of infections.   
 
Phased Re- opening (Unlock-1.0)  
 
1.36 On 30th May, 2020, the NEC issued guidelines for Phased Re -opening (Unlock -1) with 
country's economic on focus. Under these guidelines, lockdown was limited to Containment Zones 

10 
 
up to 30.06.2020. Hotels, restaurants and other hospitality services, shopping malls, religions 
places/ places of worships for public were allowed with guidelines issued by MoH&FW.  Night 
curfews were in effect from 9  p.m. to 5  a.m. in all areas and State Governments were allowed to 
impose suitable restrictions on all activities. No restriction on inter -State and intra -State 
movements of persons was put. H owever, States/ UTs based on reason of public health and its 
assessment of the situation were allowed to regulate movement of persons  with the condition to 
give wide publicity in advance regarding restriction placed on such movement and procedures to 
be followed. 
 
Re- opening (Unlock-2.0)  
 
1.37 The Unlock-2 provided restrictions limited to Containment Zones only and night curfews 
were in effect from 10  p.m. to 5  a.m. in all areas. Training institutions of the Central and State 
Governments were allowed to function with SOP specifying restrictions on certain activities, but 
State borders remained open to all. Inter - and intrastate travel was permitted. Limited international 
travel was permitted as part of the Vande Bharat Mission. Educational institutions, metros, 
recreational activities remained closed till 31 July. Only essential activities, such as intensive 
contact tracing, house -to-house surveillance, and other clinical interventions"  were permitted in 
containment zones. Further guidelines regarding usage of Aarogya Setu and masks were reiterated.  
 
Re-opening (Unlock 3.0) 
 
1.38 Phased Re-opening (Unlock-3.0) from August 2020 removed night curfews and permitted 
gymnasiums and yoga centres to reopen. Educ ational institutions remained  closed till 31 August. 
All inter-and intra State travel and transportation was permitted. However, Maharashtra and Tamil 
Nadu imposed a lockdown for the whole month, while West Bengal was forced to impose 
lockdowns twice a week.  
 
Unlock 4.0 (1-30 September) 
 
1.39 The Unlock 4.0 phase provided for lockdown in force in the Containment Zones till 30 th 
September 2020. Outside the containment zone, however, some activities were given permission. 
Metro Rail was allowed to be reopened in graded manner from 7 th September. Marriage functions 
with gatherings of upto 50 people and up to 20 people funereal/last rites ceremonies were 
permitted. Religious, entertainment, political, sports, academic functions and gatherings of up to 
100 people were allowed.  Face coverings/masks were made compulsory in public places, 
workplaces and during transport.  
 
Unlock 5.0 (1-31 October) 
1.40 On September 30, 2020, the NEC issued guidelines for activities permitted in Unlock Phase 
5.0. with respect to the opening of schools and coaching institutions, it was left to the State/UT 
Governments to decide after 15th Oct, in a graded manner. Lockdown remained in force strictly in 
the Containment Zones till 31 st October, 2020. Also, swimming pools being used for training of 

11 
 
sportsperson was allowed to open.  Cinema halls that had remained close d was opened from 15th 
October 2020, with 50% of their seating capacity.  
 
Unlock 6.0 (1-30 November) 
 
1.41 The Ministry of Home Affairs announced on 27 th October, 2020 Unlock 6.0 guidelines for 
the month of November directing State and Union Territories Governments to enforce Covid -19 
Appropriate Behaviour. Th e Central Government asked the S tates and UTs to take a call on 
reopening of State and private U niversities for research scholars, schools and coaching institutes, 
and gatherings of over 100 people. Social, academic, sports, entertainment, cultural, religious, 
political functions and other congregations, in closed spaces with a maximum of 50 per cent of the 
hall capacity with a ceiling of 200 persons continued.  
1.42 The Committee is of the view that if we had not hit the history books for guidance, the  
reality would have hit us harder. The Government of India learnt from its past experience 
and took successful measures like janta curfew, imposition of 4 months long lockdown and 
its gradual opening, travel restrictions and other social distancing measures to con tain the 
spread of Corona virus. The Committee appreciates the measures  but also observes that 
there have been few glaring lapses in the  battle against pandemic like shortage of emergency 
supplies, red-tapism, shortage and quality of testing kits, delay in domestic production etc.  
 
Management of COVID-19 and State of preparedness 
 
1.43 The Committee was given to understand that the main purpose of implementing the 
lockdown measures was to contain/ slow down the spread of Coronavirus by breaking the chain of 
transmission and to provide additional time to ramp up capacities at  all levels. During this period, 
the capacities and health infrastructure were ram ped up. It was estimated that an arrangement was 
made for a total of 3914 facilities in the country wit h 3,77,737 Isolation beds (without ICU 
support), 39,820 ICU beds and 1,42,415 oxygen supported beds along with 20,047 ventilators. In 
terms of healthcare logistics, cumulatively 213.55 lakh N95 masks, 120.94 lakh PPEs and 612.57 
lakh HCQ tablets were distributed. 
 
1.44 The Committee was informed that the laboratory network was being continuously 
strengthened. Adequate laboratory reagents are available with ICMR. The number of sample tested 
for detection of COVID -19 has been substantially growing every day. The sharp  focus was on 
“Test, Trace, Treat, Technology” strategy in coordination with the States/UTs. Effective clinical 
management of all COVID -19 positive patients  was done under the expert advice of specialist 
doctors of AIIMS, New Delhi and doctors man ning ICUs in State hospitals . This tele-consultation 
exercise was extended to various hospitals which have bed capacity ranging from 500 -1000 on 
twice a week basis. Enhanced focus on “Test, Trace, Treat”, further augmented with various 
measures has facilitated widespread COVID-19 testing by States/UTs.  
1.45 The Union Health Ministry has issued a number of guidelines and the same have been 
made available on the website of the Ministry (www.mohfw.gov.in) targeting various 
groups/activities such as (i) Travel (ii) Behavioural Health, (iii) Citizens, (iv) Hospitals, (v) States / 
Departments / Ministries, (vi) Employees, (vii) Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme 
(IDSP), (viii) Clinical Management: Guidelines on Clinical management of COVID -19 was 

12 
 
updated a nd widely circulated that included case definition, prevention of infection control, 
laboratory diagnosis, early  supporting therapy, management of severe cases and complications. 
Involvement of various cadres of personnel and volunteers across sectors and  like Department of  
Defence, AYUSH, National Cadet Corps ( NCC), National Services Scheme (NSS),  Nehru Yuvak 
Kendra Sangathan (NYK) , public sector enterprises, and private sector that can be involved in 
COVID related work and maintenance of other essential medical services have been worked out by 
pooling manpower resources. Webinar and Online capacity building courses for medical and non -
medical personnel engaged for logistics and surveillance related duties for Covid management 
have been arranged by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare . Online training and webinars for 
physicians and n ursing personnel is being conducted by AIIMS and training Modules have also 
been made available on iGOT (online platform) by DOPT (https://igot.gov.in/igot/ ). The training 
modules have been translated to regional languages. The health infrastructure and other capacities 
are being expanded to reduce the case fatality ratio and COVID-19 effects. 
 
PM's Jan Andolan against Pandemic 
 
1.46 The Secretary also apprised the Committee about the PM's announcement on 8 th October, 
2020 of launching of Jan Andolan against the Pandemic Covid -19. During the course of the Jan 
Andolan, the people of the country would be made aware of Covid Appropriate Behavior viz 
wearing of masks, maintaining social distancing, washing and sanitization of hands. It was 
maintained by the Secretary that Jan Andolan would be intensively implemented in all the States.  
  
1.47 The Committee appreciates the PM's call for  Jan Andolan against Pandemic. The 
Committee agrees that pandemic Covid -19 can be contained and controlled by adhering to 
Covid Appropriate Behavior across the country and therefore, e ach State Government must 
make their best efforts to live up to the objective of the Jan Andolan.  
 
Strategic Approach 
 
1.48 Taking cue from the past pandemics and outbreaks of major viral disease outbreaks , India 
followed a scenario based approach for the following possible scenarios: 
 
i. Travel related case reported in India, 
ii. Local transmission of COVID-19, 
iii. Large outbreaks of COVID-19 disease amenable to containment, 
iv. Widespread community transmission requiring mitigation measures, 
v. India becomes endemic for COVID-19. 
1.49 The details of the scenario, inference and approach adopted by Government of India are 
given below:- 
Scenario Inference Approach 
Only travel 
related cases 
No community 
transmission in 
India 
• Continued activities at Points of Entry 
Surveillance 
• Concurrent review and strengthening of 
all core capacities 

13 
 
Local cluster 
of 
indigenous 
cases (with 
no travel 
history) 
Signalling start 
of local 
transmission 
• Cluster containment strategies  
• listing of contacts,  
• deciding on the containment zone,  
• perimeter control (exit and entry controls) 
and 
• focused actions in the containment zone 
for   
• isolation of cases,  
• home quarantine of contacts,  
• social distancing  
• measures (school closure, office 
closure, ban on gatherings) and 
•  Communicating the risk to 
public. 
Large 
outbreaks 
amenable to 
containment 
Local 
community 
transmission 
within a 
specified large 
geographic area 
• Cluster containment strategies as 
above with: 
• geographic community 
wide quarantine  
• strict perimeter control  
• strict implementation of 
social distancing measures  
• Focused actions in the 
containment zone for   
• Surveillance and testing  
• Rapid operationalization 
of surge capacities for 
hospitals and laboratories 
• Resource mobilization: 
Logistic and manpower 
• Chemoprophylaxis for 
healthcare workers and 
close contacts 
Large outbreaks Widespread 
community 
transmission  
• Abandon cluster containment strategy  
and  Points of Entry surveillance 
• Minimize mortality and morbidity while 
ensuring essential services and 
continuity of operations to minimize 
impact on health and non-health sectors 
• Exit Screening (based on risk 
assessment to other countries) 
• Mitigation measures :  
• triage of patients (through 
screening clinics),  
• surge capacity of hospitals for 
isolation  and  
• ventilator management and  
• large scale IEC activities. 
COVID-19 
becomes 
endemic 
Pool of 
susceptible 
population will 
decrease – 
• Programmatic approach shall be 
followed – akin to that being followed 
post Pandemic Influenza 2009 (H1N1 
outbreak)  

14 
 
stabilization of 
incidence of new 
cases 
• Routine surveillance as an epidemic 
prone disease and sentinel surveillance 
to know public health burden of the 
disease.  
 
1.50 The key to managing outbreaks, especially public health emergencies of large magnitude 
involved Whole Of Government approach an d strengthening core capacities like (i) Legislation 
and policy, (ii) Coordination, (iii) Surveillance, (iv) laboratory capacity (v) Hospital preparedness, 
(vi) logistic management, (vii) Human resource and capacity building and (viii) Risk 
communication. 
 
Scale of Incidence 
1.51 The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare during  his deposition before 
the Committee on 16 th October, 2020 furnished the latest statistics of incidence of COVID 19 in 
India vis-à-vis in other countries which are enumerated below: 
i. Currently more than 39 million cases have been reported all over the world and has  
caused more than 11 lakh deaths worldwide. The highest number of reported cases 
and deaths are in USA which is more than 82 lakh and 2.22 lakh respectively. After 
that Brazil has 1.52 lakh deaths and 51.7 lakh cases. In India, 73.7 lakh cases have 
been reported since inception, of which 64.53 lakh cases have been cured and 8.04 
lakh are active cases. 
 
ii. The case fatality rate of India or the death rate due to COVID is 1.52 percent which is 
one of the lowest in the world. The death rate in USA is  2.71 percent followed by  
2.95 percent in Brazil and 1.73 percent in Russia. It is much higher in Spain with 3.5 
percent, 2.62 percent in South Africa, 4 percent in France and 6.5 percent in Britain. 
 
iii. India has 81 deaths per million, whereas it is 672 in USA,  716 deaths per million in 
Brazil and 718 deaths per million in Spain. While India has conducted more than 9 
crore tests, USA has done  11 crore tests and all other countries have had fewer tests 
than India. Number of cases per million population is 5,341 in  the country, while in 
the USA it is 24,780 per million, 24,277 in Brazil, 9,278 in Russia and 9,900 in the 
UK. 
 
1.52 The trend of daily new cases of COVID -19 from March till 10 th November 2020  as 
furnished by the Ministry is indicated as under: 

15 
 
 
 
1.53 The spread of India’s Active Cases in the Political Map (data as on 8th November 2020) 
as furnished by the Ministry is indicated as under: 
 
 
0 
20000 
40000 
60000 
80000 
100000 
120000 
26-Apr 
30-Apr 
4-May 
10-May 
14-May 
18-May 
22-May 
26-May 
30-May 
3-Jun 
7-Jun 
11-Jun 
15-Jun 
19-Jun 
23-Jun 
27-Jun 
1-Jul 
5-Jul 
9-Jul 
13-Jul 
17-Jul 
21-Jul 
25-Jul 
29-Jul 
2-Aug 
6-Aug 
10-Aug 
14-Aug 
18-Aug 
22-Aug 
26-Aug 
30-Aug 
3-Sep 
7-Sep 
11-Sep 
15-Sep 
19-Sep 
23-Sep 
27-Sep 
1-Oct 
5-Oct 
9-Oct 
13-Oct 
17-Oct 
21-Oct 
25-Oct 
29-Oct 
2-Nov 
6-Nov 
10-Nov 
Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov 
New cases (n) 


16 
 
1.54 The Committee observes that after a steady increase in the number of Covid Cases 
across the country, there has been a downtrend in Covid Cases. However, the Committee 
strongly feels that the threat of Covid-19 is still looming large on the country keeping in 
view the second and third wave in European countries and spike in Delhi. The Secretary, 
Department of Health and Family Welfare also expressed concern over the possible spike 
in the incidence of the Covid cases due to super spreading forthcomin g festive events in the 
country and advent of the winter season. T he Ministry should, therefore, take effective 
measures to control the scale of incidence of Covid -19 in the country. The Committee also 
recommends the States with high case load to adopt rob ust strategy for containment and 
mitigation of Covid-19.  
 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER 2 
CONTINGENT PLAN 
 
2.1 The Committee decided to make an assessment of the contingent plan in combating 
Covid-19 by the Government. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is the nodal Ministry 
in devising policie s and ensuring their implementation. A better understanding about the 
contingent plan could be appraised only through the interaction with the officials of the 
MoHFW.  Accordingly, the Committee heard the views of the Secretarie s of Department of 
Health and Family Welfare and Department of Health Research  respectively in its two meetings 
held on 5 th March, 2020 and 4 th August, 2020 .  In its m eeting held on 5th March, 2020 , the  
Committee also heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH.  
  
Oral evidence of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare in the 
Committee meeting held on 14th February, 2020 
 
2.2 In his deposition during the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2020-21) on 
14th February, 2020,  the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare apprised the 
Committee about the outbreak of Corona Virus (nCOVID-19) and action taken by the Ministry 
to prevent the incidence of the disease. The Secretary submitted that though the  transmission 
was huge but the percentage of mortality or fatality in this disease is less than SARS.  He 
submitted that as on 13 th February, 2020, in China, the new confirmed cases for the day were 
1820 and in total, there were 46473 cumulative confirmed cases. Three confirmed cases w ere 
reported in Kerala and all three  cases had travel history from Wuhan. Travel advisories were 
issued and  quarantine centres were set up. Screening of passengers was initiated at  21 
Airports, 12 major Seaports and 65 minor seaports and land crossings particularly bordering 
Nepal. A total of 2481 flights had been screened covering a total of 2,69,268 passengers.  
 
2.3 The Committee was also informed that 17,678 passengers were under community 
surveillance and 525 were found t o be symptomatic and referred  to 45 hospitalized in the 
Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) network. The Secretary also submitted that 
guidelines were issued to States on surveillance and contact tracing, laboratory samples 
collection, packaging and transport, clinical management protocol and prevention and control 
in healthcare facilities.  
 
Oral evidence of the Secretary, Department of Health Research in the Committee 
meeting held on 5th March, 2020 
 
2.4 The Secretary, Department of Health Research during his interaction with the 
Committee on 5 th March, 2020 shared in detail, about the virus , its impact and preparatory 
measures taken to contain it. Elaborating the background of the virus, he mentioned that the 
Corona virus group had six viruses and the Covid -19 is the seventh virus in the same group. 
The symptoms of virus are fever, dry cough, body pain and difficulty in breathing. The WHO 
declared it as a public health emergency of international concern on  30th January, 2020. 
Kerala reported its first case in India on 6th January, 2020. Kerala Government did well in 
managing Covid -19 with the help of ICMR -NIV and the Ministry of Health. The Secretary 

18 
 
mentioned about the following steps taken by the Ministry to contain the pandemic at an early 
stage: 
 
(a) Screening at 21 Airports, 12 major seaports and 65 minor seaports and 
land crossings particularly bordering Nepal. 
(b) Universal screening for all flights from Singapore, Thailand, Hong Kong, 
Japan, South Korea and China at earmarked aero-bridges. 
(c) Universal screening also started for flights from Vietnam, Malaysia, 
Nepal, Indonesia, Iran and Italy. 
(d) A total number of 5,89,438  passengers were screened at Airports and 
16,076 at Ship Ports. 
 
2.5 The Government had evacuated 645 Passengers from Wuhan, China through special 
aircrafts and kept them for 14 days quarantine in Army camp, Manesar and Chhawla camp of 
ITBP. Secretary submitted that 132 crew members and six passengers from India were 
evacuated from Japanese ship on 27th February and  were kept in the Manesar camp and their 
first test was negative.  Further, 112 people, including nationals of Myanmar, Bangladesh, 
Maldives, China, South Africa, USA and Madagascar alongwith some of the spouses of 
Indians were evacuated from China. 
 
2.6 The Secretary mentioned that there were 106 viral laboratories under the Department of 
Health Research, of which 31 viral research laboratories had been activated and started testing 
and as on 5th March, 3,777 samples ha d been tested from 3,123 individuals.  Till that date, the 
maximum number of people under observation were from Delhi followed by Punjab, Kerala, 
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat.  Community surveillance is also being done through the 
IDSP regularly.  
 
2.7 The Committee was apprised that the target is to increase the number of VRDLs to 125 
by the end of this year and further expand the number of VRDLs. There is another Scheme - 
"Development of Tools and Support to Prevent Outbreaks of Epidemics" which has bee n 
providing testing kits during other seasonal diseases.   The Committee was also apprised that 
advisories were issued by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in view of the emerging 
global scenarios. The guiding principles were surveillance, laboratory  diagnosis, hospital 
preparedness, logistic management, capacity building and risk communication.  
 
2.8 The Ministry apprised the Committee about Government's operation plan that inter -alia 
included:- 
 
i involvement of District Collectors; 
ii preparation of micro plans; 
iii mobilization of health force and training of rapid response teams; 
iv training of workforce by the Rapid Response Team; 
v active surveillance and contact tracing covering all households; 
vi arrangement for sample collection; 
vii transportation and testing; 
viii identification of health facilities for isolation of suspects; 
ix passive surveillance through identified health facilities; 

19 
 
x home quarantine and daily follow up of all contacts;  
xi information management and daily sitreps;  
xii social distancing measures in the containment zone;   
xiii risk assessment such as closure of schools; 
xiv closure work places and ban on gatherings; 
xv risk communication. 
 
Oral evidence of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare in the 
Committee meeting held on 4th August, 2020:  
 
2.9 The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare during his deposition before 
the Committee on 4th August, 2020 highlighted the broad timelines of the information received 
on the outbreak of COVID -19 and the follow up steps taken by the Government. H e informed 
that of the total COVID -19 positive cases the world over, it was limited only to mild -disease 
stage in 80 percent of the people  of which, only 15 per cent need ed hospitalization and only 5 
percent cases are critical and need ventilators. Global Case Fatality Rate (CFR) is 3.8% while 
in India CFR is 2.10%.  
 
2.10 The Secretary submitted that as part of contingent plan, Government announced Janta 
Curfew followed by long duration of lockdown and efforts made to contain the spread of 
COVID-19 during continuing unlocking phase. Growth -rate of COVID cases during initial 
stage of lockdown was 36% while during the unlocking period , it was reduced to 3.3%. 
Lessons learnt and experiences gained from outbreak of viral diseases/epidemic, viz. Avian  
influenza (Bird flu) during 2006 -2008, H1N1 in 2009 and Zika Virus & Nipah Virus during 
2016-2019 was utilized by the Government to work out a preemptive, pro -active and graded 
response to combat COVID -19.  The lockdown provided the much needed time for m aking 
arrangement to the extent of 34 times more isolation beds, 20 times more ICUs, 35 times more 
daily handling capacities of the hospitals and opening of 1331 test labs with 6.61 lakh actual 
daily tests through RT -PCR and rapid antigen tests. Tracking plan followed the testing of the 
positive case i.e. origin of infection and probability of the capacity to spread the infection in 
the population, provided the scope for surveillance over chain of transmission.  
 
2.11 The Committee was also informed that the incidence of COVID -19 cases appear large 
because of aggressive testing policy but the fact remains that 83% of total cases were reported 
from 10 States only and the recovered cases on that day  were more than double than the 
number of active cases.  The Secretary further submitted that AIIMS, New Delhi was 
conducting skill enhancement of doctors through video -conferencing on every Tuesday and 
Friday every week with duration of two and half hours where issues pertainin g to various 
aspects of treatment of COVID -19, viz, prescription of medicines, use of oxygen, high - flow 
nazal cannula or ventilators etc. were deliberated upon and the strategies planned. 
 
2.12 Data-bank of final -year students, interns and retired doctors  alongwith  their mobile 
numbers and addresses was prepared in each State to avail their service, if the need arose.  The 
Secretary informed that the Government of Karnataka has utilized the services of retired 
doctors on a large scale . Again  the effective clinical management of COVID -19 led to 
reduction of mortality rate to 2.1% in India which was lower in comparison to the global 
mortality rate. As various sectors of economy were being unlocked, there was perceived threat 

20 
 
of people being infected by COVID -19 at a rapid pace, therefore, COVID Appropriate 
Behaviour, viz., distance of two yards, mask -wearing and hand - hygiene and public -hygiene 
was emphasized upon.  
 
2.13 The Secretary further submitted that people's participation and service of opinion 
makers, people's representatives, viz., MLAs and MPs were required for successful 
implementation of mitigation plan intended to combat the challenges posed by COVID-19. 
 
STRATEGIES ADOPTED TO CONTAIN COVID-19 
 
2.14 The Ministry, in its written submission, stated  that the Government of India was 
following a containment strategy to break/suppress the cycle of transmission. The key activities 
under containment strategy being adopted for COVID-19 management were: 
 
i. Delineation of containment and buffer zones as per MoHFW guidelines based on 
geographic dispersion of cases and contacts. 
ii. Enforcing strict perimeter control around containment zones to restrict public 
movement except for essential services 
iii. House to house search in containment zones for early detection of c ases and their 
facility/home isolation as per MoHFW guidelines.  
iv. Ensuring special surveillance in areas such as urban settlements and those predicted as 
hotspots as per ITIHAS (based on Aarogya Setu and telecom data, mapping of cases, 
identification of clusters, contact tracing etc.) 
v. Contact tracing by local teams and placing contacts under home quarantine/facility 
quarantine. 
vi. Testing of suspect cases and contacts as per laid down guidance of ICMR. 
vii. Facility based treatment in dedicated COVID treatment facilities  
viii. Maintaining essential services in containment zones with adherence to COVID 
appropriate behaviour by personnel deployed for such purpose. 
2.15 The Ministry has submitted that even during unlock phase , the aforesaid containment 
strategy is being followed for managing clusters or large outbreaks of COVID.  
2.16 The Ministry, however, clarified that India has not followed a mitigation strategy. Such 
strategy implie d, allowing the virus to run through the population in an effort to mount herd 
immunity in the community while protecting the vulnerable population. In the absence of 
definite pharmaceutical intervention such as drugs or vaccines, the only intervention is u se of 
masks, hand hygiene and social distancing. Non adherence of such non-pharmaceutical 
interventions by the people may result in large number of cases and deaths in a short period of 
time. Countries (UK, Sweden and USA) that planned for mitigation as an  intervention in the 
early part of the Pandemic have experienced large number of cases and deaths. Further , it would 
take substantive time for such herd immunity to develop. 

21 
 
2.17 The Committee however differs from the viewpoint of the Ministry as it feels that all 
the steps taken to contain control and minimize the incidence may appropriately be called 
the Mitigation Plan.  
Role of National Center for Disease Control (NCDC) and Integrated Disease Surveillance 
Programme (IDSP) 
 
2.18 The National Center for D isease Control (NCDC) is a premier institution undertaking 
crucial tasks related to surveillance and response to epidemic prone disease in the country. 
NCDC conducted epidemiological investigation into COVID outbreaks for COVID 
assessment in various States. NCDC participated in Joint Monitoring Group and National Task 
Force for periodic review, planning & preparing the testing strategies.  NCDC’s apex 
laboratory provided laboratory support to Delhi and other States in north India and over 
1,33,049 samples have been tested by RT-PCR with an average turnaround time of 24 hours.  
2.19 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in collaboration with WHO technical support 
has developed and implemented a web -enabled Integrated Health Infrastructure Platform (IHIP), 
electronic information system to serve as a single, centralized mechanism to integrate health 
information across all health and health -relevant data from various national programs and 
entities. The Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) compone nt of IHIP has been 
launched so far in 9 States (Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, 
Odisha, Telangana, Kerala, Manipur and Maharashtra) in a phased manner. Training has been 
completed in many States and action is being initiated t o launch the same in remaining S tates. 
IDSP would help surveillance, contact tracing and monitoring of containment activities in 
COVID affected and non -COVID affected areas. By trainings, video conferencing and visits to 
various State/UTs as Cluster containment activities for COVID -19, these were being carried out 
routinely by district level IDSP units. Enhanced influenza like illness (ILI) and severe acute 
respiratory infections (SARI) surveillance is another important component for early detection of 
COVID cases. Capacity building by training the human resource on COVID -19 surveillance, 
Contact Tracing and Testing and Data Management is a continuous process being done by IDSP. 
2.20 The Committee is of the view that the unprecedented outbreak of Corona -virus 
required a well planned and coordinated response from the Central as well as State 
Governments for successful containment of the pandemic. There has to be an integrated as 
well as a decentralized response to outbreak of pandemic Covid -19 for rescuing the 
common masses.  The disease trend data under IDSP is crucial for generating the required 
response to contain the outbreak especially when Inter Sectoral Coordination for zoonotic 
diseases is one of the main programme components of IDSP. The Committee is constrained 
to observe the failure of NCDC -IDSP in generating the required response in the wake of 
the pandemic. The Committee feels that NCDP -IDSP should have been utilized in a more 
effective manner especially when the sole objective of IDSP is to detect and respond to 
outbreaks in the early rising phase through trained Rapid Response Teams (RRTs). The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for revitalizing the enshrined role and 
responsibility of NCDC for effective control of the disease  along with strengthening of the 
Central Surveillance Unit (CSU), State Surveillance Units (SSU) and District Surveillance 
Units (DSU). The Committee also recommends the Ministry to effect ively implement the 
various programme components under IDSP . The Committee would like the Ministry to 

22 
 
launch Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme in the remaining States  i.e. beyond 
existing 9 States .  The Committee observes that there is an urgent ne ed to assess the 
financial requirement for NCDP-IDSP for its revitalization. The Committee, in this 
connection, strongly recommends the Ministry to chalk out strategy and specific course of 
action to revamp the institutional and Human Resource Management s tructure and 
further strengthen NCDP -IDSP and pursue with the Ministry of Finance for higher 
budgetary allocation to NCDP-IDSP.   
 
Advisories and Guidelines for COVID-19:  
 
2.21 The Ministry has issued a number of guidelines and the same have been made available 
on the website of the Ministry (www.mohfw.gov.in) targeting various groups/activities such as 
(i) Travel (ii) Behavioural Health, (iii) Citizens, (iv) Hospitals, (v) State s / Departments / 
Ministries, (vi) Employees etc.  
 
2.22 Some of the important guidance documents are: 
 
i Guidance for sample Collection, Packaging and Transportation for COVID-19 
ii Guidance on surveillance for human infection with SARS COV-2 
iii Norms of assistance from State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) in wake of 
COVID-19 outbreak 
iv Guidelines on dead body management  
v Guidelines for notifying COVID-19 affected persons by Private Institutions 
vi Guidelines on rational use of Personal Protective Equipment 
vii Guidelines on disinfection of common public places including offices 
viii Advisory for quarantine of migrant workers 
ix Guidance document on appropriate management of suspect/confirmed cases of 
COVID-19 - Types of Covid-19 dedicated facilities 
x Guidance note for enabli ng Delivery of Essential Health Services during the 
COVID 19 Outbreak 
xi Guidelines to be followed on detection of suspect or confirmed COVID-19 case 
in a non-COVID Health Facility 
xii Additional guidelines for quarantine of returnees from abroad / contacts / 
isolation of suspect or confirmed cases in private facilities 
xiii Updated Additional guidelines on rational use of Personal Protective 
Equipment (setting approach for Health functionaries working in non -COVID 
areas) 
xiv Preparedness and response to COVID-19 in Urban Settlements 
xv Guidance note for Immunization services during and post COVID outbreak 
xvi Guidelines on preventive measures to contain spread of COVID -19 in 
workplace settings 
xvii Guidance note on Essential RMNCAH+N Services during and post COVID 
xviii Clinical Management Protocol for COVID-19. 
 
2.23 The Committee observes that plethora of guidelines issued by the Ministry in the 
course of the containment of outbreak of pandemic Covid -19 also caused ambiguity in 
interpretation of multiple guidelines . The contradiction in guidelines and the resultant 

23 
 
chaos among the general masses  could have been averted by making the public aware of 
the provision of guidelines  and better implementation of the advisories. Needless to say, 
particularly the separate guidelines on the quarantine issue by different State Governments 
created more panic and confusion.  
 
Surveillance in the community 
 
2.24 The Ministry further submitted that the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme 
(IDSP) had issued advisory to all States/UTs on 17.01.2019 for SARI surveillance to pick up 
any travel related case reported in the community and follow up contacts of suspec t/confirmed 
cases. Community surveillance was introduced initially for travel related cases and 
subsequently for clusters of cases being reported. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
released containment plans to contain cluster and large outbreaks on 2nd March and 4th April, 
2020 respectively and these plans were updated from time to time. The containment plans 
envisage a strategy of breaking the chain of transmission by (i) defining containment and 
buffer zones, (ii) applying strict perimeter control,  (iii) intensive active house to house search 
for cases and contacts, (iv) isolation and testing of suspect cases and high risk contacts, (v) 
quarantine of high risk contacts, (vi) intensive risk communication to raise community 
awareness on simple prevent ive measures and need for prompt treatment seeking and (vii) 
strengthening of passive ILI/SARI surveillance in containment and buffer zones.  
 
2.25 The Committe e has been informed that on 24 th July, there were 24,923 active 
containment zones in the country . During house to house surveillance elderly and other high 
risk population (in particular those with co -morbidities) were identified and followed up. In 
high density populations like urban settlements, such high risk population were moved out of 
such sett lements into quarantine facilities. IDSP covered and enabled cumulative total of 
32,68,042 persons from 37 States/UTs, out of that IDSP, 11,60,152 have completed 28 days of 
observation period. Hence the total number of persons under IDSP follow up was 21,0 7,890 as 
on 24th July, 2020. That was besides the follow up of confirmed and suspected cases in 
containment zones from time to time.    
 
2.26 The Committee believes that contact tracing, testing and isolating are the crucial 
components for Covid-19 containment strategy. The Committee is of the view that poor 
contact tracing and slow testing in the initial phase of pandemic led to the increased 
number of infections in the country.  
Hospital Infrastructure 
 
2.27 The Ministry, in its b ackground note, submitted that for appropriate management of 
suspect/confirmed COVID -19 cases, a three tier arrangement of health facilities has been 
implemented in consultation with the State Governments as per the following details: 
 
(a). COVID Care Center (CCC) to care for mild cases are being set up in hostels, hotels, 
schools, stadiums, lodges etc., both public and private. If need be, existing quarantine 
facilities could also be converted into COVID Care Centers. Functional hospitals like 
CHCs, etc, which may be handling regular, non-COVID cases might also be designated 
as COVID Care Centers as a last resort.  

24 
 
(b). Dedicated COVID Health Centre (DCHC) that shall offer care for all cases that have 
been clinically assigned as moderate. These should either be a fu ll hospital or a 
separate block in a hospital with preferably separate entry/exit/zoning. Private hospitals 
might also be designated as COVID Dedicated Health Centres. These hospitals would 
have beds with assured Oxygen support.  
(c). Dedicated COVID Hospi tal (DCH) shall offer comprehensive care primarily for those 
who have been clinically assigned as severe. These Hospitals should either be a full 
hospital or a separate block in a hospital with preferably separate entry/exit. The 
Ministry further submitted  that private hospitals might also be designated as COVID 
Dedicated Hospitals. These hospitals w ould have fully equipped ICUs, v entilators and 
beds with assured o xygen support. Tertiary care hospitals under ESIC, Defence, 
Railways, paramilitary forces, Ste el Ministry etc. were also being leveraged for case 
management. States have opted for public private partnership with many private 
hospitals coming forward to work as stand -alone COVID hospitals.  DRDO set up 
large field hospitals with capacities ranging from 1000 to 10,000 isolation beds.   
 
2.28 To a specific query about steps to be taken to enhance the health infrastructure in the 
country and the requisite funds for the purpose, the Department of Health & Family Welfare 
has submitted that the announcemen ts made under the Atma Nirbhar Bharat underlines the 
commitment of the Government for the health sector in terms of increase public expenditure 
on health by investing in health and ramping up health infrastructure for management of 
infectious diseases at the District and Block levels. A proposal named Prime Minister Atma 
Nirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojana (PM -ASBY) for strengthening the public health system for 
effective pre paredness and response was under consideration of the Government. The 
Committee has been informed that the activities proposed under PM -ASBY include the 
following: 
 
(i) Strengthening Surveillance of Infectious Diseases and Outbreak Response  
(ii) Strengthening surveillance capacity of Points of Entry 
(iii) Strengthening laboratory capacity with integrated public health labs in all the 
Districts. Strengthening of VRDL network of laboratories and setting up of new 
BSL 2-3 laboratories. 
(iv) Strengthening emergency response t hrough Health Emergency Ceration Ccntres 
and Mobile Hospitals  
(v) Early case management through infectious disease blocks in Central Hospitals and 
in district hospitals and strengthening health and wellness centers in rural and 
urban areas 
(vi) Leverage digital te chnology for infectious disease management through National 
Digital Health Mission and strengthening digital services  
(vii) Research on epidemiology, drugs, diagnostics and vaccines by Department of 
Health Research/ ICMR 
 
2.29 The Committee observes that the P radhan Mantri Atma Nirbhar Swasth Bharat 
Yojana is an ambitious program of the government that encompasses vital components 
to consolidate and enrich health infrastructure in the country.  The Committee 
recommends that government should not leave any stone  unturned in implementing its 
each and every component to achieve its cherished goal.  

25 
 
Availability of Beds 
2.30 One of the most crucial aspects of the pandemic was seeking a hospital bed for those 
affected with Covid. States have opted for public private partnership with many private hospitals 
to work as stand -alone COVID hospitals. DRDO has set up large field hospitals with capacities 
ranging from 1000 to 10,000 isolation beds.   
2.31 Beds dedicated for Covid (As on 25 th July, 2020) in central hospitals and hospitals with 
other ministries are as follows:  
State Hospital                           Total beds       COVID 
beds 
Manipur RIMS                                                      1060 50 
Meghalaya                                              NEIGRIHMS 700   180 
 
Delhi 
LHMC and associated Hospitals    1252 147   
Dr. RML Hospital                      1572 242 
Safdarjung Hospital                    2873 289 
AIIMS, Delhi & Jhajjar                  3515                   1515 
Bihar AIIMS, Patna                         820                      680 
Chhattisgarh AIIMS, Raipur                       800                       400 
M. P.                AIIMS, Bhopal                      793 248 
Odisha   AIIMS, Bhubaneswar           922                       218 
Rajasthan AIIMS, Jodhpur                    960                      290 
Uttarakhand AIIMS, Rishikesh 960                      355 
 
2.32 States upload on the COVID portal the number of beds allocated by the States in different 
COVID facilities. Availability of beds as on 13.10.2020 is as shown below:- 
Status of COVID Dedicated Facilities and availability of beds as on 13.10.2020 
S. No. Equipment Status As on date (13.10.20) 
1.       
Dedicated COVID-19 
treatment facilities 
15,239 
  
2.       
Isolation Beds 
(without oxygen 
support) 12,73,100 
3.       
Isolation Beds (with 
Oxygen support) 26,4107 
4.       ICU beds 76,709 
5.       
Ventilators 
supported beds  39,476 
 
Category No of Facilities 
Cat. I - Dedicated COVID Hospitals 
/ DCH 220 

26 
 
Cat. II - Dedicated COVID Health 
Center / DCHC 4153 
Cat. III - Dedicated COVID Center 
/ DCCC 8880 
Grand Total 15239 
 
2.33 Additionally, it was decided to use railway coaches as COVID Care Centre for the very 
mild/ mild cases. So far, the State Governments have requisitioned for 736 coaches for being 
used as COVID Quarantine Centres against which Railways have provided 813 coaches having 
12472 be ds.  Till 21.07.2020, total number of 454 COVID patients were admitted in these 
COVID Care Centres out of which 330 patients were discharged.  Out of Rs. 620 crores allocated 
to Railways, 140 crores have been allocated for conversion of coaches into COVID Care 
Centers. 
 
2.34 The Committee observes that the total number of Government hospital beds in the 
country was grossly inadequate keeping in view the rising incidence of Covid -19 cases. 
Attention of the Committee has also been brought to Media Reports which highlighted the 
abysmally low number of beds in Government hospital s in the country especially at the 
peak of the pandemic. Data from National Health Profile –2019 states that there are total 
7,13,986 Government hospital beds available in India which amounts to 0.55 beds per 1,000 
population. As per Reports, 12 States stand below the national level figure. The Committee 
notes that lack of hospital beds  and the inadequate ventilators further complicated t he 
efficacy of the containment plan against the pandemic. As the numbers of cases were on the 
rise, a frantic search for vacant hospital beds became quite harrowing. Instances of 
patients being turned away from overburdened hospitals due to lack of vacant beds became 
the new normal. The scenario of patients holding oxygen cylinder rushing from pillar to 
post in search of bed in AIIMS Patna is a testimony to fact that tear apart humanity. The 
Committee is aggrieved at the poor state of healthcare system and therefore, recommends 
the Government to increase the investment in public health and take appropriate steps to 
decentralize the healthcare services/facilities in the country.  
2.35 The Committee is pained to observe that in RML hospital out of the 1572 bed s, only 
242 beds were dedicated COVID beds whereas in Safdarjung Hospital, out of 2873 beds, 
only 289 were reserved for Covid patients. The Committee fails to understand the rationale 
behind the miniscule number of beds reserved for Covid patients in the C entral 
Government Hospitals especially at a time when the number of covid patients were 
increasing rapidly in the capital city. The Committee, therefore, desires the Ministry to 
submit a note on the rationale for allocating such limited number of beds for COVID 
patients.  The Committee would like to be apprised regarding the status of beds exclusively 
reserved for COVID patients in the capital of the country.  
2.36 The Committee has been given to understand that Railways have provided 813 
coaches having 12472 beds for conversion of coaches into COVID Care Centers . As per 
information submitted by the Ministry till 21.07.2020, only 454 COVID patients were 
admitted in these COVID Care Centres. The Committee fails to comprehend the 
underutilization of the ava ilable resources especially at a time when people struggled to 

27 
 
find a bed in the hospitals. The Committee expects a convincing response from the Ministry 
on the issue.  
Increasing demand of non-invasive Oxygen Cylinders 
2.37 On 16 th October, 2020, t he Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare 
informed the Committee that the Ministry has requested the National Pharmaceutical Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) to fix the price of Oxygen as non -invasive Oxygen has been found to deliver 
good results. Since the hospitals are using Oxygen on a large scale, the consumption of oxygen is 
increasing.  The overall production in the country is roughly in the region of 6,900 metric ton 
every day. Out of 6,900 metric ton, the highest consumption of medical oxygen was r eported in 
mid-September, in and around 24 th  or 25th  September, when the consumption was almost 3,000 
metric ton of oxygen a day. He also submitted that during the pre -Covid days, the consumption 
of medical oxygen was almost 1,000 metric tons per day and  the rest of the 6000 metric tons of 
oxygen was being used in the Industry. Therefore, there is a strong need to ensure that the 
oxygen inventory is in place and oxygen prices are controlled. 
2.38 The Committee agrees with the Department that the pandemic has led to an 
unprecedented increase in the demand of non -invasive Oxygen Cylinders a nd instances of 
lack of Oxygen C ylinders in the hospitals had also been reported. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly advocates National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority to  take 
appropriate measures for capping the price of the Oxygen Cylinders so that the availability 
as well as affordability of the Oxygen Cylinders is ensured in all hospitals for medical 
consumption. The Committee also recommends the Government for encoura ging adequate 
production of Oxygen for ensuring its supply as per demand in the hospitals. 
Laboratory support 
 
2.39 The Ministry, in its Background Note, submitted that starting with just one laboratory 
for testing of samples for COVID -19, the network of e xisting laboratories has been expanded 
vastly to test samples for COVID-19. As on 10th November, 2020, the total number of labs for 
COVID-19 testing is 2082 out of which 1143 are Government laboratories and 939 are Private 
laboratories as per table:  
 
  
Sr. 
No. 
COVID-19 Tests Total Labs Government 
Labs 
Private 
Labs 
1 Real-Time RT PCR 
for COVID-19 
1116 507+ 609 
2 TrueNat Test for 
COVID-19 
838 601+ 237 
3 CBNAAT Test for 
COVID-19 
128 35+ 93 
 
2.40 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry for augmenting the testing 
infrastructure in such a short period of time and believes that testing , isolating and 
treating holds the key for containing the virus.  
 

28 
 
2.41 ICMR had also undertaken a detailed exercise to upgrade diagnostic capacity 
development in the country. Adequate numbers of testing kits are also available and the same 
is being monitored by ICMR. RT -PCR test recommended by ICMR is considered the Gold 
Standard for diagnosis of COVID -19. In addition, rapid antigen test has been introduced for 
testing in containment zones and in hospital settings. Those found positive by this test are 
considered as ‘true positives’.  Those found symptomatic but late test negative should be 
sequentially tested by RT -PCR. Besides the Gold Standard RT -PCR, TrueNat an d CBNAAT 
techniques are also being used for testing. In addition, Rapid Antigen testing is being utilized 
for point of care testing in containment zones and hospitals. States are conducting sero -
prevalence studies using antibody based testing for identifying susceptible population.  
 
2.42 As regards, the testing criteria, the Ministry submitted that the strategy for COVID -19 
testing in India has evolved over the months with the changing trajectory of the current 
COVID-19 pandemic. At the start of the pandemic, only international travelers from affecte d 
countries and regions were being considered for testing. The modified testing criteria now 
include high risk contacts, health care workers, patients of severe acute respiratory infection. 
Subsequent changes in testing strategies also included Influenza l ike illness (ILI) patients and 
Severe Acute Respiratory Illness (SARI) patients in containment zones, buffer zones and 
hospital settings, as well as symptomatic ILI among returnees and migrants within 7 days of 
illness.  In response to a query regarding th e number of tests conducted from March to 
October, the Ministry submitted the following data:  
 
Month wise details of COVID-19 tests conducted (March to October 2020) 
Month Tests 
March 33330 
April 864517 
May 2937283 
June 4993407 
July 10532295 
August 23977081 
September 33069878 
October  33878288 
                                                                                                    
2.43 The Ministry clarified that at the beginning of the pandemic, testing was confined to 
international travelers from affected countries and thus the numbers were comparatively low as 
compared to later when testing was extended to contacts, health care workers as well as 
asymptomatic con tacts. As per estimates, the laboratories functional in March 2020 were 
testing only 30% of their full capacity.  
 
2.44 The Committee was informed that ICMR has instituted fast track mechanisms for 
validation of RT -PCR diagnostic material (RT -PCR kits, antibody ELISAs/ Rapid kits, RNA 
extraction kits and VTMs). A total of 24 Institutions have been identified and designated to 
perform validation. Status of validation of kits is as follows: 
 

29 
 
i. ICMR-National Institute of Virology has very effectively used the  SARS-CoV-2 virus 
isolated at the Institute to develop IgG ELISA test. Technology transfer has been 
effectively made to seven indigenous companies. The kits are available in the market. 
IgG ELISA is useful to conduct sero -surveys in vulnerable populations and also 
understand the proportion of population infected and recovered from COVID-19. 
 
ii. To facilitate testing at district level, ICMR has also tapped the TrueNat machines for TB 
diagnosis. The Truenat COVID19 screening and confirmatory test has been valida ted by 
ICMR and now the machines have been deployed to testing even in district level 
hospitals. Since TrueNat platform comes with an inbuilt sample collection in viral lysis 
buffer, the virus is inactivated and the biosafety requirements are minimal while  handling 
the sample. Similarly, alternate platforms working on GeneXpert and Abott machines 
engaged in testing TB and HIV viral load testing respectively have also been mapped and 
operationalized. 
 
2.45 As regards the variability in RT -PCR Testing due to use of different kits, the Ministry 
apprised the Committee that variations do exist between the RT -PCR kits manufactured by 
different companies due to variations in the factors that inter-alia include sample volume, 
primers, probes/fluorophores, enzyme sys tems and target genes, etc.  The validation procedures 
aim to keep these variations at a minimum level by comparing all the different kits with the 
results of a single standard kit. However, post validation, the quality of the kits differ while 
manufacturing is done on a large scale. Batch testing is being done to test quality at this stage.  
The Ministry submitted the following data  regarding the specificity and sensitivity of different 
COVID-19 Tests:  
 
 
2.46 The Committee observes that only 33, 330 and 8,64,517 tests were conducted in the 
month of March and April respectively which increased to 33,878,288 in the month of 
October. The Committee believes that poor contact tracing and less testing could have been 
a factor for the exponential growth of COVID cases in the country. The Committee is also 
worried at the use of less reliable diagnostic tests which increase the chances of false 
negatives. Though the Rapid Antigen Tests may give faster results but are less reliable than 
the gold standard RT -PCR tests. Large scale use of such tests with low specificity and 
Type of Kit Acceptance Criteria 
RT-PCR Kit Sensitivity: 94.7% and above (71 out of 75 samples positive) 
Specificity: 98.8% and above (84 out of 85 samples negative) 
RNA Extraction Kit 95% concordance among positive  
90% concordance among negative samples  
> 95 % samples showed amplification in internal control 
VTM 100% concordance among spiked samples 
100% samples showed amplification in internal control 
Antibody Rapid Kit Sensitivity: >90% 
Specificity: 99% and above  
ELISA / CLIA kit IgM: Sensitivity- > 90%, Specificity-99% and above  
IgG: Sensitivity- > 90%, 
        Specificity- 95% and above 

30 
 
sensitivity may end up giving false negatives and subsequently derail the Covid -19 
containment strategy.  The Committee is of the view that the Government must assess the 
veracity of Rapid Antigen Test vis -à-vis RT-PCR and other diagnostic tests conducted to 
bring forth the true picture of the testing capacity in the country. The Committee,  
therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to ramp up the testing facilities in the country 
for more accurate tests. The Committee strongly recommends the testing rate through the 
more reliable RT-PCR tests.  
2.47 The Committee also underlines the need t o encourage domestic medical device 
manufacturing industry so that the import of diagnostic kits from other countries is 
minimized. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to boost investment 
and innovation in the medical device industry in the country.   
Nationwide Sero-survey 
2.48 ICMR conducted a n ationwide serosurvey to estimate the overall seroprevalence of 
SARS-CoV-2 infection. As per information submitted by the Ministry, the first sero -survey 
conducted by ICMR in May 2019  which indicated that less than 1% of the population was 
exposed to SARS -Cov-2 infection. In containment zones where the transmission is expected to 
be high, the sero -prevalence was found to be higher. These findings indicate wider spread of 
infection limited to  pockets or containment zones and not entire cities. The ongoing control 
measures in terms of testing, contact tracing, quarantining of contacts and isolation of positives 
as well as non -pharmaceutical interventions need to continue in order to prevent the spread of 
infection. 
2.49 To a specific query on findings of other rounds of serological survey conducted by 
ICMR, the Ministry submitted that ICMR conducted population sero-surveilance involving about 
60 districts with a sample size of about 24,000. The f irst round was conducted in April – May 
2020  and  the second round August - September 2020. The National seroprevalence was 0.7% in 
the first round and 6.6% in the second round. Both these seroprevalence studies highlighted that 
a substantive population are still susceptible to COVID infection. In the Committee meeting held 
on 16th October, 2020, the Secretary, Department of Health Research informed that in rural areas 
the sero-prevalance is almost 4 percent whereas it is 8 percent and 16 percent in urban areas and 
urban-slums respectively.  
2.50 On the reason behind the different results of sero-survey conducted in Delhi, the Ministry 
submitted that the difference could be due to a number of variables includ ing methodology 
adopted by the investigators, difference in population groups sampled, sensitivity and specificity 
of kits, different time periods during which the tests were conducted etc. For these reasons , no 
statistical inference can be drawn. The details of sero-surveys conducted in Delhi are as follows:  
Sl. 
No. 
Dates of 
Sero 
surveys 
Sample 
size 
Overall 
Sero 
prevalence 
Kit used for testing Whether 
district 
wise sero 
prevalence 
calculated 
Remarks 
1 June 27 -
10 July, 
2020 
21387 22.83% ICMR approved 
ELISA (COVID 
Kawach- sensitivity: 
Yes Conducted 
by NCDC in 
collaboration 

31 
 
92.1% specificity -
97.7%) 
with Delhi 
govt. 
2.  August 1 
to August 
7, 2020 
15,239 28.35% ICMR approved 
ELISA (COVID 
Kawach- sensitivity: 
92.1% specificity -
97.7%)  
Yes Maulana 
Azad 
Medical 
College and 
Delhi govt. 
3 September 
1 to 
September 
05 
17,409 25.1% ERBALISA Covid19 
kit (sensitivity - 
99.12%; specificity -
99.3%) 
Yes Maulana 
Azad 
Medical 
College and 
Delhi govt. 
 
2.51 The Committee understands that Covid -19 Seroprevalence survey is crucial for 
studying the exte nt to which the Corona virus had spread among the Indian population. 
The Committee observes  that sero -survey tests account  for the presence of antibodies 
amongst the person s who might have suffered from SARS-COV-2 virus. The Committee 
notes that despite limitations due to volley of variable factors , the data received from tests 
and surveys provides useful information on the trends in new infections and better 
understanding of the pandemic . The seropreval ence survey would enable the Government 
to formulate its strategy and the course of acti on plan to contain the expansion of the 
COVID-19. 
Capacity building and Health Resource Management  
 
2.52 The Ministry, in its background Note, submitted that Rapid Response Teams (RRTs) of 
the States/UTs were trained in 2014 in management of a similarly placed virus namely MERS-
CoV outbreak . More recently (in Nov -Dec, 2019) these Rapid Response Teams of all 
States/UTs, APHO/PHOs and Regional Directors of  Ministry of He alth and Family Welfare 
have also been trained on management of high risk pathogens in context of Ebola virus disease 
outbreak in Democratic Republic of Congo. Immigration officers have been sensitized to 
traveler's history of travel to China .  A National level Training of Trainers was organized by 
MoHFW in collaboration with the World Health Organization on 6 th March, 2020 with 270 
participants from all States/UTs participating and 1000 persons joining through Video link. 
States were asked to replicate the trainings at State and district levels so as to cover all districts 
and health facilities by 20th March, 2020. Various cadres of personnel and volunteers across 
sectors and departments that can be involved, in not only COVID related work but also for 
ensuring maintenance of other essential medical services, have been worked out, pooling 
manpower resources from Defence, AYUSH, NCC, NSS, NYK, public sector enterprises, and 
private sector. The respective roles of these cadres have also been mapped. 
 
2.53 The Ministry further submitted that a S oP for reallocation of residents/PG students and 
nursing students as part of hospital management has been prepared. An ‘Advisory for Human 
Resource Management of COVID -19’ has been prepared providing guidance to States/UT s to 
build the capacities of human resources including the medical manpower who help managing 
patients in hospitals; as well as non -medical personnel, front -line workers, who may be 

32 
 
involved in non -medical duties such as logistics, surveillance etc., for C OVID-19 
management.   
 
2.54 The Training Resources for medical and non-medical personnel on infection prevention 
and control, clinical management including ventilation, logistics etc. is being updated regularly 
and is available on the website of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. State Government and 
institutions are also being encouraged to conduct required training by mobilizing necessary 
resources.  Online training and webinars for Physicians and Nursing personnel is being 
conducted by AIIMS on managem ent of patients with COVID -19, septic shock, ventilation 
strategy, management of aerosol generating medical procedures, infection and prevention 
control practices, psychological care of patients etc.  In addition to that, training m odules have 
also been mad e available on iGOT online platform by DOPT (https://igot.gov.in/igot) where 
pre-curated content can be accessed on all devices - smart phones, tablets, laptops, PCs - by 
multiple learners simultaneously at the time and place of their choice. The training m odules 
have been translated to regional languages. Currently, there are 12 courses in different 
languages which have been uploaded under the MoHFW tab on the website including courses 
on topics like- 
 
i. Basics of COVID-19 
ii. Quarantine and isolation 
iii. Infection prevention through PPE 
iv. Psychological care of patients with COVID-19 
v. Infection prevention and control 
vi. Laboratory sample collection and testing 
vii. Clinical management of COVID-19 
viii. Management of COVID-19 
ix. ICU Care and Ventilation Management  
 
2.55 Similarly, addit ional Human Resources such as anaesthetists, physicians and other 
specialists, doctors, nurses and other necessary medical and paramedical staff have been 
engaged by the States \UTs. Additional incentives are also being provided to staff on COVID 
duties. In surance cover of Rs. 50 lakhs has been provided to 22 lakhs health professionals, 
including front line workers and ASHAs, involved across the country in COVID -19 
management, under the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana, for a three months period up to 
June 2020. As on 13.07.2020, a total of Rs. 130 crore have been spent on insurance of health 
workers under the PMGKY.  
 
2.56 President, Public Health Foundation of India submitted that India has a shortage of health 
workers. For attainment of  Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)  and delivery of Universal 
Health Coverage, WHO  recommended 44  health workers per 10,000 population  whereas 
presently, India has 22 health workers per 10,000. There is also marked maldistribution of these 
human resources across the  country, with rural areas expe riencing shortages and several S tates 
having much lower health worker density than the national average. 
2.57 Indian Public Health Association (IPHA), Indian Association of Preventive and Social 
Medicine (IAPSM) & Indian Asso ciation of Epidemiologists submitted that States like Tamil 
Nadu and Gujarat with existing public health cadre are relatively better placed in handling such 

33 
 
public health crisis on their own. They suggested an early establishment of a dedicated, efficient, 
and adequately resourced public health cadre as Indian Health Service (IHS) in the Center and 
across States as recommended by various national committees and expert groups since 1946 on 
the pattern of Indian Administrative Service (IAS).' 
2.58 The Committee finds that the healthcare workers lack the skills required for 
epidemic outbreak investigation, contact tracing, counselling, home care and community 
mobilization. The Committee  underlines an urgent need for capacity building and 
maintaining the pool of health resources  to fight against the outbreak of the pandemic . 
The Committee strongly supports the demand for the 'Indian Health Service' ( IHS) in 
the Center and across S tates as a dedicated, efficient, and adequately resourced public 
health cadre on the pattern of Indian Administrative Service (IAS).  Creation of Indian 
Health Service (IHS) can help in streamlining the healthcare delivery as envisaged in the 
National Health Policy 2017.   
 
2.59 The Ministry further submitted that capacity building  initiatives to conduct large scale 
containment operations for active case search and tracking has been carried out which include 
training of trainers of State Surveillance Officers, Rapid Response Teams and grass root level 
workers/volunteers identified for surveillance activities, ASHAs, Anganwadi Workers, Auxiliary 
Nurse Midwives, National Service Scheme, Indian Red Cross Society volunteers, Nehru Yuvak 
Kendra Volunteers, Ayush Students and National Cadet Corps. 
2.60 Accredited Social Health Activists (A SHA) and Anganwadi workers are playing a key 
role in contact -tracing, surveys and awareness generation. They observed a two -day strike (7 -8 
August 2020) protesting against inadequate assistance from the government in the COVID 
response including lack of safety equipment, payment of salary and risk allowance. 
2.61 The Committee applauds the ASHA, ANM and Anganwadi workers who were at 
the forefront of community surveillance and risked their lives at these challenging times. 
The Committee expresses its anguish over the instances of ASHA workers being mistreated 
engaged for contact tracing and that too in the absence of safety equipment like masks, 
PPE kits for them. The Committee is also pained to note that community health workers 
were denied wages even though they are the foot soldiers of the healthcare system. It is too 
much to expect from the community health workers to accomplish big task without proper 
training, incentives and support from the health system. The Committee strongly advocates 
for strengthening the network of ASHAs, ANMs and other community health workers and 
the necessary support in the healthcare delivery system. The Committee also recommends 
the Ministry to improve the quality of trainin g imparted to health workers so as to enable 
them to provide effective and efficient delivery of healthcare service s. Regular training to 
the community health workers and Anganwadi workers particularly in the post COVID 
scenario of increasing incidence of Covid-19 cases and complexities involved in the post 
Covid-19 treatment of infected persons  has become more relevant and an inevitable 
intervention.  
2.62 The Committee expresses concern over the large numbers of vacancies in secondary 
and tertiary public hospitals which considerably increases the dependence on private 
providers and contractual workers. In its earlier reports, the Committee has been pointing 
out gross shortage of healthcare workforce in the country. The Committee  urges upon the 

34 
 
Ministry to fill up the posts of specialist lying vacant at Community Health Centres (CHC); 
doctors at Primary Health Centres (PHC), ANMs and nurses at accentuated pace to meet 
India’s health needs without any further delay.  
2.63 Attention of the Committe e has also brought to Integrated Disease Surveillance 
Programme (IDSP) which is mandated to conduct different training programmes for 
epidemiologists, microbiologists, entomologists, finance consultants and other support staff. 
FETP is a two week long trai ning course designed to train Disease Surveillance Officer (DSOs)/ 
Epidemiologists to enhance their epidemiological skills in outbreak investigations. As per the 
information available on IDSP website, the total 756 DSOs have been trained through FETP 
program throughout the country till April 2016. Further the IDSP conducted one FETP for 21 
DSOs/epidemiologists from 24 th December, 2018 - 5th January, 2019 at PGIMER, Chandigarh  
and One FETP 20 epidemiologists between 10th - 22nd September, 2018 at PHFI, Delhi.   
2.64 The Committee would like to highlight that t he National  Commission for Allied and 
Healthcare Professions Bill, 2020 as introduced in Lok Sabha intends to strike a working balance 
between medical professionals and alli ed and healthcare professionals. The Bill aims to 
strengthen the health workforce and also increase access to quality health services through 
qualified and competent set of allied and healthcare professionals. 
2.65 The Statement of Objects and Reasons (SOR) to the Bill stip ulates that as per estimation 
of the World Health Organization, by the year 2030, the global economy is projected to create 
around forty million new health sector jobs mostly in the m iddle and high income countries, 
However, despite the anticipated growth in jobs there shall be projected shortage of fifteen 
million health workers to achieve the sustainable development goals in low and lower middle 
income countries.  
2.66 The Committee recognizes the crucial role of Epidemiologists in underlying the 
distribution of disease an d the strategy for its control and therefore better trained health 
workers in epidemiology are fundamental for a robust surveillance system. The Committee 
observes that the Workforce Development Action Package under the Global Hea lth 
Security Agenda (GHSA) sets a target of one trained field epidemiologist per 200,000 
population. India, being a member of GHSA should positively work on capacity building of 
the frontline epidemiology workforce.  
2.67 The Committee, in its 117 th Report on the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill 
2018, has exhaustively examined the different clauses of the Bill. The Committee had 
recommended for need of de -medicalisation and bringing forth the Allied and Healthcare 
Profession to the forefront of patient care and safety. With the unprecedented testing times  
of the current pandemic where the health sector world over is struggling with heavy disease 
burden the allied health sector  needs to be strengthen ed. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry that along with medical professionals, the quality management of 
nursing and allied professionals in the country must also be ensured. 
Logistics 
 
2.68 The Ministry, in its background n ote, submitted that at the onset of COVID pandemic, 
there were no indige nous manufacturers of PPEs with requisite standards. That capacity was 
up-scaled with involvement of Ministry of Textiles, Department of Pharmaceuticals, Central 

35 
 
Drugs Standard Control Organisation ( CDSCCO), Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Directorate 
General of Foreign Trade  (DGFT), National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority ( NPPA) by 
promoting indigenous manufacturers and ensuring market availability. A technical committee 
under DGHS reviewed and revised specifications to enable indigenous  manufacturers to 
manufacture and provide coveralls in requisite number. 
 
2.69 The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that as on 23rd July, 2020, nearly 
109 domestic manufacturers have cleared quality tests so far and orders for over 1.62 Crore 
PPEs have been placed with them. Successful efforts were made in conjunction with Ministry 
of External Affairs to place order for PPE Kits from abroad. Orders for 30 lakh PPEs were 
placed on foreign sources. A total orders of 1.92 crore PPEs have been placed  by the Central 
Government so far. Initially Central procurement was done.  As on 23 rd July, 2020, the 
Ministry has already supplied 1.17 Crore PPE Kits and 2.50 crore N-95 masks to States.  
 
2.70 The Ministry further submitted that with the country now at taining self sufficiency, the 
PPEs made available on GeM and in addition to the central supply, States have  also been 
requested to assess their own stocks, and procure the same accordingly. As on 23rd July, 2020, 
Govt. has a buffer stock of 11.45 crore tablets of Hydroxychloroquine, of which 6.45 crore has 
been issued to States/UTs. Similarly, and of a central stock of 26.8 lakh tablets of 
Azithromycin, 21.5 lakh tablets have been issued to the affected States so far.   Again, 18,013 
ventilators had been allocated to States of which 14,616 had been delivered. 
 
2.71 The country is self -sufficient in oxygen and oxygen cylinders. The Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare has placed orders for 102400 oxygen cylinders of which 80,629 have been 
delivered to the States as on 17th July, 2020.  
 
2.72 The Committee notes that the healthcare workers had to work under huge stress 
due to shortage of PPE kits amidst impending threat of corona virus infection  as a res ult, 
quite many of them had to l ose their precious lives. The Committee pays tribute to the 
doctors and nurses who have sacrificed their lives while combating Covid -19. The Ministry 
needs to ensure that there is no shortage of personal protective equipment (PPE) kits.  The 
Committee also recommends the Min istry to ensure the adequate supply of oxygen 
cylinders with appropriate price caps.  
 
2.73 The Committee observes that disposal of biomedical waste has become a big 
challenge in the wake of the pandemic. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
the Ministry to ensure that the States strictly implement the guidelines on management of 
corona virus related bio-medical waste and take all sorts of requisite safety measures.   
 
 
Risk Communication 
 
2.74 Population Foundation of India viewed the strategies adopted as a systems response 
and as a community response. System response was through the ti mely decision of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare . Government of India (GOI)  in its guid elines to the 
State Governments on “Enabling Delivery of Essential Health Services during the COVID 19 
Outbreak” dated 14 th April 2020 has requested for provision of essential services, including 

36 
 
family planning, immunization and other critical maternal and child health services. 
Convergence among the departments of Health, Women and Child Development, Education, 
Rural Development, Panchayat Raj and ot hers for food distribution  has been a good initiative .  
Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) have also stepped up particularly in the area of awareness 
generation and distribution of food commodities.  There were concerted efforts on 
communication and awaren ess building through digital platforms.  As regards community 
response, there was increased involvement of gram panchayats in awareness generation, 
vigilance and screening activities. Also, Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee 
(VHSNC) members across states played a crucial role in educa ting the community on 
preventive measures of hand washing, physical distancing and use of masks. 
 
2.75 The Ministry submitted that the MoHFW website is being updated daily to provide 
information on current status  of COVID-19 spread in India. Media briefing/ press releases are 
held daily. Communication material and toolkits in the form of pamphlets, poster, audio and 
AV films have been provided to the States. Communication material is also being hosted on 
MoHFW web site and through social media. Dos and don’ts are being widely circulated 
through SMS . Caller-tune messages are being used through telecom subscribers in 13 
Languages Community to brief about action taken by Ministry through electronic and print 
media as well as social media. Technical Officials from Ministry have attended various shows 
in Doordarshan/TV Channels to brief community at large. A dedicated call centre / helpline 
(1075) has been started to guide community at large which is being used by the cit izens very 
effectively and on a regular basis. As on 21 -07-2020, a total of 34,83,622 calls have been 
received on the COVID-19 helpline 1075. 
 
2.76 The Committee notes the Ministry 's initiative to ensure appropriate risk 
communication through SMS and caller tunes. However, the Committee feels that 
information dissemination regarding covid -19 in rural areas is still inadequate. The 
Committee, therefore,  recommends the Ministry to enco urage active participation of self 
help groups, the Panchayats and the Gram Sabhas for better public health messaging. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to take more inclusive measures for bringing a 
behavioral change regarding hand-washing and mask wearing among the masses.  
SWOT ANALYSIS 
 
2.77 A SWOT analysis of the Government's contingent and mitigation plans pertaining to 
COVID-19 as received from various stakeholders is as follows:- 
 
Strengths Weaknesses 
(i) Coordinated national response and 
proactive surveillance 
(ii) Early impact of lockdown on virus 
dissemination and deaths 
(iii) Step up in National capacity for 
manufacture of medical equipment, test 
kits and drugs  
(iv) Increase in healthcare facility for 
quarantine, isolation, treatment and 
intensive care 
(i) Inadequate healthcare spending with 
no focused budget for Covid 
(ii) Inadequate primary and secondary 
healthcare infrastructure and staffing 
in many areas.  Absence of 
organized urban primary healthcare 
has been a major weakness  
(iii) Although health infrastructure was 
massively upgraded but the scale 
and speed was not commensur ate to 

37 
 
(v) Increase in testing labs and testing 
rates  
(vi) Diligent contact tracing to identify 
primary and secondary contacts of 
cases 
(vii) Capacity Building of all levels of 
workers through tailor made modules 
(viii) Risk communication through various 
means and campaigns like ‘B reak the 
Chain’ 
(ix) Digital healthcare modals like tele -
medicine, e-ICU etc. enabling access to 
quality healthcare 
(x) Delegation of powers to local 
administration under Disaster 
Management Act facilitated inter -
institutional coordination (health, 
police, municipa l, local govt. etc.) 
planning and response at district level 
(xi) Convergence among the Department of 
Health, WCD Education, Rural 
Development Panchayat Raj and others 
for Food distribution, IEC, local 
surveillance, availability of masks, 
sanitizers, screening and vigilance and 
awareness etc. 
(xii) ASHAs and Angandwadi workers 
playing a critical role in community 
outreach  
the population size and demand for 
services for the peak transmission 
season 
(iv) Districts and States with already 
fragile health infrastructure unable to 
cope with demand for testing, 
tracing and treatment during peak 
transmission  
(v) Gaps in implementati on strategies 
and measures by some States 
especially in initial months 
(vi) Delays in coordination between the 
Centre and States 
(vii) Inadequate contact tracing in many 
areas leading to high rates of viral 
spread despite increased testing 
(viii) Lack of public health exper tise at 
various levels of the health system 
(ix) Reverse migration during lockdown 
and the inability of the system to 
cope up with the huge migrating 
population 
(x) Excessive dependence on Rapid 
Antigen Tests which have low 
sensitivity 
(xi) Data collection system not providing 
complete, timely and accurate data 
on newly tested persons, ratio of RT-
PCR to other tests, Covid -19 related 
deaths, co -morbidities, antibody 
surveillance studies and hospital bed 
availability  
(xii) Multiple guideline with differences 
in interpretations 
(xiii) Although first lockdown was 
appropriate to identify and locate the 
active Covid -19 transmission zones 
and facilitated source reduction and 
containment of the disease especially 
in metros but further lockdown 
could have had a more nuanced and 
tailored appr oach incorporating risk 
of infection and disease transmission 
(xiv) Economic slowdown precipitated by 
global pandemic and restrictions of 
travel and trade to prevent the spread 
of the virus also impacted the 
country.  Poor and vulnerable 
population (elderly, women, children 
and infants) were disproportionately 
affected.   

38 
 
Opportunities Threats 
(i) Covid-19 pandemic has exposed the 
broken links of economic system and 
linkages of health to economic 
progress.  The provides an opportunity 
to increase investments in health sector 
significantly (3.0% of GDP) 
(ii) Enhanced investment in health should 
have both short and medium term 
perspective.  In short term, 
opportunities should be utilized to 
upscale current size of human 
resources for health particularly in 
smaller towns and rural areas.  With a 
medium to long term perspective, 
increased investment should be 
undertaken for creating health 
infrastructure with a decentralized 
approach. 
(iii) Provides an opportunity to develop 
integrated healthcare system where 
service provisioning can be by both 
public and private sector and individual 
patient may have choice.  Eligibility 
criteria of Ayushman Bharat maybe 
expended  to other vulnerable 
population groups and expanding the 
package of services by including 
outpatient care for women, children, 
elderly and NCDs and empanelling 
more hospitals from ru ral and remote 
districts 
(iv) R&D research and innovation can be 
harnessed by creating a network of labs 
and institutions engaged in 
fundamental research and transnational 
research, linking them with the 
industry to develop self -reliance in 
healthcare technolog y pharmaceuticals 
and diagnostics 
(v) Making ‘AtmaNirbhar Bharat’ and 
stress on “Vocal for Local” 
(vi) India’s manufacturing capacities for 
PPEs, Masks, ventilators, testing kits 
etc. have been immensely augmented 
(vii) To maintain and expedite digital 
healthcare models with inbuilt   
safeguards  
(viii) Increased testing capacities 
(ix) Mortality kept low due to focus on 
systems and manpower 
(i) Spikes in Covid cases still being 
seen in affected regions and India 
yet to reach its peak 
(ii) Unpredictable pandemic with 
possibility of second wav e like in 
Europe  
(iii) Inability to stop or slow down 
transmission to rural areas and small 
towns 
(iv) Lack of threat perception in sections 
of the people 
(v) Crowd  density in urban areas 
especially slums, areas of indoor 
employment and in public transport  
(vi) Unaddressed issues of 
communicable, non -communicable 
diseases, maternal and child health 
issues, rampant malnutrition  
(vii) Loss of livelihood of many leading 
to various concuss  
(viii) Closure of schools and 
administrative institutions led to 
suboptimal  performance and anxiety 
(ix) Lack of firm action by 
administration to prevent large 
gatherings 
(x) Non-adherence by people to public 
health measures like physical 
(social) distancing, masks and hand -
washings 
(xi) Population density, high public 
morbidity   
(xii) Violence on healthcare workers 
(xiii) Psycho-social impact on the people 
(xiv) Poor risk perception at the individual 
level and stigma associated with the 
disease 
(xv) Dependency on global economic and 
supply chain systems 
(xvi) Violence against women and 
children 
(xvii) Adverse impact on reproductive 
health ca re services such as clean 
and safe deliveries, contraceptives 
and pre and post natal care. 

39 
 
2.78 As regards the contingent and containment plan against Covid 19, the Department of 
Health & Family Welfare submitted that the strength of containment strategy is past successes of 
managing epidemics and pandemics. It can break or suppress the cycle of transmission. This 
helped in shift of epidemic in timeline, blunting of peak of the epidemic an d taking off 
immediate pressure on health systems as a result of which 3-4 months of lead time for instituting 
preparedness measures  was possible .  A successful implementation of the containment plan 
requires whole -hearted government approach, overhauling of human resource planning and 
community participation for effective containment. 
 
2.79 Noting the SWOT analysis of contingent and containment plan of the Government 
shared by the stakeholders , the Committee feels that adequate primary and secondary 
healthcare infrastructure needs to be put in place especially in the rural areas by increasing 
requisite investment on physical infrastructure. The Ministry should also increase the 
number of VRDLs across different  States so that testing capacity in the country is 
upgraded manifold. The Committee also strongly recommends that every State should 
establish at least one medical college and hospital as 'Centre of Excellence'. The Committee 
desires the Ministry to issue clear guidelines on facilities for teleconsultation and encourage 
the participation of the public through various awareness and outreach programs. 
Panchayat and community leaders need to be  actively involved for dissemination of 
information regarding hand washing, physical distancing and use of masks. The 
Committee also advocates research and development and innovation in the healthcare 
sector and increase the medical device manufacturing capacity in the country.  
2.80 The Committee is of the view that Districts and States with poor public health sector 
need to be identified on priority and provided the required infrastructure for tracing, 
testing and treatment by providing the required financial aid. The Committee calls upon 
the Ministry to make best use of the extra-ordinary situation arising out of the outbreak of 
pandemic COVID -19 for strengthening the primary and secondary healthcare services . 
The Ministry should take all the necessary measures to promote private consumption and 
investments in the countr y. A second wave of COVID has been witnessed in European 
countries and the Committee, therefore, feels that India must also be prepared to combat a 
possible second wave of Corona especially in the ensuing winter season and super -
spreading series of festive-events.  
 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER 3 
MANAGING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
3.1 The Pandemic COVID -19 has caused significant morbidity and mortality all over the 
world. However till date, there is no specific drug or  vaccine to treat or prevent spread of this 
disease. Few repurposed drugs and broad -spectrum antivirals are being used for treatment and 
have shown varying benefits. Development of effective vaccines appears to be a promising tool 
to help develop immunity and reduce disease transmission.  
CLINICAL TRIAL/RESEARCH STUDIES 
3.2 The Ministry submitted that Guidelines on Clinical management of COVID-19 have been 
updated on 03.07.2019 and widely circulated. These include case definition, prevention of 
infection co ntrol, laboratory diagnosis, early supporting therapy, management of severe cases 
and complications. No specific anti -virals have been proven effective. However, symptomatic 
treatment for fever and pain, appropriate rehydration, supplemental oxygen therapy  and use of 
drug Hydroxychloroquine has been advised for mild to moderate cases. In addition, provisions 
for Investigational Therapies has also been made for using Remdesivir, Convalescent  plasma 
and Tocilizumab for managing severe cases under close medical supervision.  
 
3.3 MoHFW has also supported the use of drug Hydroxychloroquine for prophylaxis for 
asymptomatic healthcare workers managing COVID -19 cases, contacts of confirmed cases of 
COVID-19 and asymptomatic frontline workers, such as surveillance workers deployed in 
containment zones and paramilitary/police personnel involved in COVID-19 related activities.  
 
3.4 The Ministry in its background note submitted that ICMR convenes the National Task 
Force on COVID-19 Chaired by Member Niti Aayog and co -chaired by Director, AIIMS, Delhi. 
Under the aegis of this Task Force, four research groups have been constituted  to study/carry: (i) 
Operational research; (ii) Epidemiology & surveillance; (iii) Clinical research; (iv) Diagnostics. 
Several research studies including the following are worth mentioning.  
 
i. ICMR-National AIDS Research Institute (NARI) has taken lead as the country 
coordinator for WHO Solidarity Trial which was initiated to look at the beneficial 
effects of Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), Lopinavir -Ritonavir combination therapy, 
Interferon beta-1a and Remdesivir. The trial has been initiated on 30 th April, 2020. 
Based on conflicting results, now HCQ and Lopinavir-Ritonavir have been dropped. 
ii. To guide evidence-based policy decisions, an observational study has been concluded 
to understand the  benefits of using hydroxy -choloroquine o n health -care workers. 
Five sites have participated in the study, however results are being analyzed. 
iii. ICMR has just concluded PLACID trial to understand the effect of convalescent sera 
in moderately ill COVID patien ts in 450 subjects at 60 sites and the results are being 
analyzed. 
iv. Recently, a Nation -wide COVID-19 clinical registry has been launched by ICMR to 
systematically document the clinical signs and symptoms of COVID -19 patients in a 
uniform clinical proforma. This activity is an important step to understand various 
disease presentations and plan treatment modalities accordingly. 

41 
 
v. ICMR has also launched a network of National Bio -repositories for collecting and 
storing various samples of COVID -19 patients. Such sa mples are a precious resource 
to aid in development of diagnostics, studying various bio-markers of disease severity 
etc. 
vi. Three special COVID supplement of ICMR’s scientific journal – Indian Journal of 
Medical Research (IJMR) has been released, recently. This includes 24 editorials, 
perspectives, policy pieces, protocols, short commentaries, review articles and 
original research papers from ICMR and non -ICMR researchers. The supplement 
highlights the high quality of research conducted in India towards unde rstanding 
COVID-19. 
 
3.5 The Committee takes note of the different initiatives taken by ICMR for devising 
treatment protocol for Covid-19. However, the Committee observes that in the initial phase 
there was certain ambiguity in the treatment protocol for Covid -19 which is somehow 
attributed to the mutating strain of Corona virus. The Committee understands that 
devising a full p roof treatment plan will have to be substantiated by different phases of 
clinical trials and have to be governed by strict protocols. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends ICMR to widen the scope of its clinical research and studies and keep on 
updating its database which could prove beneficial in containing and mitigating Covid -19 
as well as such future outbreaks. The Committee also recommends ICMR to collaborate 
with other international institutes and pharmaceutical companies to test the safety and 
effectiveness of different drugs and devices.  
Present line of treatment or drugs being used in tackling Covid-19 
3.6 As novel drug development is a time and resource intensive process, repurposing of drugs 
has been taken up .  Keeping in view the need for pharmacological interventions for COVID -19, 
a Task Force under the aegis of the Science & Technology Core Group on COVID19, has been 
constituted on Repurposing of Drugs for COVID19 (in short “TFORD -COVID19”), which has 
identified several drugs those could be potentially repurposed for COVID -19 management. The 
task force has so far identified 19 molecules for such purpose. 
 
Hydroxychloroquine 
3.7 As per information submitted by the Ministry, currently, hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) is 
recommended for use as Proph ylaxis (specifically, pre -exposure prophylaxis) and as Treatment 
of mild to moderate COVID -19 cases. Hydroxychloroquine has demonstrated in vitro activity 
against SARS -CoV2 and was shown to be clinically beneficial in small single center studies 
though with significant limitations. Nonetheless, several large observational studies with severe 
methodologic limitations have shown no effect on mortality or other clinically meaningful 
outcomes. As is the case with other antivirals, HCQ drug should be used as ear ly as possible in 
the disease course to achieve any meaningful effects and should be avoided in patients with 
severe disease. The commonest side effects are nausea, vomiting, abdominal  cramps 
and headache. However, following intake of HCQ, the side effects related to any of the following 
systems viz. ophthalmic, hematologic, dermatologic, endocrine & metabolic, gastroi ntestinal, 
hepatic, nervous system and cardiovascular can rarely be experienced by a person taking this 
medicine. 

42 
 
3.8 The Health  Secretary informed that HCQ was used for a prophylactic (protection) 
purpose and also for front line health care workers, altho ugh, one group of studies indicate its 
effectiveness in protection against COVID -19, with mild symptom and other group of studies 
expresses indifference to its use. 
 
3.9 The Ministry submitted that India is part of the ongoing global SOLIDARITY Trial (with 
support from WHO), which is being coordinated by the ICMR -Institute named NARI, for one 
arm of which HCQ was a component. This arm of treatment has been dropped from Sol idarity 
Trial. 
Remdesivir 
 
3.10 The revised clinical management protocol for COVID -19, outlines the use of Remdesivir 
as an investigational therapy. Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) allows a physician to use this 
drug when they feel that there is no choic e left considering the disease condition. The physician 
is expected to take informed consent from the patient/legal representative. The data emerging 
from its use has to be submitted to CDSCO. Like other investigational drugs, its use in treatment 
of Covid can only be ascertained once evidence is established by the ongoing research studies.   
Lopinavir/Ritonavir 
 
3.11 Originally used for the management of HIV/AIDS, Lopinavir/Ritonavir have also been 
re-purposed for the management of COVID-19. This is not recommended for the management of 
COVID-19 according to the revised clinical management protocols for COVID -19 released on 
13th June, 2020. It is, rather, being used as one of the arms (originally there were four arms) in 
the SOLIDARITY Trial.  However, the emerging data on its efficacy from other studies suggests 
that it may not be effective.  
 
3.12 The Ministry, on 21 st October, 2020, shared the following on the COVID -19 clinical 
management protocol of drugs: 
S. No. Clinical 
severity 
Drug/therapy 
1 Mild Paracetamol  
Hydroxychloroquine* 
2 Moderate Paracetamol  
Hydroxychloroquine 
Steroids (Dexamethasone/ Methylprednisolone 
Prophylactic dose of Low Molecular Weight Heparin 
(LMWH) 
Oxygen therapy 
3 Severe Paracetamol 
Steroids (Dexamethasone/ Methylprednisolone 
Prophylactic dose of Low Molecular Weight Heparin 
(LMWH) 
Oxygen therapy 
* For mild cases with high risk features for severe disease (such as age>  60 years; Hypertension, diabetes, chronic 
lung/kidney/ liver disease, cerebrovascular disease and obesity) under medical supervision.  

43 
 
3.13 In addition, severe cases may require drugs to manage Septic shock, Acute respiratory 
distress syndrome  (ARDS) and other complications. Also, provisions have been made in the 
clinical management protocol for use of investigational therapies like treatment with (i) 
Convalescent plasma, (ii) Tocilizumab and (iii) Remdesivir for managing moderate to severe 
cases, not responding to usual therapy, under strict medical supervision. 
3.14 The Committee is of the view that only those drugs whose efficacy for treating 
COVID-19 patients have been established should be used for hospitalized patients and the 
drugs should be prescribed only after multicentric trials and detailed study . The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to issue clear guidelines for safe use of 
drugs. The Committee notes that there have been instances where certain drugs were 
prescribed for COVID -19 but clinical trials gave unfavorable results. The Committee, in 
this connection, strongly recommends the Ministry to issue strict guidelines against use of 
such drugs when the evidence conclusively shows that it does  not work for Covid 
treatment. The Committee believes that only drugs with reliable data and research should 
be used among Covid patients, especially for patients with co-morbidities.  
 
Status of Vaccine Development in the country and abroad 
 
3.15 The world is racing against time to develop the vaccine against Novel Corona -Virus. 
Responding to the queries of the Members related to vaccine, the Secretary Department of 
Health and Family Welfare submitted that as per WHO, on 25th August 2020, 31 vaccine 
candidates were under clinical evaluation and 142 candidates were in pre -clinical evaluation 
stage. 
 
3.16 Following is the status of the vaccine candidates in advanced stages (phase III clinical 
trials ongoing) of clinical evaluation: 
 
a) Three inactivated vaccines from China are in phase III clinical trial stage in China. 
b) One recombinant vaccine (non -replicating viral vector vaccine – ChAdOx1-S) 
developed by University of Oxford/AstraZeneca is in phase III trials in Brazil.  
c) RNA vaccine of Moderna (in collaboration with NIAID) and Pfizer are also approved 
for phase III clinical trials. 
 
3.17 In India, Department of Bio Technology (DBT) has been pro -active in responding to the 
emerging situation to support advancement of vaccine candidates and related technologies  by 
actively partnering with CEPI (Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations), through the 
DBT supported Ind -CEPI Mission. DBT would be actively supporting the Indian component of 
the applicants selected in response to the call (i) 'Proven vaccine te chnologies, applicable for 
large scale manufacturing, (ii) Rapid response against novel Coronavirus, 2019 -nCoV’ issued by 
CEPI. 
3.18 Indian laboratories, both private and public are taking a wide variety of approaches to 
develop vaccines against COVID-19. The leading vaccine manufacturers in India are using well -
defined vaccine development platforms, which were successfully used for other vaccines in the 
past for potential COVID-19 vaccines.  

44 
 
3.19 The Committee has been apprised of the vaccine development a pproaches for COVID-19 
including the following: 
 
i. Whole virion inactivated vaccines 
ii. Recombinant vaccines:  
a) RNA / DNA vaccines;  
b) Non-replicating viral vector vaccines;  
c) Replicating viral vector vaccines; and  
d) Protein sub-unit vaccines;  
iii. Live attenuated vaccines 
iv. Virus Like Particles (VLP) vaccines 
Indigenous Vaccines 
3.20 On a specific query related to the efforts to develop anti COVID -19 vaccine in the 
country, the Ministry submitted that the several private or public Indian laboratories are involved 
in developing COVID-19 vaccine and some are at the advanced stages of development and one 
has already entered the clinical trial. If successful and the proposed milestones are not deferred 
due to unforeseen circumstances, the first vaccine may be available in the Indian market by early 
next year. In many cases, they are collaborating with the academic institutions in India and 
abroad where the R&D has been and is being done to develop the vaccine prototype. 
 
3.21 The Ministry has submitted that Serum Institute of India (SII) and ICMR have partnered 
on clinical development of two global vaccine candidates: ChAdOx1 -S, which is a 
nonreplicating viral vector vaccine developed by University of Oxford/AstraZeneca  is 
undergoing phase III clinical trials in Brazil. The other candidate which is being supported by SII 
for further clinical development is the glycoprotein subunit nanoparticle adjuvanted vaccine 
developed by Novavax from USA. 
3.22 On the status of the vaccines undergoing trials in India , the Ministry on 9 th November, 
2020 submitted the following information: 
 
Name Manufacturer Clinical trial stage 
COVAXIN* Bharat Biotech Phase II Human Clinical Trial – completed 
DCGI approval for Phase III Human Clinical 
Trials – received 
ZyCoV-D* Zydus Cadila Phase II Human Clinical Trial – ongoing 
Covishield* Serum Institute of India Phase II Human Clinical Trial – ongoing 
Oxford 
Vaccine 
AstraZeneca and Serum 
Institute of India 
Phase III advanced – ongoing 
* As per ICMR website (https://vaccine.icmr.org.in/covid-19-vaccine) 
 
3.23 With regards to the role of vaccines in controlling the ongoing outbreak, the Indian 
Public Health Association (IPHA), Indian Association of Preventive and Social Medicine 
(IAPSM) &  Indian Association of Epidemiologists in its "3rd Joint Statement on COVID -19 
Pandemic in India – Public Health Approach for COVID -19 Control" concluded that Vaccines 
have no role in current ongoing pandemic control. However, the vaccine may play a role i n 

45 
 
providing personal protection to high -risk individuals like Healthcare Workers (HCWs) and 
elderly with co -morbidities. While being optimistic the prevention and control strategy should 
also prepare for the worst. It must assume that an effective vaccine would not be available in 
near future. False sense of hope that this panacea is just around the corner should be avoided. 
The Associations were of the view that the testing strategy needs to be pragmatic from a public 
health perspective, promoting differen tial/targeted testing of high -risk individuals and 
discontinuing universal testing at this stage. Vaccines do not have any role in current ongoing 
COVID-19 pandemic control in India. 
 
3.24 The Committee understands the urgency among the global scientific community for 
development of a vaccine against Covid -19. However, the Committee strongly emphasizes 
the need to ensure highest level of ethical and procedural standards in the vaccine research 
studies. The vaccine should pass the stri ctly regulated route of all phases of clinical trials 
and the data should be made available in the public domain. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends the Ministry to follow a transparent approach so that any 
irregularity in the approval/production of vaccine is avoided.  
 
3.25 The Committee also urges the Ministry to devise a plan for the availability of the 
vaccine.  For this to happen, the vaccine production capacity in the country has to be 
considerably ramped up for making the vaccine accessib le to its citizens.  The Committee , 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to collaborate with Serum Institute of India and other 
vaccine manufacture rs so that vaccines are easily available at an affordable rate to the 
general public. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to subsidize the vaccine cost for the 
weaker section s of the country , especially in rural and urban slum areas .  The Ministry 
should be cautious in its efforts to check instances of black -marketing and shortage of 
vaccines. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to administer the vaccines 
according to the WHO’s “strategic allocation” approach or a multi -tiered risk -based 
approach.  
 
Strategy of smart vaccination 
 
3.26 The Secretary DHR, in the Committee's meeting held on 16 th October, 2020 stated that a 
high level Committee under Dr. Paul with co -chairmanship of Secretary, Health has been 
constituted to chalk out plan for smart vaccination. The Secretary submitted that there are mainly 
three groups, viz, core group, bridge group and general  population. Once the core group is 
vaccinated, there is least chance of spread of the diseased and there would not be requirement for 
vaccination of whole population of the country. With all preventive measures such as wearing 
masks and through smart vacc ination, the pandemic can be contained without vaccinating the 
entire population.  
 
3.27 The Committee is of the view that smart vaccination may be used as an immediate 
strategy but subsequently the whole population should be vaccinated. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to upgrade its cold -chain storage system so that country wide 
vaccination can be carried out without any hurdles.  
 
 
 
 

46 
 
Convalescent plasma 
 
3.28 The Committee has been given to understand that convalescent plasma is a means of 
passively providing antibodies to the patient and has been used previously in many viral illnesses 
with equivocal results. Currently, it is being used in treatment of moderat e to severe COVID 19 
patients under emergency with authorization from various agencies worldwide. Though large 
data sets are available which document the safety of using convalescent plasma, the studies 
stating the effectiveness of plasma are only observat ional in nature. The published randomized 
controlled trials from China and Netherlands do not show any mortality benefit in the patients 
receiving convalescent COVID19 plasma as compared to those who receive only the usual care 
for COVID19. A recent meta -analysis on 20 controlled and uncontrolled studies in use of 
convalescent plasma in COVID19 remained undecided on both the safety and effectiveness of 
convalescent plasma as a therapeutic option in hospitalized patients of COVID-19. 
 
3.29 The Committee notes that convalescent plasma therapy has been used against other 
diseases in the past and has show n good results. The Committee recommends ICMR to 
conduct high-quality trials to examine the efficacy of plasma therapy on the mortality of 
COVID-19 patients and  if the research outcome is favourable , efforts must be made for 
dissemination of use of convalescent plasma therapy.  
 
The concept of Herd immunity 
 
3.30 The Ministry has submitted that the two plausible interventions for the cessation of 
COVID outbreaks are (i) when the virus is allowed to spread through susceptible populations and 
they build up herd immunity or (ii) an effective vaccine becomes available.  This apart the virus 
may mutate to become a mild virus, the chances of which are remote. In either of these 
situations, the virus may not die down completely. Sporadic cases or outbreaks may appear and it 
may also become endemic.  
 
3.31 In case of SARS -CoV-2 virus, the option of letting it go through the population, waiting 
for herd immunity to emerge had been adopted by some European countries and USA initially. 
UK quickly abandoned the strategy when the tally of cases and deaths began to increase. 
Similarly, the Swedish response of not introducing social distancing had led to one of the highest 
mortality rates (currently at 50 COVID-19 deaths per 100,000 people) from COVID-19. 
 
3.32 If similar intervention is followed in India, and the pandemic virus is a llowed to pass 
through the population, the mortality numbers could be very high. Given the stage of the 
pandemic in India now, the current strategy of slowly opening up economic activities, while 
maintaining physical distancing norms, and tracking the spre ad of the pandemic through India, 
with early isolation and treatment of infected persons seems an appropriate way forward. 
 
3.33 The Committee is of the view that letting people get infected with the virus till they 
develop herd immunity would result in a high mortality rate. The Committee agrees that 
given the poor health infrastructure in the country, the effect could be really adverse. The 
Committee notes that the trials of the vaccines are still underway and providing vac cine 
dose to a population of 1. 3 billion will take time. The Committee, therefore, believes the 
best strategy available at present is to increase the testing capacity and isolate the affected 

47 
 
persons to contain the further spread of the virus and keep infected persons under 
appropriate medical observation.   
 
TESTING CAPACITY 
 
3.34 As per the information submitted by ICMR, from January 2020 till date, there has been a 
calibrated and phased expansion of testing strategy based on evidence of spread of the virus to 
avoid indiscriminate testi ng and conserve resources.  As on 10th November 2020, a total of 
12,07,69,151 samples have been tested for COVID-19.  Action was taken to increase the number 
of labs, streamline the supply of testing kits and include point of care devices in testing arena. 
ICMR has shared the following details about the testing strategy:- 
 
i. The testing capacity has been expanded significa ntly as reflected in the table 
below:-  
 
Date Testing Labs Total Tests done Testing 
Capacity 
per day 
1
st
 April 151  4208 30,000 
1
st
 May 254 9,02,654 90,000 
1
st
  June 676   38,37,207 1,65,000 
31st  July 1321   1,88,32,970 6,82,340 
 
ii. Approval of new Labs : As of 10 th November 2020, the total number of labs 
approved for COVID -19 testing has increased to 2082  including 1143 
Government labs and 939 labs in the private sector. 
 
iii. Mentor Institutes-Creating 14 regional hubs at AIIMS like Institutes as well as 
other Medical Institutes of excellence to enable handholding and fast -track 
approvals of COVID test ing facility across various Government  and private 
Medical Colleges. 
 
iv. Testing capacity has been scaled up from about 1,500 tests per day to more than 
6.42 lakh tests per day as on 30 th July. In addition to RT -PCR, testing platforms 
have also been expanded to include TrueNat, CBNAAT and Rapid Antigen point -
of-care test. 
v. ICMR conducted a quick study on effectiveness of pooled testing to minimize 
wastage of testing reagents and accordingly issued guidelines for pooled testing in 
low prevalence zones (<2%); 
vi. To ensure seamless availability of diagnostic kits and reagents all across the 
country, 15 depots have been created at ICMR Institutes. More than 75 dedicated 
staff of ICMR and facilities at ICMR Institutes have been earmarked to execute 
the task and ensure timely supply of reagents to all States. 

48 
 
vii. Best efforts have been put in to overcome the crisis in terms of limited availability 
of imported RT-PCR testing kits, R NA extraction kits and Viral Transport Media 
(VTMs) by engaging with Indian Missions in source countries. 
viii. Multidisciplinary and multi -departmental teams of senior officials have been 
aligned to work against all odds towards procurement of testing reagents, kits etc. 
 
Laboratory Preparedness : Role of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) in 
diagnosis of COVID-19: 
3.35 ICMR-National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune functions as the resource centre for the 
Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDL) n etwork and providing technical training for 
performing molecular and serological assays for virological diagnosis. NIV, Pune also performs 
the important task of standardizing assay procedures for the network as well as quality control 
and quality assurance activities. 
 
3.36 In the preparedness for the COVID -19 outbreak in India, NIV Pune served as the apex 
laboratory to optimize the conventional and real -time Polymerase chain reaction  (PCR) assays 
targeting different genomic regions of SARS -CoV-2 and initiate testing of suspected cases. NIV 
Pune supplied the primers, probes, PCR reagents, positive and negative controls  to all 
laboratories and also created standard operating procedure for the Real Time PCR assay. Further, 
NIV also undertook quality control activities.  
 
Expansion of testing capabilities and selection of testing laboratories for SARS-CoV-2 
3.37 Following the increase in the load of screening samples from suspected cases with 
symptoms and travel history to China or asymptomatic persons with travel history to Wuhan 
after 15th January 2020, it was decided that strategically located VRDLs needed to start testing 
for SARS-CoV-2 in addition to the apex laboratory at NIV Pune. VRDLs w ere chosen based on 
their location in cities with international airports receiving travelers from China, the capability of 
the VRDLs to perform real -time PCR assays, and their involvement in the ongoing testing for 
influenza viruses within the network. A t otal of 13 VRDLs across 11 States were selected for 
SARS-CoV-2 testing. As the number of suspect cases increased after 26 th February, DHR/ICMR 
decided to commission 18 more labs to meet the increased demand.  
3.38 Initial support was provided to National C entre for Disease Control (NCDC), Delhi. 
However, afterwards, NCDC started testing on its own  and shared the numbers tested daily with 
ICMR. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
Figure 1 depicts the number of VRDLs commissioned for testing samples of COVID-19 patients  
 
Testing conducted at VRDLs and NIV, Pune: 
3.39 The VRDLs have been provided with a screening assay for detecting COVID -19. If any 
positive case is detected by VRDLs, it is shipped to NIV for reconfirmation, using three different 
assays. Once confirmed by NIV, Pune - the results are declared as positive. Further, for quality 
control purpose, first 10 negative samples and all positive samples are sent to NIV, Pune for re -
testing.  
3.40 As on March 4, 2020, a total of 3492 samples from 2838 individuals were tested by the 
network. This include d testing of 1308 samples from 654 individuals evacuated from Wuhan, 
China and quarantined at ITBP and Manesar Camp. They were tested twice on days 0 and 14. 
Subsequently another 236 individuals evacuated from Wuhan and Diamond Pri ncess Ship, Japan 
on 27th February 2020 were tested on day 0. Repeat testing were done on day 14.  
3.41 In the Committee's meeting held on 16 th October, 2020, the Secretary, Department of 
Health Research submitted that initially there was a shortage of testing kits but now the kits are 
manufactured in the country. Almost 1000 kits manufacturers, Viral Transports Medium and 
Swabs have been validated and are available  on GeM. The Secretary further submitted that 
initially the cost of RTPCR testing kit was Rs. 4500 which has been reduced to  Rs. 318. The 
RTPCR testing has also been expanded to more than 2000 labs. At places where RTPCR is not 
available, CBNAAT and TrueNat is being used for testing.  
3.42 The Committee was also apprised that the CBNAAT and TrueNat were being used in TB 
diagnosis and the same has been repurposed for Covid diagnosis. The Secretary informed that 
out of total testing, almost 4 percent testing has been done through TrueNat. The DNA Nudge 
test started by BBC has been used in India since April and is presently carried out in 2500 
locations. At places where TrueNat installation is not possible, the Ministry has been conducting 
Rapid Antigen testing  since June, and the same has been appreciated by WHO. The Secretary 
also apprised the Committee on Feluda Test for Covid -19. FELUDA is an acronym for FNCAS9 
Editor Linked Uniform Detection. It uses CRISPR -Cas technology for detection of gene specific 
SARS-COV-2 virus. 
Apex Laboratory – ICMR-NIV, Pune
Testing VRDLs for COVID-19
1. AIIMS, Delhi 2. KGMU, Lucknow
3. SMS, Jaipur 4. NICED, Kolkata
5.    GMC, Gauhati 6. IGGMC, Nagpur
7. Kasturba Hospital for Infectious Diseases, Mumbai
8. Gandhi Medical College, Secunderabad
9. BMCRI, Bangalore 10. KIPMR, Chennai
11. NIV Field Unit, Kerala
12. BJ Medical College, Ahmedabad
13.  NIV Field Unit Bangalore
New Testing VRDLs for COVID-19
1. SKIMS, Srinagar 13. GMC, Jammu
2. PGIMER, Chandigarh 14. GMC, Amritsar
3. Dr. S.N Medical College, Jodhpur
4. RMRIS, Patna 15. GMC, Haldwani
5. RMRC, Dibrugarh 16. MP Shah Jamnagar
6. GMC, Agartala 17. GMC, Theni
7. RMRC, Bhubaneswar 18. IMS BHU, Varanasi
8. AIIMS, Raipur
9. AIIMS, Bhopal
10. NIRTH, Jabalpur
11. SVIMS, Tirupati
12. JIPMER, Puducherry


50 
 
3.43 The trend of weekly average of daily tests conducted in the country as furnished by the 
Ministry is indicated below:  
 
3.44 The Committee is of the view that the pandemic Covid -19 has highlighted the need 
for creation of a robust network of laboratories in the country. The Committee observes 
that though in the beginning only ICMR -National Institute of Virology (NIV) was tasked 
with the initial testing of suspected cases but in a short span of time, testing capacity was 
escalated an d other viral research and diagnostic laboratories were commissioned. Even 
then identification of only 13 VRDLs across 11 states in a country with 1.3  billion 
population is indicative of the fact that the testing capacity was highly inadequate . It is 
quite disheartening to note that many States did not have the required infrastructure for 
testing facilities. This led to overburdening of the labs and caused inordinate delays in 
giving the test results. The Committee is, therefore, of the considere d view that the 
laboratory infrastructure in the country needs to be strengthened along with the technical 
workforce required to operate these labs.  
 
3.45 The Committee observes that initially only NIV -Pune was equipped to carry out 
Covid-19 testing; However by 1 st April, testing facilities were increased to 151 labs and by 
31st July, testing capacity was expanded to 1321 labs which further has been expanded to 
2082 labs as on 10 th November, 2020 (1143 labs in Government Sector and 939 labs in the 
private sector) . This ramping up of testing capacity within few months is commendable. 
The Committee, however, finds that testing facility is only limited to bigger districts and 
cities.  Lack of testing facilities in rural areas has also resulted in under  reporting of cases. 
The PHCs and the CHCs are still largely devoid of any testing facilities and the required 
technical workforce. The Committee  strongly recommends the Ministry to establish a 
strong ne twork of Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) in the country to 
tackle the constantly increasing incidences of Covid-19 cases.   
 
3.46 The Committee is of the view that a differentiated approach with aggressive testing 
in containment zones and cities with high level of infection could have arrested the spread 
of infection.  However, with unlocking, the infection has now spread to differen t parts of 
the country . The Committee also believes that Tracing, Tracking, Testing, Treating and 
Technology (5Ts) are the answer to tackling Covid -19 and the Ministry has been working 
on all the fronts. However, the Committee still feels that the coordina tion between the 
60363 
79431 
88634 
102317 
113177 
132525 
141427 
165407 
202945 
223045 
256880 
314966 
357070 
504357 
612231 
762666 
835893 
881695 
1054358 
1065316 
1097203 
1150820 
1119850 
841705 
1040183 
1062729 
1012813 
1098266 
1194487 
0 
2000000 
26 Apr - 2 … 
3-9 May 
10-16 May 
17-23 May  
24-30 May 
31May- 6 … 
7-13 Jun 
14-20 Jun 
21-27 Jun 
28-4 Jun  
5-11 Jun 
12-18 Jun 
19-25 Jun 
26Jul- 1 Aug 
2-8 Aug 
9-15 Aug 
16-22 Aug 
23-29 Aug 
30Aug- 5 … 
6-12 Sep 
13-19 Sep 
20-26 Sep 
27Sep- 3 … 
4-10 Oct 
11-17 Oct 
18-24 Oct 
25-31 Oct 
1-7 Nov 
8 Nov 
Total Tests (n) 

51 
 
Centre and the States needs further strengthening  for better result . The required 
infrastructure to imbibe the 5Ts cannot be established overnight rather it demands 
adequate financial aid and specialized human resources.  
 
3.47 The Committee notes that at present , India has the second highest number of total 
Covid positive cases after USA. However, inspite of the scaling up of testing,  the number of 
tests per million population  in India is only 44,524 whereas for USA, it is 287,354 (source: 
Worldometer 18 th September, 2020). Brazil which has the third highest number of Covid 
positive cases is also conducting 68,666 tests per million population. The Committee , 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to further increase the number of Covid-19 tests in the 
country.  
 
3.48 The Committee was given to understand that various diagnostic kits being used in 
carrying out Covid-19 Testing, include kits imported from other countries. The Committe e 
is of the view that with an enabling policy framework, the Indian medical device industry 
could grow by leaps and bounds. The Committee strongly advocates providing support to 
the indigenous medical device manufacturing industry to make India self sufficient and 
promote local production under  PM’s flagship programme of Atma Nirbhar Bharat - that 
focuses on self reliance and local production. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to formulate specific schemes for providing finan cial incentives as well as 
infrastructure assistance to the industry that would work like ‘Sanjeevani booti’ to already 
slackening economy growth. The Ministry should devise segment specific approach for 
consumables, implants, diagnostic imaging and kits a nd other medical devices to boost up 
healthcare industry. 
 
3.49 The Ministry also submitted that as on 9 th November 2020, India has conducted a 
cumulative 83990 tests per million population. The State/UT wise break up of the same is 
detailed at Annexure I. 
3.50 The Committee is concerned at the low number of  Tests per Million population  in 
States such as  Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal etc. The 
Committee, therefore recommends the State Government s to shed their lackadaisical 
approach and continue t racking, testing and isolating so that Covid cases do not spike in 
the winter months.  
Strategy of the Government to ensure Bio-Security against Biological Weapons 
 
3.51 Committee’s attention has been drawn to the fact that Covid -19 like viruses infecting 
large populations across the globe and emerging as a pandemic, can be used as biological 
weapons against enemy nations. Bio-security therefore is a critical area of concern.  The 
Department of Health & Family has submitted that a holistic approach is needed for ensuring 
bio-security against biological weapons, that inter-alia include: 
i. approach for deterrence, prevention, protection and response against biological 
weapons.  
ii. Engagement with agencies and active participation in ongoing International treaties. 
iii. Strengthening bio-safety and bio-security platforms in India 

52 
 
iv. Instituting robust bio -repositories for high risk emerging/reemerging infectious 
pathogens 
v. Strengthening disease surveillance including at animal-human interface 
vi. Training and capacity building for management of public health emergencies arising 
from use of bio-weapons.  
vii. Strengthening research and surveillance activities related to development of 
diagnostics vaccines and drugs. 
 
3.52 The Committee underlines the nee d of bio-safety to protect  the world community 
from any activity signaling bioterrorism. The adverse effects of Covid -19 pandemic have 
taught the lesson on the importance of controlling biological agents and the need of 
strategic partnerships among different nations. The Committee, therefore, feels that  the 
present time is the most appropriate for the Government to formulate effective laws to 
counter bio -terrorism. The Committee also believes with expanding network of VRDLs, 
ICMR would serve as an im portant platform for diagnosis and surveillance of existing as 
well as emerging viral infections and thus make the country bio -secured against life -
threatening viruses and the menace of bio-terrorism. 
 
3.53 The Committee agrees with the Ministry that a holistic approach is needed for 
ensuring bio -security against biological weapons. The Ministry should also engage with 
agencies and actively participate in ongoing International treaties.  The Committee 
strongly recommends the Ministry to conduct mo re research and work towards training 
and capacity building for management of public health emergencies arising from use of 
bio-weapons.  
 
Air Pollution and Covid Management 
 
3.54 The Committee is also concerned at the growing pollution in major cities of the 
country. Studies have highlighted that air pollution during the time of pandemic will cause 
additive adverse effect on health and well being. The fact that air pollution can aggravate 
co-morbidities and other respiratory illnesses cannot be denied. Air  pollution will increase 
the risk associated with Covid and could lead to fatal outcomes. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to encourage undertaking of necessary health research projects 
on air pollution and better Covid management. Further, the Committee is of the view that 
the Ministry should also liaise and coordinate with the Ministry of Environment Forest and 
Climate Change to find immediate solution for bringing down air pollution so that it does 
not aggravate the pandemic situation. The Committee also recommends the Government to 
make arrangement of adequate health infrastructure to combat the challenges of air 
pollution and manage its adverse impact on the Covid patients.  
NEED TO STRENGTHEN RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT 
 
Budgetary allocation to DHR/ICMR 
 
3.55 The Committee while examining the Demand for Grants (2020-21) of the Department of 
Health Research noted that the projected budgetary demand for ICMR was Rs. 2300 crore and 

53 
 
for Bhopal Memorial Hospital and Research Center, the demand was Rs. 165.22 crores. After 
merger of ICMR with BMHRC, the total budgetary demand amounts to Rs. 2465.22 crores. The 
Committee further observed that against the projected demand of Rs. 2465.22 c rores, Rs. 
1795.71 crores were allotted to ICMR+BMHRC leading to a shortfall of Rs. 669.51 crores.  
 
Projected demand and actual allocation in BE 2020-21 
Rs. In  crores 
Component  Projected 
Demand  
Allocation in 
BE 2020-21 
Shortfall 
Schemes 305.50 262.29 43.21 
ICMR 2300.00 1795.71 669.51 
Bhopal Memorial Hospital & 
Research Centre (BMHRC) 
165.22 
Total ICMR+BMHRC  2465.22 
DHR Sectt Expenditure  42.00 42.00 0.00 
Grand Total 2812.72 2100.00 712.72 
 
3.56 The Committee observes with concern that as compared to other Departments 
involved in scientific research, the budgetary allocation of Department of Health Research 
has been one of the lowest in 2019 -20, i.e, Rs. 1900 crores. For the year 2020 -21, the budget 
marginally increased to Rs. 2100 crores. The Committee , in its 119 th Report on the 
Demands for Grants for the year 2020 -21 of the Department of Health Research , had 
expressed its deep concern over the lower budgetary allocation during 2020 -21 vi s-à-vis 
projected demands under various components of DHR schemes/ICMR. The Committee 
had highlighted that the shortfall in allocations under the schemes would sever ely impact 
the establishment of new Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories; Multi Discipl inary 
Research Units in Medical Colleges (MRUs), Model Rural Health Research Units 
(MRHRUs) in States and funding of projects under the schemes of Human Resource & 
Capacity Development. The Committee reiterates its recommendations as made in the 119th 
Report that the budgetary allocation to Department of Health Research should be 
increased.  
 
3.57 The Committee also emphasizes on the pivotal role played by ICMR in the fight 
against the pandemic. The Committee believes that Department of Health Research and 
especially ICMR are at the forefront in devising a suitable strategy in combating such 
outbreaks. In view of this, this Department and ICMR deserve  a consistent budgetary 
support for its research resources activities. The Committee strongly recommends Ministry 
to increase the budgetary allocation to ICMR to broaden its research activities which 
would in turn help in formulation of better health outcomes.  
 
Research and Development  
 
3.58 The Ministry has submitted that investment in research, healthcare and public health 
infrastructure have been considered as vital investment for the health and protection of the 
nation.  The Ministry further submitted that technology and innovation have been a major part o f 
the response to COVID-19 pandemic.  The scaling up of testing was facilitated by the indigenous 
production of testing equipments and kits, which were largely imported in the pre -COVID-19 

54 
 
era. This includes validation and scaling up of indigenous diagnost ic technologies, such as the 
TrueNat platform, development and independent validation of the COVID KAVACH ELISA 
etc.  The Ministry further submitted that development of low -cost, easy to use ventilators across 
multiple technology incubators, most notably i n various IITs across the country has been taken 
up to respond to the need for delivering respiratory support to COVID-19 patients. 
 
3.59 As per information submitted by the Ministry, earlier it was completely dependent on 
imported PPEs, but in last few months, India has developed its own PPE industry.  
 
3.60 The AarogyaSetu app has been developed and deployed for risk stratification and contact 
tracing. Linking of Aarogya Setu App with ITIHAS is facilitating the field surveillance and to 
detect potential clusters of disease in advance. Teleconsultation through e-Sanjeeveni application 
is providing online OPD services. Safe & structured video based clinical consultations between a 
doctor in a hospital and a patient in the confines of his home has been made operational. 
3.61 Prof. Srinath Reddy , Public Health Foundation of India  has shared the following R&D 
and Health (innovations) proposals to contain zoonotic viral epidemics like Covid19:- 
  
(i) ‘One Health’ surveillance systems are needed for tracing microbial outbreaks and 
linking wildlife, captive and free living veterinary populations and human 
communities. This will establish early warning systems of microbial ‘spillover’ 
across species and e nable effective containment strategies to disrupt the chain of 
transmission without delays.  
(ii) Development, validation and scaled up production of low cost, easy to administer 
point of care diagnostic tests for accurate and early identification of virus in e asy 
to obtain samples (e.g., saliva).  
(iii) Artificial Intelligence for diagnostic and prognostic algorithms, drug development 
and pandemic modelling.  
(iv) Vaccine Development and Evaluation: clinical assay development; design and 
conduct of Phase 1, 2,3 Clinical T rials; evaluating possible laboratory correlates 
of immune protection and Phase 4 post -marketing surveillance for vaccine 
effectiveness in the population and delayed adverse effects.  
(v) Discovery And Development of Effective Treatments: Drugs for Prevention;  
Drugs for Treatment; Monoclonal Antibodies; Non -Allopathic treatments and 
Non-Drug treatments.  
 
3.62 Apart from basic, clinical and technology related research, public health research needs to 
be supported  in the following segments :- (i) infectious disea se epidemiology; (ii) research on 
associated conditions that increase risk of viral infections, especially co -morbidities; (iii) socio-
behavioural factors that support or impede epidemic control; (iv) health system capacity and 
pathways for a quick and eff ective surge response in the health system capacity in response to a 
public health emergency; (v) role of the private sector at various levels of healthcare; (vi) 
enablers and barriers to epidemic related technology; (vii) ability of health information sys tems 
to provide ready, reliable and disaggregated information to enable rapid and location specific 
responses. Public health institutes must be provided financial support to conduct multi -
disciplinary research on these areas. 

55 
 
3.63 The Indian Medical Associ ation has submitted that research projects on COVID -19may 
benefit the country either in the short term or in the long term in the following manner:- 
(a) For short term benefits, research should focus on learning s that will enhance 
prevention of spread of C OVID-19, through the development, testing, and use of, 
vaccines; or they should accelerate COVID -19 testing, and/or improve treatment 
outcomes. 
(b) For long term benefits, research should look at how future outbreaks of serious 
infectious diseases, new or existing, can be contained within a minimized local 
zone, and prevented from uncontrolled spread in the general community and 
across the country/globe. Learning will include understanding of measures that 
will have political, administrative, technical, and technological ramifications. 
3.64 The Committee expresses concern over inadequate investment on public health 
research despite the fact that innovation play pivotal role in controlling the spread of 
disease.  The country lacks resilient field surveillance to detect potential cluster of diseases.  
Lack of investment leads to dependence on imports of diagnostic kits and development of 
vaccine and  drugs which ultimately enhances 'out of pocket expenditure ' of common 
populace. The Committee  strongly recommends the higher investment on research and 
development and innovation  in the field of health research at multiple levels to contain 
zonotic virals  like COVID -19 and to establish One Health S urveillance System with 
potential warning system of microbial spill over. The Committee is distressed to note the 
recent UIS data (UNESCO Institute of Statistics data) expressing that India invests only 
0.65 percent of GDP on Research and Development. India's GERD as a percentage of GDP 
was 0.67 in 2017 and 0.65 in 2018. The Gross domestic expenditure on R&D (GERD) as a 
percentage of GDP is the total intramural expenditure on R&D performed in the national 
territory during a specific reference period expressed as a percentage of GDP of the 
national territory. The Committee notes that India's GERD is well below the world average 
and the GERD of other countries. Countries like United States of America spend almost 
2.84 percent of its GDP on research whereas China also spends 2.19 percent of its GDP on 
research. The Committee deprecates the fact that India's lower appropriation on Research 
speaks volumes of how neglected the R&D sector has been in the country. The Commi ttee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should at least increase its spending  on 
research to the world average of 1.72 as a percentage of GDP within two years. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to set specific expenditure targets for R&D and 
for promotion of science, technology and innovation (STI). This dedicated separate 
budgetary allocation should be supported even in financial crisis situations so that research 
activities do not suffer in the wake of any unforeseen circumstances. 
 
3.65 The Committee strongly underlines the pivotal role of research and development 
and would like the Ministry to strive hard for an innovation enabling infrastructure in the 
country. The Committee applauds ICMR in leading the fight against the pandemic and 
strongly believes that dedicated research institutes on the lines of ICMR should be 
established across the country. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to increase 
funding for machine learning and artificial intelligence based projects and also promote 
international collaboration in Science & Technology.  The Ministry should also explore AI 
tools and innovative methods for providing personalized treatment to Covid-19 patients.   

56 
 
Research as a career opportunity 
 
 
3.66 The Committee expresses concern over  the low number of researchers in the 
country and lack of research culture among students. As per the UIS data, there are almost 
252 researchers per million population  in India against 1,370 researchers in China . The 
Committee opines that the Ministry should focus on linking research with education and 
teaching and give incentives for increasing the retention rate in Health Research Field. The 
Committee strongly recommends the creation of a pool of talented health research 
personnel with upgraded skills of faculty of medical colleges, mid -career scientists, medical 
students, etc. The Department should also chalk out specialized training courses  regarding 
infectious disease epidemiology risk on viral infection especially co -morbidities micro 
behavioral factors and related multi -disciplinary research and support the trainees to take 
up res earch projects for addressing critical national and local health problems. The 
Committee, in this connection recommends the Ministry to launch health specific research 
programs for generation o f a research culture in the country and encourage the young 
undergraduates/postgraduates to pursue research in science and technology. The 
Committee desire the Ministry to provide financial assistance to institutions for conducting 
research in health specific areas. Financial incentive in form of research grants shoul d also 
be provided to young graduates  proposing to undertake health research projects . The 
Ministry should also assess the quality and outcome of research projects from time to time 
by evaluating the research outcomes and results. 
  

57 
 
CHAPTER - 4 
COVID MANAGEMENT UNDER AYUSHMAN BHARAT-PMJAY SCHEME 
4.1 While deliberating the parameters of the pandemic, the Committee also took an 
opportunity to understand the benefits of treatment available to the patients under the aegis of 
Ayshman Bharat PM -JAY Scheme.  It was given to understand that Ayushman Bharat (AB), 
launched in 2018, marks a paradigm shift to move from sector and selective approach of health 
service delivery to a comprehensive range of health care service. Ayushman Bharat aims to 
holistically address healthcare covering prevention, promotion and ambulatory care , at primary, 
secondary and tertiary level by adopting a continuum of care approach. Considering the 
importance of this flagship Health insurance Scheme of the Government, the Committee decide d 
to hear the views of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and National Health Authority on 
Covid Management through the scheme of Ayushman Bharat/Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana (PMJAY). Accordingly, the Secretary, Department of Health and Family W elfare, 
Secretary, Department of Health Research and the Chief Executive Officer, National Health 
Authority, gave a presentation on the subject before the Committee in its meeting held on 16 th 
October, 2020.  
Oral evidence of Secretaries, Ministry of Healt h and Family Welfare and Chief Executive 
Officer, National Health Authority: 
4.2 Elaborating the status of Covid in the country, t he Secretary, Department of Health and 
Family Welfare informed that till that date, 39 million cases have been reported all ov er the 
world and have caused more than 11 lakh deaths worldwide. USA has the maximum number of 
Covid cases in the world, i.e 82 lakh and 2.22 lakh deaths have been reported in the USA. Brazil 
has reported 51 lakh 70 thousand cases and 1 lakh 52 thousand de aths. In India, 73 lakh 70 
thousand cases have been reported and presently the numbers of active cases are 8 lakh 4 
thousand.  The Secretary mentioned that the case fatality rate of India or the death rate due to 
COVID is 1.52 percent which is one of the l owest death rates in the world. The death rate in 
USA is 2.71 percent, 2.95 in Brazil , 1.73 in Russia,  3.5 percent in Spain, 2.62 percent in South 
Africa, 4 percent in France and 6.5 percent in Britain.  
4.3 The Secretary, MoH&FW  submitted that Ayushman B harat consists of two interrelated 
components, i.e. (i) the first component pertains to creation of 1,50,000 Health and Wellness 
Centres (ABHWCs) to provide comprehensive health care (CPHC) services to all; and (ii) The 
second component Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB -PMJAY) 
provides health cover of Rs. 5 Lakh per family per annum, for secondary and tertiary care 
hospitalization, to around 10.74 crore families covering (more than 50 crore individuals). He 
further submitted that under AB -HWCs, 1.5 lakh Health and Wellness Centres will be 
established by Dec, 2022. There are 48,606 functional AB -HWCs at the moment and 1,04,862 
approvals have been given till 14th October, 2020.  
4.4 The Chief Executive Officer, National Health Authority informed that free COVID 
testing and treatment was conducted for PMJAY beneficiaries. NHA has notified 64 packages 
for testing and treatment across 32 States/UTs and also supported State Governments in 
engaging private healthcare providers. HEM Lite Module to fast-track hospital empanelment was 
also launched and 141 hospitals have been empanelled. NHA also launched Direct Lab 
Empanelment (DLE) module for ICMR registered labs. The IT system was also modified for 

58 
 
providing treatment to non AB -PMJAY beneficiaries. NHA also provided Call Centre Support 
and a National Covid-19 helpline “1075” was set up. 
Efforts made for Covid-19 management through scheme of Ayushman Bharat and PMJAY  
 
4.5 The Ministry, in its written submission, shared that Public Health and Hospitals’ being a 
State subject, the institutional response for COVID -19 management has been driven by the 
respective States.  The States have deployed health officials working in various public healthcare 
facilities including AB-HWCs for COVID-19 related tasks as per the local needs and context, for 
surveillance, awareness creation, triaging and other works.   Ayushman Bharat - PradhanMantri 
Jan Arogya Yojana (AB -PMJAY) conceived to provide quality health care to the poor 
population in the on -going pandemic has proven to be more critical than imagined. Continuous 
efforts have been made to ensure that no beneficiary of the AB -PMJAY scheme is deprived of 
right to avail free and quality treatment under the scheme in spite of the pandemic. 
 
4.6 The Committee was also informed that with the help of AB -PMJAY, access to private 
facilities was provided free of cost to the scheme beneficiaries. In order to achieve this, on April 
4, 2020, specific packages for testing for COVID and treatment for COVID were notified. A 
total of 64 packages have been notified under AB -PMJAY for testing and treatment of COVID.   
National Health Authority (NHA) also provided flexibility in designing of the packages to the 
States. So far, the COVID -19 testi ng and treatment numbers registered in the IT system of 
scheme are approximately 5,07,393 COVID tests and 2,46,581 COVID treatments. However, as 
most of the cases of COVID testing and treatment are already happening free of cost in public 
hospitals, some o f the tests and treatments of AB -PMJAY beneficiaries may not have been 
booked on the scheme’s IT system. 
 
4.7 The Ministry further submitted that to ensure continued supply of essential healthcare 
services especially for non COVID critical illnesses and to balance out the reduction in supply of 
these services due to the lockdown, an express empanelment mechanism, Hospital Empanelment 
Module (HEM) Lite was launched. A total of 535 applications (all private) were received, out of 
which 141 hospitals have alre ady been empanelled under HEM Lite.   A new transaction 
management system (TMS) to allow State Governments to extend treatment to non -AB-PMJAY 
beneficiaries on NHA’s IT platform was launched  and few States like Madhya Pradesh are 
availing this facility.  NH A also introduced a Direct Lab Empanelment (DLE) module for 
empanelment of ICMR registered labs to increase the number of testing facilities for AB -
PMJAY beneficiaries. In addition to the activities under AB -PMJAY, National Health Authority 
is also providing assistance to States in their response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The NHA has 
been striving to ensure that all the existing resources are optimally utilized to meet the healthcare 
needs. Following were the interventions by NHA during the response to pandemic –  
i. NHA operated and managed the National COVID Helpline -1075 set up by the 
Government to provide citizens with all necessary information and guidance. This 
was a centralized toll -free helpline to ensure that all incoming queries are 
addressed and redirected to the respective states for action. More than 34 lakh 
calls were handled by the centre during mid-March 2020 to 30th September 2020. 
ii. For taking precautions and measures and to be safe during the current COVID 
pandemic, NHA initiated a campaign on automatic voice -enabled tele-calling for 

59 
 
COVID precaution advisory. The main objective of this campaign was to 
disseminate important information to beneficiaries over 60 years of age across the 
country. A total of 5 Crore numbers were reached out.  
iii. NHA also conducted a detailed verification of patients as per the data shared by 
ICMR. A team of over 300 tele-callers was engaged towards this exercise. A total 
of 31.36 Lakh calls were attempted by NHA on the data shared by ICMR till early 
August 2020. 
iv. NHA also undertook the cleansing and verification of AarogyaSetu data whereby 
data provided in the ‘AarogyaSetu’ application by the citizens was validated 
through a 3 -step process to obtain accurate and complete information. N HA also 
handled over 20 Lakh calls on behalf of the AarogyaSetu application.  
 
4.8 In response to a specific query regarding the number of beneficiaries who got free Covid 
testing and treatment, the Ministry submitted that AB -HWCs are not employed in the task of 
undertaking COVID tests or treating COVID patients. However, as on 02.10.202 0, details of 
screenings of Non Communicable Diseases at functional AB-HWCs are as below:-   
i. Screenings for Hypertension - 547.81 Lakhs 
ii. Screenings for Diabetes - 451.55 Lakhs 
iii. Screenings for Oral Cancer-  281.47 Lakhs 
iv. Screenings for Breast Cancer -  155.13 Lakhs 
v. Screenings for Cervical Cancer- 105 Lakhs 
 
 4.9 The Ministry also submitted that till 5th October, 2020,  2,46,581 cases of COVID -19 
treatment and 5,07,393 cases of COVID -19 testing worth Rs. 518.00 crore and Rs 94.00 crore 
respectively have been authorized under AB-PMJAY across States/UTs. Some of these numbers 
are still being compiled as preauthorization of COVID patients are delayed due to isolation and 
other COVID related protocols. 
4.10 As regards insurance coverage for beneficiary /beneficiaries who succumb to COVID -19, 
Ayushman Bharat – PMJAY provides health cover for secondary and tertiary care hospitalization 
of the entitled beneficiaries. Therefore, compensation for the families of beneficiary/beneficiaries 
who succumb to COVID -19 is beyond th e mandate of AB -PMJAY. However, Under Pradhan  
Mantri Garib Kalyan Package one of the component is  Insurance Scheme for Health Workers 
Fighting COVID-19’, which was launched w.e.f. 30.03.2020 to provide comprehensive personal 
accident cover of Rs. 50 lakh t o around 22.12 lakh public healthcare providers, including 
community health workers, who might have to be in direct contact and care of COVID -19 
patients and who might be at risk of being suffered by the pandemic.   
4.11 The Ministry further submitted that  on account of the unprecedented situation, private 
hospital staff/ retired/volunteer/ local urban bodies/contract/daily wage/ ad -hoc/outsourced staff 
requisitioned by States/ Central hospitals/autonomous hospitals of Central/States/UTs, AIIMS & 
INIs/ hospitals of Central Ministries could also be drafted for   COVID19 related responsibilities. 
These cases are also covered under the PMGKP Insurance scheme for Health Workers fighting 
COVID-19. 
 

60 
 
4.12 The Committee is of the view that the AB -HWC which is envisaged to provide 
comprehensive health care to all must be positioned with the required infrastructure 
including well equipped modules , technical facilities and the requisite technical human 
resources. The Committee believes that higher investment in the health sector will facilitate 
revival of health sector and the HWCs, in the wake of any future pandemic, can act as the 
first effective point of quality healthcare delivery services.  The Committee feels that 
HWCs with its cadre of health workers and emphasis on community engagement are 
pivotal to the rural healthcare system of the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
advocates strengthening of the HWCs and developing a strong public health workforce at 
the grassroots level.  
4.13 The Committee is equally apprehensive about the ground realit ies.  Covid testing 
and treatment may not be available in all public hospitals. Given the fragile network of our 
public hospitals that struggled to deal with the increasing cases of Corona , instances of 
private hospitals charging exorbitant medical fees for C ovid treatment are being reported.  
In such a scenario, where only the affluent could afford treatment, the Committee feels that 
free Covid treatment under PMJAY could provide a sigh of relief to the entitled 
beneficiaries and the economically weaker sections of the society. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to constantly make efforts to minimise the out of 
pocket expenditure of patients due to Covid and update the details of the benefi ciaries on 
the scheme's IT System.  
4.14 The Committee notes that NHA has introduced a process of temporary 
empanelment for the hospitals to avail benefits of Ayushman Bharat Jan Arogya Yojana 
(AB PM-JAY) through HEM Lite. The Committee welcomes such an in itiative considering 
the gross shortage of adequate healthcare facilities. However, the Committee recommends 
the Ministry to effectively scrutinize the whole procedure of temporary empanellement of 
hospitals so that instances of fraudulent healthcare behav iour are avoided. The Committee 
also recommends the Ministry to empanel more hospitals especially in areas and States 
with weak health infrastructure to ensure continued supply of essential healthcare services.  
 
4.15 The Committee appreciates the new Transaction Management System (TMS) that 
allows the State Government to extend treatment to non AB -PMJAY beneficiaries. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to strengthen its monitoring mechanism and 
implement the new tra nsaction management system (TMS) in States. The Committee 
welcomes the Direct Lab Empanelment (DLE) module for empanelment of ICMR 
registered labs and feels that this will go a long way in expansion of physical testing 
infrastructure.     
 
4.16 The Committee also appreciates the helpline services offered by NHA , however, 
outreach of these services in the rural areas needs to be ensured. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to create adequate awareness of these services in the rural a reas 
as well.  
 
4.17 The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure that the benefits of the Pradhan 
Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana actually reach to, healthcare providers, including community 
health workers, fighting COVID-19. The Ministry should also assess the implementation of 
the Scheme at the ground level.  

61 
 
Key concern areas of Ayushman Bharat and PMJAY in combating COVID-19 
4.18 The Ministry, while flagging the key concern areas under Ayushman Bharat -PMJAY in 
combating Covid -19 submitted that the response towards Covid -19 is being led by the 
States/UTs through designated Covid-19 hospitals. There has been a lack of awareness regarding 
the availability of COVID -19 treatment under AB -PMJAY. Many States/UTs a re providing 
COVID-19 related treatments to all citizens free of costs irrespective of any eligibility criteria, 
therefore, PMJAY beneficiaries are not keen to use their PMJAY wallet on COVID related 
treatment. There is also lack of awareness regarding ava ilability of COVID -19 treatment and 
testing under AB-PMJAY. Restrictions on the mobility due to partial or full lockdown have also 
deterred beneficiaries from availing services under AB -PMJAY. Lack of demand for non -
COVID services has been noticed because people are afraid to visit hospitals due to fear of 
infection. The non availability of requisite ID documents at the time of hospitalization is also a 
major concern. Besides, several States have issued instructions to defer elective surgery  which 
has also been a matter of concern, The Ministry has highlighted the following challenges being 
faced by the private hospitals:  
 
i. Infrastructure challenges  
a) Appropriate infrastructure (e.g. separate entry & exit, patient transfer facility, 
dedicated COVID ward, etc.) 
b) Separate isolation facilities to manage the contagion 
c) Availability of critical care facilities (e.g. ICU, ventilation, emergency care 
equipment’s)  
 
ii. Availability of medical and allied professionals  
a. Incidence of COVID infection among healthcare staff is high  
b. Hospitals require additional staff because existing staff needs to be quarantined 
for specific days  
c. Arrangement of accommodation and other facilities as staff is reluctant to go 
home because of heightened risk of infection to family members.  
d. Unwillingness among the staff to participate in COVID management is a big 
concern  
  
4.19 To a specific query about quality of SECC data and omission of several poor people, the 
Committee was informed that though, at present, there is no provision to update or revise the list 
of beneficiaries, t he States/UTs implementing AB -PMJAY have the flexibility to add other 
categories of beneficiaries at their own  cost under the State Schemes, which are being 
implemented in alliance with AB -PMJAY. This has increased the coverage under the scheme to 
over 13.13 Crore families. Further, the possibility for use of National Food Security Act data is 
also being explored for identifying beneficiaries and improving communication with potential 
beneficiaries. Also, IT platform, Health Benefit Packages, Empanelled Healthcare providers o f 
PMJAY can be used by other Central Government departments running similar health protection 
scheme. With this in view, National Health Authority (NHA) is actively consulting with other 
Ministries and Departments implementing social security schemes in the country. 
  

62 
 
4.20 The Committee is disappointed to note that many poor people have not been 
included under the scheme due to old SECC data  and there is no provision to even update 
or revise the list of beneficiaries. The Committee is not convinced by the a rgument that 
State Governments can add beneficiaries at their own cost under State schemes . The 
Committee believes that States generally are fund -starved and it would not be appropriate 
to lay additional burden on them. The Committee , therefore,  recommends that the 
Ministry and NHA must re -visit the idea of revising and updating the list of beneficiaries 
and not deprive poor strata of socially who should be given coverage under the scheme.  
 
4.21 In response to another important query about d enial of treatment by empanelled 
healthcare providers for Covid and non -Covid illness, the Ministry clarified that a strong system 
has been developed under AB -PMJAY for ensuring that hospitals do not deny treatment to its 
beneficiaries. If any specific cas e is brought to its notice, strong action will be taken against the 
erring hospital. The outbreak of COVID -19 has created an unprecedented load on the healthcare 
infrastructure. Further the situation was aggravated because of the non -participation of large  
number of private healthcare providers due to several reasons including increase d overhead 
expenditure related to procurement of PPE and sanitization materials. During the lockdown 
period, it was observed that while 19% pre -CoVID active AB -PMJAY hospitals  (private) had 
closed down their operations during the CoVID times, 34% hospitals had scaled down their 
operations by more than 50%, and 25% hospitals had scaled down their operations by less than 
50%. Thus, 79% private hospitals have been impacted during COVID times. This is based on the 
comparison of utilization data pre -COVID (Jan to March’2020) and post Covid (April to 
June’2020). 
  
4.22 Elaborating on the reasons for the same, the Ministry submitted the following points:- 
a. Several large empanelled hospi tals were converted into dedicated Covid -19 centers. 
Therefore, they could not admit non-Covid patients.  
b. Many hospitals could not provide treatment during COVID times due to high costs of 
infrastructure and manpower related issues which are as under : 
I. Infrastructure challenges  
i. Additional infrastructure expenses towards arranging separate entry & 
exit, patient transfer facility, dedicated COVID ward, etc. 
ii. Separate isolation facilities to manage the contagion 
iii. Availability of critical care facilities (e.g . ICU, ventilation, emergency 
care equipment’s) 
iv. Arrangement of expensive personal protective equipment (PPE), medical 
consumables etc. 
II. Availability of medical and paramedical staff  
i. High incidence of COVID-19 infection among healthcare staff  
ii. Requirement of additional staff because existing staff needs to be 
quarantined for specific days  
iii. Arrangement of accommodation and other facilities as staff is reluctant to 
go home because of heightened risk of infection to family members. 
iv. Unwillingness among the staff to participate in COVID management 
c. Many hospitals are fearful about the infection from COVID as they lack proper facilities 
for screening of incoming patients  

63 
 
4.23 The Committee has also been given to understand that NHA has a well -defined grievance 
mechanism to address issues faced by scheme beneficiaries to ensure that disputes and 
grievances related to denial of treatment or demanding of money by hospitals, and any other 
types of grievances involving beneficiaries, healthcare providers and  other stakeholders under 
AB PM -JAY are resolved in an efficient, transparent and time -bound manner, Grievance 
Redressal Guidelines  and Central Grievance Redressal Management System (CGRMS) have 
been developed for the purpose. 
 
4.24 Grievance redressal un der AB -PMJAY has a three -tier system at District, State, and 
National Level. At each level, there is a dedicated nodal officer viz. District Grievance Nodal 
Officer (DGNO), State Grievance Nodal Officer (SGNO) and National Grievance Nodal 
Officer (NGNO). A lso, at each level, there is a committee formed viz. District Grievance 
Redressal Committee (DGRC) at district level, State Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC) 
at State level and National Grievance Redressal Committee (NGRC) at national level to address 
the grievances. 
 
4.25 An IT -enabled and web -based grievance redressal system has been developed which 
enables a person to register a grievance on the portals viz. https://grievance.pmjay.gov.in or 
https://cgrms.pmjay.gov.in. A grievance can also be lodged on the portal, through national call 
centre 14555 or through mail, letter, fax etc. which are acknowledged, recorded, escalated & 
resolved as per well -defined process. Any complaint regarding denial of treatment by an 
empanelled hospital is considered as SOS grievance and Turn Around Time of 6 hours has been 
defined to resolve them. Complaints or grievances received through any medium are 
immediately assigned to respective Grievance Nodal Officer designated at State and district 
level for necessary action. The concerned officer takes necessary action to resolve the case 
either through direct channel or placing it before the committee. 
 
4.26 The Committee understands the crucial situation arising due to pandemic Covid -19 
and the resultant challenges being faced with respect to the health infrastructure as well as 
services. Since all the resources stand diverted towards tackling the pandemic, people have 
been facing problems in availing treatment for covid as well as non -covid illness. The 
Committee believes that people may not be aware about the grievance redressal system and 
ways and means of registering their complaints. The Committee, however, feels that 
monitoring of empanelled hospitals must be done to ensure that treatment is not denie d to 
anyone because it will have a direct impact on the out of pocket expenditure of the poor 
patients. The Committee believes that it is the moral duty of the Government to take care 
of its poor citizens especially in critical times like these.  The Committee recommends to the 
Ministry as well as NHA that all empanelled hospitals must be monitored, fresh directions 
issued and those found guilty be penalised for denying treatment to anyone.   
 
4.27 The Ministry has also shared the following SWOT analysis of  Covid Management under 
AB-PMJAY:- 
  

64 
 
SWOT: AB-PMJAY w.r.t. COVID management 
Strengths Weaknesses 
i. Wide network of 23,000+ hospitals 
ii. Robust IT platform with dynamic 
adaptive capabilities e.g. TMS Lite 
iii. Huge beneficiary base of 13.13 Crore  
families gives strong bargaining power 
 
i. Smaller hospitals find it challenging to 
provide Covid -19 treatment due to 
overheads 
ii. State Governments not proactive in 
leveraging AB PM -JAY as they are 
funded from NHM, NDRF, SDRF, DMF 
iii. Beneficiaries not utilizing their AB PM -
JAY wallet as Covid-19 treatment is free  
 
Opportunities 
 
Threats  
 
i. IT platform can be used to provide 
treatment to Covid-19 patients & monitor 
service delivery 
ii. Increase hospitals empanelment for 
effective service delivery 
iii. Build confidence in beneficiaries about 
AB-PMJAY mechanism 
 
i. Since State/UTs are directing Covid -19 
response, awareness of AB -PMJAY’s 
role in COVID management is missing   
ii. Non Covid treatments impacted due to 
low demand, mobility restrictions, fear of 
infection etc. 
iii. Frontline staff (PMAMs) diverted 
towards Covid-19 duty 
 
 
4.28 The Committee is quite apprehensive that lack of awareness especially in the rural 
areas may be major reason for ignorance about healthcare benefits under the AB-PMJAY 
Scheme. As a result of s uch ignorance many entitled beneficiaries still remain outside the 
ambit of the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends , especially in the remotest 
and rural areas , to utilise the existing community healthcare workforce, community 
leaders, gram panchayat etc in disseminating information about the Scheme. Periodic 
awareness campaign about the right s of the beneficiaries  should be conducted. The 
Ministry needs to make s pecial efforts and sensitize the entitled beneficiaries so that 
instances of patients paying additional amount in case of any additional medical procedure 
are avoided.  
4.29 The Committee is of the view that engagement of both private and public sector is a 
must for ensuring robust delivery of healthcare services under the Scheme AB -PMJAY. 
The Committee understands that Covid treatment rate and charges for other health 
package for small private hospitals may not be sustainable which would discourage private 
hospitals from empanelling under the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to rationalize the package rates especially in rural areas where people suffer due 
to a weak primary healthcare infrastructure.   
4.30 The Committee notes that Ayushman Bharat envisages ensuring robust tertiary 
healthcare services  and therefore, recommends the Ministry to make constant efforts to 
achieve its envisaged goal of 1.5 lakh Health and Wellness Centres (AB -HWCs) to provide 
comprehensive health care (CPHC) services to enrich  the physical infrastructure in fight 
against pandemic/epidemic like situation. The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure 
availability of adequate and trained human resources for effective functioning of the 
HWCs. 

65 
 
4.31 The Committee would also like the Ministry to ensure that the private as well as 
public hospitals follow the appropriate guidelines on the isolation facilities, separate entry 
& exit, patient transfer facility etc to manage the contagion. The Committee opines that 
directing the whole hea lth machinery towards C ovid-19 while neglecting other healthcare 
services is not the right approach. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
also ensure that basic healthcare services like immunization, mater nal, neonatal healthcare 
facilities, health check -ups, screenings etc are not disrupted in the Health and Wellness 
Centres.  
Budgetary Allocation 
4.32 The National Health Authority submitted that the budgetary allocation for AB -PMJAY 
for 2020-21 is Rs. 6400 out which Rs. 1350 crore and Rs. 250 crore have been allocated under 
National Rural Health Mission and National Urban Health Mission respectively for setting up of 
Ayushman Bharat - Health & Wel lness Centers. On a specific query with regards to the 
enhancement in the budgetary allocation during the pandemic, NHA conceded that adequate 
Budget Provisions have been made for the scheme  and in case of requirement, additional  funds 
would be provided.  
4.33 The Committee has been given to understand that AB -PMJAY is completely funded by 
the Government and the costs are shared between Central and State Governments. The 
Government of India decides a national ceiling amount per family that is used to determ ine the 
maximum limit of the central share of the contribution. The actual premium fixed through open 
tendering process or the maximum ceiling of the premium is decided by Government of India, 
which is shared between Central Government and States/UTs in th e ratio as per the extant 
directives issued by Ministry of Finance, from time to time. 
4.34 The o ptimum utilization of the allocated funds has always been advocated by the 
Committee. The Committee, in this connection , recapitulates its 
recommendation/observation made in its 118 th Report on the Demands for Grants 
(Demand No.42) for the year 2020 -21 of the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
about the gross underutilisation of funds under the Scheme. It was pointed out that funds 
to the tune of Rs. 6400 crore were allotted in BE 2019 -20 under AB -PMJAY which was 
reduced to Rs. 3200 crore at the RE stage, due to underutilization of the budgetary 
allocation. The Committee reiterates its recommendation as made in the 118th Report  
desiring the Department to periodically track the progress of the Scheme in the States and 
ensure that the funds earmarked for the Scheme are optimally utilised. The Ministry must 
ensure that no course of action should remain incomplete while combating Covid -19 for 
want of fund.  
Health packages and services under Ayushman Bharat 
4.35 NHA in its written submission stated that AB -PMJAY was launched with 1393 Health 
Benefit Packages (HBPs) which included one unspecified surgical package. After the launch of 
scheme feedback on various aspects of HBPs was received. Accordingly, an exercise was 
undertaken to rationalize the benefit packages which have been coined as HBP 2.0. 
4.36 24 Specialist Committees were constituted by NHA to review the Health Benefit 
Packages. This led to th e creation of 1592 packages under 25 different specialties including 

66 
 
oncology, nephrology, cardiology and general medicine etc. NHA further submitted that 
hospitalization benefits under the scheme are provided to beneficiaries in a cashless manner. A 
beneficiary can avail any number of health benefit packages irrespective of the number of 
treatment episodes based on the clinical requirement till the wallet of Rs. 5 Lakh is completely 
exhausted.  
4.37 The Committee has been apprised that NHA and SHAs have is sued guidelines to the 
empanelled healthcare providers under AB-PMJAY to sensitize the beneficiaries on the gamut of 
cashless treatments they are entitled to under the scheme. A Central Grievance Redressal 
Management System (CGRMS) has also been developed for addressing any issue related to 
quality of treatment, denial of treatment or overcharging.  
4.38 Further, to improve the quality of healthcare services being provided and also to 
encourage the participation of public, private and corporate healthcare p roviders, empaneled 
hospitals are additionally incentivized for accreditation. 10% incentive is being provided to the 
hospitals with entry level NABH accreditation and 15% for NABH full accreditation. Hospitals 
which are imparting Post -Graduate education a re also incentivized at the rate of 10% over and 
above the base rate of HBP. 
4.39 Also, to ensure quality treatment under AB -PMJAY, NHA has signed a MoA with 
DHR/ICMR and is working in collaboration with it for developing Standard Treatment 
Workflows/ guid elines (STWs/ STGs) for PMJAY package. NHA has so far developed 
approximately 580 STGs for various PMJAY packages and released 174 STGs. 
4.40 Further, the quality of treatment is ensured through beneficiary engagement process 
which involves system -based me ssages to each beneficiary at the time of – e-card creation, 
hospitalization and discharge. Beneficiary feedback is also captured through outbound calls and 
post-paid letter after treatment. The feedback thus received is collated and studied to undertake 
process improvements.  To keep the confidence of private healthcare providers in the AB -
PMJAY’s claim settlement process, guidelines have been laid down for payment of claim to 
hospital within 15 days of intra-state claim submission and within 30 days in cas e of portability 
(inter State) claims.  
4.41 The National Health Authority submitted that a dedicated fraud and abuse control unit 
National Anti -Fraud Unit (NAFU) has been set up at National level to continuously track 
instances of fraud/abuse with respect  to utilization data, generation of e -cards through 
monitoring tools on real time basis. The NAFU works closely with State Anti -Fraud Units 
(SAFUs) to implement the anti-fraud framework established by the NHA. 
4.42 The Committee is of the view that the Min istry should make constant efforts to 
ensure delivery of quality treatment to the entitled beneficiaries under the AB-PMJAY 
Scheme. For this to happen, the Ministry needs to strengthen its monitoring mechanism 
and coordinate with the State Health Agencies (SHA) for effective implementation of the 
Scheme. Needless to mention, p eriodical review meetings and regular assessment  of the 
quality of treatment under the Scheme should become the integral parts of such robust 
mechanism. NHA should also review the outcome audit of different procedure and 
packages and conduct periodic medical audits. 
4.43 The Committee feels that undue delay in claims payment of private hospitals 
empanelled under the Scheme is equally a matter of concern . The Committee strongly 

67 
 
believes that the Ministry and NHA should make specia l efforts for ensuring timely 
payment of reimbursement claims of empanelled private hospitals to ensure uninterrupted 
treatment to needy patients. This would ensure transparency and good governance of the 
health domain free from  instances of exorbitant extraction of money from the patients in 
the private hospitals.  
4.44 In response to yet another specific query about the inclusion of AYUSH packages, the 
Committee has been apprise d that National Health Authority (NHA) is coordinating with 
Ministry of AYUSH for developing packages related to alternative medicine system for AB 
PMJAY. In this regard, several meetings have been conducted between NHA and Ministry of 
AYUSH. Further, a task force team has been constituted to draw up the roadmap for integration.  
An expert committee was constituted by this taskforce to work out the modalities and share the 
list of probable packages of Ayurveda for consideration within AB -PMJAY. The 
recommendations of this expert committee have been shared with the States/UTs implementing 
AB-PMJAY to gather their inputs and feedback.  Accordingly, based on the inputs from 
stakeholders a suitable decision will be taken regarding the inclusion of Ayush packages.  
 
4.45 The Committee is glad to know that AYUSH packages are being included under 
AB-PMJAY.  Given the importance of Indian System of Medicines in present times 
especially during pandemic Covid -19, when AYUSH products are being widely used in the 
country for prophylactic use, its inclusion is well timed and warranted for.  The Committee 
hopes that these packages are finalized soon and included under the scheme.  
 
  

68 
 
CHAPTER- 5 
COVID MANAGEMENT THROUGH AYUSH SYSTEM 
5.1 India is endowed with a rich system of Medicine. Many ancient scriptures/texts envisage 
the use of a large number of natural remedies/medicines in boosting the immunity of a person. 
Management of epidemics/pandemics is not new to traditional Indian health systems. 
Janapadodhwamsa Vyadhi is a well -defined term for epidemics in the classical ayurvedic texts. 
The mode of transmission in such pandemics has been explained under Aupasargika Roga by 
Sushrutha. Even during those days, there have been references to covering the face during 
sneezing, yawning and laughing. From the beginning of the 20th century, practitioners of Unani, 
Siddha, Ayurveda and other traditional forms of medicines systems have significantly 
contributed to the management of outbreaks of various diseases. Utilization of t raditional 
Chinese medicine in Wuhan to treat COVID -19 cases sets the example demonstrating that 
traditional health care system offers successful treatment of these patients.  After decades of 
neglect, the ancient Indian healing system is poised to take its  place in the healthcare 
mainstream. The demand for food supplements and immunity boosters is increasing across the 
globe as consumers move from curative medicine to proactive and preventive healthcare. Long -
term health immunity is at the forefront of cons umer concerns and it is bringing into spotlight 
various progressive alternatives to health and wellness. These supplements increase overall 
immunity and provide much needed nutrition that may prove to be crucial in a fight against 
pandemics. 
Approach of Ayush Systems 
 
5.2 The Ministry of AYUSH in its background note submitted that the holistic approach of 
AYUSH systems of medicine focus es on prevention through lifestyle modification, dietary 
management, prophylactic interventions for improving the immunity and simple remedies of the 
symptoms. Emphasis on avoidance of causative factors and enhancing the immunity against host 
of infections are characteristics of Ayurveda management. The preventive aspect of 
Homoeopathy is well known, and historically, Homoeopa thy has reportedly been used for 
prevention during the epidemics of Cholera, Spanish Influenza, Yellow Fever, Scarlet Fever, 
Diphtheria, Typhoid etc.  
 
5.3 The AYUSH approach to manage the outbreak broadly comprise of: 
 
i. Preventive and prophylactic, 
ii. Symptom management of COVID-19 like illnesses, 
iii. Add on Interventions to the conventional care. 
 
5.4 The Ministry of AYUSH has notified the following general preventive measures:-  
 
i. Observe good personal hygiene.  
ii. Practice frequent hand washing with soap.  
iii. Follow respiratory etiquettes - cover your mouth when coughing or sneezing.  
iv. Avoid close contact with people who are unwell or showing symptoms of illness, such as 
cough, runny nose etc.  
v. Avoid contact with live animals and consumption of raw/undercooked meats.  

69 
 
vi. Avoid travel to farms, live animal markets or where animals are slaughtered.  
vii. Wear a mask if you have respiratory symptoms such as cough or runny nose. 
 
5.5 In addition, the Ministry advocated the following AYUSH specific preventive measures: 
 
(i) The diet should be fresh, warm, easy to digest, containing whole cereals, seasonal 
vegetables etc. (ii) Frequent sipping of water boiled with Tulsi leaves, crushed ginger, and 
turmeric would be beneficial. (iii) Honey with a pinch of pepper powder is also beneficial in case 
cough.  (iv) Cold, frozen and heavy foods may be best avoided. It is always beneficial to avoid 
direct exposure to cold breeze. (v) Appropriate rest and timely sleep are advisable. (vi) The 
practice of Yogasana and Pranayama under the guidance of qualified Yoga i nstructor is 
recommended, and (vii) Common medicinal plants useful in similar symptoms are Tulsi 
(Ocimum sanctum), Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia), Ginger (Zingiber officinale) and Turmer ic 
(Curcuma longa)  
 
5.6 On a specific query regarding the prescription and efficacy of Arsenicum album 30, the 
Ministry of AYUSH submitted that Arsenic album is Pharmacopoeial drug notified by 
Government of India and is a commonly used prescription in the  case of respiratory infections in 
day to day homeopathy practice. The genus epidemicus (GE) [Homoeopathic medicine] is the 
remedy found to be most effective for an epidemic once data have been gathered from several 
cases. Keeping in view the positive resu lts from the genus epidemicus as prophylactic during 
epidemic outbreaks of various viral diseases during recent past it was found out the Arsenic 
album could modulate immunity. The dose recommended i.e. one dose of Arsenic album 30 (4 
pills of size 30 by adults and 2 pills of size 30 by children) daily, on empty stomach, for 3 days is 
considered to be safe for all the age groups and people per respective of their past medical 
history. 
 
5.7 The Committee takes note of the preventive and prophylactic approaches that help 
in symptom management of COVID-19 like illnesses as also the lifestyle advocacies to boost 
immunity for prevention of various kinds of infectious diseases. The Committee recognizes 
the importance of traditional Indian system of medicin e and the pivotal role it plays in 
boosting immunity and acting as a shield from various diseases. The Committee desires the 
people of the country to follow  these advisories in their daily lives to protect themselves. 
The Committee would like the Ministry to create adequate awareness amongst the masses 
about the various guidelines relating to the dose of medicines to be taken up by the people. 
The Ministry should also ensure that the guidelines about the medicines to be taken up to 
modulate immunity be  adequately disseminated so that patients take dose of medicine as 
per prescription of registered practitioner.  
 
Oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH in the Committee meeting held on 5 th 
March, 2020 
 
5.8 In the Committee's meeting held on 5 th March, 2020, the Secretary, Ministry of Ayush 
highlighted the following points:- 
(a) The approach of Ayush system is  more preventive and prophylactic. If the immunity, 
nourishment and hydration in this type of viral infection is maintained properly, then the 
susceptibility of infection is reduced. 

70 
 
(b) The recommendation of expert group of WHO during Ebola outbreak in 2014 stipulates 
that “it is ethical to offer unproven interventions with as yet unknown efficacy and 
adverse effects, as potential treatment or prevention” keeping in view no vaccine or anti -
viral were available. Indian traditional system of medicine have very good method s with 
evidence to address those diseases hav ing similar symptoms which they want to bring in 
use. 
(c) Medicines that can be used as an efficacy of anti -viral and flulike symptoms or 
preventive or improving the immunity are Shamshamani Vati in Ayurveda, is an extract 
of Giloy and Nilavembu Kudineer in Siddha, Decoction of Behidana and Sapistan in 
Unani, Arsenicum album 30C in Homeopathy. 
(d) The AYUSH Ministry is in constant support of main stream health system with entire 
infrastructure and human resource, for the wider prevention of the outbreaks.    
 
Statement of the Minister of Health and Family Welfare in the Rajya Sabha  
 
5.9 On 14th September, 2020 , Dr. Harsh Vardhan, Minister of Health and Family Welfare 
stated in the House that Ministry of AYUSH has contributed through various measures for the 
management and mitigation of Covid -19. The Ministry recommended guidelines of self -care 
for preventive health measures and boosting imm unity.  The Ministry of AYUSH has also 
issued health advisories from different systems of medicine on prophylaxis and immunity 
promotion which was translated into eight foreign languages and circulated to Indian 
Embassies. Various AYUSH Hospitals were desi gnated as quarantine centres, isolation 
centres, Covid Care Centres and Covid Health Centres. Around 8.5 lakh Ayush healthcare 
professionals have been registered on covidwarriors.gov.in. Ministry of AYUSH has formed 
an “Inter -disciplinary AYUSH R&D Task Fo rce”. The Task Force has formulated and 
designed clinical research protocols for AYUSH prophylactic studies and add -on interventions 
in COVID-19 positive cases. AYUSH-CSIR collaborative studies were initiated with AYUSH 
medicines for prophylaxis/treatment.  A largescale population -based study through AYUSH 
Research Councils and 269 National Institutes under the Ministry on prophylaxis of AYUSH 
interventions in targeted populations in containment zones is underway. The Ministry of 
AYUSH has also initiated imp act assessment of effectiveness, acceptance and usage of 
AYUSH advisories & measures in prevention of COVID 19 through a mobile application app 
known as AYUSH-Sanjivani app. 
 
Steps taken by Ministry of AYUSH in containing and mitigating COVID-19 
 
5.10 The Committee has been informed of the steps taken and contribution made by Ministry 
of AYUSH in containing and mitigating COVID-19 that are enumerated as under:- 
 
(a) The Ministry of AYUSH issued an advisory on 29.01.2020 on how to protect oneself from 
COVID-19 a nd how to stay healthy. The advisory  specified hygiene measures like hand 
wash, use of mask etc. apart from simple home remedies were also suggested for people. 
Further, clarification on these precautionary measures issued on 04.02.2020 indicat ed that 
these advisories neither claimed effective treatment for Corona virus nor suggested any 
specific drug to combat corona virus. Primarily, the personal hygienic measures few herbal 
preparations and consultation with registered practitioners from respec tive system of 
medicine was suggested. 

71 
 
 
(b) The Ministry has written a letter dated 06.03.2020 to all Chief Secretaries of States/Union 
territories with more specific suggestions on augmentation of General Immunity of people 
and about possible AYUSH interventi on wherever required in coordination with Health 
departments of the States / UTs. 
 
(c) The Ministry of AYUSH v ide its D.O. letter dated 16.03.2020 addressed to Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare offered for integrating and utilizing huge AYUSH infrastructure 
to combat with the COVID -19 pandemic.  Principals of all Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and 
Homoeopathy (ASU&H) colleges  (approximately 727 colleges) were also advised on 
23.03.2020 for utilization of available infrastructure facilities like Hospital (IPD & OPD) , 
pathology laboratory, ICU and manpower including medical & Paramedical Staff to combat 
with the COVID-19 pandemic. They were also advised to offer their services to local health 
authorities for utilization of the available facilities as per the need of t he situation arose due 
to outbreak of Pandemic COVID-19. Accordingly, various AYUSH institutes hospital were 
utilized by State Governments as quarantine centre, isolation centre, COVID care centre 
and COVID health centre. 
 
(d) The Ministry of AYUSH has issued self-care guidelines on 31.03.2020 for preventive 
health measures and boosting immunity with special reference to respiratory health that 
included: 
(i) General Measures; 
(ii) Ayurvedic Immunity Promoting Measures; 
(iii) Simple Ayurvedic Procedures; 
(iv) During dry cough/sore throat 
 
(e) In collaboration with M/o Health &  Family, the Ministry of AYUSH has organized 
Training of Trainers including State AYUSH Principal Secretaries, State AYUSH 
Directors, AYUSH District Medical Officers and, Master Trainers from various colleges, 
National Institutes and Research Councils for COVID-19 Preparedness, Response and 
Containment. Further, AYUSH personnel are also being trained for Covid -19 management 
at igot.gov.in platform. More than 2 lakhs AYUSH persons have been trained and among 
them, 39,555 persons have been deployed by the States/UTs.  
 
(f) An Inter-disciplinary AYUSH R&D Task Force was constituted chaired by Prof. Bhushan 
Patwardhan, Vice Chairman, UGC with representation from scientists including ICMR, 
DBT, CSIR, AIIMS and AYUSH Institutions. The Interdisciplinary AYUSH Research and 
Development Task Force has formulated and designed clinical research protocols for 
prophylactic studies and add -on interventions in COVID-19 positive cases for thorough 
review and consultative process with experts of high repute from different organizations 
across the country for studying four different interventions viz. Ashwagandha, 
Yashtimadhu, Guduchi + Pippali and a poly herbal fo rmulation (AYUSH -64). The task 
force ha s taken up the proposals received from Screening Committees of Councils and 
proactively explored possibilities based on available leads. 
(g) M/o AYUSH has launched interdisciplinary studies involving AYUSH interventions f or 
COVID-19 based on recommendations of Task force. Clinical research studies  on AYUSH 
provide for AYUSH interventions as prophylactic measures in high risk population 

72 
 
targeting approximately 05 lakhs population and as an add -on standard care for COVID -19 
management.  
 
(h) Ayush Sanjivani mobile app developed by Ministry of AYUSH has been also launched to 
generate data on acceptance and usage of AYUSH advocacies and measures among the 
population and its impact in prevention of COVID-19 targeting 05 million populations. 
 
(i) The Ministry issued an order to the States/UTs on 1 st April, 2020 to control dissemination 
of misleading information about AYUSH drugs and services amid COVID-19 outbreak,. 
 
(j) Considering the importance of immunity boosting measures in the wake of COVID -19 
outbreak and in the interest of health promotion of the population, the Ministry of AYUSH, 
on 24 th April, 2020, circulated the standardized composition of Ayush 
Kwath/Joshanda/Kudineer formulation for commercial manufacturing by Ayurveda, Siddha 
and Unani drug manufacturers across the country. 
 
(k) To make the process of product approval/licensing consiste nt at State/UT level for the 
purpose of effective quality control of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic 
medicines having underwent clinical trials/research studies for COVID -19, a directive was 
issued on 28th July, 2020 to all State/UT Licensing Aut horities to forward license 
applications with details and results of the clinical trial/research study for verification by the 
Ministry of AYUSH. 
 
5.11 The Committee observes that while there is a lot of discussion on COVID -19 control  
strategies from the mainstream approaches, it is also necessary to examine the contribution 
of the Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa Riga and Homeopathy 
(AYUSH) system, which are now being focused as effective public health interventions. The 
Committee would  like to point out that outbreak of COVID -19 has made the world 
community realize the significance of strong and resilient immune systems for good health. 
While curative medicines are crucial and indispensable in battling Pandemic COVID -19 
viruses, body’s immunity is the first and best line of defense against any disease. During 
recent times, this line of life style reflects the increasing demand for dietary supplements 
that improve nutrition and health system.  The Committee would like to appreciate the 
advisories issued by the Ministry of AYUSH. 
 
5.12 The Committee notes that the Ministry has formulated  Interdisciplinary AYUSH 
Research and Development Task for studying four different interventions viz. 
Ashwagandha, Yashtimadhu, Guduchi + Pippali and a poly herbal formulation (AYUSH -
64). However, due to scanty scientific evidence, this syste m of medicines gets very limited 
attention to the scientific community. The Committee, therefore, underlines the need to 
develop evidence based traditional medicines with scientific validation for better 
acceptability and higher credibility. Research and D evelopment is vital for growth and 
promotion of traditional system of medicine and therefore, the Committee recommends the 
Ministry to make efforts for scientific validation of the traditional medicine by introducing 
necessary technological advancements to gain trust and acceptability . This would help to 
garner confidence of more and more people who in turn would opt for traditional medicine 

73 
 
to boost their immunity and prevent and protect themselves against  various infectious 
diseases. 
 
5.13 The Committee opines that the pandemic COVID -19 has highlighted the need for 
mainstreaming Indian system of medicine and employing the alternative and traditional 
medicinal systems. The Committee would like the Government to weigh the relative 
contribution of both syste m i.e. system of modern medicine & science and the AYUSH, as 
complementary to each other in the management of diseases. The New Education Policy, 
2020 also calls for integration of Allopathy with AYUSH Systems of Medicine. The NEP, 
2020 exhorts much greater emphasis on preventive healthcare and community medicine in 
all forms of healthcare education. The Committee believes that the integration of Indian 
system with Allopathy would not only give medical students better understanding of 
preventive healthcare and community medicine, as envisioned under NEP, 2020, but at the 
same time would help the AYUSH practitioners to equip themselves to dispense basic 
medical care at the primary healthcare level. The integration of AYU SH with Allopathy is 
a positive move that would help India move towards meeting the goal of universal 
healthcare by improving access and delivery in remote areas. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Government to make all out efforts for the integrati on of Allopathy with 
Indian traditional system of medicine. 
 
Utilization of AYUSH manpower as Covid Warriors 
5.14 The Committee has been also given to understand that Ministry of AYUSH has 
coordinated with Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for utilizatio n of AYUSH manpower as 
COVID warrior for the management of COVID -19 with identified roles. More than 2 lakhs 
AYUSH persons have been trained and among them, only 39,555 persons have been deployed by 
the States/UTs.  For increasing the deployment of trained AYUSH manpower, SOPs has been 
prepared and shared with Empowered Group -4 constituted by the Ministry of Home Affairs for 
augmenting human resources and capacity building and same is under consideration of Group -4 
members. 
5.15 The Committee appreciates the  contribution of AYUSH doctors in combating 
COVID since the outbreak of the pandemic. The Committee believes that with the virus 
now spreading beyond metros and big cities and to rural and remote areas where an 
allopathic doctor is not always available or COVID centers/ hospitals with shortage of 
doctors, AYUSH doctors can be the first line of defense in those areas. The Committee is 
aware that AYUSH doctors have been filling up the gaps where there is scarcity of health 
human resources. The Committee feels that the basic training of the AYUSH doctors in the 
modern scientific systems would go a long way in the management of COVI D-19 especially 
in rural areas and would reduce burden o f the allopathic doctors in the management of 
COVID-19 virus. 
 
5.16 The Committee notes that out of 2 lakh trained AYUSH doctors, only 39,555 have 
been deployed by States/UTs. The SOPs for the deployment of trained AYUSH manpower  
has been prepared and same is under consideration. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to expedite deployment of remaining trained Ayush doctors in the light of 
increasing number of COVID patients with each passing day. The Committee also 

74 
 
recommends the Gov ernment to train more and more AYUSH doctors to overcome the 
shortage of doctors and to achieve the goal of universal health coverage. 
 
5.17 The Ministry has also submitted that initially, permission to Research Councils and 
National Institutes under the M inistry of AYUSH in some of the States/UTs Governments for 
clinical and population based research studies under taken by them with AYUSH intervention on 
Covid-19 was delayed due to lack of clarity in policies and guidelines for undertaking such 
research.  However, the isseue was resolved in most of the States/UTs after the Ministry issued a 
Gazette notification dated 21.04.2020 with appropriate guidelines. 
5.18 The Committee deprecates the delay in permission to Research Councils and 
National Institutes under the Ministry of AYUSH in some of the States/UTs Governments 
for clinical and population based research studies  due to lack of clarity of policies and 
guidelines. This shows the apathy of the Government in formulating guidelines with regard 
to researc h activities under AYUSH system. The Committee, at the same time, 
recommends that AYUSH Research Councils and the National Institutes must undertake 
such research projects that would help in management of pandemic COVID -19 and extend 
protection to common masses against life threatening diseases.  
Quality control and licensing of AYUSH drugs 
 
5.19 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to quality control of AYUSH drugs/ 
medicines and various AYUSH products like boosters whose demand has grown immensely in 
the wake of the pandemic. Grant of license for manufacturing of ASU drugs monitoring/ensuring 
quality control of AYUSH drugs/products and misleading advertisements are the areas of 
concern. To a specific query about quality control of AYUSH drugs, the Ministry has submitted 
that enforcement of the legal provisions related to quality control of Ay urveda, Siddha, Unani 
and Homoeopathy medicines as prescribed in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules, 
1945 is vested with the State Licensing Authority and Drug Controllers appointed by the State 
Government. Ministry of AYUSH, under Section 33(P) o f the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 
issues guidelines and advisories to States and Union Territories for smooth implementation of 
the quality control provisions pertaining to ASU medicines. The Ministry has also informed that 
product approval is given by t he concerned State Licensing Authority (AYUSH) in accordance 
with the provisions of Drugs & Cosmetics Rule 158 -B for proof of safety and effectiveness. 
Quality standards of the classical/generic formulations are provided in the respective 
pharmacopoeia and formulary of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs. For patent and proprietary 
drugs, in -house standards are required to be submitted to the concerned State Licensing 
Authority for product approval.   The Committee has also been informed a directive was issued 
by Ministry on 2nd April, 2020 to all State/UT Licensing Authorities and Drug Controllers of 
AYUSH to expedite the process of granting approval/license/renewal of license for 
manufacturing of ASU immunity boosting healthcare products and sanitizers 
 
5.20 The Ministry has submitted that Central Sector Scheme of Pharmacovigilance of 
ASU&H Drugs has been implemented since November 2017  to ensure quality control of 
AYUSH drugs . Through this scheme, a network of National Pharmacovigilance C entres, five 
Intermediary system -wise Pharmacovigilance Centres and sixty three Peripheral 
Pharmacovigilance Centres have been established and made functional since August 2018 to 
inculcate the culture of reporting Adverse Drug Events and misleading advertisemen ts of 

75 
 
ASU&H drugs for regulatory action.  Eleven more Peripheral Centres have recently been added 
to the network. The pharmacovigilance centres have reported 7589 cases of misleading 
advertisements and 449 cases of Adverse Drug Events since January 2019 up  to July, 2020. Year 
wise breakup of misleading advertisements reported is as follows: 
 
S. No Year and period of reporting No of cases reported  
1 August 2018 to March 2019 1127 
2 April 2019 to March 2020 4950 
3 April 2020 to July 2020 1512 
 Total till July 2020 7589 
 
5.21 Since April, 2020 misleading advertisements related to COVID -19 are being reported on 
daily basis under the Pharmacovigilance initiative. Pharmacovigilance centres have reported 139 
misleading advertisements related to COVID 19 till July 2020. Since, legal  action is vested with 
the State Licensing Authorities, appropriate action on such instances of misleading 
advertisements is taken as per the extant Rules and guidelines issued by the Ministry of AYUSH. 
 
5.22 The Committee expresses its concern over the reported adverse reactions of number 
of ASU&H drugs introduced in market since January, 2019. The reference to 139 
misleading cases by Pharmacovigilance centres related to COVID-19 pandemic in last four 
months is testimony to this  fact. It appears that the regulatory framework for the quality 
control of Ayush drugs is not stringent to prevent threat of misleading claims/ medications. 
The Committee believes that these cases have put a question mark on the quality of 
traditional medicines available during outbreak of pandemic COVID -19. The Committee 
cautions the Ministry of AYUSH that the current pandemic should not let the 
unscrupulous sellers/manufacturers of AYUSH drugs/products to increase their profits by 
misleading the consumer in the name of health immune boosters. The Committee strongly 
recommends the Ministry of AYUSH to strictly monitor the cases of misleading 
advertisements and protect the consumers of AYUSH products. 
 
5.23 The Committee appreciates the pharmacovigilance initiative taken by the Ministry 
with the aim to prevent the adverse drug reaction and safeguard the public health. This is a 
positive step to showcase that Indian traditional system of medicine is not only safe but also 
scientifically validated. The Committee, however, cautions that the fake claims and 
misleading advertisements about ASU&H drugs would  not only damage the credibility of 
AYUSH medicines but also create distrust amongst the users of ASU&H drugs as well. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to evolve stringent regulatory framework 
to tackle the problems of failed samples and ensure quality control of AYUSH drugs. Strict 
and exemplary action in a time bound manner must be taken against the manufacturers 
involved in manufacturing of spurious /low quality AYUSH drugs. The Ministry ought to 
fix the responsibility of the officials concerned who approve low/substandard quality drugs. 
The Ministry must sensitize physicians, pharmacists, patients, the pharmaceutical industry 
and other stakeholders towards reporting adverse drug reactions. The Ministry should also 
make efforts to strengthen State Government ASU&H Pharmacies and drug testing 
laboratories in tackling the menace of misleading advertisement and low quality AYUSH 
drugs.  
 

76 
 
5.24 The attention of the Committee was drawn to the provisions of Drugs and Magic 
Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954 which prohibits advertisement s of 
drugs and remedies that directly or indirectly gives a false impression regarding the true 
character of the drug; or (b) makes a false claim for the drug; or (c) is otherwise false or 
misleading in any material particular. The Committee urges upon the  Ministry to strictly 
follow the provisions of the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 
1954 that prevent publication of inappropriate/misleading advertisements. The Committee, 
in this connection , recommends the Ministry to monitor advertisements issued regarding 
usage of AYUSH drugs  and take actions against reported misleading advertisements and 
false claims in a time bound manner. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to 
direct States/UTs for ensuring strict  monitoring/vigilance of quality control of ASU&H 
drugs as also the adherence of general guidelines for development of traditional medicine. 
 
5.25 The Committee understands that  since the product approval to AYUSH drugs is 
given by the concerned State Licen sing Authority (AYUSH) in accordance with the 
provisions of Drugs & Cosmetics Rule , due precautious needs to be exercised by licensing 
authorities so that unscrupulous manufacturers do not get any corridor for bringing 
spurious products into the Indian market. Even though the power to grant license and legal 
actions against fake claims and misleading advertisements is vested with the State 
Licensing Authorities, the Ministry also owe accountability to follow up the matter with the 
State Governments and i nstruct the State licensing Authority to take suitable action in a 
transparent and time bound manner.  
 
5.26 The Committee also takes into cognizance the directives issued by Ministry on 2 nd 
April, 2020  to all States/UTs Licensing Authorities and Drug Controllers of AYUSH to 
expedite the process of granting approval/license/renewal of license for manufacturing of 
ASU immunity boosting healthcare products and sanitizers. The Committee however, 
would like to caution that Government should instruct the State licensing authorities not to 
rush through the process of granting approvals to new ASU products at the cost of public 
health. Despite the growing demand in the wake of the COVID -19 pandemic, the usual 
safety standards and approval mechanisms for AYUSH products must be strictly followed 
and there should be no compromise with safety of the people who are using these products.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to grant approvals/license only  after 
following the due procedure ,  strict monitoring of the products, keeping in mind the rights 
of consumers and protect lives of the people using the AYUSH products.  
 
Research and Development 
 
5.27 The Ministry did not respond to the Committee’s specific query about the percentage of 
funds allocated to research and development out of the total allocation for Ministry of AYUSH .  
However, the Ministry furnished  details of the funds allocated and utilized by the Research 
Councils during last five years is at Annexure II. 
5.28 The Committee finds the trend of  budgetary allocation to six research Institutes and its 
utilization during the last 5 years as satisfactory. In the year 2017 -18, total BE was Rs. 553.00 
crore and RE was Rs. 638.50 crore  while the actual expenditure during the year was Rs. 638.50 
crore. In the year 2018 -19, total BE and RE was Rs. 659.90 crore and Rs. 721.53 crore 

77 
 
respectively and the actual expenditure during the year was Rs. 691.93 crore although Rs. 29.60 
crore remained unutilized. 
5.29 The Committee appreciates the absorption capacity of all the Research Institutes. 
Research, being an important component for achieving scientific validation of traditional 
system and making it widely accepted, the Committee believes that all res earch Institutes 
must yield the research outcome to achieve the objective of investment on R&D. Effective 
AYUSH products/drugs in the treatment of diseases would revitalize the AYUSH segment 
on Indian system of traditional medicine. The Government must continue its efforts for 
mainstreaming traditional system of medicine and integrating it with mo dern system of 
medicine. Adequate allocation of funds for projects would enable research Institutes to 
undertake research activities that help mainstreaming the AYUSH system. The Committee 
is of the view that mainstreaming traditional system of medicine is  a long drawn process 
that requires continuous efforts from all the stakeholders alongwith continued budgetary 
support.  The Committee also believes that there is ample scope for research and 
development within Indian system of medicine and given the prese nt scenario of COVID 
19, all out efforts need to be made to enhance research and development through requisite 
fund allocation. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry of AYUSH to 
persuade Ministry of Finance for the higher allocation of budget i n coming years so that 
research activities continue in the aftermath of Pandemic COVID-19.   
5.30 On a specific query regarding research activities planned in AYUSH for next five years 
keeping in view the challenges posed by outbreak of COVID -19 and the pr ojected 
demand/budget for the purpose, it has been submitted that the Ministry in collaboration with 
CSIR has taken up the following clinical research studies: 
 
a) Ashwagandha for the Prophylaxis against SARS-CoV-2 Infection: A Randomized 
Hydroxychloroquine Controlled Clinical Trial in Health Care Providers. 
b) A Randomized, Open Label, Parallel Efficacy, Active Control, Multi -Centre 
Exploratory Drug Trial to Evaluate Efficacy and Safety of AYUSH 64 as Adjunct 
Treatment to Standard of Care for the management of M ild to Moderate COVID-
19 Patients. 
c) A Randomized, Open Label, Parallel Efficacy, Active Control, Multi -Centre 
Exploratory Drug Trial to Evaluate Efficacy and Safety of Guduchi + Pippali as 
Adjunct Treatment to Standard of Care for the management of Mild to Moderate 
COVID-19 Patients. 
d) A Randomized, Open Label, Parallel Efficacy, Active Control, Multi -Centre 
Exploratory Drug Trial to Evaluate Efficacy and Safety of Yastimadhu as Adjunct 
Treatment to Standard of Care for the management of Mild to Moderate COVID-
19 Patients. 
5.31 With respect to outcomes the Ministry has submitted that, the prophylactic clinical 
studies are yet to be started. 
5.32 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the fact that  the clinical research 
studies that was intended to be taken up by the Ministry of AYUSH in collaboration with 
CSIR are yet to see the light of the day.  The Committee opines that on one hand the 
Government is determined to mainstream AYUSH system and explore s cientific validation 

78 
 
of AYUSH advocacies and measures for the prevention of Covid -19, on the other hand, 
theses clinical research studies are yet to be taken up. The Committee is of the considered 
view that research being an important component, the resear ch studies should been taken 
up with utmost priority without procrastination.  AYUSH has a major role to play in 
present pandemic as its main objective is to boost the immune system and maintain health 
so as to prevent the spread of the disease. The Committee believes that the outcome of these 
studies would help understand AYUSH interventions during pandemics like COVID -19 
through scientific evidence & validation. Delay in research actives would not only stall the 
promotion of tradition medicine but also thwart the efforts for integration and 
mainstreaming of the Indian systems of medicine and Homeopathy into the existing public 
healthcare system. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to start  
clinical research studies without further delay so that its outcome could be used to combat 
the present crisis. 
 
5.33 The Ministry has also informed the Committee that a budget of Rs. 50 lakh has been 
sanctioned to each Research Council and National Institute for undertaking various research 
activities on Covid-19. The status of the research studies on Covid-19 conducted by the Research 
Councils and National Institutes is at Annexure-III. 
 
 
5.34 The Committee observes that 59 research studies  are being conducted by the 
Ministry of AYUSH at various AYUSH Research Councils and Institutes. Of these, many 
studies have been completed with promising results in preventing the threat of COVID 19. 
The trials indicated that alternative medicine therapie s prevented severe COVID 
symptoms among people in quarantine.  One of the primary criticisms leveled against the 
AYUSH system is the lack of scientific evidence for efficacy of AYUSH medicines . The 
Committee underscores the need of designing research studie s to generate some tangible 
evidence in AYUSH against Covid -19. Promising results shown by these studies would 
progressively march ahead in scientifically validating traditional medicine. The Committee 
observes that participation of AYUSH medicines in addr essing the COVID-19 challenge in 
India should not be restricted and rather seen as the extension of healthcare services and 
support to bio -medical system. The Committee hopes that with adequate monitoring and 
research directions, the Indian System of Medicines would emerge as a prominent platform 
in the management of increasingly frequent and virulent communicable diseases. The 
Committee, while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry, recommends that more and 
more research studies should be conducted by the Ministry of AYUSH.  
5.35 On being asked about the number of COVID patients treated/being treated with Ayush 
system of Medicine and the success rate thereof, the Ministry submitted the State -wise details of 
the COVID patients treated/ being treated with A YUSH system of medicine which are as  
follows: 
 

79 
 
S. No. Name of 
State 
No. of COVID 
patients treated 
with AYUSH 
system of 
medicine 
No. of COVID 
patients are 
being treated 
with AYUSH 
system of 
medicine 
Success 
Rate 
Remarks 
1.  Gujarat 14,456  3,710 99.4% None 
2.  Haryana 1,498 353 71.85% None 
3.  Karnataka 1177 1000 95% None 
4.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
12808 1744 99.6% Among total cases, 
only 45 cases were 
referred. Further, 
among total 10,259 
quarantined cases, 
10029 improved 
after treatment and 
230 are still under 
treatment. 
5.  Maharashtra 10540*  100% 
(Ahmadn
agar 
District) 
*Govt. of 
Maharashtra has 
provided only the 
number of Covid -19 
positive cases are 
being treated with 
AYUSH 
intervention. 
Further, success rate 
is reported only for 
one district i.e. 
Ahmadnagar (100%) 
in 584 9 Covid -19 
treated patient. 
6.  Punjab 199 41 82.9% Patients are 
treated/being treated 
in 3 districts 
including 
Gurdaspur, Patiala 
& Ludhiana as add 
on therapy to 
standard treatment. 
7.  Tamil Nadu 12,953 0 100% None 
 
The Ministry of AYUSH apprised the Committee that States/UTs namely Uttar Pradesh, 
Nagaland, Jammu & Kashmir, Lakshadweep, Jharkhand, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, 
Tripura, Uttarakhand, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Assam, Goa, Mizoram, Manipur and Rajasthan 
have reported Nil information or patients are not being treated with AYUSH intervention in 
these States/UTs. Other States/UTs have not reported on this aspect.  

80 
 
 
5.36 The Committee is disappointed with the S tate-wise status about efficacy and effect 
of traditional medicines in treating COVID patients. The Committee believes that rigorous 
data are needed to show -case that remedies under AYUSH system are safe and effective  
and all the States should  be seen as actively promoting  the Ayush Sys tem. For this to 
happen, all States should have dedicated AYUSH COVID care centers where patients 
could be treated with the traditional medicine along with modern medicine. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to establish AYUSH COVID care centers 
in every state/UT of the Country. Further, the Ministry should maintain the data from each 
State to evaluate the efficacy of the system.  
 
  

81 
 
CHAPTER 6 
MANAGEMENT OF POST-COVID COMPLICATIONS 
Post-COVID Management Protocol 
6.1 The Ministry has informed that in view of emerging views by experts that COVID may 
not be just an acute illness and may have long term sequelae, a series of steps have been taken to 
gain insights into post -COVID recovery phase. Four Sub -Committees have been constituted 
under DGHS to examine the sequelae of COVID -19 on acute event associated with COVID and 
post recovery complications of COVID. The Sub -Committees are meeting frequently to discuss 
emerging evidence on impact in the organ system such as cardiac, pulmonary, cerebral, 
respiratory, renal, and hepatobiliary systems. The Joint Monitoring Group under DGHS is also 
following up on the recommendations of these Sub -Committees. The Government has reviewed 
the current evidence base and a National level research protocol is under dev elopment. All 
AIIMS like institutions have been requested on 14th July 2020 to undertake research to study 
long term impact of COVID.  
6.2 ICMR has establish ed a National Clinical Registry on COVID -19, wherein 15 mentor 
Institutions dedicated to COVID hospitals/COVID health centers have been identified as satellite 
centers. This will provide quality data including follow -up on discharged COVID -19 patients. 
Central Government hospitals, Dr. RML Hospital, LHMC and Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi have 
started COVID follow up clinics. On 13 th September 2020, a Post-COVID Management Protocol 
was released by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare that followed a holistic approach – a blend 
of treatment from modern medicine as well as AYUSH system of medicine. 
6.3 The Ministry has informed that COVID-19 disease is relatively a new disease, with fresh 
information on a dynamic basis about the natural history of the disease, especially in terms of 
post-recovery events. After COVID -19 illness, recovered patients may continue to report wide 
variety of signs and symptoms including fatigue, body ache, cough, sore throat, difficulty in 
breathing, etc. As of now, there is limited evidence of post-COVID sequalae and further research 
is being actively pursued. The holistic approach provides for follow up care and well-being of all 
post COVID recovering patients which is not meant to be used as preventive / curative therapy. 
The recovery period is likely to be longer for patients who suffered from more severe form of the 
disease and those with pre-existing illness.  
Post-COVID Follow Up Protocol  
A.  At individual level  
(i) Continue COVID appropriate behaviour (use of mask, hand & respiratory hygiene, 
physical distancing).  
(ii) Drink adequate amount of warm water (if not contra-indicated).  
(iii) Take immunity promoting AYUSH medicine prescribed by a qualified practitioner of 
AYUSH.  
(iv) Immunity promoting AYUSH medicine includes: 
a. Ayush Kwath (150 ml; 1 cup) daily, Samshamani vati twice a day 500 mg (1 
gm per day) or Giloy powder 1 -3 grams with luke warm water for 15 days, 
Ashwagandha 500 mg twice a day (1 gm per day) or Ashwagandha powder 

82 
 
1-3 grams twice daily for 15 days and Amla  fruit one daily/Amla powder 1 -
3 grams once daily. 
b.  1- 3 gram Mulethi powder (in case of dry cough) with luke warm water 
twice daily  
c. Warm Milk with ½ teaspoonful Haldi in morning/evening  
d. Gargling with turmeric and salt  
e. 1 teaspoonful (5 mg) Chyawanprash once daily in morning (as per directions 
from Vaidya)  
(v) The Ministry of AYUSH also suggested that the use of Chyawanprash in the morning 
(1 teaspoonful) with luke warm water/milk is highly recommended (under the 
direction of Registered Ayurveda physician) a s in the clinical practice Chyawanprash 
is believed to be effective in post-recovery period. 
 
(vi) If health permits, regular household work to be done. Professional work to be 
resumed in graded manner. 
 
(vii)     Mild/ moderate exercise  
a) Daily practice of Yogasana, Pranayama and Meditation, as much as 
health permits or as prescribed. 
b) Breathing exercises as prescribed by treating physician.  
c) Daily morning or evening walk at a comfortable pace as tolerated.  
(viii)     Balanced nutritious diet, preferably easy to digest fresh ly cooked soft diet. • Have 
adequate sleep and rest.  
(ix) Avoid smoking and consumption of alcohol.  
(x) Take regular medications as advised for COVID and also for managing 
comorbidities, if any. Doctor to be always informed about all medicines 
(allopathic/AYUSH) that the individual is taking so as to avoid prescription 
interaction.  
(xi) Self-health monitoring at home - temperature, blood pressure, blood sugar 
(especially, if diabetic), pulse oximetry etc. (if medically advised)  
(xii)       If there is persistent dry cough / sore throat, do saline gargles and take steam 
inhalation. The addition of herbs/spices for gargling/steam inhalation Cough 
medications, should be taken on advice of medical doctor or qualified practitioner of 
Ayush.  
(xiii)     Look for early warning signs like high grade fever, breathlessness, Sp02 < 95%, 
unexplained chest pain, new onset of confusion, focal weakness.  
B.  At the level of community  
(i) Recovered individuals to share their positive experiences with their friends and  
relatives using social media, community leaders, opinion leaders, religious leaders for 
creating awareness, including dispelling myths and stigma.  
(ii) Take support of community based self -help groups, civil society organizations, and 
qualified professionals for recovery and rehabilitation process (medical, social, 
occupational, livelihood).  
(iii) Seek psycho -social support from peers, community health workers, counsellor. If 
required seek mental health support service.  

83 
 
(iv) Participate in group sessions of Yoga, Meditation etc. while taking all due precautions 
like physical distancing. 
C.  In healthcare facility setting  
(i) The first follow -up visit (physical/telephonic) should be within 7 days after 
discharge, preferably at the hospital where he/she underwent treatment.  
(ii) Subsequent treatment/follow up visits may be with the nearest qualified 
allopathic/AYUSH practitioner/medical facility of other systems of medicine. Poly -
therapy is to be avoided due to potential for unknown drug -drug interaction, which 
may lead to Serious Adverse Events (SAE) or Adverse Effects (AE).  
(iii) The patients who had undergone home isolation, if complain of persisting  
symptoms, will visit the nearest health facility.  
(iv) Severe cases requiring critical care support will require more stringent follow up. 
Oral Evidence of Director, AIIMS  with respect to Post COVID Management 
6.4 The Director, AIIMS informed the Committee that AIIMS, Delhi is also planning to start 
the Post-COVID Management Clinic for those patients who have recovered from COVID which 
would help in managing such patients and also in their rehabilitation.  AIIMS Delhi has also 
collaborated with the Government through Doordarshan and other avenues in imparting health 
education, focussed especially on women’s health, and also the ongoing COVID and post -
COVID experience. 
6.5 The Committee understands that having defeated the virus is just the beginning of 
an unresearched path of recovery for survivors of severe COVID -19 disease, since COVID 
19 is a new disease. The post -acute phase of SARS-CoV-2 infection depends on the severity 
of virus attack on different patients. Apart from the fear of unknown, the survivors of 
COVID 19 venture into an unchartered territory of post COVID complications. Not only 
do they have to deal with fatigue, breathles sness and other physical effects of the disease, 
but also grapple with the psychological impact of it. The Committee is relieved to note that 
the Government has taken cognizance of complexities caused by COVID during post 
recovery phase and identified pote ntial post -acute care needs of recovered COVID -19 
patients. The Committee notes that the Ministry has adopted integrated holistic approach 
for managing patients who have recovered from COVID and advised to take care at home. 
The Committee in this regard re commends the Government to put in place healthcare 
services to ensure a holistic follow -up of post COVID treatment of the patients who are 
showing post COVID complications. It is also necessary to address the possibility of SARS -
CoV-2 re -infection, the pro portion of adverse reactions after hospital discharge and the 
possible development of other viral and/or bacterial infections.  
6.6 The Committee is of the view that since COVID is an unknown virus across the 
world, research is going forward to unravel the mystery of the virus  constantly mutating 
itself. It remains to be seen how COVID -19 evolves further and what symptoms do the 
survivors may experience. Further, it has been observed that the virus spreads to many 
different organs of the body like the heart, blood vessels, kidneys, lungs, and brain. The 
Committee believes that there is a need for multidisciplinary care service involving several 
specialists from both the systems i.e Allopathy and AYUSH system of medici ne for the 
evaluation and the follow -up of patients suffered with COVID -19 disease. The Committee 

84 
 
therefore recommends the Ministry to set up a multidisciplinary care service system as a 
part of post COVID Management protocol based on research on post -COVID 
complications. 
6.7 Acknowledging the efficacy of AYUSH system in boosting the immunity of the 
person, the Government of India inducted various AYUSH practices of healthcare to 
facilitate faster recuperation of health of recovered COVID 19 patients. With respect to 
AYUSH, the Ministry has advised to take immunity promoting AYUSH medicine as 
practiced and prescribed by a qualified practitioner of AYUSH, daily practice of Yogasana, 
Pranayama and Meditation, as much as health permits or as prescribed. The Com mittee is 
of the considered view that post COVID follow -up is as important as taking medications 
while suffering from COVID.  
6.8 The Committee observes that a regular and comprehensive follow-up by people 
having recovered from COVID -19 would help define the clinical and care needs. Such 
information can also be used to modify/improvise the post COVID treatment 
model/protocol and plan. The Committee recommends the Ministry to set up post -COVID 
clinics, on the lines of AIIMS Delhi, to look after the recovered patients who are facing post 
COVID 19 illness issues like breathlessness, body ache, fatigue etc  and provide counselling, 
yoga, physiotherapy, consultation and medication to boost immunity  on case to case basis 
to ensure their full proof treatment including rehabilitation.  
 
6.9 The Committee was apprised by the Secretary that the Ministry is carrying out 
post-Covid sequelae where the number of people who suffer from heart related, 
respiratory, renal problems post recovery from COVID is being docum ented.  The 
Committee appreciates the initiative of the Department and believes that such 
documentation is essential for providing a comprehensive treatment and for shaping the 
post covid care approach of the healthcare system. Not only this, the documentation would 
be of immense help in enriching knowledge proof research projects related to Covid -19 for 
better research outcomes that would be beneficial in combating the future pandemic. 
 
  

85 
 
CHAPTER 7 
 
COMBATING THE CHALLENGES OF PANDEMIC COVID-19 
7.1 The ongoing Covid-19 pandemic has posed monumental challenges before the leadership 
of every country. It has not only resulted in the loss of human lives but also distressed different 
sectors and economies. The impact of this pandemic is comparatively higher in 
emerging/developing countries like India due to moderate growth rate, frag ile health 
infrastructure and prevailing poverty.  
HEALTHCARE 
7.2 The healthcare sector is at the epicenter of this unprecedented global pandemic challenge. 
COVID-19 has overburdened the fragile Indian Healthcare infrastructure. The inadequacies of 
health-care facilities, negative impact on the morale of health -care workers, and the collapse of 
private sector institutions have exposed the vulnerability of our h ealthcare system. L ack of 
effective universal health coverage has further accentuated the concerns beyond the frontiers of a 
pandemic response into the larger domain of access, equity, and quality in health care. 
7.3 The pandemic has centre-staged the need for a robust public health system and increased 
investment. National Health Policy 2017 has targets of India’s Government expenditure on 
healthcare upto 2.5% of GDP by 2025 from just 1.15 per cent in 2017. 
7.4 While direct impact of the pandemic  on health looks visible , its indirect impact on the 
national is little understood as of now. As per a recent study by Lancet, the indirect effects of the 
pandemic on maternal and child mortality in low - and middle-income countries are likely to be 
more se vere than the pandemic itself. A look at past pandemics such as Ebola is a sobering 
reminder of the long -term disruptive impact on basic and regular health services that tend to be 
neglected due to the overwhelming focus on the epidemic itself. 
DISRUPTION IN DELIVERY OF ESSENTIAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES 
7.5 Indian Public Health Association (IPHA), Indian Association of Preventive and Social 
Medicine (IAPSM) & Indian Association of Epidemiologists submitted that p rimary, secondary 
and tertiary health care servi ces including outpatient and inpatient services and 
routine/emergency surgeries suffered badly due to pandemic. They wanted these services to 
resume as early as feasible, at least in those areas that are progressing towards containment of the 
pandemic and in towns/districts with no cases. Adequate safety measures should be put in place 
for the safety of health care staff engaged with optimal PPE and testing of patients for COVID -
19 as may be appropriate. 
7.6 The Associations apprised the Committee about the  National Health Authority’s analysis 
of the Pradhan Mantri Jan Aarogya Yojana (AB -PMJAY) utilisation during COVID -19. The 
analysis bears some key messages such as (i) average daily hospitalisation dropped by over 70% 
during the COVID-19 lockdown, up to mo re than 90% on some days; (ii) while there has been a 
significant drop in admissions for elective procedures, the decline in critical care services vary 
from 64% for chemotherapy to 26% for childbirths; (iii) the utilisation of private hospitals 
increased; and, (iii) the share of claims from private hospitals (more government hospitals are 

86 
 
empanelled than private) has registered an increase since pre -COVID levels as most public 
hospitals were converted to COVID care centres. 
7.7 The Committee observes that closure of OPD services in government hospitals in the 
wake of outbreak of pandemic Covid -19 crippled the healthcare delivery system in the 
country. Non-covid patients especially female patients and the patients with chronic and 
lethal diseases were the worst sufferers. The Committee is pained at the reported death of 
at least 61 pregnant women and 877 newborns in Meghalaya in the  four months after 
April, 2020.   
7.8 ASHA and ANM workers that play a crucial role in ensuring good  maternal health 
and promoting institutional delivery were all engaged in community surveillance and 
contact tracing.  The Committee notes that health machinery was diverted to fight the 
pandemic which left the poor public without a healthcare support syst em. The Ministry 
needs to learn from its mistakes and work towards establishing a resilient public health 
system that does not collapse in view of any future outbreaks.  
FINANCIAL DISTRESS IN THE HEALTHCARE SECTOR 
7.9 FICCI in its written submission pointed out that COVID-19 and the subsequent lockdown 
has accentuated the financial distress of the healthcare sector. The hospitals, that were already 
financially fragile over past few years, have been stressed with the unplanned investments for 
COVID-19 prepar edness and response  and have seen their revenues topple due to 60 -80% 
decline in patient footfalls, leading to estimated operational losses of 4500 crores per month. 
Many small hospitals and nursing homes in tier II & III cities had become non-operational due to 
the challen ges of liquidity and cash flow and some of them have even been shut down. The 
hospitals are now facing acute financial distress given that they need to keep all their services 
and facilities functioning to be able to provide the healthcare services to the citizens. 
7.10 The Committee has been given to understand that the private hospitals have also been at 
the frontline of COVID -19 response and have invested in procuring large volumes of essential 
medical supplies like PPEs, respi rators, etc. Hospitals have also been spending significant 
amount in arranging pandemic related treatment/protocols like restructuring COVID and non -
COVID treatment, creating isolation and quarantine facilities as well as fever clinics. Massive 
investments was required in purchase of new equipments, air conditioning multiple filtration of 
air (HEPA), ICUs and CCUs in addition to sanitizers, disinfectants and sterilisers leave alone the 
expenditure incurred on additional power consumption. Unscientific and u nsustainable pricing 
for COVID treatment by the government authorities added financial woes for private hospitals as 
the prices so fixed are not sustainable for any hospital given the high cost involved in COVID 
treatment, specifically in the case of co-morbidities. 
7.11 Further, there are human resources challenges such as arrangement for training 
manpower for COVID-19 putting more doctors and nurses on roll , provisioning their transport 
and lodging in many areas taking care of staff infected positive or getting quarantined during the 
treatment of COVID patients. Further, staff either in isolation or who have contracted COVID 
are paid sick leave.  
7.12 FICCI submitted the following key suggestions for support to the private healthcare 
providers: 

87 
 
i. Government support through Liquidity infusion  for financing of the operating losses 
through short term interest free/ concessional interest rate loans to address the liquidity 
gap to the tune of Rs 14,000 -24,000 Cr, is required for the sector. 
ii. Indirect tax reliefs/ exemptions/ waivers like - recoup amount equivalent to ineligible 
GST credits paid on procurements for a stipulated period, Customs duty / GST exemption 
on essential medicines, consumables and devices for treatment of COVID patients 
iii. Subsidy @ 25% of salary for healthcare staff for the next 3 months 
iv. Rebate on commercial rate of power for a stipulated period 
v. Extension of time for a period of three years needs to be provided under the EPCG 
scheme for fulfilment of existing export obligations for th e healthcare sector given that 
international patient traffic flow has completely stopped and it would take a considerable 
period of time for the same to return to the pre- COVID 19 incidence levels. 
vi. Enabling a fair pricing framework  to ensure that private hospitals are able to continue 
treating COVID patients.  
7.13 FICCI advocated a scientific costing framework  to derive rational reimbursement rates. 
In 2018, FICCI conducted a sample costing study based on Time Driven Activity Based  Costing 
(TDABC), an internationally recognised bottoms -up costing approach for estimating costs of 
processes used in patient care, which was submitted to the government.  The Committee was 
given to understand that there has been a long -standing request for Zero-rating GST  from the 
private healthcare sector which will not only ensure that the credit chain is intact but also ensure 
that the input taxes are not loaded into the cost of healthcare services. 
7.14 In its submission before the Committee, the FICCI appreciates the support of the 
government in fast-tacking the release of outstanding dues under the CGHS and ECHS schemes 
which is  great help for the sustenance of the private sector in these times of acute crisis. 
However, the private hospitals stil l have a large amount of outstanding receivables from the 
Central Government as well as State Government schemes. The release of these dues, along with 
a financial stimulus, would help the private hospitals tide over the financial crisis and effectively 
deliver healthcare services. 
7.15 The Committee observes that the limited health care infrastructure in the country 
has further been overburdened while coping up with the rising covid cases in the country. 
The Committee believes healthcare should never be lim ited to only those who can afford to 
pay but should move towards the noble vision  of Universal Health coverage. For this  to 
happen, the government needs to be considerate and support the private healthcare sector.  
7.16 In this regard, the Committee has taken note of the financial distress of the 
healthcare infrastructure where small hospitals and nursing home in towns and cities have 
been shut down due to lack of liquidity and cash flow accentuated owing to unscientific and 
sustainable capping of cost/pricing for COVID treatment by Government authorities.  The 
government support through liquidity for financing the operating loss followed by indirect 
tax relief/exemption on essential medicine, consumable and devices for treatment of 
COVID patients can go a long way in  revival of private healthcare sector .  The Committee 
also recommends a scientific and fair costing/pricing framework wherein Government may 
ensure that input taxes are not attributed to the cost of healthcare services.  The Committee 
also recommends the Government for expediting payment of outstanding Bills of  the 
private hospitals.  

88 
 
7.17 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the shortage of healthcare providers 
due to vacancies in the State run hospitals in the country. Many hospitals and medical 
colleges across the country are function ing below the sanctioned strength and speciality 
Departments are non -functional due to lack of required faculty. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry and the States/UTs to fill up these vacancies at the earliest. The 
Committee also feels that healthcare providers from other regions  may be deputed to 
districts with higher burden of covid cases. However, the Committee urges upon  the 
Ministry and the States Government to ensure the safety and security of all the healthcare 
providers.  
POOR ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE SERVICES 
7.18 IMA submitted that the routine medical services have been seriously hampered by 
COVID-19 and the resulting lockdown. Small and medium clinics and hospitals were shut 
resulting in poor access to health care, loss of jobs/liv elihood among health care staff  and 
increased cost of health service delivery. Diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic infectious 
and non-communicable diseases have all taken a backseat. Particularly, the efforts to eliminate 
TB, or manage NCDs like hypertension and diabetes are yet to be known. 
7.19 IMA informed the Committee that the Government underestimated the criticality of the 
continuity medical services for Non-COVID patients by advising the hospitals to defer treatment 
and medical interventions required for other chronic ailments. Further, the Government 
instructed to and keeping 20% of the capacity for COVID without working out a feasible 
mechanism to support the sustenance of the operations. T his led to total paralysis of regular 
healthcare service in India and severely impacted millions of people who were in dire need of 
medical services. 
7.20 FICCI in its written submission has informed that the most of the non -COVID treatment 
and elective an d semi-elective procedures both in public and private sector hospitals took a hit 
during the first 3 months of the pandemic.  A severe impact has also been felt on national health 
programs. As per the analysis of the National Health Mission data on in -patient and out -patient 
treatment, between 100,000 and 200,000 children missed routine vaccinations during February 
and March. Treatment for tuberculosis also showed declines. Analysis conducted on the claims 
data of AB-PMJAY program also showed that weekly cla ims volume during the initial 10 weeks 
of lockdown was half the pre-lockdown claims volume. Claims for cataract eye surgery and joint 
replacements fell by over 90 percent  and significant declines were also seen in cardiovascular 
surgeries, child delivery, and oncology. These findings raise concerns about a potential 
resurgence of vaccine-preventable illnesses, infectious diseases, and chronic ailments. 
7.21 The Committee notes that disruption of medical services for Non -Covid patients 
during lockdown paralyzed the delivery of essential healthcare services. Particualry, the 
diagnosis and treatment of other services did take a backseat which even led to many non -
covid deaths. The Committee also agrees that the cost of health service delivery increased 
due to absence of specific guidelines for Covid treatment in private hospita ls as a result of 
which patients were charged exorbitant fees.  
7.22 The Ministry during the examination of the Demand for Grants 2020 -21 of the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare had submitted that India's Government Health 

89 
 
Expenditure (GHE) as percent of the Current Health Expenditure (CHE) is only 27.1%. In 
India, Out of Pocket Expenditure in Health is 62.4% and India ranks 15 out of 186 
countries in OOPE as % of CHE. The Committee apprehends that amidst the pandemic 
and the uncertainty in the treat ment protocol, this OOPE may have further driven many 
families to below poverty line. 
7.23 The Committee is of the view  that arriving at a sustainable pricing model to treat 
Covid patients could have averted many deaths. The Committee observes that the num ber 
of Government Hospital beds in the country were not adequate to handle the increasing 
number of Covid and non -Covid patients. In the wake of the pandemic and shortage of 
Government healthcare facilities, the Government should have strategized a better 
partnership with the Private Hospitals under PPP model.  
SOCIAL IMPACT 
7.24 Indian Public Health Association (IPHA), Indian Association of Preventive and Social 
Medicine (IAPSM) & Indian Association of Epidemiologists in their “3rd Joint Statement on 
COVID-19 Pandemic in India –Public Health Approach for COVID -19 Control” mentioned that 
the closure of educational institutions, especially schools for children (5 -18 years) has had a 
significant impact on the teaching -learning system as well as mental health of the children. The 
impact has been disproportionately higher on the children of lower socio-economic strata who do 
not have social capital for alternatives like digital platforms.  
7.25 The Indian Medical Association submitted  that the lockdown resulted in undesired, 
sometimes brutal, administrative implementation and media responses. This generated a lot of 
fear among people across the country. The fear is  not just of COVID -19, the disease, but of 
social stigma if one were to have the disease, or show any symptoms suggestive of COVID -19. 
Fear of separation from family if affected by COVID -19, of forced quarantine in unfriendly 
environments, of insensitive or poor quality of health care, of catastrophic health care costs, etc. 
has had unmeasurable impact on society. 
7.26 Prof. K. Srinath Reddy, President, Public Health Foundation of India, submitted that the 
mental health effects of home confinement impacted children. Suspension of schooling also 
affected their learning and inter rupted the process of socialisation. Physical activity of children 
suffered. Where markets became difficult to access or family income fell, nutritional needs of 
growing children were compromised. 
7.27 The Committee is concerned over the confinement of the school going children due 
to prolonged closure of education institutions in the wake of outbreak of pandemic Covid -
19. With schools closed for long periods, online classes have proved instrumental in 
maintaining students’ learning level.  The Committee is equally concerned at the existing 
digital divide in the country which has jeopardised the future of millions of students from 
the weaker section of the society. With the shift in education -method from classroom to 
online medium, the education of the studen ts residing in areas with poor connectivity has 
been compromised.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to strengthen 
its network for digital and online classes and once the normal classes resume, provision for 
extra special classes should b e made especially for students from the economically and 
socially weaker section.   

90 
 
7.28 The Committee also understands that since many students may not be able to afford 
a smartphone or computer with internet connection, the Government needs to provide 
television-sets and satellite TV connections in schools as a short term measure so that the 
education for students of economically weaker sections do not suffer further.  
IMPACT ON WOMEN   
7.29 According to the WHO, violence against women remains a major thr eat to global public 
health and women’s health during emergencies. Although data are scarce, reports from China, 
the United Kingdom, the United States, and other countries suggest an increase in domestic 
violence cases since the COVID -19 outbreak began. Th e National Commission of Women in 
India has also reported a surge in the reported cases of violence in the country.  
7.30 Policy Brief July 2020 of Population Foundation of India while referring to emerging 
evidence on the impact of COVID-19 suggests that women’s economic and productive lives will 
be affected disproportionately and differently from men. Across the globe, women earn less, save 
less, hold less secure jobs, and are more likely to be emp loyed in the informal sector. In 
developing economies 70% of women work in the informal sector with few protections against 
dismissal or for paid sick leave and limited access to social protection. The Ebola virus showed 
that quarantines can significantly reduce women’s economic and livelihood activities, increasing 
poverty rates, and exacerbating food insecurity. In India, the nationwide lockdown imposed by 
the government has left millions of migrant women unemployed and starved for food, placing a 
huge financial burden on these women, who contribute substantially to their household income.   
7.31 Global lockdowns have led to several women being stuck at home with their perpetrators 
and incidents and reports of violence against women has been on a rise glob ally. Women’s 
access to sexual and reproductive health services has also been severely impacted due to the 
COVID-19 emergency response and global lockdowns. The following measures have been 
suggested by PFI for addressing the violence against women during COVID-19: 
i. Inclusion of measures to address violence against women in preparedness and 
response plans for COVID-19 by Governments and policy makers. 
ii. Development of a public health response to violence against women.  
iii. Ensuring preventive, curative and system atic referral support to the survivors of 
violence and early detection cases. 
iv. Training of healthcare providers to provide better quality of care and counseling 
services to victims of violence. 
v. Facilitating hotlines, telemedicine services, shelters, rape cr isis centers, counselling 
for survivors of violence must be ensured. 
vi. Emphasis on greater reporting on violence in COVID-19 response plans.   
7.32 The Committee observes that the restrictive social norms, gender stereotypes, home 
quarantining and diversion of resources to respond to the COVID -19 pandemic can limit 
women’s ability to access health services which makes them more susceptible to health 
risks. The pandemic has not only adversely affected women’s social and mental well being 
but also disrupted access to healthcare services especially sexual and reproductive 
healthcare services. Access to contraceptives or healthcare services became difficult which 
led to many unwanted pregnancies and unsafe abortions. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends the Government to chalk out specific course of action for rescuing 

91 
 
the women out of mental trauma by resuming the sexual and reproductive healthcare 
services and allocating the resources to improve women health services.  
7.33 The Committee notes that violence against women increased during the lockdown 
period as the perpetrators of violence and susceptible both stayed at home due to 
compulsion of lockdown. The Committee strongly recommends the Government to identify 
such women who have been the  victims of sexual and domestic violence during the 
pandemic and rehabilitate them. The Committee would like the Ministry to create specific 
hotlines, telemedicine services, rape crisis centers for women and the counselling of victims 
or survivors of violence. The Ministry should further ensure that instances of gender based 
violence are reported and timely actions are taken against the perpetrators. 
7.34 The Committee, while taking into account, the economic consequence of the 
pandemic on women, feels the urgent need for economic emancipation of women by 
providing them with equitable opportunity of employment and enabling their participation 
in the micro and macro -decision making process. In a world, where the share of women in 
the workforce is already less, the Committee believes that financial inequality between men 
and women will further rise sharply. The Committee notes many women are employed in 
the informal sector which has been worst hit due to the pandemic. The Committee 
therefore recommends the Mini stry to make social security measures accessible to women 
and launch specific programmes so that women are able to absorb the economic shock  and 
the resultant mental stress caused due to the sudden job losses.  
PSYCHOLOGICAL IMPACT OF COVID 19 
7.35 As a re sult of the emergence of COVID-19, a situation of socio -economic crisis and 
profound psychological distress has rapidly occurred worldwide. Various psychological 
problems and resultant mental health issues including stress, anxiety, depression, frustration, 
uncertainty during COVID-19 have been noticed. Common psychological reactions related to the 
mass quarantine, which was imposed in order to attenuate the COVID -19 spread, are fear and 
anxiety which are ty pically associated with disease outbreaks, and increased with the escalation 
of new cases together with inadequate, anxiety -provoking information which was provided by 
media. COVID-19 has affected the mental health of all the sections of society, be it tod dlers and 
adolescents, women, senior citizens, domestic caregivers, marginalized community - migrants, 
daily wagers, slum dwellers, general public etc. The psychological impact of fear and anxiety, 
induced by the rapid spread of pandemic, needs to be clearl y recognized as a public health 
priority 
7.36 Population Foundation of India informed the Committee  that w hile there have been 
reports suggesting that men, the elderly, and persons with compromised immune systems may be 
at be greatest risk of fatality from  COVID-19, the fact remains that women and girls who are 
expected to perform may compromise their mental health and well -being.  Results from a recent 
PFI study show that 51% female adolescents experienced an increase in workload during the 
nationwide lock down, as compared to 23% male adolescents. In fact, in UP 96% females 
experienced an increase in workload, with 67% of them, being below 18 years of age.  
7.37 Specific population groups are showing high degrees of COVID-19-related psychological 
distress. Frontline healthcare workers are facing backlash from communities leading to stress. In 

92 
 
the wake of the lockdown, people across all strata and age groups are finding it increasingly 
difficult to deal with social isolation and stress at home. 
7.38 The Population Foundation of India advocated the following measure  to tackle mental 
health issues arising from the Covid-19 pandemic 
i Inclusion of psychological support services for women into primary health care. 
ii Development of a comprehensive crisis prevention and intervention system including 
epidemiological monitoring, screening, referral and targeted intervention to reduce 
psychological distress. 
iii Awareness campaigns to ensure vulnerable groups including women, are well informed 
about the availability and accessibility of mental health related services. 
iv Increased investments in mental health research. 
v Building a cadre of trained professionals to strengthen mental health services. 
7.39 The Ministry has submitted that it has issued guidelines on psycho -social care. 
NIMHANS, Bengaluru has developed a plan of action and resource material. The District 
Mental Health Programme is providing psycho-social care to those affected by COVID. 
 
7.40 The Ministry further submitted that the Pandemic has its psycho -social impact on the 
population and it has t aken following proactive steps to address the psychosocial issues during 
COVID-19: 
 
i The Ministry, through National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru, has set up a 24/7 helpline (080 -4611 0007), to 
provide psychosocial support, by mental health professionals, to the entire affected 
population, divided into different target groups viz children, adult, elderly, women and 
healthcare workers.  
ii 20 States have on bo arded the NIMHANS helpline for providing psychosocial support. 
Many States/UTs are using other helplines for their own mental health helpline. 
iii Guidelines / advisories on management of mental health issues, catering to different 
segments of the society have been issued. 
iv Advocacy through various media platforms   in the form of creative and audio -visual 
materials on managing   stress and anxiety, and promoting an environment of support 
and care for all  
v NIMHANS has issued detailed guidelines on  Mental Health in the times of COVID -19 
Pandemic - Guidance for General Medical and Specialized Mental Health Care Settings 
vi Modules have been prepared and uploaded on the Integrated Government Online 
Training (iGOT) -Diksha platform (https://igot.gov.in) for standardized capacity 
building and training of all the service providers (including volunteers, police and all 
frontline workers). These modules cover topics such as COVID appropriate behaviors, 
psychological care of patients, stress management, psychosocial care, COVI D 
awareness, awareness for community health workers, etc. 
vii NIMHANS has also been working towards building capacity of health workers in 
providing support and has undertaken online training of psychologists across the 
country for providing brief and basic te lephonic psychological support in the context of 
COVID-19.  
 

93 
 
7.41 This is in addition to an online platform (https://psychcare -nimhans.in/) set up to support 
healthcare workers involved in providing psychosocial help in the context of COVID-19. 
7.42 The Ministry further submitted that the Government  has developed advisory on 
addressing social stigma associated with COVID -19 and also various IEC material 
inducing audio-visuals on Social stigma attached with COVID -19 patients.  The advisories 
and videos are  available at MoHFW website under “Behavioural Health –Psychosocial 
helpline” (http://www.mohfw.gov.in/). 
 
7.43 The Committee endorses the study conducted by PFI and agrees that there has been 
a considerable rise in mental health issues during the lockdown. Sudden loss of 
employment and social isolation aggravated the psychological burden among the masses. 
The Committee also finds that stretched work hours have increased the levels of depression 
among the frontline healthcare workers. There is no denying the fact that staying in touch 
with friends or family is a typical mechanism for coping with stress but during lockdown in 
the absence of any coping mechanism, working age adults, students etc who live alone, were 
more prone to depression. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to increase 
its investments in mental health research and ensure better outreach of its mental health 
care services. The Committee  would also like  the Ministry to carry out more awareness 
campaigns for erasing the stigma attached to mental health and focus on the measures for 
alleviating the depressed out of their prevailing mental framework and inject new rays of 
hope and expectation through social interaction and psychological stress emancipation 
practices viz. yoga and better way of living.  
7.44 The Committee is also concerned at the increased risk of suicide during the 
pandemic which may be attributed t o social isolation, fear of the pandemic, loss of 
livelihood and other economic and health fallouts. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
urges the Ministry to make suicide prevention and mental health its priority. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry  to utilize the different means of social and press 
media to generate awareness and provide necess ary support through help lines and by 
counseling to the individuals in distress.   
INCREASING UNEMPLOYMENT IN UNORGANIZED SECTOR  
7.45 The COVID-19 pandemic has worst hit workers of unorganized sector mostly who are 
daily wager or informal laborers or those working in Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs) and rendered them jobless. Increased unemployment rate, with no alternative in come 
source and left them high and dry without adequate provisions for safety, food and other basic 
necessities. Due to this, the country has witnessed massive exodus of laborers on foot and cycles 
to their homes. Some sort of help was extended by States b y way of running some special trains, 
however, delayed and flawed response let them suffer for long.  
UNPRECEDENTED SHOCK TO INDIAN ECONOMY 
7.46 The outbreak of the Covid -19 pandemic created on unprecedented stress to the Indian 
economy. The  economic impac t of the 2020 corona virus pandemic in India  has been largely 
disruptive. It has penetrated all the key sectors such as Auto, Shipping, Industry, and Commerce. 
Significant reductions i n income, rise in unemployment, and massive disruptions in the 

94 
 
transportation, service, and manufacturing industries are the crucial determinants for the disease 
mitigation measures.  
7.47 The Centre for Policy Research in its study "India as the Engine of Recovery for South 
Asia" has rightly observed that "there can be no dou bt that COVID -19 has cast a shadow on 
virtually every aspect of life, not least the economy. Economist, Hu Angang rightly refers to its 
impact as the ‘three declines’ (economic growth, per capita income and trade growth) and ‘three 
increases’ (unemployment , fiscal deficit and inflation). COVID -19 pandemic has invoked 
parallels with the Spanish flu of 1918 -19, the recurring plague pandemic that raged from 1860 -
1960 and the Great Depression of the 1930s causing sharpest fall in global GDP and unpredent 
rise in unemployment rates in recent memory. Geopolitically, the pandemic is clearly set to be a 
game changer by reordering global strategic equations radically". 
7.48 With the prolonged country -wide lockdown, global economic downturn and associated 
disruption o f demand and supply chains, the economy is likely to face a protracted period of 
slowdown. The outbreak has presented fresh challenges for the Indian economy now, causing 
severe disruptive impact on both demand and supply side elements. Necessary measures to 
combat the economic impact from the rapidly spreading corona virus need to be taken.  
7.49 Indian Medical Association also submitted that the key negative impact of the lockdown 
was on the economy that was already weak, resulting in huge losses in revenue to national and 
state governments. Nearly every citizen outside of government employment suffered from 
financial losses, especially in loss of incomes/livelihood. The impact on the poor,  marginalized, 
and vulnerable sections have been catastrophic and it will take months to evaluate, and quantif y 
the losses suffered due to the pandemic. 
7.50 With regards to the overall impact assessment of COVID -19 on various sectors of 
economy, the Ministry submitted that COVID has adversely affected the sectors - agriculture, 
construction, trade, travel, tourism, transport, MSME etc.  However, the Ministry advocates that 
the overall impact can only be assessed once the Pandemic is declared to be over.  The 
Committee notes that t o overcome these testing times, the PM  has come up with Aatma Nirbhar 
Bharat Abhiyan to promote the local economy. A special and comprehensive economic package 
of Rs 20 lakh crore that accounts for 10% of India’s GDP, has been announced to bring the 
economy back on track. In November 2020, the Cabinet gave in principle approval to production 
linked incentives PLI worth Rs. 1.45 lakh crore for 10 sectors including white goods, 
automobiles, pharmaceuticals and textiles to attract big ticket investment.  
CORONA WARRIORS  
7.51 Doctors, Paramedics, Policemen, Sanitation workers and others engaged in different 
duties in the fight against the Covid -19 are called "Corona Warriors". Their noteworthy 
contribution in fight against the pandemic has been praised by one and all  
7.52 Dr. Harsh Vardhan, Minister for Health and Family Welfare in his statement in Rajya 
Sabha on 15th September, 2020 praised the corona warriors and stated the following: 
“In spite of various constraints and challenges, the Covid warriors rose to the occasion 
in serving humanity. The country feels indebted to the doctors, nurses, paramedics, 
frontline field workers, security and police personnel, sanitary workers, volunteers and 

95 
 
journalists who have worked tirelessly to protect our countrymen from Covid. I would 
request the August House to place on record the appreciation for the yeoman services 
delivered by them.  
There had been instances where healthcare service personnel had to face harassment, 
acts of violence, intimidation and danger to life during discharge of their duties. To 
overcome this and support their efforts, Government of India promulgated Epidemic 
Diseases (Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 on 22ndApril 2020. “ 
7.53 Indian Medical Association submitted that management of pandemic depends on round 
the clock availability of manpower resources of different skills and competences. However, the 
State Heal th D epartments and municipal corporation s are  currently going through tremendous 
stress due to continued workload without any break for frontline  workers. This  has not only 
created fatigue but also reduced their productivity and impacted their morale . The Association 
further submitted that due to lack of clarity and support of the Government for healthcare 
professionals under the circumstances of themselves bec oming COVID positive has created 
insecurity in the minds of healthcare professionals especially frontline staff forcing them to 
withdraw from the services.   
7.54 IMA further submitted that the health care workers need to be adequately remunerated, 
financially, not as incentive or reward, but out of respect for what they are worth. Health care 
workers working on COVID -19 should be incentivized through non -financial means, including 
through 'respect and recognition' from authorities and the public. Important ly, health workers, as 
they are at high risk of being infected with SARS -CoV-2 virus, need to be well protected from 
getting COVID-19, with the assurance that if they or their families are infected, they will receive 
the best possible medical care, at no c ost. Health workers should also be protected from physical 
harm/threats, and should have acceptable work environments that are conducive to optimal 
service delivery. Health workers involved in COVID -19 care should have substantial life 
insurance cover that protects their dependents/families from additional financial catastrophe in 
the event of death. 573 healthcare workers which include 364 doctors have laid down their lives 
in fight against COVID. Over 87000 healthcare workers are infected with the vi rus. IMA 
strongly appealed that all doctors who have laid down their lives in fighting this epidemic should 
be treated at par with the martyrs of Indian armed forces and acknowledged appropriately. The 
surviving spouse or dependent should be provided a Government job as per their qualification.  
7.55 Substantial differences are noticed from district to district in how doctors and health care 
workers are deployed. District administration are not sensitive to the safety angle and the 
concerns of stress and fa tigue of the medical manpower. Deploying doctors 24X7 without 
intermittent quarantine periods or long working hours in PPE for COVID care is not the same as 
24X7 COVID control from safe offices. Uniform practices have to be put in place throughout the 
country. The current system of administration has led to considerable difficulties for the medical 
profession in all sectors. 
7.56 On a specific query regarding the incentives to be provided to the healthcare workers, 
Prof. K. Srinath Reddy submitted that two  types of incentives may be provided , viz, (a) removal 
of the hurdles and grievances that are impeding their work or endangering them; (b) positive 
incentives for boosting their morale and enhancing their performance. These are detailed below:- 
 

96 
 
(A)  Responding to their felt needs:  
 
(i) Right to Protection From Viral Exposure :- 
 
All categories of health workers run occupational risk of viral exposure ( for they being 
involved in patient care, testing, family contact, home care, patient transport, waste disposal and 
cleaning at any level of healthcare, in hospital or ambulatory settings) . They must be provided 
adequate quantities of quality assured personal protection equipment, as appropriate to the 
location and nature of contact.  
 
(ii) Right to Health Care :- 
 
Healthcare workers who are exposed to Covid19 virus must be tested without delay and if 
infected, they must be provided care as per need, with priority accorded for hospitalisation when 
required. If they are the source of infection for other membe rs of their household, those 
household members too should be provided timely testing and care as needed.  
 
(ii) Defined And Humane Hours of Work :- 
 
All health workers who are engaged in Covid19 related work must be assured of defined 
and humane working hours, predictably functioning reliever rosters and scheduled off-duty days.  
 
(iv) Protection of Pay And Leave During Covid19 Related Isolation or Quarantine :- 
 
Any health worker who is exposed to the virus and is at a high risk of infection must be 
advised quarantine and that period must be treated as ‘on duty’.  
 
(v) Ending Discrimination Between Contract Workers And Regular Employees :-  
 
All health workers, whether regular or contractual, who are employed in Covid19 related 
duties must be provided simil ar protection with respect to: grant of exposure or infection related 
quarantine or isolation period as leave on duty; testing and illness care with full financial cost 
coverage and protected accommodation or transport for persons working till late night o r early 
morning.  
 
(vi) Right To Information And Training Related To Covid19 :- 
 
All categories of health workers must be regularly provideding updated information on 
Covid19, to enable them to protect themselves and perform their jobs well. On the job training 
should also be provided as per needs assessment.  
 
(vii) Safe Stay And Transport :- 
 
Any health worker having late duty hours ending in the night or early morning should be 
provided safe and clean on -site or near-site accommodation by the employer. Alternatively, safe 
transport should be provided for travel between worksite and h ome, if the employee prefers to 
return home.  

97 
 
(viii) Ending Stigma And Violence Against Health Workers :- 
 
Government must take strict legal action against individuals, groups or organisations who 
provoke, perpetrate or prejudicially publicise stigma or vi olence against health workers engaged 
in providing Covid19 related services.  
 
(ix) Timely Payment :- 
 
Complaints have been voiced by ASHAs and sanitation workers from many states that 
monthly salary/allowance/incentive payments are markedly delayed, expos ing them to economic 
hardship and affecting their work. These grievances should be redressed.  
 
(B)  Positive Incentives:  
 
(i) Recognition Certificates:- Certificate be awarded to health workers rendering efficient 
and empathetic service.  
 
(ii) Salary Increments : - Healthcare providers rendering dedicated high quality services 
with extraordinary commitment may be awarded salary increments ahead of due time.  
 
(iii) Sponsorship For Higher Education /Training : - Depending on their educational 
qualifications and service category, healthcare providers who are rendering yeoman 
service may be sponsored by central and state government for higher education and 
training in public health/health programme management, monitoring and 
evaluation/hospital management. With regards to Personal Protective Equipment Kits for 
the Healthcare workers, the Ministry submitted that at the onset of COVID pandemic, 
there were no indigenous manufacturers of PPEs with requisite standards. This capacity 
was up-scaled with involvement of Ministry of Textiles, Department of pharmaceuticals, 
CDSCO, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, DGFT, NPPA and a multipronged strategy of 
promoting indigenous manufacturers and ensuring market availability, ban on exports 
and price control was put in place. 
 
7.57 The Committee appreciates the contribution of the frontline warriors who have 
been tirelessly working amidst the pandemic. The Committee also observes that the 
problem of shortage of healthcare workers was deepened during the pandemic crises. 
Amidst an already fragile healthcare system, the healthcare workers were forced to ta ke 
the bru nt of the increasing number of c ovid cases. Long working hours and inadequate 
protection against the virus overburdened the healthcare workers. 
7.58 The Committee is of  the view that the healthcare workers deserve respect and 
recognition for their valuable service. All the healthcare workers need to be given adequate 
remuneration and financial incentives along with insurance coverage. The Committee 
advocates the two pronged strategy (i) incentives to healthcare workers and (ii) to redress 
their grievances which will help boosting their morale and enhancing the performance.  
The Committee, in this regard, recommends the Ministry to ensure every effort to end the 
stigma and violence against the healthcare workers.  The Committee would like the 

98 
 
Ministry to ensure that the healthcare workers should have defined working hours, reliever 
rosters and scheduled off-duty days.  
 
7.59 The Committee is of the view that health workers at higher risk of infection must be 
advised quarantine and the same peri od must be treated as ‘on duty’. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to provide paid sick leave to the healthcare workers 
who have been infected and advised isolation. The Committee also recommends the 
Ministry to ensure that all the healthca re workers are given timely salary and allowances 
and all their grievances must be addressed. The doctors , who have laid down their lives in 
fight against the pandemic , must be acknowledged as martyrs and their families be 
adequately compensated.  
  

99 
 
CHAPTER 8 
FINANCING THE HEALTH SECTOR 
8.1 While the health sector in India faces many challenges, the healthcare delivery to 1.3 
billion population got further exposed with the outbreak of Covid-19.  The challenges in terms of 
awareness, access, human power crisis, affordability and accountability constituents proved to be 
major vulnerabilities of health care delivery system. The basic objective behind identifying the 
subject by the Committee was to understand and assess these vulnerabilities in the light o f 
investment made in the health sector, the lesson learnt from the Covid -19 pandemic and 
prescribe the solutions as road map for addressing the challenges the health sector is faced with.  
The existing fragile health infrastructure of the country calls for  some brainstorming the way we 
allocate funds to health sector  with half hearted approach.  Over the years , the Committee has 
been pointing out the inadequacy of budgetary resources in the health sector.  The current 
spending of 1.5% of total budget on health sector has proved to be much below the desired level 
of 3% of GDP as a result of which the country has failed to provide the minimum level of 
healthcare facilities to large populace leave alon e the additional funds  required to address the 
challenges of pandemic situations like Covid -19.  Being at the crossroad the need of the hour is 
that the policy maker must ponder and decide a practical approach for funding pattern required to 
set up a robus t health infrastructure for public at large.  India has lessons to learn from the 
countries who have invested substantially to cover the healthcare needs of their citizens.  
Although the Government could positively respond to the need of spending on Covid -19 but the 
picture is much larger and the Government need to urgently arrange finances for health sector in 
totality.  Financing the health sector also needs to be considered in the light of interventions on 
global spending on pandemics.    
GLOBAL SPENDING ON PANDEMICS 
8.2 The pandemics like COVID 19 which has affected almost every part of the world requires 
huge amount of funding. According to WHO "the  strategic preparedness and response 
plan outlines a funding need of at least US $675 million for critical response efforts in countries 
most in need of help through April 2020. As this outbreak evolves, funding needs are likely to 
increase". Brookings India in its study "preparing fo r pandemics such as coronavirus will we ever 
break the vicious cycle of panic and neglect?" has highlighted that "  Global public health has long 
struggled with an “out of sight, out of mind” paradox. Once a disease seems to be under control, it 
becomes invisible to policymakers or funders, even if there is a threat of disease resurgence".  As a 
result, a truly effective pandemic preparedness system is never built. Highlighting the Ebola 
outbreak in West Afri ca where it became clear that many critical global public goods (GPGs) for 
health had been chronically underfunded, including regional and global surveillance systems and 
research and development (R&D) for pandemic vaccines and other technologies. 
 
8.3 In the aftermath of Ebola in West Africa, there were promising signs that the international 
community might finally get its act together to create a pandemic preparedness system truly fit for 
purpose. Multiple independent panels and commissions made assess ment of the weaknesses in the 
global response to Ebola and proposed ways to reform the pandemic preparedness system. The 

100 
 
proposed reforms focused on strengthening national capabilities in outbreak preparedness; 
improving WHO’s handling of epidemics; mobili zing new pandemic funding; and accelerating the 
development of medical countermeasures (vaccines, diagnostics, and medicines) for outbreak 
control. Some health reforms occurred but were not enough to cater to large risk of future 
pandemics. 
 
8.4 Observing the trends in donor funding for what the Lancet Commission on Investing in 
Health calls “global functions”—global health activities that benefit multiple countr ies by tackling 
transnational threats. “Global functions” encompass three essential activities: providing GPGs for 
health (e.g., R&D to develop new medicines and vaccines for neglected diseases); managing cross-
border threats (e.g., pandemic preparednes s); and fostering global health leadership and 
stewardship (e.g., global health priority setting). These are the types of activities that had been 
historically underfunded when Ebola hit in 2014. A substantial increase in donor funding for 
epidemic/pandemic preparedness and response, likely a reaction to Ebola, was the chief driver of 
the sharp rise in funding for global functions from 2013 to 2015. However, funders did not sustain 
their pandemic financing in 2017. Brookings India concluded that in line with t he notion that there 
was a ‘panic’ phase in response to the Ebola epidemic in which funding for preparedness efforts 
rose, followed by a decline in funding during the ‘neglect’ phase. All countries —both global 
health donors and low- and middle-income countries—need to invest in pandemic preparedness. 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
8.5 With regards to the Committee's specific query about fund requirement for 
implementation of the action plan to contain Covid 19, the Ministry submitted that the estimated 
fund requirement is about Rs. 65.585.76 Crores. The Ministry furnished the following details 
with regards to the financial progress under NHM activities:  
(a) The total expenditure for the activities under NHM for phase 1 (01.01.2000 to 
30.06.2020) is Rs. 9604 crores.   
(b) As on 13.07.2020, a total of Rs. 130 crore have  been spent on insurance of 
health workers under the PMGKY.  
8.6 The Ministry further submitted that 17 States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,  Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Sik kim, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal  have achieved 
100% expenditure. 
8.7 During the retroactive period (01.01.2020 to 03.04.2020), an amount of Rs. 1113.21 
crore was released to the States/UTs. Against this release, an amount of Rs. 1082 cr ( approx) 
has been utilized by the States/UTs for the period 01.01.2020 to 31.03.2020. The status is as 
per FMR reported by the States/UTs. Whereas, during the period 04.04.2020 to 30.06.2020, an 
amount of Rs. 3000 crore  was released to the States/UTs. Again st this release, an expenditure 
of amount of Rs. 2229.40 crore (as on 24.07.2020) has been reported by the states.  
 

101 
 
8.8 During the course of examination of the subject, many stakeholders have raised concern 
over the dismal amount of budget allotted to Health sector. The stakeholders emphasized on the 
dire need of strengthening the healthcare infrastructure in the country which in absence of 
adequate budget faces multiple challenges.  
 
8.9 Indian Public Health Association (IPHA), Indian Association of Preve ntive and Social 
Medicine (IAPSM) & Indian Association of Epidemiologists submitted that Public health care 
should be significantly strengthened and enhanced with overall public expenditure to be 
increased to at least 5% of the GDP. The focus of increased health expenditure should be on 
primary health care and human resource and infrastructure strengthening rather than 
opening/strengthening tertiary care centers.  
 
8.10 The Committee reiterates its  considered view that the healthcare spending in India 
is abysmally low for an emerging economy with a population of 1.3  billion. Lack of desired 
level of investment in the health infrastructure has so far resulted into fragility of Indian 
health ecosystem which posed a big hurdle in generating an effective response against the 
pandemic. The Committee has time and again recommended the Ministry for increasing its 
spending in the health sector for ensuring better health infrastructure and health services 
to the needy common masses. The Committee expresses its serious displeasure over the 
Government's reluctance to act upon the Committee's recommendations in letter and 
spirit. The Committee is assured that the serious impact of the pandemic could have been 
minimized had the Government over the years increased its investment in the healthcare 
system. The Committee is pained to note the trauma and distress the public had to undergo 
due to absence of a dedicated healthcare system. The Committee, therefore, strongl y 
recommends the Government to increase its investments in the public healthcare system 
and make consistent efforts to achieve the National Health Policy targets of expenditure 
upto 2.5% of GDP within two years as the set timeframe of year 2025 is far away  and the 
public health cannot be jeopardized till that time schedule. 
8.11 The Committee also laments the poor state of primary healthcare especially in rural 
areas. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to urgently increase its spending 
under the National Rural Health Mission to strengthen the delivery of health care services 
in the rural areas, keeping in view the languishing health infrastructure and inadequate 
delivery of health services to much needed rural population. 
8.12 The Committee is of the view that pandemic Covid -19 offers a window to revisit the 
country’s health policy with the purpose of strengthening the health sector, and thus 
necessitates a higher investment in creating permanent basic health infrastructure. The 
Committee also bel ieves that a higher budgetary allocation will also boost the healthcare 
industry and shift the focus to Indian manufacturers and domestic supply chain of 
products.  The Committee believes that it is the opportune time to boost India’s healthcare 
infrastructure and push for greater technology deepening in the healthcare sector.  
 
Projected Financial requirement of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the next 
five years FY 2021-22 to FY 2025-26 

102 
 
8.13 The Committee was also apprised of the total financial requirement of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare for the FY 2021-22 to FY 2025-26 which is as follows: 
 
 
S. No. 
 
Key elements of Support 
Amount required 
for the five-year 
period (in Rs. Cr) 
 Medical  Education Related  
 
1. 
Proposal to set up 50 Medical Colleges in Phase-IV 
(Phase IV is being proposed as a new phase under the existing Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme for opening new medical colleges) 
 
21,27500 
 
2. 
Proposal to support the States to set up 75 Medical Colleges in Phase — 
III (This is ongoing phase of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
“Opening of New Medical Colleges” 
 
23,758.19 
3. Training of 1.5 million of skilled workforce related to Allied Health 14,562.71 
 PMSSY Related  
4. Starting of Super Speciality Blocks under PMSSY 15,000.00 
 NHM Related  
5. Bridging the shortfall infrastructure gap in public health facilities 
including for Wellness Infrastructure 
1,04,611.49 
6. Addressing the shortfall in Health Workforce 1,83,595.07 
7. Supporting the National Ambulance Service 15,951.95 
 Support for IT Infrastructure for the primary health care 11,203.20 
9. Support for diagnostic infrastructure to the primary healthcare facilities 18,807.20 
10. Ensuring Access to Medicines to reduce Out of Pocket Expenditure 1,38,039.0 0 
11. Support to the States to run DNB Courses in the District Hospitals 2,933.34 
 
Post COVID Health Sector Reforms 
 CSS Component of PM 
A5BY 
Amount including  
State and Central 
Share 
Amount required to 
cover 
Districts/Blocks 
 


103 
 
 
12. 
Support to 'Buildingless’ 
Rural SHCs PHCs CHC 
 
9828.83 
 
6066.63 
 
1589546 
13. Urban HWCs 25066.35 5110.9 S 25066.35 
14. Block PH Units 3829.50 1662.66 549216 
15. Dt  PH Labs 1482.50  1482.50 
16. Critical Care 
Hospital Blocks 
19064.80  19 064.80 
 
  B. Central Sector Components 
 
17. Critical Care Hospital Blocks in 12 Central Hospitals 2220.00 
18. Strengthening Surveillance of Infectious Diseases and 
Outbreak Response 
3060.30 
19. Strengthening Surveillance Capacity of Points of Entry 294.11 
20. Health Emergency Operation Centres and Mobile 
Hospitals 
330.3 
21. Department of Health Research / ICMR 1287.00 
22. Additional needs for Emergency COVID-19 Response 2148.18 
 Total 6,16,189.33 
 
8.14 All these proposals are well aligned to the goal of t he National Health Policy 2017 and 
the following relevant targets pertaining to the creation and use of public health facilities are 
defined in the National Health policy, 2017 as:- 
 
i. Increase utilization of public health facilities by 50% from current levels by 2025. 
ii. Establish primary and secondary care facility as per norms in high priority districts 
(population as well as time to reach norms) by 2025. 
iii. Ensure availability of paramedics and doctors as per Indian Public Health Standard 
(IPHS) norm in high priority districts by 2020. 
iv. Increase community health volunteers to population ratio as per IPHS norm, in high 
priority districts by 2025. 
v. Increase the expenditure on primary health care by 66.6% of total expenditure. 
vi. Reduction in OOPE  from 58.S% of Total  Health Expenditure (THE) (FY 2016 -17) to 
55% of THE 
vii. 20% increase in the number of footfalls in AB-HWCs over baseline FY 19-20 data  
viii. 50% increase in the number of footfalls in urban Health and Wellness Centres over 
baseline FY 19-20 data. 

104 
 
ix. 20% increase in t he cumulative screenings at HWCs for NCDs and other infectious 
disease’s over baseline FY 19-20 data. 
x. 10% increase in the number of diagnostic tests over the baseline annual diagnostic tests 
of FY 19-20. 
8.15 The Committee notes that the Ministry's project ed demand for the five year period 
from 2021-22 to 2025 -26 is Rs. 6,16,189.33 crore. This demand has been spread over some 
very crucial aspects of health sector like setting up of medical colleges, NHM, Post C ovid 
health sector reforms etc. The Committee strongly believes that the Health sector in India 
lacks adequate investment and health infrastructure as well as human resources deserves 
high priority. Higher public investment in health is significant for ful filling the goals of 
Universal Health Coverage and making the healthcare services accessible. The Committee 
appreciates the goal of the National Health Policy, 2017 which calls for the attainment of 
the highest possible level of health and well-being for all at all ages, through a preventive 
and promotive health care orientation in all developmental policies, and universal access to 
good quality health care services without anyone having to face financial hardship  as a 
consequence. The Committee is of the opinion that the Government will have to 
considerably increase its spending on the health sector to achieve this envisaged goal. 
8.16 The Committee understands that coordination and collaboration between the States 
as well as the C entral Government is important for fulfilling the commitment to increase 
the Government health expenditure to 2.5 percent of the GDP by 2025. The Committee 
strongly urges the Ministry to lay special emphasis on the provision of primary health  care. 
The Committee believes that spending on the public health system  can result in important 
population health gains which subsequently translate into financial impacts beyond what 
was originally invested. The Committee urges upon the Government in general and the 
Ministry of Finance in particular to treat the health infrastructure and healthcare service 
as a public good and consider enhanced allocation for the health sector in the public 
interest. The Committee accordingly pleads the Government to increase the budget of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as per its projected demand.  Here the Committee 
would like to remind the Government about the call given by Hon'ble Prime Minister to 
treat the corona pandemic (calamity) a s an opportunity and adequately augment the 
finance of health sector as priority sector in the interest of the nation.  
8.17 The Committee also recommends the Ministry of Health and family Welfare to set 
realistic physical targets and achievable timelines.  The Ministry should plan and monitor 
its financial resources so that the goals are achieved and undue delay is avoided.  The 
Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to chalk out a financial plan so that the 
allocated budget is fully and timely utilized.   
8.18 Projected Budgetary Requirement for the period 2021-22 to 2025 -26 for the Ministry of 
AYUSH is as indicated under: 
(in Crores) 
S.No Name of the Scheme 
Projected requirements from period 2021-22 to 
2025-26 Total 
2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 

105 
 
1 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 
National AYUSH Mission 
(NAM) 
1056.77 1357.87 1633.39 1796.73 1976.4 7821.16 
2 
Central Sector Scheme on 
Conservation, Development and 
Sustainable Management of 
Medicinal Plants 
60 66 72 79 86 363 
3 Mission-VRIKSH AYUSH 2056 1806 0 0 0 3862 
4 Champion Services Sector 
Scheme 259.11 193.21 66.55 28.95 0 547.82 
5 
Central Sector Scheme for 
Promotion of International Co -
operation in AYUSH (IC -
Scheme) 
38.6 42.46 46.73 50.76 56.53 235.08 
6 
Central Sector Scheme on 
Pharmacovigilance Initiatives for 
ASU&H Drugs 
4 4 4.5 4.5 5 22 
7 
Central Sector Scheme on 
Central Drug Controller of 
ASU&H Drugs 
1.5 2 2 2 2.5 10 
8 Public Health Initiative (PHI) 45 45 
9 Continuing Medical Education 
(CME) 40 40 
10 Center of Excellence (CoE) 70 70 
11 Extra Mural Research (EMR) 70 70 
12 
Central Sector Scheme on 
Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) 
175 175 
GRAND TOTAL 13261.1 
 
8.19 The Committee notes that the National Health Policy 2017 has emphasized on the 
potential of AYUSH and  advocated its integration with National Health Mission. The 
Committee notes that the trend of utilization has been satisfactory for AYUSH and it is 
capable of absorbing more funds under its different schemes. The pandemic has also 
highlighted the importance of AYUSH medicines for prophylactic use. The Committee has 
time and again advocated the mainstreaming of AYUSH and highlighted  on the need of 
scientific validation and quality control. The Committee therefore, recommends the 
Government to ensur e that the required funds are available to the Ministry of AYUSH. 
However, the Committee observes that the schemes such as Central Sector Scheme on 
Pharmaco-vigilance Initiatives for ASU&H Drugs should be given adequate importance 
and the funds may be increased under the Scheme.  

106 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE  
PHASES OF LOCKDOWN 
 The Committee is of the view that if we had not hit the history books for guidance,  the  
reality would have hit us harder. The Government of India learnt from its past experience 
and took successful measures like janta curfew, imposition of 4 months long lockdown and 
its gradual opening, travel restrictions and other social distancing measures to con tain the 
spread of Corona virus. The Committee appreciates the measures but also observes that 
there have been few glaring lapses in the  battle against pandemic like shortage of emergency 
supplies, red-tapism, shortage and quality of testing kits, delay in domestic production etc.  
(Para 1.42) 
PM'S JAN ANDOLAN AGAINST PANDEMIC 
 
 The Committee appreciates the PM's call for  Jan Andolan against Pandemic. The 
Committee agrees that pandemic Covid -19 can be contained and controlled by adhering to 
Covid Appropriate Behavior across the country and therefore, each State Government must 
make their best efforts to live up to the objective of the Jan Andolan. 
(Para 1.47) 
STRATEGIC APPROACH 
 
 The Committee observes that after a steady increase in the number of Covid Cases 
across the country, there has been a downtrend in Covid Cases. However, the Committee 
strongly feels that the threat of Covid -19 is still looming large on the country keeping in 
view the second and third wave in European countries and spike in Delhi. The Secretary, 
Department of Health and Family Welfare also expressed concern over the possible spike 
in the incidence of the Covid cases due to super spreading forthcoming festive events in the 
country and advent of the winter season. The Ministry should, therefore, take effective 
measures to control the scale of incidence of Covid -19 in the country. The Committee also 
recommends the States with high case load to adopt robust strategy for containment and 
mitigation of Covid-19. 
(Para 1.54) 
STRATEGIES ADOPTED TO CONTAIN COVID-19 
 
 The Committee however differs from the viewpoint of the Ministry as it feels that all 
the steps taken to contain control and minimize the incidence may appropriately be called 
the Mitigation Plan. 
(Para 2.17) 
ROLE O F NATIONAL CENTER FOR DISEASE CONTROL (NCDC) AND 
INTEGRATED DISEASE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMME (IDSP) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the unprecedented outbreak of Corona -virus 
required a well planned and coordinated response from the Central as well as State 

107 
 
Governments for successful containment of the pandemic. There has to be an integrated as 
well as a decentralized response to outbreak of pandemic Covid -19 for rescuing the 
common masses.  The disease trend data under IDSP is crucial for generating the required 
response to contain the outbreak especially when Inter Sectoral Coordination for zoonotic 
diseases is one of the main programme components of IDSP. The Committee is constrained 
to observe the failure of NCDC -IDSP in generating the required response in the wake of 
the pandemic. The Committee feels that NCDP -IDSP should have been utilized in a more 
effective manner especially when the sole objective of IDSP is to detect and respond to 
outbreaks in the early rising phase through trained Rapid Response Teams (RRTs). The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for revitalizing the enshrined role and 
responsibility of NCDC for effective control of the disease  along with strengthening of the 
Central Surveillance Unit (CSU), State Surveillance Units (SSU) and District Surveillance 
Units (DSU). The Committee also recommends the Ministry to effectively imple ment the 
various programme components under IDSP . The Committee would like the Ministry to 
launch Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme in the remaining States  i.e. beyond 
existing 9 States .  The Committee observes that there is an urgent need to asses s the 
financial requirement for NCDP-IDSP for its revitalization. The Committee, in this 
connection, strongly recommends the Ministry to chalk out strategy and specific course of 
action to revamp the institutional and Human Resource Management s tructure an d 
further strengthen NCDP -IDSP and pursue with the Ministry of Finance for higher 
budgetary allocation to NCDP-IDSP.   
(Para 2.20) 
ADVISORIES AND GUIDELINES FOR COVID-19  
 
 The Committee observes that plethora of guidelines issued by the Ministry in the 
course of the containment of outbreak of pandemic Covid -19 also caused ambiguity in 
interpretation of multiple guidelines . The contradiction in guidelines and the resultant 
chaos among the general masses  could have been averted by making the public aware o f 
the provision of guidelines  and better implementation of the advisories. Needless to say, 
particularly the separate guidelines on the quarantine issue by different State Governments 
created more panic and confusion.  
(Para 2.23) 
SURVEILLANCE IN THE COMMUNITY 
 
 The Committee believes that contact tracing, testing and isolating are the crucial 
components for Covid-19 containment strategy. The Committee is of the view that poor 
contact tracing and slow testing in the initial phase of pandemic led to the  increased 
number of infections in the country. 
(Para 2.26) 
HOSPITAL INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
 The Committee observes that the P radhan Mantri Atma Nirbhar Swasth Bharat 
Yojana is an ambitious program of the government that encompasses vital components 
to consolidate and enrich health infrastructure in the country.  The Committee 

108 
 
recommends that government should not leave any stone unturned in implementing its 
each and every component to achieve its cherished goal. 
(Para 2.29) 
AVAILABILITY OF BEDS 
 The Committee obs erves that the total number of Government hospital beds in the 
country was grossly inadequate keeping in view the rising incidence of Covid -19 cases. 
Attention of the Committee has also been brought to Media Reports which highlighted the 
abysmally low numb er of beds in Government hospitals in the country especially at the 
peak of the pandemic. Data from National Health Profile –2019 states that there are total 
7,13,986 Government hospital beds available in India which amounts to 0.55 beds per 1,000 
population. As per Reports, 12 States stand below the national level figure. The Committee 
notes that lack of hospital beds  and the inadequate ventilators further complicated the 
efficacy of the containment plan against the pandemic. As the numbers of cases were on the 
rise, a frantic search for vacant hospital beds became quite harrowing. Instances of 
patients being turned away from overburdened hospitals due to lack of vacant beds became 
the new normal. The scenario of patients holding oxygen cylinder rushing from  pillar to 
post in search of bed in AIIMS Patna is a testimony to fact that tear apart humanity. The 
Committee is aggrieved at the poor state of healthcare system and therefore, recommends 
the Government to increase the investment in public health and take  appropriate steps to 
decentralize the healthcare services/facilities in the country.  
(Para 2.34) 
 The Committee is pained to observe that in RML hospital out of the 1572 beds, only 
242 beds were dedicated COVID beds whereas in Safdarjung Hospital, out of 2873 beds, 
only 289 were reserved for Covid patients. The Committee fails to understand the rationa le 
behind the miniscule number of beds reserved for Covid patients in the Central 
Government Hospitals especially at a time when the number of covid patients were 
increasing rapidly in the capital city. The Committee, therefore, desires the Ministry to 
submit a note on the rationale for allocating such limited number of beds for COVID 
patients.  The Committee would like to be apprised regarding the status of beds exclusively 
reserved for COVID patients in the capital of the country. 
(Para 2.35) 
 The Committ ee has been given to understand that Railways have provided 813 
coaches having 12472 beds for conversion of coaches into COVID Care Centers . As per 
information submitted by the Ministry till 21.07.2020, only 454 COVID patients were 
admitted in these COVID Care Centres. The Committee fails to comprehend the 
underutilization of the available resources especially at a time when people struggled to 
find a bed in the hospitals. The Committee expects a convincing response from the Ministry 
on the issue. 
(Para 2.36) 
 
 

109 
 
INCREASING DEMAND OF NON-INVASIVE OXYGEN CYLINDERS 
 The Committee agrees with the Department that the pandemic has led to an 
unprecedented increase in the demand of non -invasive Oxygen Cylinders a nd instances of 
lack of Oxygen C ylinders in the hospitals had also been reported. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly advocates National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority to take 
appropriate measures for capping the price of the Oxygen Cylinders so that the availability 
as well as affordability of the Oxy gen Cylinders is ensured in all hospitals for medical 
consumption. The Committee also recommends the Government for encouraging adequate 
production of Oxygen for ensuring its supply as per demand in the hospitals. 
(Para 2.38) 
LABORATORY SUPPORT 
 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry for augmenting the testing 
infrastructure in such a short period of time and believes that testing, isolating and treating 
holds the key for containing the virus.  
(Para 2.40) 
 
 The Committee observes that only 33, 330 and 8,64,517 tests were conducted in the 
month of March and April respectively which increased to 33,878,288 in the month of 
October. The Committee believes that poor contact tracing and less testing could have been 
a factor for the exponential growth of COVID cases in the country. The Committee is also 
worried at the use of less reliable diagnostic tests which increase the chances of false 
negatives. Though the Rapid Antigen Tests may give faster results but are less reliable than 
the gold standard RT -PCR tests. Large scale use of such tests with low specificity and 
sensitivity may end up giving false negatives and subsequently derail the Covid -19 
containment strategy.  The Committee is of the view that the Government must assess the 
veracity of Rapid Antigen Test vis -à-vis RT-PCR and other diagnostic tests conducted to 
bring forth the true picture of the testing capacity in the country. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to ramp up the testing facilities in the country 
for more accurate tests. The Committee strongly recommends the testing rate through the 
more reliable RT-PCR tests. 
(Para 2.46) 
 The Committee also underlines the need to encourage domestic medical device 
manufacturing industry so that the import of diagnostic kits from other countries is 
minimized. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to boost investment 
and innovation in the medical device industry in the country.   
(Para 2.47) 
NATIONWIDE SERO-SURVEY 
 The Committee understands that Covid -19 Seroprevalence survey is crucial for 
studying the exte nt to which the Corona virus had spread among the Indian population. 
The Committee observes  that sero -survey tests a ccount for the presence of antibodies 

110 
 
amongst the person s who might have suffered from SARS -COV-2 virus. The Committee 
notes that despite limitations due to volley of variable factors , the data received from tests 
and surveys provides useful information on the trends in new infections and better 
understanding of the pandemic . The seroprevalence survey would enable the Government 
to formulate its strategy and the course of acti on plan to  contain the expansion of the 
COVID-19. 
(Para 2.51) 
CAPACITY BUILDING AND HEALTH RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
 
 The Committee finds that the healthcare workers lack the skills required for 
epidemic outbreak investigation, contact tracing, counselling, home care an d community 
mobilization. The Committee  underlines an urgent need for capacity building and 
maintaining the pool of health resources  to fight against the outbreak of the pandemic . 
The Committee strongly supports the demand for the 'Indian Health Service' ( IHS) in 
the Center and across S tates as a dedicated, efficient, and adequately resourced public 
health cadre on the pattern of Indian Administrative Service (IAS).  Creation of Indian 
Health Service (IHS) can help in streamlining the healthcare delivery as  envisaged in the 
National Health Policy 2017. 
(Para 2.58) 
 The Committee applauds the ASHA, ANM and Anganwadi workers who were at 
the forefront of community surveillance and risked their lives at these challenging times. 
The Committee expresses its anguish over the instances of ASHA workers being mistreated 
engaged for contact tracing and that too in the absence of safety equipment like masks, 
PPE kits for them. The Committee is also pained to note that community health workers 
were denied wages even thoug h they are the foot soldiers of the healthcare system. It is too 
much to expect from the community health workers to accomplish big task without proper 
training, incentives and support from the health system. The Committee strongly advocates 
for strengthening the network of ASHAs, ANMs and other community health workers and 
the necessary support in the healthcare delivery system. The Committee also recommends 
the Ministry to improve the quality of training imparted to health workers so as to enable 
them to provide effective and efficient delivery of healthcare service s. Regular training to 
the community health workers and Anganwadi workers particularly in the post COVID 
scenario of increasing incidence of Covid -19 cases and complexities involved in the post 
Covid-19 treatment of infected persons  has become more relevant and an inevitable 
intervention.  
(Para 2.61) 
 The Committee expresses concern over the large numbers of vacancies in secondary 
and tertiary public hospitals which considerably increases the de pendence on private 
providers and contractual workers. In its earlier reports, the Committee has been pointing 
out gross shortage of healthcare workforce in the country. The Committee  urges upon the 
Ministry to fill up the posts of specialist lying vacant at Community Health Centres (CHC); 
doctors at Primary Health Centres (PHC), ANMs and nurses at accentuated pace to meet 
India’s health needs without any further delay. 

111 
 
(Para 2.62) 
The Committee recognizes the crucial role of Epidemiologists in underlying t he 
distribution of disease an d the strategy for its control and therefore better trained health 
workers in epidemiology are fundamental for a robust surveillance system. The Committee 
observes that the Workforce Development Action Package under the Global Health Security 
Agenda (GHSA) sets a target of one trained field epidemiologist per 200,000 population. 
India, being a member of GHSA should positively work on capacity building of the frontline 
epidemiology workforce.  
(Para 2.66) 
 The Committee, in its 117th Report on the Allied and Healthcare Professions Bill 
2018, has exhaustively examined the different clauses of the Bill. The Committee had 
recommended for need of de -medicalisation and bringing forth the Allied and Healthcare 
Profession to the forefront of patient care and safety. With the unprecedented testing times  
of the current pandemic where the health sector world over is struggling with heavy disease 
burden the allied health sector  needs to be strengthened . The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry that along with medical professionals, the quality management of 
nursing and allied professionals in the country must also be ensured. 
(Para 2.67) 
LOGISTICS 
 
 The Committee notes that the healthcare workers had to work under huge stress 
due to shortage of PPE kits amidst impending threat of corona virus infection  as a result, 
quite many of them had to lose their precious lives . The Committee pays tribute to the 
doctors and nurses who have sacrificed their lives while combating Covid -19. The Ministry 
needs to ensure that there is no shortage of personal protective equipment (PPE) kits.  The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to ensure the adequate supply of oxygen 
cylinders with appropriate price caps. 
(Para 2.72) 
 
 The Committee observes that  disposal of biomedical waste has become a big 
challenge in the wake of the pandemic. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
the Ministry to ensure that the States strictly implement the guidelines on management of 
corona virus related bio-medical waste and take all sorts of requisite safety measures 
  
(Para 2.73) 
 RISK COMMUNICATION 
 
 The Committee notes the Ministry 's initiative to ensure appropriate risk 
communication through SMS and caller tunes. However, the Committee feels that 
information diss emination regarding covid -19 in rural areas is still inadequate. The 
Committee, therefore,  recommends the Ministry to encourage active participation of self 
help groups, the Panchayats and the Gram Sabhas for better public health messaging. The 

112 
 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to take more inclusive measures for bringing a 
behavioral change regarding hand-washing and mask wearing among the masses. 
(Para 2.76) 
SWOT ANALYSIS 
 
 Noting the SWOT analysis of contingent and containment plan of the Government 
shared by the stakeholders, the Committee feels that adequate primary and secondary 
healthcare infrastructure needs to be put in place especially in the rural areas by increasing 
requisite investment on physical infrastructure. The Ministry should also increase the 
number of VRDLs across different States so that testing capacity in the country is 
upgraded manifold. The Committee also strongly recommends that every State should 
establish at least one medical college and hospital as 'Centre of Excellence'. The Committee 
desires the Ministry to issue clear guidelines on facilities for teleconsultation and encourage 
the participation of the public through various awareness and outreach programs. 
Panchayat and community leaders need to be actively involved for dissemination of 
information regarding hand washing, physical distancing and use of masks. The 
Committee also advocates research and development and innovation in the healthcare 
sector and increase the medical device manufacturing capacity in the country. 
(Para 2.79) 
 The Committee is of the view that Districts and States with poor public health sector 
need to be identified on priority and provided the required infrastructure for tracing, 
testing and treatm ent by providing the required financial aid. The Committee calls upon 
the Ministry to make best use of the extra-ordinary situation arising out of the outbreak of 
pandemic COVID -19 for strengthening the primary and secondary healthcare services . 
The Ministry should take all the necessary measures to promote private consumption and 
investments in the country. A second wave of COVID has been witnessed in European 
countries and the Committee, therefore, feels that India must also be prepared to combat a 
possible second wave of Corona especially in the ensuing winter season and super -
spreading series of festive-events. 
(Para 2.80) 
CLINICAL TRIAL/RESEARCH STUDIES 
 The Committee takes note of the different initiatives taken by ICMR for devising 
treatment protocol for Covid-19. However, the Committee observes that in the initial phase 
there was certain ambiguity in the treatment protocol for Covid -19 which is somehow 
attributed to the mutating strain of Corona virus. The Committee understands that 
devising a full p roof treatment plan will have to be substantiated by different phases of 
clinical trials and have to be governed by strict protocols. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends ICMR to widen the scope of its clinical research and studies and keep on 
updating its database which could prove beneficial in containing and mitigating Covid -19 
as well as such future outbreaks. The Committee also recommends ICMR to collaborate 
with other international institutes and pharmaceutical companies to test the safety and 
effectiveness of different drugs and devices. 
(Para 3.5) 

113 
 
LOPINAVIR/RITONAVIR 
 
 The Committee is of the view that only those drugs whose efficacy for treating 
COVID-19 patients have been established should be used for hospitalized patients and the 
drugs should be prescribed o nly after multicentric trials and detailed study . The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to issue clear guidelines for safe use of 
drugs. The Committee notes that there have been instances where certain drugs were 
prescribed for COVI D-19 but clinical trials gave unfavorable results. The Committee, in 
this connection, strongly recommends the Ministry to issue strict guidelines against use of 
such drugs when the evidence conclusively shows that it does  not work for Covid 
treatment. The Committee believes that only drugs with reliable data and research should 
be used among Covid patients, especially for patients with co-morbidities. 
(Para 3.14) 
STATUS OF VACCINE DEVELOPMENT IN THE COUNTRY AND ABROAD 
 
 The Committee understands the urgency among the global scientific community for 
development of a vaccine against Covid -19. However, the Committee strongly emphasizes 
the need to ensure highest level of ethical and procedural standards in the vaccine resear ch 
studies. The vaccine should pass the strictly regulated route of all phases of clinical trials 
and the data should be made available in the public domain. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends the Ministry to follow a transparent approach so tha t any 
irregularity in the approval/production of vaccine is avoided. 
(Para 3.24) 
 
 
 The Committee also urges the Ministry to devise a plan for the availability of the 
vaccine.  For this to happen, the vaccine production capacity in the country has to be 
considerably ramped up for making the vaccine accessible to its citizens.  The Committee , 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to collaborate with Serum Institute of India and other 
vaccine manufacture rs so that vaccines are easily available at an affordable r ate to the 
general public. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to subsidize the vaccine cost for the 
weaker section s of the country , especially in rural and urban slum areas .  The Ministry 
should be cautious in its efforts to check instances of black -marketing and shortage of 
vaccines. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to administer the vaccines 
according to the WHO’s “strategic allocation” approach or a multi -tiered risk -based 
approach. 
(Para 3.25) 
STRATEGY OF SMART VACCINATION 
 
 The Committee is of the view that smart vaccination may be used as an immediate 
strategy but subsequently the whole population should be vaccinated. The Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to upgrade its cold -chain storage system so that country wide 
vaccination can be carried out without any hurdles. 
(Para 3.27) 

114 
 
CONVALESCENT PLASMA 
 
 The Committee notes that convalescent plasma therapy has been used against other 
diseases in the past and has show n good results. The Committee recommends ICMR to 
conduct high-quality trials to examine the efficacy of plasma therapy on the mortality of 
COVID-19 patients and if the research outcome is favourable , efforts must be made for 
dissemination of use of convalescent plasma therapy. 
(Para 3.29) 
THE CONCEPT OF HERD IMMUNITY 
 
 The Committee is of the view that letting people get infected with the virus till they 
develop herd immunity would result in a high mortality rate. The Committee agrees that 
given the poor health infrastructure in the country, the effect could be really adverse. The 
Committee notes that the trials of the vaccines are still underway and providing vac cine 
dose to a population of 1.3  billion will take time. The Committee, therefore, b elieves the 
best strategy available at present is to increase the testing capacity and isolate the affected 
persons to contain the further spread of the virus and keep infected persons under 
appropriate medical observation.   
(Para 3.33) 
TESTING CAPACITY 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the pandemic Covid -19 has highlighted the need 
for creation of a robust network of laboratories in the country. The Committee observes 
that though in the beginning only ICMR -National Institute of Virology (NIV) was tasked  
with the initial testing of suspected cases but in a short span of time, testing capacity was 
escalated and other viral research and diagnostic laboratories were commissioned. Even 
then identification of only 13 VRDLs across 11 states in a country with 1.3 billion 
population is indicative of the fact that the testing capacity was highly inadequate . It is 
quite disheartening to note that many States did not have the required infrastructure for 
testing facilities. This led to overburdening of the labs and caused inordinate delays in 
giving the test results. The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that the 
laboratory infrastructure in the country needs to be strengthened along with the technical 
workforce required to operate these labs. 
(Para 3.44) 
 The Committee observes that initially only NIV -Pune was equipped to carry out 
Covid-19 testing; However by 1 st April, testing facilities were increased to 151 labs and by 
31st July, testing capacity was expanded to 1321 labs which further has been expa nded to 
2082 labs as on 10 th November, 2020 (1143 labs in Government Sector and 939 labs in the 
private sector) . This ramping up of testing capacity within few months is commendable. 
The Committee, however, finds that testing facility is only limited to bigger districts and 
cities.  Lack of testing facilities in rural areas has also resulted in under reporting of cases. 
The PHCs and the CHCs are still largely devoid of any testing facilities and the required 
technical workforce. The Committee  strongly rec ommends the Ministry to establish a 
strong network of Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) in the country to 
tackle the constantly increasing incidences of Covid-19 cases.   
 
(Para 3.45) 

115 
 
 The Committee is of the view that a differentiated appro ach with aggressive testing 
in containment zones and cities with high level of infection could have arrested the spread 
of infection.  However, with unlocking, the infection has now spread to different parts of 
the country . The Committee also believes that  Tracing, Tracking, Testing, Treating and 
Technology (5Ts) are the answer to tackling Covid -19 and the Ministry has been working 
on all the fronts. However, the Committee still feels that the coordination between the 
Centre and the States needs further str engthening for better result . The required 
infrastructure to imbibe the 5Ts cannot be established overnight rather it demands 
adequate financial aid and specialized human resources.  
 
(Para 3.46) 
 The Committee notes that at present , India has the second h ighest number of total 
Covid positive cases after USA. However, inspite of the scaling up of testing,  the number of 
tests per million population in India is only 44,524 whereas for USA, it is 287,354 (source: 
Worldometer 18 th September, 2020). Brazil which has the third highest number of Covid 
positive cases is also conducting 68,666 tests per million population. The Committee , 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to further increase the number of Covid-19 tests in the 
country. 
(Para 3.47) 
 
 The Committee was given to understand that various diagnostic kits being used in 
carrying out Covid-19 Testing, include kits imported from other countries. The Committee 
is of the view that with an enabling policy framework, the Indian medical device industry 
could grow by leaps and bounds. The Committee strongly advocates providing support to 
the indigenous medical device manuf acturing industry to make India self sufficient and 
promote local production under  PM’s flagship programme of Atma Nirbhar Bharat - that 
focuses on self reliance and local production. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to formulate specific s chemes for providing financial incentives as well as 
infrastructure assistance to the industry that would work like ‘Sanjeevani booti’ to already 
slackening economy growth. The Ministry should devise segment specific approach for 
consumables, implants, dia gnostic imaging and kits and other medical devices to boost up 
healthcare industry. 
(Para 3.48) 
 The Committee is concerned at the low number of Tests per Million population  in 
States such as  Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal etc.  The 
Committee, therefore recommends the State Governments to shed their lackadaisical 
approach and continue tracking, testing and isolating so that Covid cases do not spike in 
the winter months. 
(Para 3.50) 
STRATEGY OF THE GOVERNMENT TO ENSURE BIO -SECURITY AGAINST 
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS 
 
 The Committee underlines the need of bio -safety to protect  the world community 

116 
 
from any activity signaling bioterrorism. The adverse effects of Covid -19 pandemic have 
taught the lesson on the importance of controlling biological agents and the need of 
strategic partnerships among different nations. The Committee, therefore, feels that  the 
present time is the most appropriate for the Government to formulate effective laws to 
counter bio -terrorism. The Committee also beli eves with expanding network of VRDLs, 
ICMR would serve as an important platform for diagnosis and surveillance of existing as 
well as emerging viral infections and thus make the country bio -secured against life -
threatening viruses and the menace of bio-terrorism. 
(Para 3.52) 
 The Committee agrees with the Ministry that a holistic approach is needed for 
ensuring bio -security against biological weapons. The Ministry should also engage with 
agencies and actively participate in ongoing International treaties.  The Committee 
strongly recommends the Ministry to conduct more research and work towards training 
and capacity building for management of public health emergencies arising from use of 
bio-weapons. 
(Para 3.53) 
AIR POLLUTION AND COVID MANAGEMENT 
 
 The Committee is also concerned at the growing pollution in major cities of the 
country. Studies have highlighted that air pollution during the time of pandemic will cause 
additive adverse effect on health and well being. The fact that air pollution can aggrav ate 
co-morbidities and other respiratory illnesses cannot be denied. Air pollution will increase 
the risk associated with Covid and could lead to fatal outcomes. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to encourage undertaking of necessary health research projects 
on air pollution and better Covid management. Further, the Committee is of the view that 
the Ministry should also liaise and coordinate with the Ministry of Environment Forest and 
Climate Change to find immediate solution for bringing do wn air pollution so that it does 
not aggravate the pandemic situation. The Committee also recommends the Government to 
make arrangement of adequate health infrastructure to combat the challenges of air 
pollution and manage its adverse impact on the Covid patients. 
(Para 3.54) 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION TO DHR/ICMR 
 
 The Committee observes with concern that as compared to other Departments 
involved in scientific research, the budgetary allocation of Department of Health Research 
has been one of the lowest in 2019 -20, i.e, Rs. 1900 crores. For the year 2020 -21, the budget 
marginally increased to Rs. 2100 crores. The Committee , in its 119 th Report on the 
Demands for Grants for the year 2020 -21 of the Department of Health Research , had 
expressed its deep concern over the lower budgetary allocation during 2020 -21 vis -à-vis 
projected demands under various components of DHR schemes/ICMR. The Committee 
had highlighted that the shortfall in allocations under the schemes would sever ely impact 
the establishment of new Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories; Multi Disciplinary 
Research Units in Medical Colleges (MRUs), Model Rural Health Research Units 
(MRHRUs) in States and funding of projects under the schemes of Human Resource & 
Capacity Development. The Committee reiterates its recommendations as made in the 119th 

117 
 
Report that the budgetary allocation to Department of Health Research should be 
increased. 
(Para 3.56) 
 The Committee also emphasizes on the pivotal role played by ICMR in the  fight 
against the pandemic. The Committee believes that Department of Health Research and 
especially ICMR are at the forefront in devising a suitable strategy in combating such 
outbreaks. In view of this, this Department and ICMR deserve a consistent budg etary 
support for its research resources activities. The Committee strongly recommends Ministry 
to increase the budgetary allocation to ICMR to broaden its research activities which 
would in turn help in formulation of better health outcomes. 
(Para 3.57) 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT  
 
 The Committee expresses concern over inadequate investment on public health 
research despite the fact that innovation play pivotal role in controlling the spread of 
disease.  The country lacks resilient field surveillance to detect potential cluster of diseases.  
Lack of investment leads to dependence on imports of diagnostic kits and development of 
vaccine and  drugs which ultimately enhances ' out of pocket expenditure ' of common 
populace. The Committee  strongly recommends the higher investment on research and 
development and innovation  in the field of health research at multiple levels to contain 
zonotic virals  like COVID -19 and to establish One Health S urveillance System with 
potential warning system of microbial spill over. The Committee is distressed to note the 
recent UIS data (UNESCO Institute of Statistics data) expressing that India invests only 
0.65 percent of GDP on Research and Development. India's GERD as a percentage of GDP 
was 0.67 in 2017 and 0.65 in 2018. The Gross domestic expenditure on R&D (GERD) as a 
percentage of GDP is the total intramural expenditure on R&D performed in the national 
territory during a specific reference period expressed as a percentage of GDP of the 
national territory. The Committee notes that India's GERD is well below the world average 
and the GERD of other countries. Countries like United States of America spend almost 
2.84 percent of its GDP on research whereas China also spends 2.19 percent of its GDP on 
research. The Committee deprecates the fact that India's lower appropriation on Research 
speaks volumes of how neglected the R&D sector has been in the country. The Commi ttee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should at least increase its spending  on 
research to the world average of 1.72 as a percentage of GDP within two years. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to set specific expenditure targets fo r R&D and 
for promotion of science, technology and innovation (STI). This dedicated separate 
budgetary allocation should be supported even in financial crisis situations so that research 
activities do not suffer in the wake of any unforeseen circumstances. 
(Para 3.64) 
 The Committee strongly underlines the pivotal role of research and development 
and would like the Ministry to strive hard for an innovation enabling infrastructure in the 
country. The Committee applauds ICMR in leading the fight against the p andemic and 
strongly believes that dedicated research institutes on the lines of ICMR should be 
established across the country. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to increase 
funding for machine learning and artificial intelligence based projects a nd also promote 

118 
 
international collaboration in Science & Technology.  The Ministry should also explore AI 
tools and innovative methods for providing personalized treatment to Covid-19 patients. 
  
(Para 3.65) 
RESEARCH AS A CAREER OPPORTUNITY 
 
 
 The Committee expresses concern over  the low number of researchers in the 
country and lack of research culture among students. As per the UIS data, there are almost 
252 researchers per million population  in India against 1,370 researchers in China . The 
Committee opines that the Ministry should focus on linking research with education and 
teaching and give incentives for increasing the retention rate in Health Research Field. The 
Committee strongly recommends the creation of a pool of talented healt h research 
personnel with upgraded skills of faculty of medical colleges, mid -career scientists, medical 
students, etc. The Department should also chalk out specialized training courses  regarding 
infectious disease epidemiology risk on viral infection espe cially co -morbidities micro 
behavioral factors and related multi -disciplinary research and support the trainees to take 
up research projects for addressing critical national and local health problems. The 
Committee, in this connection recommends the Ministry to launch health specific research 
programs for generation o f a research culture in the country and encourage the young 
undergraduates/postgraduates to pursue research in science and technology. The 
Committee desire the Ministry to provide financial assistance to institutions for conducting 
research in health specific areas. Financial incentive in form of research grants should also 
be provided to young graduates  proposing to undertake health research projects . The 
Ministry should also assess the quality  and outcome of research projects from time to time 
by evaluating the research outcomes and results. 
 (Para 3.66) 
 
COVID MANAGEMENT UNDER AYUSHMAN BHARAT-PMJAY SCHEME 
 The Committee is of the view that the AB -HWC which is envisaged to provide 
comprehensive health care to all must be positioned with the required infrastructure 
including well equipped modules , technical facilities and the requisite technical human 
resources. The Committee believes that higher investment in the health sector will facilitate 
revival of health sector and the HWCs, in the wake of any future pandemic, can act as the 
first effective point of quality healthcare delivery services.  The Committee feels that 
HWCs with its cadre of health workers and emphasis on community engagement are 
pivotal to the rural healthcare system of the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
advocates strengthening of the HWCs and developing a strong public health workforce at 
the grassroots level. 
(Para 4.12) 
 The Co mmittee is equally apprehensive about the ground realit ies.  Covid testing 
and treatment may not be available in all public hospitals. Given the fragile network of our 
public hospitals that struggled to deal with the increasing cases of Corona , instances of 
private hospitals charging exorbitant medical fees for C ovid treatment are being reported.  
In such a scenario, where only the affluent could afford treatment, the Committee feels that 

119 
 
free Covid treatment under PMJAY could provide a sigh of relief to t he entitled 
beneficiaries and the economically weaker sections of the society. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to constantly make efforts to minimise the out of 
pocket expenditure of patients due to Covid and update the details of the ben eficiaries on 
the scheme's IT System. 
(Para 4.13) 
 The Committee notes that NHA has introduced a process of temporary 
empanelment for the hospitals to avail benefits of Ayushman Bharat Jan Arogya Yojana 
(AB PM-JAY) through HEM Lite. The Committee welcomes such an initiative considering 
the gross shortage of adequate healthcare facilities. However, the Committee recommends 
the Ministry to effectively scrutinize the whole procedure of temporary empanellement of 
hospitals so that instances of fraudulent health care behaviour are avoided. The Committee 
also recommends the Ministry to empanel more hospitals especially in areas and States 
with weak health infrastructure to ensure continued supply of essential healthcare 
services..  
(Para 4.14) 
 
 The Committee appre ciates the new Transaction Management System (TMS) that 
allows the State Government to extend treatment to non AB -PMJAY beneficiaries. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to strengthen its monitoring mechanism and 
implement the new transaction management  system (TMS) in States. The Committee 
welcomes the Direct Lab Empanelment (DLE) module for empanelment of ICMR 
registered labs and feels that this will go a long way in expansion of physical testing 
infrastructure.     
(Para 4.15) 
     
 
 The Committee also appreciates the helpline services offered by NHA , however, 
outreach of these services in the rural areas needs to be ensured. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to create adequate awareness of these services in the rural areas 
as well. 
(Para 4.16) 
 The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure that the benefits of the Pradhan 
Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana actually reach to, healthcare providers, including community 
health workers, fighting COVID-19. The Ministry should also assess the imp lementation of 
the Scheme at the ground level. 
(Para 4.17) 
  
KEY CONCERN AREAS OF AYUSHMAN BHARAT AND PMJAY IN COMBATING 
COVID-19 
  
 The Committee is disappointed to note that many poor people have not been 
included under the scheme due to old SECC data  and there is no provision to even update 

120 
 
or revise the list of beneficiaries. The Committee is not convinced by the argument that 
State Governments can add beneficiaries at their own cost under State schemes . The 
Committee believes that States generally a re fund-starved and it would not be appropriate 
to lay additional burden on them. The Committee , therefore,  recommends that the 
Ministry and NHA must re -visit the idea of revising and updating the list of beneficiaries 
and not deprive poor strata of socially who should be given coverage under the scheme. 
 
(Para 4.20) 
 The Committee understands the crucial situation arising due to pandemic Covid -19 
and the resultant challenges being faced with respect to the health infrastructure as well as 
services. Since all the resources stand diverted towards tackling the pandemic, people have 
been facing problems in availing treatment for covid as well as non -covid illness. The 
Committee believes that people may not be aware about the grievance redressal system and 
ways and means of registering their complaints. The Committee, however, feels that 
monitoring of empanelled hospitals must be done to ensure that treatment is not denied to 
anyone because it will have a direct impact on the out of pocket expenditure of th e poor 
patients. The Committee believes that it is the moral duty of the Government to take care 
of its poor citizens especially in critical times like these.  The Committee recommends to the 
Ministry as well as NHA that all empanelled hospitals must be mo nitored, fresh directions 
issued and those found guilty be penalised for denying treatment to anyone.   
(Para 4.26) 
 
 The Committee is quite apprehensive that lack of awareness especially in the rural 
areas may be major reason for ignorance about healthcare benefits under the AB-PMJAY 
Scheme. As a result of s uch ignorance many entitled beneficiaries still remain outside the 
ambit of the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends , especially in the remotest 
and rural areas , to utilise the existing community healthcare workforce, community 
leaders, gram panchayat etc in disseminating information about the Scheme. Periodic 
awareness campaign about the right s of the beneficiaries  should be conducted. The 
Ministry needs to make special efforts and sensitize the entitled beneficiaries so that 
instances of patients paying additional amount in case of any additional medical procedure 
are avoided. 
(Para 4.28) 
 The Committee is of the view that engagement of both private and public sector is a 
must for ensuring robust delivery of healthcare services under the Scheme AB -PMJAY. 
The Committee understands that Covid treatment rate and charges for other health 
package for small private hospitals may not be sustainable which would discourage private 
hospitals from empanelling under the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to rationalize the package rates especially in rural areas where people suffer due 
to a weak primary healthcare infrastructure.   
(Para 4.29) 
 The Com mittee notes that Ayushman Bharat envisages ensuring robust tertiary 
healthcare services  and therefore, recommends the Ministry to make constant efforts to 

121 
 
achieve its envisaged goal of 1.5 lakh Health and Wellness Centres (AB -HWCs) to provide 
comprehensive health care (CPHC) services to enrich  the physical infrastructure in fight 
against pandemic/epidemic like situation. The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure 
availability of adequate and trained human resources for effective functioning of the 
HWCs. 
(Para 4.30) 
 The Committee would also like  the Ministry to ensure that the private as well as 
public hospitals follow the appropriate guidelines on the isolation facilities, separate entry 
& exit, patient transfer facility etc to manage the contagion. T he Committee opines that 
directing the whole hea lth machinery towards C ovid-19 while neglecting other healthcare 
services is not the right approach. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
also ensure that basic healthcare services like immunization, maternal, neonatal healthcare 
facilities, health check -ups, screenings etc are not disrupted in the Health and Wellness 
Centres. 
(Para 4.31) 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 The optimum utilization of the allocated funds has always been advocated by the 
Committee. The Committee, in this connection , recapitulates its 
recommendation/observation made in its 118 th Report on the Demands for Grants 
(Demand No.42) for the year 2020 -21 of the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
about the gross underutilisation of funds under the Scheme. It was pointed out that funds 
to the tune of Rs. 6400 crore were allotted in BE  2019-20 under AB -PMJAY which was 
reduced to Rs. 3200 crore at the RE stage, due to underutilization of the budgetary 
allocation. The Committee reiterates its recommendation as made in the 118th Report  
desiring the Department to periodically track the prog ress of the Scheme in the States and 
ensure that the funds earmarked for the Scheme are optimally utilised. The Ministry must 
ensure that no course of action should remain incomplete while combating Covid -19 for 
want of fund. 
(Para 4.34) 
HEALTH PACKAGES AND SERVICES UNDER AYUSHMAN BHARAT 
 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should make constant efforts to 
ensure delivery of quality treatment to the entitled beneficiaries under the AB-PMJAY 
Scheme. For this to happen, the Ministry needs to strengthen its monitoring mechanism 
and coordinate with the State Health Agencies (SHA) for effective implementation of the 
Scheme. Needless to mention, p eriodical review meetings and regular assessment of the 
quality of treatment under the Scheme should become the integral parts of such robust 
mechanism. NHA should also review the outcome audit of different procedure and 
packages and conduct periodic medical audits. 
(Para 4.42) 

122 
 
 The Committee feels that undue delay in claims payment of private hospitals  
empanelled under the Scheme is equally a matter of concern . The Committee strongly 
believes that the Ministry and NHA should make specia l efforts for ensuring timely 
payment of reimbursement claims of empanelled private hospitals to ensure uninterrupted 
treatment to needy patients. This would ensure transparency and good governance of the 
health domain free from  instances of exorbitant extraction of money from the patients in 
the private hospitals. 
(Para 4.43) 
 The Committee is glad to know that AYUSH pack ages are being included under 
AB-PMJAY.  Given the importance of Indian System of Medicines in present times 
especially during pandemic Covid -19, when AYUSH products are being widely used in the 
country for prophylactic use, its inclusion is well timed and warranted for.  The Committee 
hopes that these packages are finalized soon and included under the scheme. 
(Para 4.45) 
COVID MANAGEMENT THROUGH AYUSH SYSTEM 
 The Committee takes note of the preventive and prophylactic approaches that help 
in symptom management of COVID-19 like illnesses as also the lifestyle advocacies to boost 
immunity for prevention of various kinds of infectious diseases. The Committee recognizes 
the importance of traditional Indian system of medicine and the pivotal role it plays in 
boosting immunity and acting as a shield from various diseases. The Committee desires the 
people of the country to follow  these advisories in their daily lives to protect themselves. 
The Committee would like the Ministry to create adequate awareness amongst the masses 
about the various guidelines relating to the dose of medicines to be taken up  by the people. 
The Ministry should also ensure that the guidelines about the medicines to be taken up to 
modulate immunity be  adequately disseminated so that patients take dose of medicine as 
per prescription of registered practitioner. 
(Para 5.7) 
 
 The Committee observes that while there is a lot of discussion on COVID -19 control  
strategies from the mainstream approaches, it is also necessary to examine the contribution 
of the Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa Riga and Homeopathy 
(AYUSH) system, which are now being focused as effective public health interventions. The 
Committee would like to point out that outbreak of COVID -19 has made the world 
community realize the significance of strong and resilient immune systems for good health. 
While curative medicines are crucial and indispensable in battling Pandemic COVID -19 
viruses, body’s immunity is the first and best line of defense against any disease. During 
recent times, this line of life style reflects the increasing demand for dietary supplements 
that improve nutrition and health system.  The Committee would like to appreciate the 
advisories issued by the Ministry of AYUSH. 
(Para 5.11) 
 

123 
 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry has formulated  Interdisciplinary AYUSH 
Research and Development Task for studying four different interventions viz. 
Ashwagandha, Yashtimadhu, Guduchi + Pippali and a poly herbal formulation (AYUSH -
64). However, due to scanty scientific evidence, t his system of medicines gets very limited 
attention to the scientific community. The Committee, therefore, underlines the need to 
develop evidence based traditional medicines with scientific validation for better 
acceptability and higher credibility. Resea rch and Development is vital for growth and 
promotion of traditional system of medicine and therefore, the Committee recommends the 
Ministry to make efforts for scientific validation of the traditional medicine by introducing 
necessary technological advanc ements to gain trust and acceptability . This would help to 
garner confidence of more and more people who in turn would opt for traditional medicine 
to boost their immunity and prevent and protect themselves against  various infectious 
diseases. 
(Para 5.12) 
 
 The Committee opines that the pandemic COVID -19 has highlighted the need for 
mainstreaming Indian system of medicine and employing the alternative and traditional 
medicinal systems. The Committee would like the Government to weigh the relative 
contribution of both system i.e. system of modern medicine & science and the AYUSH, as 
complementary to each other in the management of diseases. The New Education Policy, 
2020 also calls for integration of Allopathy with AYUSH Systems of Med icine. The NEP, 
2020 exhorts much greater emphasis on preventive healthcare and community medicine in 
all forms of healthcare education. The Committee believes that the integration of Indian 
system with Allopathy would not only give medical students better understanding of 
preventive healthcare and community medicine, as envisioned under NEP, 2020, but at the 
same time would help the AYUSH practitioners to equip themselves to dispense basic 
medical care at the primary healthcare level. The integration of AY USH with Allopathy is 
a positive move that would help India move towards meeting the goal of universal 
healthcare by improving access and delivery in remote areas. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Government to make all out efforts for the integrat ion of Allopathy with 
Indian traditional system of medicine. 
(Para 5.13) 
UTILIZATION OF AYUSH MANPOWER AS COVID WARRIORS 
 The Committee appreciates the contribution of AYUSH doctors in combating 
COVID since the outbreak of the pandemic. The Committee believes that with the virus 
now spreading beyond metros and big cities and to rural and remote areas where an 
allopathic doctor is not always available or COVID centers/ hospitals with shortage of 
doctors, AYUSH doctors can be the first line of defense in those areas. The Committee is 
aware that AYUSH doctors have been filling up the gaps where there is scarcity of health 
human resources. The Committee feels that the basic training of the AYUSH doctors in th e 
modern scientific systems would go a long way in the management of COVI D-19 especially 
in rural areas and would reduce burden o f the allopathic doctors in the management of 
COVID-19 virus. 
(Para 5.15) 

124 
 
 
 The Committee notes that out of 2 lakh trained AYUSH doctors, only 39,555 have 
been deployed by States/UTs. The SOPs for the deployment of trained AYUSH manpower  
has been prepared and same is under consideration. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to expedite deployment of remaining trained Ayush doctors in the light of 
increasing number of COVID patients with each passing day. The Committee also 
recommends the Government to train more and more AYUSH doctors to overcome the 
shortage of doctors and to achieve the goal of universal health coverage. 
(Para 5.16) 
 
 The Committee deprecates the delay in permission to Research Councils and 
National Institutes under the Ministry of AYUSH in some of the States/UTs Governments 
for clinical and population based research studies  due to lack of clarity of policies and 
guidelines. This shows the apathy of the Government in formulating guidelines with regard 
to research activities under AYUSH system. The Committee, at the same time, 
recommends that AYUSH Research Councils and the Nat ional Institutes must undertake 
such research projects that would help in management of pandemic COVID -19 and extend 
protection to common masses against life threatening diseases. 
(Para 5.18) 
QUALITY CONTROL AND LICENSING OF AYUSH DRUGS 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the reported adverse reactions of number 
of ASU&H drugs introduced in market since January, 2019. The reference to 139 
misleading cases by Pharmacovigilance centres related to COVID-19 pandemic in last four 
months is testimony to this fact . It appears that the regulatory framework for the quality 
control of Ayush drugs is not stringent to prevent threat of misleading claims/ medications. 
The Committee believes that these cases have put a question mark on the quality of 
traditional medicines available during outbreak of pandemic COVID -19. The Committee 
cautions the Ministry of AYUSH that the current pandemic should not let the 
unscrupulous sellers/manufacturers of AYUSH drugs/products to increase their profits by 
misleading the consumer in the name of health immune boosters. The Committee strongly 
recommends the Ministry of AYUSH to strictly monitor the cases of misleading 
advertisements and protect the consumers of AYUSH products. 
(Para 5.22) 
 The Committee appreciates the pharmacovigilance initiative taken by the Ministry 
with the aim to prevent the adverse drug reaction and safeguard the public health. This is a 
positive step to showcase that Indian traditional system of medicine is not only safe but also 
scientifically validated. The Committee, however, cautions that the fake claims and 
misleading advertisements about ASU&H drugs would  not only damage the credibility of 
AYUSH medicines but also create distrust amongst the users of ASU&H drugs as well. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to evolve stringent regulatory framework 
to tackle the problems of failed samples and ensure quality control of AYUSH drugs. Strict 
and exemplary action in a time bound manner must be taken against the manufacturers 
involved in manufacturing of spurious /low quality AYUSH drugs. The Ministry ought to 

125 
 
fix the responsibility of the officials concerned who approve low/substandard quality drugs. 
The Ministry must sensitize physicians, pharmacists, patients, the pharmaceutical industry 
and other stakeholders towards reporting adverse drug reactions. The Ministry should also 
make efforts to strengthen State Government  ASU&H Pharmacies and drug testing 
laboratories in tackling the menace of misleading advertisement and low quality AYUSH 
drugs. 
(Para 5.23) 
 
 The attention of the Committee was drawn to the provisions of Drugs and Magic 
Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954 which prohibits advertisements of 
drugs and remedies that directly or indirectly gives a false impression regarding the true 
character of the drug; or (b) makes a false claim for the drug; or (c) is otherwise false or 
misleading in any material particular. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to strictly 
follow the provisions of the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 
1954 that prevent publication of inappropriate/misleading advertisements. The Committee, 
in this connection , recommends the Ministry to monitor advertisements issued regarding 
usage of AYUSH drugs  and take actions against reported misleading advertisements and 
false claims in a time bound manner. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to  
direct States/UTs for ensuring strict  monitoring/vigilance of quality control of ASU&H 
drugs as also the adherence of general guidelines for development of traditional medicine. 
 
(Para 5.24) 
 The Committee understands that  since the product approval to AYUSH drugs is 
given by the concerned State Licensing Authority (AYUSH) in accordance with the 
provisions of Drugs & Cosmetics Rule , due precautious needs to be exercised by licensing 
authorities so that unscrupulous manufacturers do not get any corridor f or bringing 
spurious products into the Indian market. Even though the power to grant license and legal 
actions against fake claims and misleading advertisements is vested with the State 
Licensing Authorities, the Ministry also owe accountability to follow up the matter with the 
State Governments and instruct the State licensing Authority to take suitable action in a 
transparent and time bound manner. 
(Para 5.25) 
 The Committee also takes into cognizance the directives issued by Ministry on 2 nd 
April, 2020  to all States/UTs Licensing Authorities and Drug Controllers of AYUSH to 
expedite the process of granting approval/license/renewal of license for manufacturing of 
ASU immunity boosting healthcare products and sanitizers. The Committee however, 
would like to caution that Government should instruct the State licensing authorities not to 
rush through the process of granting approvals to new ASU products at the cost of public 
health. Despite the growing demand in the wake of the COVID -19 pandemic, the usual 
safety standards and approval mechanisms for AYUSH products must be strictly followed 
and there should be no compromise with safety of the people who are using these products.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to grant approvals/license only  after 
following the due procedure ,  strict monitoring of the products, keeping in mind the rights 
of consumers and protect lives of the people using the AYUSH products. 
(Para 5.26) 

126 
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
 The Committee appreciates the absorption capacity of all the Research Institutes. 
Research, being an important component for achieving scientific validation of traditional 
system and making it widely accepted, the Committee believes that all research Insti tutes 
must yield the research outcome to achieve the objective of investment on R&D. Effective 
AYUSH products/drugs in the treatment of diseases would revitalize the AYUSH segment 
on Indian system of traditional medicine. The Government must continue its efforts for 
mainstreaming traditional system of medicine and integrating it with modern system of 
medicine. Adequate allocation of funds for projects would enable research Institutes to 
undertake research activities that help mainstreaming the AYUSH system. The Committee 
is of the view that mainstreaming traditional system of medicine is a long drawn process 
that requires continuous efforts from all the stakeholders alongwith continued budgetary 
support.  The Committee also believes that there is ample scope  for research and 
development within Indian system of medicine and given the present scenario of COVID 
19, all out efforts need to be made to enhance research and development through requisite 
fund allocation. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Minis try of AYUSH to 
persuade Ministry of Finance for the higher allocation of budget in coming years so that 
research activities continue in the aftermath of Pandemic COVID-19.   
(Para 5.29) 
 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the fact that  the clinical research 
studies that was intended to be taken up by the Ministry of AYUSH in collaboration with 
CSIR are yet to see the light of the day.  The Committee opines that on one hand the 
Government is determined to mainstream AYUSH system and explore s cientific validation 
of AYUSH advocacies and measures for the prevention of Covid -19, on the other hand, 
theses clinical research studies are yet to be taken up. The Committee is of the considered 
view that research being an important component, the resear ch studies should been taken 
up with utmost priority without procrastination.  AYUSH has a major role to play in 
present pandemic as its main objective is to boost the immune system and maintain health 
so as to prevent the spread of the disease. The Committee believes that the outcome of these 
studies would help understand AYUSH interventions during pandemics like COVID -19 
through scientific evidence & validation. Delay in research actives would not only stall the 
promotion of tradition medicine but also thwart the efforts for integration and 
mainstreaming of the Indian systems of medicine and Homeopathy into the existing public 
healthcare system. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to start  
clinical research studies without further delay so that its outcome could be used to combat 
the present crisis. 
(Para 5.32) 
 The Committee observes that 59 research studies  are being conducted by the 
Ministry of AYUSH at various AYUSH Research Councils and Institutes. Of these, many 
studies have been completed with promising results in preventing the threat of COVID 19. 
The trials indicated that alternative medicine therapie s prevented severe COVID 
symptoms among people in quarantine.  One of the primary criticisms leveled against the 
AYUSH system is the lack of scientific evidence for efficacy of AYUSH medicines . The 

127 
 
Committee underscores the need of designing research studie s to generate some tangible 
evidence in AYUSH against Covid -19. Promising results shown by these studies would 
progressively march ahead in scientifically validating traditional medicine. The Committee 
observes that participation of AYUSH medicines in addr essing the COVID-19 challenge in 
India should not be restricted and rather seen as the extension of healthcare services and 
support to bio -medical system. The Committee hopes that with adequate monitoring and 
research directions, the Indian System of Medicines would emerge as a prominent platform 
in the management of increasingly frequent and virulent communicable diseases. The 
Committee, while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry, recommends that more and 
more research studies should be conducted by the Ministry of AYUSH. 
(Para 5.34) 
 The Committee is disappointed with the State -wise status about efficacy and effect 
of traditional medicines in treating COVID patients. The Committee believes that rigorous 
data are needed to show -case that remedies under AYUSH system are safe and effective  
and all the States should be seen as actively promoting the Ayush System. For this to 
happen, all States should have dedicated AYUSH COVID care centers where patients 
could be treated with the traditional medicine along with modern medicine. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to establish AYUSH COVID care centers 
in every state/UT of the Country. Further, the Ministry should maintain the data from each 
State to evaluate the efficacy of the system. 
(Para 5.36) 
 
POST-COVID MANAGEMENT PROTOCOL 
 The Committee understands that having defeated the virus is just the beginning of 
an unresearched path of recovery for survivors of severe COVID -19 disease, since COVID 
19 is a new disease. The post -acute phase of SARS-CoV-2 infection depends on the severity 
of virus attack on different patients. Apart from the fear of unknown, the survivors of 
COVID 19 venture into an unchartered territory of post COVID complications. Not only 
do they have to deal with fatigue, breath lessness and other physical effects of the disease, 
but also grapple with the psychological impact of it. The Committee is relieved to note that 
the Government has taken cognizance of complexities caused by COVID during post 
recovery phase and identified p otential post -acute care needs of recovered COVID -19 
patients. The Committee notes that the Ministry has adopted integrated holistic approach 
for managing patients who have recovered from COVID and advised to take care at home. 
The Committee in this regard  recommends the Government to put in place healthcare 
services to ensure a holistic follow -up of post COVID treatment of the patients who are 
showing post COVID complications. It is also necessary to address the possibility of SARS -
CoV-2 re -infection, the proportion of adverse reactions after hospital discharge and the 
possible development of other viral and/or bacterial infections. 
(Para 6.5) 
 The Committee is of the view that since COVID is an unknown virus across the 
world, research is going forward to u nravel the mystery of the virus  constantly mutating 
itself. It remains to be seen how COVID -19 evolves further and what symptoms do the 

128 
 
survivors may experience. Further, it has been observed that the virus spreads to many 
different organs of the body like  the heart, blood vessels, kidneys, lungs, and brain. The 
Committee believes that there is a need for multidisciplinary care service involving several 
specialists from both the systems i.e Allopathy and AYUSH system of medicine for the 
evaluation and the f ollow-up of patients suffered with COVID -19 disease. The Committee 
therefore recommends the Ministry to set up a multidisciplinary care service system as a 
part of post COVID Management protocol based on research on post -COVID 
complications. 
(Para 6.6) 
 Acknowledging the efficacy of AYUSH system in boosting the immunity of the 
person, the Government of India inducted various AYUSH practices of healthcare to 
facilitate faster recuperation of health of recovered COVID 19 patients. With respect to 
AYUSH, the M inistry has advised to take immunity promoting AYUSH medicine as 
practiced and prescribed by a qualified practitioner of AYUSH, daily practice of Yogasana, 
Pranayama and Meditation, as much as health permits or as prescribed. The Committee is 
of the consid ered view that post COVID follow -up is as important as taking medications 
while suffering from COVID. 
(Para 6.7) 
 The Committee observes that a regular and comprehensive follow-up by people 
having recovered from COVID -19 would help define the clinical and care needs. Such 
information can also be used to modify/improvise the post COVID treatment 
model/protocol and plan. The Committee recommends the Ministry to set up post -COVID 
clinics, on the lines of AIIMS Delhi, to look after the recovered patients who ar e facing post 
COVID 19 illness issues like breathlessness, body ache, fatigue etc  and provide counselling, 
yoga, physiotherapy, consultation and medication to boost immunity  on case to case basis 
to ensure their full proof treatment including rehabilitation. 
(Para 6.8) 
 The Committee was apprised by the Secretary that the Ministry is carrying out 
post-Covid sequelae where the number of people who suffer from heart related, 
respiratory, renal problems post recovery from COVID is being documented.  The 
Committee appreciates  the initiative of the Department and believes that such 
documentation is essential for providing a comprehensive treatment and for shaping the 
post covid care approach of the healthcare system. Not only this, the documentation would 
be of immense help in enriching knowledge proof research projects related to Covid -19 for 
better research outcomes that would be beneficial in combating the future pandemic. 
(Para 6.9) 
 
DISRUPTION IN DELIVERY OF ESSENTIAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES 
 The Committee observes that closure of OPD services in government hospitals in the 
wake of outbreak of pandemic Covid -19 crippled the healthcare delivery system in the 
country. Non-covid patients especially female patients and the patients with chronic and 

129 
 
lethal diseases were the worst sufferers. The Committee is pained at the reported death of 
at least 61 pregnant women and 877 newborns in Meghalaya in the four months after 
April, 2020.   
(Para 7.7) 
 ASHA and ANM workers that play a crucial role in ensuring good  maternal health 
and promoting institutional delivery were all engaged in community surveillance and 
contact tracing.  The Committee notes that health machinery was diverted to fight the 
pandemic which left  the poor public without a healthcare support syst em. The Ministry 
needs to learn from its mistakes and work towards establishing a resilient public health 
system that does not collapse in view of any future outbreaks. 
(Para 7.8) 
FINANCIAL DISTRESS IN THE HEALTHCARE SECTOR 
 The Committee observes that the  limited health care infrastructure in the country 
has further been overburdened while coping up with the rising covid cases in the country. 
The Committee believes healthcare should never be limited to only those who can afford to 
pay but should move toward s the noble vision  of Universal Health coverage. For this to 
happen, the government needs to be considerate and support the private healthcare sector. 
(Para 7.15) 
 In this regard, the Committee has taken note of the financial distress of the 
healthcare infrastructure where small hospitals and nursing home in towns and cities have 
been shut down due to lack of liquidity and cash flow accentuated owing to unscientific and 
sustainable capping of cost/pricing for COVID treatment by Government authorities.  The 
government support through liquidity for financing the operating loss followed by indirect 
tax relief/exemption on essential medicine, consumable and devices for treatment of 
COVID patients can go a long way in revival of private healthcare sector.  The Co mmittee 
also recommends a scientific and fair costing/pricing framework wherein Government may 
ensure that input taxes are not attributed to the cost of healthcare services.  The Committee 
also recommends the Government for expediting payment of outstandin g Bills of the 
private hospitals. 
(Para 7.16) 
 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the shortage of healthcare providers 
due to vacancies in the State run hospitals in the country. Many hospitals and medical 
colleges across the country are functio ning below the sanctioned strength and speciality 
Departments are non -functional due to lack of required faculty. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry and the States/UTs to fill up these vacancies at the earliest. The 
Committee also feels that healthcare providers from other regions  may be deputed to 
districts with higher burden of covid cases. However, the Committee urges upon  the 
Ministry and the States Government to ensure the safety and security of all the healthcare 
providers. 
(Para 7.17) 

130 
 
POOR ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE SERVICES 
 The Committee notes that disruption of medical services for Non -Covid patients 
during lockdown paralyzed the delivery of essential healthcare services. Particualry, the 
diagnosis and treatment of other services did take a backseat which even led to many non -
covid deaths. The Committee also agrees that the cost of health service delivery increased 
due to absence of specific guidelines for Covid treatment in private hospita ls as a result of 
which patients were charged exorbitant fees. 
(Para 7.21) 
 The Ministry during the examination of the Demand for Grants 2020 -21 of the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare had submitted that India's Government Health 
Expenditure (GHE) as percent of the Current Health Expenditure (CHE) is only 27.1%. In 
India, Out of Pocket Expenditure in Health is 62.4% and India ranks 15 out of 186 
countries in OOPE as % of CHE. The Committee apprehends that amidst the pandemic 
and the uncertainty in th e treatment protocol, this OOPE may have further driven many 
families to below poverty line. 
(Para 7.22) 
 The Committee is of the view  that arriving at a sustainable pricing model to treat 
Covid patients could have averted many deaths. The Committee observ es that the number 
of Government Hospital beds in the country were not adequate to handle the increasing 
number of Covid and non -Covid patients. In the wake of the pandemic and shortage of 
Government healthcare facilities, the Government should have strate gized a better 
partnership with the Private Hospitals under PPP model. 
(Para 7.23) 
SOCIAL IMPACT 
 
 The Committee is concerned over the confinement of the school going children due 
to prolonged closure of education institutions in the wake of outbreak of pandemic Covid-
19. With schools closed for long periods, online classes have proved instrumental in 
maintaining students’ learning level.  The Committee is equally concerned at the existing 
digital divide in the country which has jeopardised the future of m illions of students from 
the weaker section of the society. With the shift in education -method from classroom to 
online medium, the education of the students residing in areas with poor connectivity has 
been compromised.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to strengthen 
its network for digital and online classes and once the normal classes resume, provision for 
extra special classes should be made especially for students from the economically and 
socially weaker section.   
(Para 7.27) 
 The Committee also understands that since many students may not be able to afford 
a smartphone or computer with internet connection, the Government needs  to provide 
television-sets and satellite TV connections in schools as a short term measure so that the 
education for students of economically weaker sections do not suffer further. 
(Para 7.28) 

131 
 
IMPACT ON WOMEN   
 The Committee observes that the restrictive social norms, gender stereotypes, home 
quarantining and diversion of resources to respond to the COVID -19 pandemic can limit 
women’s ability to access health services which makes them more susceptible to health 
risks. The pandemic has not only adversely affected women’s social and mental well being 
but also disrupted access to healthcare services especially sexual and reproductive 
healthcare services. Access to contraceptives or healthcare services became difficult which 
led to many unw anted pregnancies and unsafe abortions. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends the Government to chalk out specific course of action for rescuing 
the women out of mental trauma by resuming the sexual and reproductive healthcare 
services and allocating the resources to improve women health services. 
(Para 7.32) 
 The Committee notes that violence against women increased during the lockdown 
period as the perpetrators of violence and susceptible both stayed at home due to 
compulsion of lockdown. The Committee strongly recommends the Government to identify 
such women who have been the victims of sexual and domestic violence during the 
pandemic and rehabilitate them. The Committee would like the Ministry to create specific 
hotlines, telemedicine services, rape crisis centers for women and the counselling of victims 
or survivors of violence. The Ministry should further ensure that instances of gender based 
violence are reported and timely actions are taken against the perpetrators. 
(Para 7.33) 
 The Committee,  while taking into account, the economic consequence of the 
pandemic on women, feels the urgent need for economic emancipation of women by 
providing them with equitable opportunity of employment and enabling their participation 
in the micro and macro -decision making process. In a world, where the share of women in 
the workforce is already less, the Committee believes that financial inequality between men 
and women will further rise sharply. The Committee notes many women are employed in 
the informal sector which has been worst hit due to the pandemic. The Committee 
therefore recommends the Ministry to make social security measures accessible to women 
and launch specific programmes so that women are able to absorb the economic shock  and 
the resultant mental stress caused due to the sudden job losses. 
(Para 7.34) 
PSYCHOLOGICAL IMPACT OF COVID 19 
 The Committee endorses the study conducted by PFI and agrees that there has been 
a considerable rise in mental health issues during the lockdown. Sudden loss of 
employment and social isolation aggravated the psychological burden among the masses. 
The Committee also finds that stretched work hours have increased the levels of depression 
among the frontline healthcare workers. There is no denying the f act that staying in touch 
with friends or family is a typical mechanism for coping with stress but during lockdown in 
the absence of any coping mechanism, working age adults, students etc who live alone, were 
more prone to depression. The Committee, theref ore, recommends the Ministry to increase 

132 
 
its investments in mental health research and ensure better outreach of its mental health 
care services. The Committee  would also like  the Ministry to carry out more awareness 
campaigns for erasing the stigma attach ed to mental health and focus on the measures for 
alleviating the depressed out of their prevailing mental framework and inject new rays of 
hope and expectation through social interaction and psychological stress emancipation 
practices viz. yoga and better way of living. 
(Para 7.43) 
 The Committee is also concerned at the increased risk of suicide during the 
pandemic which may be attributed to social isolation, fear of the pandemic, loss of 
livelihood and other economic and health fallouts. The Committee, t herefore, strongly 
urges the Ministry to make suicide prevention and mental health its priority. The 
Committee also recommends the Ministry to utilize the different means of social and press 
media to generate awareness and provide necess ary support through  help lines and by 
counseling to the individuals in distress.   
(Para 7.44) 
CORONA WARRIORS  
 The Committee appreciates the contribution of the frontline warriors who have 
been tirelessly working amidst the pandemic. The Committee also observes that the 
problem of shortage of healthcare workers was deepened during the pandemic crises. 
Amidst an already fragile healthcare system, the healthcare workers were forced to take 
the bru nt of the increasing number of c ovid cases. Long working hours and inadequate 
protection against the virus overburdened the healthcare workers.  
(Para 7.57) 
 The Committee is of  the view that the healthcare workers deserve respect and 
recognition for their valuable service. All the healthcare workers need to be given adequate 
remuneration and financial incentives along with insurance coverage. The Committee 
advocates the two pronged strategy (i) incentives to healthcare workers and (ii) to redress 
their grievances which will help boosting their morale and enhancing the performance.  
The Committee, in this regard, recommends the Ministry to ensure every effort to end the 
stigma and violence against the healthcare workers.  The Committee would like the 
Ministry to ensure that the healthcare workers should have defined working hours, reliever 
rosters and scheduled off-duty days. 
(Para 7.58) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that health workers at higher risk of infection must be 
advised quarantine and the s ame period must be treated as ‘on duty’. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to provide paid sick leave to the healthcare workers 
who have been infected and advised isolation. The Committee also recommends the 
Ministry to ensure that all the healthcare workers are given timely salary and allowances 
and all their grievances must be addressed. The doctors , who have laid down their lives in 

133 
 
fight against the pandemic , must be acknowledged as martyrs and their families be 
adequately compensated. 
(Para 7.59) 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 The Committee reiterates its considered view that the healthcare spending in India 
is abysmally low for an emerging economy with a population of 1.3  billion. Lack of desired 
level of investment in the health infrastructure  has so far resulted into fragility of Indian 
health ecosystem which posed a big hurdle in generating an effective response against the 
pandemic. The Committee has time and again recommended the Ministry for increasing its 
spending in the health sector for  ensuring better health infrastructure and health services 
to the needy common masses. The Committee expresses its serious displeasure over the 
Government's reluctance to act upon the Committee's recommendations in letter and 
spirit. The Committee is assur ed that the serious impact of the pandemic could have been 
minimized had the Government over the years increased its investment in the healthcare 
system. The Committee is pained to note the trauma and distress the public had to undergo 
due to absence of a dedicated healthcare system. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends the Government to increase its investments in the public healthcare system 
and make consistent efforts to achieve the National Health Policy targets of expenditure 
upto 2.5% of GDP within two years as the set timeframe of year 2025 is far away and the 
public health cannot be jeopardized till that time schedule. 
(Para 8.10) 
 The Committee also laments the poor state of primary healthcare especially in rural 
areas. The Committee strong ly recommends the Ministry to urgently increase its spending 
under the National Rural Health Mission to strengthen the delivery of health care services 
in the rural areas, keeping in view the languishing health infrastructure and inadequate 
delivery of health services to much needed rural population. 
(Para 8.11) 
 The Committee is of the view that pandemic Covid -19 offers a window to revisit the 
country’s health policy with the purpose of strengthening the health sector, and thus 
necessitates a higher invest ment in creating permanent basic health infrastructure. The 
Committee also believes that a higher budgetary allocation will also boost the healthcare 
industry and shift the focus to Indian manufacturers and domestic supply chain of 
products.  The Committee believes that it is the opportune time to boost India’s healthcare 
infrastructure and push for greater technology deepening in the healthcare sector. 
(Para 8.12) 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry's projected demand for the five year period 
from 2021-22 to 2025 -26 is Rs. 6,16,189.33 crore. This demand has been spread over some 
very crucial aspects of health sector like setting up of medical colleges, NHM, Post C ovid 
health sector reforms etc. The Committee strongly believes that the Health sector in India 
lacks adequate investment and health infrastructure as well as human resources deserves 
high priority. Higher public investment in health is significant for fulfilling the goals of 

134 
 
Universal Health Coverage and making the healthcare services acces sible. The Committee 
appreciates the goal of the National Health Policy, 2017 which calls for the attainment of 
the highest possible level of health and well-being for all at all ages, through a preventive 
and promotive health care orientation in all developmental policies, and universal access to 
good quality health care services without anyone having to face financial hardship  as a 
consequence. The Committee is of the opinion that the Government will have to 
considerably increase its spending on the health sector to achieve this envisaged goal. 
 
(Para 8.15) 
 The Committee understands that coordination and collaboration between the States 
as well as the Central Government is important for fulfilling the commitment to increase 
the Government health expenditure to 2.5 percent of the GDP by 2025. The Committee 
strongly urges the Ministry to lay special emphasis on the provision of primary health care. 
The Committee believes that spending on the public health system  can result in important 
population health gains which subsequently translate into financial impacts beyond what 
was originally invested. The Committee urges upon the Government in general and the 
Ministry of Finance in particular to treat the health infrastructure and healthcare service 
as a public good and consider enhanced allocation for the health sector in the publi c 
interest. The Committee accordingly pleads the Government to increase the budget of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as per its projected demand.  Here the Committee 
would like to remind the Government about the call given by Hon'ble Prime Minister to 
treat the corona pandemic (calamity) as an opportunity and adequately augment the 
finance of health sector as priority sector in the interest of the nation. 
(Para 8.16) 
 The Committee also recommends the Ministry of Health and family Welfare to  set 
realistic physical targets and achievable timelines. The Ministry should plan and monitor 
its financial resources so that the goals are achieved and undue delay is avoided.  The 
Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to chalk out a financial plan so that the 
allocated budget is fully and timely utilized.   
(Para 8.17) 
 The Committee notes that the National Health Policy 2017 has emphasized on the 
potential of AYUSH and advocated its integration with National Health Mission. The 
Committee notes that  the trend of utilization has been satisfactory for AYUSH and it is 
capable of absorbing more funds under its different schemes. The pandemic has also 
highlighted the importance of AYUSH medicines for prophylactic use. The Committee has 
time and again advo cated the mainstreaming of AYUSH and highlighted on the need of 
scientific validation and quality control. The Committee therefore, recommends the 
Government to ensure that the required funds are available to the Ministry of AYUSH. 
However, the Committee o bserves that the schemes such as Central Sector Scheme on 
Pharmaco-vigilance Initiatives for ASU&H Drugs should be given adequate importance 
and the funds may be increased under the Scheme. 
(Para 8.19) 
***** 

135 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
  

136 
 
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 2.30 p.m. on Thursday, the 13th February, 2020 in Committee 
Room C, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
2. Shri A.K. Antony     
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
5. Dr. Santanu Sen 
6. Shri K. Somaprasad 
7. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
8. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
9. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
10. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
11. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
12. Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
13. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
14. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
15. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
16. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
17. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
18. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
19. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
Shri V.S.P.Singh    Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of Ministry of AYUSH 
 
1. Sh. Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha,  Secretary 
2. Dr. Dharmendra Singh Gangwar, AS &FA 
3. Sh. P.K. Pathak, AS 

137 
 
4. Sh. P.N. Ranjit Kumar, JS 
5. Dr. Manoj Nesari, Adv. (AY.) 
6. Dr. D.C. Katoch, Adv. (AY.) 
7. Dr. Mohd. Tahir, Adviser (Unani) 
8. Dr. J L N Sastry, CEO, NMPB  
9. Sh. T. Srinivas, DDG 
10. Sh. S.R.K. Vidyarthi, Director 
11. Sh. Vikram Singh, Director 
12. Sh. S. Srinivas, Sr. Consultant 
13. Dr. A. Raghu, Jt. Adviser 
14. Dr. S. R. Chinta, Dy. Adviser  
15. Dr. K.S. Dhiman, Director General, CCRAS 
16. Dr. Anil Khurana, Director General, CCRH 
17. Prof. Asim Ali Khan, Director General, CCRUM 
18. Dr. Raghavendra Rao M., Director, CCRYN 
19. Dr. Tanuja Nesari, Director, AIIA 
20. Dr. I.V. Basavaraddi, Director, MDNIY 
21. Dr. Suresh Kumar, Deputy Adviser 
22. Dr. Sulochana Bhat, Assistant Director, Ayushman Bharat 
 
Representatives of Department of Health Research, M/o H&FW 
 
1. Prof. Balram Bhargava, Secretary  
2. Dr. Dharmendra Singh Gangwar, AS &FA 
3. Smt. Geeta Narayan, Joint Secretary 
4. Smt. Anu Nagar, Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives of ICMR 
 
1. Dr. G. S. Toteja, Additional Director General, ICMR 
2. Dr. R Gangakhedkar, Head, ECD, ICMR 
3. Dr. R. S. Dhaliwal, Head, NCD, ICMR 
4. Dr. R. S. Sharma, Head, RBMCH, ICMR 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that 
Secretaries of the Ministry of AYUSH & the Department of   Health Research have been invited 
in connection with the examination of the Demands for Grants (2020 -21) of the 
Ministry/Department concerned.   
3.1 *** 
3.2 *** 
3.3 *** 
3.4 *** 
 
* Relates to other matter 

138 
 
 (The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 p.m. for tea break and assembled again at 4.20 p.m.) 
 
4.1 The Committee then heard the views of the Secretary of the Department of Health 
Research who gave a brief overview of the Demands for Grants (2020 -21) of the Department of 
Health Research through a power point presentation highlighting the following:  
i. ***  
ii. ***  
iii. ***  
iv. ***  
v. DHR Network for strengthening health infrastructure;  
vi. Standard treatment workflows; 
vii. ***  
viii. Steps taken to prevent Coronavirus; 
ix. ***  
x. ***  
xi. ***  
xii. ***  
xiii. ***  
 
4.2. During the course of the meeting, Members raised queries on the Demands for Grants 
(2020-21) of the Department of Health Research, some of which are as follows: 
i. Inadequate budgetary allocation resulting into sufferings of Research Schemes; 
ii. Need of a 24x7 crisis management team at the national level that works in 
coordination with the  State Governments; 
iii. Programme to educate the people about the unforeseen viral infections; 
iv.  
* Relates to other matter 

139 
 
v. *** 
vi. *** 
vii. *** 
viii. *** 
ix. *** 
 
4.3  The Secretary and other officials replied to the queries raised which are as follows: 
i. *** 
ii. Need for a National Bio-security plan; 
iii. Need for high end diagnostics and high end treatment for virus infection; 
 
4.4 The Chairman directed the Secretary to furnish detailed written replies to the queries that 
remained unanswered within three days.    
 5  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 6. The Committee adjourned at 5.33 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on  14 th February, 
2020.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Relates to other matter 
  

140 
 
XII  
 
TWELFTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, the 14 th February, 2020 in   Room No.63, 
First  Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA      
2. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
3. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
4. Shri K. Somaprasad 
5. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
LOK SABHA 
6. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
7. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
8. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
9. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
10. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
11. Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
12. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
13. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
14. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
15. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
16. Shri Anurag Sharma 
17. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
18. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
19. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
Shri V.S.P.Singh    Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
Smt. Harshita Shankar      Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of Department of Health & Family Welfare 
 
1. Ms. Preeti Sudan, Secretary (H&FW) 
2. Shri Sanjeeva Kumar, Spl. Secretary 

141 
 
3. Shri Arun Singhal, Spl. Secy. 
4. Shri D.S. Gangwar, Addl. Secretary & Financial Adviser 
5. Dr. Manohar Agnani, Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Lav Agarwal,  Joint Secretary  
7. Shri Sudhir Kumar,  Joint Secretary 
8. Dr. Mandeep K. Bhandari,  Joint Secretary 
9. Shri Alok Saxena,  Joint Secretary 
10. Dr. Nipun Vinayak,  Joint Secretary 
11. Ms. Gayatri Mishra,  Joint Secretary 
12. Ms. Rekha Shukla,  Joint Secretary 
13. Ms. Padmaja Singh,  Joint Secretary 
14. Ms. Preeti Pant,  Joint Secretary 
15. Ms. Bharati Das, CCA 
16. Shri Nilambuj Saran, EA 
17. Ms. Preeti Nath, EA 
18. Dr. Sandhya Bhullar, Director 
19. Shri Sudeep Shrivastava, Director 
20. Shri Jitendra Arora, Director 
21. Shri Sanjay Roy, Director 
22. Dr. Sudhir Gupta, DDG 
Representatives of Central Government Health Scheme: 
Dr. D. C. Joshi, Adviser, CGHS 
 
Representatives of National Health Authority: 
 
Shri Indu Bhushan, CEO, NHA 
 
Representatives of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India: 
 
Shri Pawan Aggarwal, CEO, FSSAI 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that 
the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare and other officials have been invited in 
connection with the examination of Demands for Grants (2020 -21) pertaining to Depar tment of 
Health & Family Welfare (Health Sector and NHM). 
 
 
 

142 
 
 
3. *** 
 
4.  The Secretary also apprised the Committee about the s tatus of Corona Virus (nCOVID -
19) and action taken by the Ministry to prevent incidence of the disease. The Secretary submitted 
that though the transmission is huge but the percentage of mortality or fatality in this disease is 
less than SARS.  Travel advisories have been issued and the thermal screening of p assengers has 
been started at the Airports. People with fever and other symptoms are being quarantined and 
tested for Corona Virus.  
 
5. to 7 *** 
 
8.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
9.  The Committee then adjourned at 1:38 p.m.  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Relates to other matter 
  

143 
 
XIV 
 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 5th March, 2020 in Room No. ‘63’, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav         -         Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA       
 
 2.     Shri A.K. Antony 
 3.     Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
 4.     Shrimati Kahkashan Perween  
 5.     Shri Suresh Prabhu 
 6.      Dr. Santanu Sen 
 7.     Shri K. Somaprasad 
 8.     Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
9.      Ms. Ramya Haridas 
10.      Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
11.    Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
12.    Shri Arjunlal Meena 
13.    Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
14.    Dr. Ptitam Gopinath Munde 
15.    Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
16.    Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
17.    Adv. Adoor Prakash 
18.    Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
19.    Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
20.    Shri Anurag Sharma  
21.    Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
22.    Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
23.    Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 

144 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
Shri V.S.P. Singh    Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
Smt. Harshita Shankar      Under Secretary 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
 
Department of Health Research 
 
1. Prof. Balram Bhargava, Secretary 
2. Mrs. Anu Nagar, Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. R.R. Gangakhedkar, Scientist 'G' & Head, ICMR 
4. Dr. Nivedita Gupta, Scientist 'F', ICMR 
 
Ministry of AYUSH 
 
1. Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha, Secretary 
2. Shri Roshan Jaggi, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Vaidya Manoj Nesari, Adviser, Ayush 
4. Shri Vaidya D.C. Katoch, Adviser, Ayush 
5. Dr. Mohd. Tahir, Adviser, Unani 
6. Shri Vaidya Kartar Singh Dhiman, DG, CCRAS 
7. Dr. Raghvendra Rao, DG, CCRYN 
8. Dr. Anil Khurana, DG, CCRH 
9. Dr. Asim Ali Khan, DG, CCRUM 
10.  Dr. A. Raghu, Joint Adviser, Ayush 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that 
the meeting had been convened to (i) consider and adopt draft 120 th Report on the Demands for 
Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of AYUSH and (ii) hear the views of Secretaries, Department 
of Health Research and Ministry of AYUSH on the status of outbreak of Corona virus and the 
contingent & mitigation plan put in place for managing its outbreak in the country.       
3. ***.  
 
3.1 *** 
 
3.2 *** 
* Relates to other matter 
 

145 
 
Discussion on the status of outbreak of Corona virus 
4. The Committee then commenced its deliberations on the status of outbreak of Corona 
virus and the contingent and  mitigation plan put in place for managing its outbreak in the 
country.  The Committee first heard the views the Secretary, Department of Health Research 
who shared with the Committee, in detail, about the virus and its impact and preparatory  
measures taken to contain it. He highlighted the following points during his presentation:  
(i)  Corona virus group had six viruses and the Covid -19 is the seventh virus in the 
same group. The symptoms of virus are fever, dry cough, body pain and difficul ty 
in breathing.   
(ii) The WHO declared it as a public health emergency of international concern on 
30th January, 2020 
(iii) Kerala reported its first case in India on 6th January, 2020. Kerala Government did 
well in managing Covid -19 with the help of ICM R-NIV and the Ministry of 
Health. 
(iv)  Corona Virus outbroke in 76 countries till date and 93,000 cases were confirmed 
and the most affected countries were Iran, Italy, South Korea and Japan. 
(v)  The Ministry has taken steps to contain the pandemic at an early stage which were 
as under: 
(a) Screening at 21 Airports, 12 major seaports and 65 minor seaports and land 
crossings particularly bordering Nepal.  
(b) Universal screening for all flights from Singapore, Thailand, Hong Kong, 
Japan, South Korea and China at earmarked aero-bridges. 
(c)  Universal screening also started for flights from Vietnam, Malaysia, Nepal, 
Indonesia, Iran and Italy. 
(d) A total number of 5,89,438  passengers were screened at Airports and 16,076 
at Ship Ports. 
(vi) The Government had evacuated 645 Passengers from Wuhan, China through 
special aircrafts and kept them for 14 days quarantine in Army camp, Manesar and 
Chhawla camp of ITBP. Secretary submitted that 132 crew members and six 
passengers from India were evacuated  from Japanese ship on 27 th February and  
were kept in the Manesar camp and their first test was negative.  Further, 112 
people, including nationals of Myanmar, Bangladesh, Maldives, China, South 
Africa, USA and Madagascar alongwith some of the spouses of Indians were 
evacuated from China. 
(vii)  There are 106 viral laboratories under the Department of Health Research, of which 
31 viral research laboratories had been activated and started testing and as on 5th 

146 
 
March, 3,777 samples have been tested from 3,12 3 individuals.  Advisories issued 
by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in view of the emerging global 
scenarios were also mentioned. 
(viii)  The guiding principles were surveillance, laboratory diagnosis, hospital 
preparedness, logistic management, capacity building and risk communication.  
(ix)  The operation plan inter-alia  included 
 involvement of District Collectors; 
 preparation of micro plans; 
 mobilization of health force and training of rapid response teams; 
 training of workforce by the Rapid Response Team; 
 Active surveillance and contact tracing covering all households; 
 arrangement for sample collection; 
 transportation and testing; 
 identification of health facilities for isolation of suspects; 
 passive surveillance through identified health facilities; 
 home quarantine and daily follow up of all contacts;  
 information management and daily sitreps;  
 social distancing measures in the containment zone;   
 based on risk assessment such as closure of schools; 
 work places and ban on gatherings; 
 risk communication. 
5. Thereafter, the Secretary and other officials of the Department of Health Research replied 
to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and members of the Committee relating to 
screening of people coming from different countries, increa sing  capacity for quarantine, 
separation and sample testing, precaution taken for health workers, availability of masks & 
necessity to wear it, exploring the possibility of converting a hospital into an Isolation ward for 
Covid-19 infected persons, instea d of, making  Covid -19 Isolation wards in various hospitals, 
etc.  
6. The Committee then heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH who apprised 
the Committee about the various medicines that were being used for an anti -viral and flulike 
symptoms or preventive or improving the immunity. He informed the Committee about the 
following general and specific preventive measures that has been notified by the Ministry:   
General 
• Observe good personal hygiene.  
• Practice frequent hand washing with soap.  
• Follow respiratory etiquettes - cover your mouth when coughing or sneezing.  

147 
 
• Avoid close contact with people who are unwell or showing symptoms of illness, such as 
cough, runny nose etc.  
• Avoid contact with live animals and consumption of raw/undercooked meats.  
• Avoid travel to farms, live animal markets or where animals are slaughtered.  
• Wear a mask if you have respiratory symptoms such as cough or runny nose. 
 
Specific 
• The diet should be fresh, warm, easy to digest, containing whole cereals, seasonal vegetables 
etc.  
• Frequent sipping of water boiled with Tulsi leaves, crushed ginger, and turmeric would be 
beneficial.  
• Honey with a pinch of pepper powder is beneficial in case of cough. 
• Cold, frozen and heavy foods may be best avoided.  
• It is beneficial to avoid direct exposure to cold breeze. 
• Appropriate rest and timely sleep are advisable. 
• The practice of Yogasana and Pranayama under the guidance of qualified Yoga instruc tor is 
recommended. 
7.  The Secretary and other officials of Ministry of AYUSH replied to some of the queries 
raised by the members relating to traditional medicines that are useful against Corona virus.  
8. The Chairman then desired that facts about Coron a Virus and the requisite precautionary 
measures for protection against the Corona Virus may be communicated to public through 
electronic media and other Government sources for public awareness to stop gossip mongering 
and misgivings being circulated on What’s app and other social media  
9.    A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.06 p.m.  
  

148 
 
XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11 a.m. on Tuesday, the 4 th August, 2020 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
3. Shrimati Indu Bala Goswami 
4. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
5. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
6. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
7. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
8. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
9. Shri Anurag Sharma 
10. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
11. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri J. Sundriyal  Joint Secretary 
Shri V.S.P.Singh Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar Additional Director  
Smt. Harshita Shankar Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of Department of Health & Family Welfare 
 
1. Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Secretary 
2. Dr. Rajiv Garg, DGHS 
3. Smt. Arti Ahuja, Additional Secretary 
4. Shri Lav Agarwal, Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives of Department of Health Research 
 
1. Prof. Balram Bhargava, Secretary 

149 
 
2. Shri Shailender Singh, Additional Secretary 
3. Ms. Anu Nagar, Joint Secretary 
4. Dr. G.S.G. Ayyangar, Sr. DDG (A), ICMR 
5. Shri Rajeev Roy, Senior Financial Advisor, ICMR 
6. Dr. Samiran Panda, Scientist G & Head, ECD, ICMR 
7. Dr. R.S. Sharma, Scientist G & Head, RBMCH, ICMR 
8. Dr. Rajni Kant, Scientist G & Head RMPPC, ICMR 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee in general and to 
Smt. Indu Bala Goswami in particular who had been recently nominat ed to this Committee. The 
Chairman stated that Covid -19 has brought everything to a standstill and the whole world, 
including India, had been grappling to contain the pandemic COVID -19. He maintained that the 
weaker sections of the society, especially the migrant labours, the vendors, the daily - wage 
earners, etc. had been the worst sufferers of outbreak of COVID-19. 
2.1 The Chairman pointed out the instances of several deaths at the  hospital premises across 
the country due to lack of ICU beds and ventilato rs. He also underlined that lack of proper PPE 
kits and masks had also compromised the safety of front -line health -care workers.  The 
pandemic exposed the loopholes in the public health infrastructure and the poor condition of the 
Govt. hospitals. He furth er pointed  out that lack of clarity in issuing proper  guidelines and 
protocols had not only led to administrative ambiguity but also created confusion amongst the 
common masses. 
2.2 The Chairman informed the members that it was in this background  that Secretaries of 
the Department of Health and Family Welfare and the Department of Health Research were 
invited to present their first hand information on the outbreak of Corona virus and the contingent 
& mitigation plan put in place for its management in the country. 
3. The Chairman, thereafter, welcomed the Secretaries of Department of Health and Family 
Welfare, the Department of Health Research and other Officers to the Meeting and requested 
them to apprise the Committee about the present status of COVID -19 pandemic in the country, 
the contingent and mitigation  plan for containing the virus, the probable time -line for roll out of 
vaccine, status of indigenous vaccine undergoing clinical trials, any breakthrough research 
conducted by ICMR and other national le vel research bodies. He also desired the Secretaries to 
address the issues of patient being referred from one hospital to another, ambiguous and varied 
guidelines that led to confusion and chaos, lack of ICU beds and ventilators, the exorbitant fees 
charged by the private hospitals, the lack of good -quality PPE Kits and masks for the health - 
care workers and the dismal condition of the Govt. hospitals in the country. The Chairman also 
desired that the Committee be apprised of the specific challenges being f aced by the Ministries 
while taking effective measures for implementing the contingent and mitigation plan specially in 
the rural areas considering the absence of adequate health -care infrastructure there and the status 
of COVID management plan in the flood-affected States. 

150 
 
3.1 The Committee, thereafter, heard the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Health 
and Family Welfare. The Secretary highlighted the following points during his oral evidence:- 
(i) He highlighted the broad timelines of the information received on the outbreak of 
COVID-19 and the follow up steps taken by the govt. He stated that at present it had spread to 
215 countries. However, it was heartening to note that of the total COVID -19 positive cases the 
world over, it was limited only to mi ld-disease stage in 80 percent of the people; only 15 per 
cent need hospitalization and only 5 percent are such who are critical and need ventilators. 
Global Case Fatality Rate (CFR) is 3.8% while in India CFR is 2.10%.; 
(ii) As contingent plan Govt. announced Janta Curfew followed by long duration of 
lockdown and efforts were at present being made to contain the spread of COVID -19 during 
continuing unlocking phase. Growth -rate of COVID cases during initial stage of lockdown was 
36% on day to day basis while during the present unlocking period it was reduced to 3.3%; 
(iii) Lessons learnt and experiences gained from outbreak of viral diseases/epidemic, viz., 
Avian influenza (Bird flu) during 2006 -2008, H1N1 in 2009 and Zika Virus & Nipah Virus 
during 2016 -2019 was utili sed by the Govt. to work out a preemptive, pro -active and graded 
response to combat COVID-19; 
(iv) Lockdown provided the much needed time for making arrangement to the extent of 34 
times more isolation beds, 20 times more ICUs, 35 times more  daily handling cap acities of the 
hospitals and opening of 1331 test labs with 6.61 lakh actual daily tests through RT -PCR and 
rapid antigen tests; 
(v) Tracking plan followed the testing of the positive case i.e. origin of infection and 
probability of the capacity to spread the  infection in the  population, thus, requiring surveillance 
over chain of transmission; 
(vi) Incidence of COVID -19 cases appear large because of aggressive testing policy but the 
fact remains that 83% of total cases were reported from 10 States only and the rec overed cases 
today were more than double than the number of active cases; 
(vii) AIIMS, New Delhi was conducting skill enhancement of doctors through video -
conferencing on every Tuesday and Friday every week with duration of two and half hours 
where doctors raised issues pertaining to various aspects of treatment of COVID -19, viz, 
prescription of medicines, use of oxygen, high- flow nazal cannula or ventilators etc. 
(viii) State Govts. had been requested to accord one medical college of the State with the status 
of 'Centre of Excellence' for dissemination of information, knowledge and experience, as done 
by AIIMS, New Delhi, frequently, for skill development of doctors; 
(ix) Issuance of guidelines to State Govts. on donning and doffing of PPE Kits by doctors and 
nurses and adoption of infection-safe practices; 
(x) Guidelines on allotment of duties to doctors and nurses on roster basis to avoid fatigue 

151 
 
followed by leave for three days for rest and to count the leave period on duty'; 
(xi) Data-bank of final -year students, interns and  retired doctors alongwith  their mobile 
numbers and addresses had been prepared in each State to facilitate the State to avail their 
service, if the need arose and the State Govt. so feels.   The Govt. of Karnataka has utilised the 
services of retired doctors on a large scale; 
(xii) Effective clinical management of COVID-19 led to reduction of mortality rate to 2.1% in 
India which was lower in comparison to the global mortality rate; 
(xiii) As the various sectors of economy were being unlocked, there was perceived thre at of 
people being infected by COVID -19 at a rapid pace, therefore, there was urgent need for the 
people to adopt and practice COVID Appropriate Behaviour, viz., distance of two yards, mask -
wearing and hand- hygiene and public-hygiene; and 
(xiv) People's partici pation and service of opinion makers, people's representatives, viz., 
MLAs and MPs were required for successful implementation of mitigation plan intended to 
combat the challenges posed by COVID-19. 
3.2 Thereafter, the Chairman and the members of the Committee raised the following issues:- 
(i) Status of vaccine development, controversy over trade of HCQ,   COVID -19 a variation 
of Corona Virus or its origin out of research on Wuhan University and whether permission was 
granted by the Govt. to Tata Institute of Fundamental Research to participate in bat research 
with Wuhan with the United State Defence Department in Nagaland; 
(ii) Whether Corona Virus was manufactured in a laboratory of China as biological weapon, 
if so, the preparedness to combat the biological weapon ; 
(iii) Prescribed uses, doses and effectiveness of medicines like dexamethasone, prednisolone, 
Tocilizumab, Remdesivir, azithromycin, doxycycline and non -availability and black -marketing 
of these drugs or mechanism to prescribe the limit of viral load to doct ors and nurses, 
clarification on cycle threshold value, success rate of anti -coagulant therapy and result of 
convalescent plazma; 
(iv) making sero surveillance results public and vaccine should be introduced after proper 
evidence and due care and issue of duplicate sanitizer in the market; 
(v) specificity of swab test and its standardization, uses of alternate medicine of Ayush; 
(vi) In COVID fund under National Health Mission, that has been disbursed to various  States 
and Districts but there is no provision for a rental allowance in PIP and procedure of 
utilization of COVID fund in PIP ignore the representative of people, Member of Parliament at 
the district level, concern over variability in rRT -PCR testing due to use of Kits of different 
companies, viz., R Genes, Perkins, Siemens and making availability of kits free of cost to the 
private labs  as an incentive to conduct investigation free of cost. Uses of anti-retro viral drugs to 

152 
 
treat COVID thereby meaning that morphology of virus pertaining to HIV and COVID be 
similar. Possibility to develop vaccine to treat COVID -19  in view of the genome and the 
mutations of COVID; 
(vii) Problem of proper testing in rural areas and despite allocation of funds from MPLADS 
for purchase of masks and sanitizer but its benefit was not ev ident on the ground due to undue 
interference of bureaucrats and non- participation of the representatives of people; 
(viii) Was there any other standard testing method apart from RT -PCR test ? Whether any 
other kit was being developed which was faster and much more accurate. Status of repurposed 
molecules or vaccines that were on clinical trials, use of AYUSH prescribed medicines as 
immunity boosting trials, Govt.'s policy on price grouping or making available the vaccine at a 
reasonable price to the common citizen, provision of number of vaccines to cover the population 
of the country, any incentive being contemplated to be given to manufacturers to start setting of 
capacities to produce the verified and tested vaccines, lessons learnt from earlier pandemics 
about tracing method or is there better method of tracing problems being faced by asymptomatic 
patients due to lack of facilities during quarantine at L -1 Centre and children who are 
asymptomatic should not be sent to quarantine centres; 
(ix) Lack of adequate infrastructure and allocation of inadequate budget to improve the health 
infrastructure, therefore, the Department should come forward  with a revised estimate with 
proper justification, adequate budgetary allocation to the Department of Health Research, 
participation of people's representatives at the district level for ensuring proper utilization of 
funds given to combat COVID -19, opening of OPD in various hospitals for giving adequate 
attention to the other patients; 
(x) model adopted by the Delhi Government to c ontain COVID-19 and key components of 
Delhi’s COVID-19 management strategy; 
(xi) Standard clinical treatment protocol, special guidelines for treatment of children testing  
positive; 
(xii) percentage of healthcare workers consuming Hydrochloroquine who have actually g ot 
COVID positive; 
(xiii) cost of testing kits imported from abroad and possibility of indigenous manufacturing of  
Kits; 
(xiv) Financial assistance of Central Government to the States, etc. 
 
3.3 Responding to the specific query of the member on the status of vaccine de velopment, 
the Secretary Department of Health and Family Welfare stated that there were more than 200 
vaccine candidates in the world which were at different stages. Out of 200, 139 vaccines were at 
pre-clinical evaluation where animal toxicity studies wer e going on. 26 vaccines out of 200 

153 
 
vaccines are at clinical trails which are evaluated on healthy volunteers. 2 vaccines are home 
ground, one with the collaboration of Bharat Biotech and ICMR and other vaccines being 
developed by Zydus Cadila. As regards the use of HCQ, the Secretary maintained that HCQ was 
used for a prophylactic (protection) purpose and also for front line health care workers, although, 
one group of studies indicate its effectiveness in protection against COVID -19, with mild 
symptom and other group of studies expresses indifference to its use, however, HCQ has no side 
effect. The Secretary, the Department of Health Research clarified that the use of HCQ as 
prophylactic is clearly safe. Pertaining to origin of COVID -19, the Secretary, the D epartment of 
Health and Family Welfare pointed out that one group of studies indicate that COVID -19 
originated from bats, while other group of studies argued that COVID -19 was genetic 
manipulation and lab engineering leading to creation of particular virus . The Secretary, 
Department of Health Research also clarified that Government had given permission to the 
Defence Department to conduct research by the institute at Bangalore alongwith institute with 
Singapore having some members from Chinese team and funded by US Government. 
4. The Chairman then directed both the Departments to furnish detailed written replies to 
the queries that were raised by the Committee within one week. 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
6. The Committee adjourned at 1:03 P.M. 
 
  

154 
 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11 a.m. on Monday, the 7 th September, 2020 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Dr. L Hanumanthaiah 
3. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
4. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
5. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
6. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
7. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
8. Dr. Subash Sarkar 
9. Shri Anurag Sharma 
10. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
11. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
12. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri J. Sundriyal Joint Secretary 
Shri V.S.P.Singh Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar Additional Director  
Smt. Harshita Shankar Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi 
 
1. Dr. Randeep Guleria, Director 
2. Shri Subhashish Panda, Deputy Director 
 
Representative of Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI) 
 
Prof. K. Srinath Reddy, President, Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI) 
 

155 
 
Representatives of Population Foundation of India (PFI) 
 
1. Ms. Poonam Muttreja, Executive Director, 
2. Shri Bijit Roy, Associate Director; and  
3. Ms. Purnima Khandelwal, Senior Programme Officer 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that 
the meeting was convened to consider and adopt two draft Action Taken Reports of  the 
Committee on the 110 thReport on Functioning of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
and 120 th Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Demand No.4) of the Ministry of AYUSH, 
respectively. The Chairman also informed the members that the Committee would be hearing the 
views of Dr. Randeep Guleria, Director, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Prof. K. Srinath 
Reddy, President, Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI) and Ms. Poonam Muttreja,  
Executive Director, Population Foundation of India on the subject "Outbreak of Pandemic 
COVID-19 and Related Contingent and Mitigation Plan". 
3.   ***  
4.  The Committee then heard the views of  Dr. Randeep Guleria, Director, AIIMS, New 
Delhi who apprised the Committee about the role/involvement of AIIMS, in containing and 
management of COVID 19. 
4.1  During his presentation, Dr. Guleria highlighted that the preparation made and training 
imparted for management of outbreak of SARS, H1N1 Swine Flu, Zika viru s, MERS -Corona 
virus Ebola, etc in AIIMS proved to be quite useful in the aftermath of outbreak of COVID 19. 
Many faculty Members of AIIMS were made part of National Task Force, formed by 
Government of India for monitoring COVID 19. He apprised that AIIMS , Delhi is involved with 
the Joint Monitoring Group in making national guidelines for the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare and he was the  part of the empowered group constituted by the PMO to delve into 
strategies for containing and management of COVI D 19 in  the country. Director, AIIMS  was 
appointed the Chairman of a clinical research group of ICMR for research priorities for Covid-19 
as well. He stated that the key challenges in  battle against COVID 19 are protection and 
motivation of health care workers, immediate increase of intensive care beds, training for Covid -
19-related protocols, mentoring & capacity building of other institutions across the country, 
awareness generation on COVID appropriate behavior among staff and public, etc. 
4.2  Dr. Guler ia, thereafter, apprised the Committee   of  the   Strategic response of AIIMS 
against COVID 19 which included setting up of Covid -19 task force, formation of the Resource 
Management Committee, Human Resource Committee, Medical Management Committee, the 
IEC Committee, Training and   Diagnostic Management Committee, daily meetings with the 
faculty, residents, nursing officers, technicians, reorganization/prioritization of hospital services, 
human resource planning, Training module for infection control, donnin g  and doffing of  PPE 
kits,  treatment  methodology of patients with COVID -19 through the  process e-design, testing 
with RT-PCR CBNAAT, Rapid antigen kit, research and donation of one day's salary to the PM 
CARES Fund, etc. He added that  Hospital Infection Control Committee started training models 
twice a day by using webinars, online training and videos and more than 2000 doctors, interns 
and nursing officers were trained through simulation,  e -learning and tele-medicine facility with 
the help of own platform known as SARAL. 
 
* Relates to other matter 

156 
 
4.3  Pertaining to training of doctors, Dr Guleria informed the Committee that Clinical 
Excellence programme was started at national level that helped in training doctors in Covid -19 
management. National E -ICU was started through which inter -action of Director AIIMS on 
every Tuesday and Friday with Doctors from different COVID Hospitals in the Country used to 
be held. Capacity building for COVID -19 testing was started twice a week and mentoring 
institutes viz  -AIIMS, PGI Chandigarh, AGMU, NIMHANS, Sri Chitra Institute in the South 
started mentoring medical colleges in their areas for COVID Testing. Testing capacity now 
increased to more than 1400 lakhs in the country to test for COVID -19 and more than 10 lakh 
tests per day are being conducted. 
4.4  Dr. Guleria further highlighted that the National Clinical Grand Round has been started 
on each Wednesday where one topic are discussed among experts from other institutes including 
experts from outside i.e. USA, UK.  On Second September, 2020 topic was how to manage 
pregnant women and new born COVID positive and on Ninth September, 2020 the topic would 
be post COVID care especially with lung - fibrosis and other problems. At International level 
through video conferenci ng especially with SAARC Countries, arrangement were made   for 
conferences, webinars of management of COVID, infection control, biomedical waste 
management and laboratory diagnosis wherein various questions were raised by doctors from 
Maldives & Nepal. 
4.5  The Director, AIIMS also informed the committee that more than 50 research projects on 
basic sciences, artificial intelligence and other newer drugs for COVID management was funded 
by AIIMS , New Delhi. It was further informed that  more than 83 extra mur al projects were 
funded by WHO, ICMR, CSIR. 
4.6  In order to enhance the number of bed especially for COVID patients, he added that  the 
existing hospital infrastructure had been reorganized by converting the National Cancer Institute, 
Vishram Sadan and Jai Prakash Narayan Apex Trauma Center (JPNATC) into COVID hospitals 
and requisites number of PPEs and dialysis machines were arranged. 
 4.7  He also informed the committee that as on 31 st August,2020 AIIMS, Delhi provided tele-
consultation to 134402 patients  while  94542 outpatients attended AIIMS, 40683 patients 
attended emergency/casualty, 27161 non-COVID admissions, 5958 surgeries performed. A Total 
number of 5774 COVID patients were admitted and more than 700 dialysis for COVID positive 
patients has been done. 
4.8 Amidst ongoing COVID Management, Dr. Guleria   pointed out that the academic 
activities of AIIMS   continued viz National PG Entrance Exam, EXIT Exams for MD, MS, 
MCH, DM with due attention to Guidelines of maintaining the physical distance. Moreov er, the 
virtual classes through the video conferencing were carried on. IEC i.e. Information, Education 
& Communication kept going on  with aid of    COVID Portal, COVID Videos, AIIMS Website, 
YouTube Channel, Webinars, Training etc. Information booklet enti tled COVID-19: Be Careful, 
not fearful was circulated among healthcare workers and AIIMS COVID Portal was kept opened 
as information platform for public, professionals and trainers. COVID -19 National Tele 

157 
 
consultation is maintained as helpline facility. Moreover, E-mail facilities, the COVID-19 E-mail 
helpline are kept up at the Trauma Centre. The Committee was also informed  that  Post- COVID 
Management Clinic   would be started in AIIMS Delhi for those patients who have recovered 
from COVID but still continue to have problems. 
5.  The Committee then heard the views of Prof. K. Srinath Reddy, Public Health 
Foundation of India.  
5.1  During the course of  his presentation, Prof. K. Srinath Reddy highlighted that given size 
of population, there were only 52 deaths per million, which compared favorably with many other 
countries, especially with the Western Europe, the United States, and other parts of North 
America. However, the Virus had now started to affect   smaller towns. But with  younger age of 
the populati on, lesser population density and lesser travel distance to work, working   in more 
open space  and lesser prevalence of co -morbities viz hypertension, diabetes and cardio -vascular 
diseases, etc.  rural areas stand potentially protected against viral dissem ination. He pointed out 
that increasing the tests alone was not going to work. He emphasized on the need to encourage 
such other public health measures like physical distancing or social distancing, masks and 
hygiene.  
5.2 He further emphasized that there was the need of strengthening Health sector network to 
make the system function with efficiency and equity in the situation of Public Health 
Emergency.  He added that Public Health System needed to incorporate the facilitie s of expertise 
at all the three levels i.e. Primary, Secondary and Tertiary. A multi -layered and a multi -skilled 
health work force was required to strengthen health infrastructure. As per WHO calculations, for 
delivery of Sustainable Development Goals and Universal Health Coverage, 44 health workers 
for 10,000 population were required, however, the existing number stood at only 22.   
 
5.3  Prof. K. Srinath Reddy  also pointed out that the National Health Policy, 2017 stipulated 
that a Public Health Cadre mus t be developed in every single State, however, only Odisha has 
followed the suit and Tamil Nadu responded with the maintenance of the public health cadre. He 
stressed on the need to bring together all the elements of health system in a coordinated manner 
for meeting public health emergency with efficiency. 
 
6.  The Committee then heard the views of Ms. Poonam Muttreja,Executive Director, 
Population Foundation of India, a 50 year old NGO set up by Shri. J.R.D. Tata and engaged in 
women's reproductive health,  family planning, community action and mobilizing programmes 
under the Government's National Rural Health Programme. 
 
6.1 During the course of her  presentation, Ms. Poonam Muttreja acknowledged that the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare took timely dec ision to ensure an early initiation of 
essential health services. The Ministry released the guidelines to the State Governments for 
provision of essential services, including family planning, immunization and other critical 
maternal and child health servic es. Although during the Lockdown period there was the huge 

158 
 
fear psychosis not only among the health professionals but in the minds of the people in general , 
ANMs, ASHA and Anganwadi workers worked across the country without any hesitation. 
Frontline worke rs (FLWs) who were conducting surveys and providing door to door 
services/home delivery reported that inadequate/no masks, gloves and hand sanitizers were 
provided to them.  The ASHAs were working closely with other frontline workers like Auxiliary 
Nurse M idwives (ANMs) and Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) to conduct community -level 
activities and worked across the country without any hesitation or fear.  
 
6.2 Ms. Poonam Muttreja stressed that there is urgent need to emphasize on health education 
through effective social and behavioral change communication strategies. All television channels 
including Doordarshan and other over -the-top (OTT) platforms should be instructed to give 
dedicated time for broadcasting health literacy and Social and Behavior Change Communic ation 
(SBCC) materials. There is a need for new strategy for the next two years not just for dealing 
with the ongoing and after -effects of the pandemic but also a national strategy for health 
education and behavioroural change and changing social norms. 
                              
6.3 Pointing out the serious impact of COVID 19 on women's health, Ms. Poonam Muttreja 
informed the Committee that  the family planning services were completely dysfunctional during 
the lockdown period. Sterilization and abortion was not taking place due to which concerns were 
also raised about increase in unwanted pregnancies. During pandemic and in post COVID phase 
tele-counselling service for family planning and institutional deliveries needed  to be made 
operational. In the overall scenario, women need to be at the central place while moving towards 
and responding to the post COVID era. Mental health was another important issue, she 
maintained. In a survey conducted by PFI, amongst young people aged 18 and 24, 82 per cent of 
the girls and 62 percent of men had high anxiety and wanted to seek help from mental health 
professionals. 
7.  Thereafter, the Chairman and the members of the Committee raised the following issues:- 
i. Whether there was any possibility of margin of error in the  data released by the 
Ministry regarding recovery rate of the COVID patients and whether the pandemic 
caused by Corona virus will disappear on its own? 
ii. Why there was so much domination of bureaucrats in various task forces established for 
containing and mi tigating the pandemic that unnecessary  reflect the diversion of 
democracy into dictatorship in the COVID situation. 
iii. Whether  patients suffering from disease/infections other than COVID got affected due 
to closure of OPD services at the Hospitals in the wake of COVID?, 
iv. What was the usage, efficacy and treatment protocol of various drugs like 
Hydroxychloroquin, Ivermectin and Ramdesivir and use of convalescent plasma? 
Whether there have been cases of re-infection? 
v. What is the role of Cycle Threshold Value, r ole and effectiveness of indigenously 

159 
 
developed ventilators, utilization of these ventilators later on? 
vi. total testing done and its rate per million, efficacy of rapid antigen test, training of Asha 
and Anganwadi workers and assignment of minimum work for them to be done.  
vii. Action plan  to control the spread of the COVID to the villages, special assistance to the 
coastal areas, to resolve the problems related to vacancy of bed at the hospitals? 
viii. Shortage of Health Care staff, thus requiring Government Action P lan to fill up the gap 
of the requirement of 1.5 lakhs nurses and 50,000 doctors to work for the next one year 
on COVID care;   reported Shortage of oxygen -supported bed, status of availability of 
blood, arrangement of psychiatric doctor at various centers,  problem of disposal of 
biomedical waste, utility of radiation therapy. 
ix. Guidelines to deal with post COVID syndrome viz deep vein thrombosis, lungs 
fibrosis, lack of psychiatric doctors for proper counseling of COVID patients and need 
for opening of clinics for treatment of Post COVID Syndrome. What is the Feedback of 
COVID patients admitted in the COVID centers and the same taken and analyzed? 
x. Suggestion for formation of a task force having Member of Parliament with the background 
of medical profession to decide the modalities and priorities of National Health 
Mission.                     
8.  The queries of the Chairman and the Members were responded by the witnesses as 
enumerated below. 
8.1  Pertaining to the rate of recovery and the margin of error as rai sed by the western 
commentators, Dr. Randeep Guleria, Director AIIMS submitted that the recovery rate was higher 
and the case fertility rate was lower in a younger population in India and South -East Asia in 
comparison to the elderly population  in Japan Ita ly and USA. Inherent immunity and BCG 
Vaccine in India gives Anti -Viral effect and milder viral infection resulting into higher recovery 
rate. Supplementing to  Dr. Randeep Guleria,  Dr. Srinath Reddy added  that the testing rate in 
India is 34 per thousand i n comparison to 68 per thousand in Brazil and 273 per thousand in 
USA and deaths per million in India are very low as compared to Western Europe and USA.   As 
regards, the Pandemic caused by CORONA Virus disappearing on its own, Dr. Srinath Reddy 
submitted that since the Virus is more infectious and slightly different than SARS that 
disappeared but it is unlikely that the Virus would disappear as did the SARS.      
8.2  In response to query regarding efficacy of rapid antigen test, Dr. Randeep Guleria, 
Director AIIMS clarified that rapid antigen test was not the gold standard. Gold standard is RT -
PCR test, but rapid antigen test has the advantage that the result of the test is declared in only 15 
minutes. If someone is positive, it is definitely positive, it cannot be false positive. Rapid 
Antigen Test was conducted in the Containment Zones where there was a higher chance of 
positive cases and therefore, help in isolating the infected person either at home or at the COVID 
Centre. 
8.3  With regard to efficacy a nd treatment protocol of various drugs, Dr. Randeep 

160 
 
Guleria, stated that data based on studies in China and France showed that Hydroxychloroquine 
reduces viral replication to some extent and is beneficial for mild diseases. Dr. Randeep 
Guleria, further stated that on the basis of studies conducted in various several hospitals in Delhi, 
it was observed that those taking it had a lower infection rate.                                              
8.4  Dr. Randeep Guleria also clarified that Ivermectin is FDA-approved for treatment of mild 
patients and also decreases the viral replication, although research is still required on 
Ivermectine, but some data says that it is a useful drug. He also stated that study has shown that 
Remdesivir may cause mortality benefit and reduces hospital stay.         
8.5  On a query related to re -infection rate of the virus, Dr. Randeep Guleria stated that re -
infection has occurred in many patients. Some data suggest that people who have mild infection 
do not have so much strong imm unity and there are more chances of  re-
 infection.                                                         
8.6  With regard to effectiveness of indigenously developed ventilators, he clarified that many 
ventilators made in our country are respiratory assis t devices. They help to breathe, but are not 
classically ICU ventilators. These ventilators have utility, but in case of serious patients 
classically ICU ventilators will be required.                                       
8.7  Regarding the role of the Cyc le Threshold Value Dr. Guleria submitted that ct -value is 
the Index of Viral load indicating lower the ct -value higher the viral load. In case the ct -value is 
less than 20 there would be higher viral load and if the ct -value is between  24 to 30 and above 
would indicate lower viral load subject to the stage/timing of   conducting the test, therefore, ct -
value does not reflect the correct assessment of viral load.         
8.8  Dr. Randeep Guleria also submitted that blood donation has been a big issue and wit h the 
help of Delhi Police and CRPF, AIIMS, New Delhi have tried its best to have regular blood 
donation camps. 
8.9  AIIMS, Delhi has also recognized mental health issues. They have created a helpline for 
patients and attendants that connect them through C ounselors and Psychiatrists and have also 
posted a Resident from Psychiatrics Department in the duty roster of COVID Hospitals on 
regularly basis.   
8.10  Regarding Post COVID Care Management, the Committee was apprised by Dr. Randeep 
Guleria that arrangem ents are being made for conducting Yoga Care Protocol especially for 
COVID patients with weaker lungs for their quick and better recovery. As regards, alternative 
therapies, be pointed out that even in the situation of H1N1, Spanish Flu, there was use of l ow 
dose radiation to kill the virus and the patients were benefited and similar alternative therapies is 
being conducted at Jhajhar Cancer Hospital of AIIMS. Dr. Guleria also added COVID Patient 
treatment strategy has improved tremendously during last two and three months as Anti -HIV 
drug Lopinavir/Ritonavir are not administered as Steroids is being administered to the 
hospitalized patients as Anti-Coagulant Prophylactic to diffuse clotting.                          
8.11  Dr. Guleria further added that a pr otocol has been posted on the website of the Ministry 

161 
 
of Health and Family Welfare that is regularly updated indicating the treatment strategy and 
management of mild, moderate and severe infected COVID patients however, there is further 
need to train the frontline health work force. 
9.   A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.  The Committee adjourned at 1:47 P.M. 
 
 
  

162 
 
RECORD NOTE OF DISCUSSION 
  
           The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Friday, the 16 th October, 2020 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA       
2. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
3. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
 
LOK SABHA 
4. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya  
5. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
6. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
7. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
8. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
9. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
    
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri J. Sundriyal   Joint Secretary 
Shri V.S.P. Singh   Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                 Additional Director 
Smt. Harshita Shankar                    Under Secretary 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
1. Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Secretary 
2. Shri Alok Saxena, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Lav Agarwal, Joint Secretary 
 
NATIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY 
1. Dr. Indu Bhushan, CEO 
2. Dr. Vipul Aggarwal, Deputy CEO 

163 
 
 Representatives of Department of Health Research  
Prof. Balram Bhargava, Secretary, DHR cum DG, ICMR 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
solicited their active participation and co -operation in carrying out the responsibility 
entrusted to this Committee. The Chairman then apprised the members about the pending 
subjects identified by the previous Committee for consideration and the proposed 
subjects for the present Committee. *** 
3. *** 
4. The Chairman thereafter informed the members that the previous Committee had also 
undertaken the subject, "Implementation of Ayushman Bharat" for examination. The Committee, 
therefore, would be hearing the views of Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare 
and CEO, Ayushman Bharat and National Health Authority on COVID management through the 
scheme of Ayushman Bharat/Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY).  
5.  The Committee heard the views of the  Secretary, Department of Health and Family 
Welfare. The Secretary apprised the Committee about the status of infection along with various 
parameters about the world and India. He informed that currently 39 million cases have been 
reported all over the world and has caused more than 11 lakh deaths worldwide. The highest  
number of reported cases and deaths are in USA which is more than 82 lakh and 2.22 lakh 
respectively. After that Brazil has 1 lakh 52 thousand deaths and 51 lakh 70 thousand cases. In 
India, in India is concerned, 73 lakh 70 thousand cases have been reported since inception, of 
which 64 lakh 53 thousand cases have been cured and 8 lakh 4 thousand are active cases. 
6. The case fatality rate of India or the death rate due to COVID is 1.52 perc ent which is 
one of the lowest death rates in the world. The death rate in USA is  2.71 percent, 2.95 in Brazil 
and 1.73 in Russia. It is much higher in Spain with 3.5 percent, 2.62 percent in South Africa, 4 
percent in France and 6.5 percent in Britain. 
7. India has 81 deaths per million, whereas it is 672 in USA,  716 deaths per million in 
Brazil and 718 deaths per million in Spain. India has conducted more than 9 crore tests, USA has 
done 11 crore tests and all other countries have had fewer tests than us.  Number of cases per 
million population is 5,341 in our country, while in the USA it is 24,780 per million, 24,277 in 
Brazil, 9,278 in Russia and 9,900 in the UK. 
8. The Secretary further stated that many festivals are coming in which the crowd will have 
a chance to gather. In such a situation, if complete vigilance and caution is not taken, there is a 
possibility that the infection may increase again.  
 
* Relates to other matter 

164 
 
9. He further informed the Committee that Ayushman Bharat' scheme had two main parts i.e the 
establishment of Health and Wellness Centers and the other was Ayushman Bharat/Pradhan Mantri 
Jan Arogya Yojana, which is implemented through the Natio nal Health Authority. The objective was 
to establish 1 lakh 50 thousand Health and Wellness Centers acrossthe country by December 2022, 
including comprehensive health services.   From January,  health and wellness centers had to work 
even though they were i nterrupted, but the screening for hypertension, diabetes, oral cancer, breast 
cancer, cervical cancer continued.  Barring these, the activities of Health and Wellness Centers in 
many states are now reaching pre-Covid levels. 
10. The Committee then heard the  views of  CEO, Ayushman Bharat and National Health 
Authority. He informed the Committee that  it was decided to include testing and treatment under 
PMJAY for private facilities and make sure that no poor person should be deprived of testing and 
treatment. Therefore, packages for testing and treatment for all the States and UTs have been defined.  
Out of 36 States and UTs, 32 States and UTs have joined Ayushman Bharat and the scheme  has 
supported five lakh patients for testing and 2.46 lakh patients for treatment. 
11. He further stated that they started a drive to empanel more hospitals and from April to August 
more than 3,000 hospitals have been empanelled.  Now, there are more than 23,000 hospitals are 
with Ayushman Bharat providing services.  Ayushman Bhara t has helped in terms of treating and 
testing COVID patients and maintaining support for critical services for non -COVID patients. They 
have used their infrastructure and large IT base for supporting their response to COVID in many 
other ways. 
12. He then informed the Committee about the challenges faced by the AB -PMJAY towards 
Covid-19 response which are reduced demand for services, infrastructural and manpower challenges. 
He informed the Committee about the call center support provided by the NHA that inc ludes setting 
up National Covid-19 helpline “1075” and handling more than 34 Lakh calls, 5 Crore+  beneficiaries 
of  above 60 age -group were reached out, verification of data provided by ICMR and more than 
31Lakh calls made on data shared and finally validation of data provided by Arogya Setu and 20 lakh 
calls were made to those people who had reported sick and needed support from hospital or doctor.  
13. The Committee then heard the views of Secretary, Department of Health Research. He informed 
that more than 1000 kits manufacturers have been validated, of which 40 percent are Indian. Initially 
there were fewer RTPCR labs and places where RTPCR Labs could not be built, CBNAAT and 
TrueNat were used.  Nearly four and a half percent of the total tests were fr om TrueNat. Places 
where both CBNAAT and TrueNat  could not be installed, Rapid Antigen test was used for the first 
time in world. Their focus on five Ts i.e. testing, tracing, tracking, treatment and technology has been 
benefitting 
14. He informed the Committee that various drugs like cortisone, Remedesvir were being used to 
treat COVID patients and trials conducted on these drugs in different countries. India has conducted 
largest trial of convalescent plasma in the world with 350 doctors were authored in 39 hospitals out 
of 464 patients. He further informed the Committee about the various vaccines being researched in 
India. He stated that they will follow smart vaccination in which core group will be vaccinated 
instead of entire 140 crore people. 
15. Thereafter, the Chairman and the members of the Committee raised the following issues:- 

165 
 
(i) Difference in rural urban breakdown, male-female, old and young in respect of spread of 
infection, after -cure consequences, possibility of second wave as experienced by 
European countries, post COVID complications. 
(ii) Working on documentation part to understand the situation of patients, the pattern that is 
emerging, geographically, ethnicity -wise and age -wise, Preparations during winters to 
fight virus, incentives for ASHA workers. 
(iii) overall death ratio in India before and during COVID, status regarding the approval 
from the Government of India regarding utilisation of ID machine and its efficacy, 
availability of vaccine. 
(iv) Emergency response and health system preparedness packa ge, problems in Socio-
Economic Caste Census and universal health insurance and coverage, measures taken to 
fight corona through Ayurveda or Ayush and action taken to make it reliable and 
effective, rate of treatment in the private hospitals.  
16. The queri es of the Chairman and the Members were responded by the witnesses as 
enumerated below: 
(i) Pertaining to the  rural-urban breakdown and male -female breakdown in respect of 
spread of infection, Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare stated that the 
spread of infection has largely been in urban and peri -urban, semi -urban areas. He 
further stated that male morality in the country have been more than female. 
(ii) With respect to query regarding efforts made by Ministry to deal with post COVID 
complications, he stated that  the Ministry, AIIMS, New Delhi and ICMR have made 
efforts that include documentation of patients getting cardiovascular diseases, 
respiratory diseases or renal diseases after recovery. Ministry has also issued a detailed 
SOP, which is shared with the states and is also on their website. 
(iii) With respect to second wave, he stated that there is a present and potent danger of surge 
in cases because of upcoming festival season so everyone should follow the protocol of 
wearing a mask, maintaining distance, hand hygiene and all other preparedness. 
(iv)  Regarding pandemic response package, he stated that the Ministry directed States in 
several video conferencing that this matter should be taken up in Disha Committee 
meeting organized at District magistrate level and they will again send the instruction t o 
the States regarding this. 
(v) With respect to incentives to ASHA workers, he stated that the Ministry has made a 
provision to provide incentive to ASHA workers and that is still being given. While they 
are employed in surveillance work in the containment area, they are paid in cash, over 
and above whatever they are paid as performance -linked payment. However, 
regularization is a far more complex issue where there is a need to look at various other 
things because there are a large number of other workers in  other sectors who are 
performing the same work and where they are receiving a performance -linked sort of 
honorarium. 

166 
 
17. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
18. The Committee adjourned at 5:03 P.M. 
  

167 
 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
  
           The Co mmittee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 17 th November, 2020 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA       
2. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
3. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
4. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
5. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon   
6. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya  
7. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
8. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
9. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
10. Shri Anurag Sharma 
11. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
12. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
13. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
    
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri J. Sundriyal   Joint Secretary 
Smt. Harshita Shankar                    Under Secretary 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 Representatives of Department of Health Research  
 
1. Prof. Balram Bhargava, Secretary, Department of Health Research 
2. Smt. Geeta Narayan, Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. R. S. Sharma, Scientist ‘G’ Head RBMH&CH, ICMR 
4. Dr. Kavitha Rajsekar, Scientist ‘E’ 
 

168 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that 
the meeting has been convened to consider and adopt draft 123rd Report on the Outbreak of 
Pandemic Covid-19 and its Management and its Management and 124 th Report on Action Taken 
by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the One Hundred 
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 of the Department of Health Research.  The 
Committee, after a brief deliberation, adopted both the Reports without any modification. 
3. The Chairman also apprised the members that his term will end on 25 th November and 
due to the uncertainty in convening of the winter session, the four Reports of the Committee, 
namely, 121st , 122nd, 123rd, and 124th Reports will have to be presented to the Hon’ble Chairman 
Rajya Sabha. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to approach the Hon'ble Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha for presentation of the aforesaid Committee Reports.  *** 
 
4. ***  
5. The Chairman also acknowl edged the unflinching support extended by the Members of 
the Committee by way of their valuable suggestions on various issues within the domain of the 
Committee. He also expressed deep sense of appreciation for the valuable assistance and 
steadfast support extended by the officers and staff of the Committee through their commitment 
and devotion to duties which enabled the Committee in completing its deliberations and 
producing quality reports on the Bills, subjects and DFGs within the scheduled timeframe. 
6. to 8 *** 
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10. The Committee then adjourned at 4:15 p.m 
 
 
 
 
* Relates to other matter 
 
 

169 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

170 
 
Annexure I 
State/UT wise details of cumulative number of COVID-19 tests conducted per million 
population (As on 9th November 2020) 
States  Test Per Million 
population 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands 149258 
Andhra Pradesh 144628 
Arunachal Pradesh 19372 
Assam 109675 
Bihar 89596 
Chandigarh 99663 
Chhattisgarh 52809 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu 122081 
Delhi 247288 
Goa 216553 
Gujarat 79422 
Haryana 100755 
Himachal Pradesh 53447 
Jammu and Kashmir 110271 
Jharkhand 91448 
Karnataka 130563 
Kerala 98933 
Ladakh 200030 
Madhya Pradesh 38996 
Maharashtra 62371 
Manipur 102217 
Meghalaya 46265 
Mizoram 94340 
Nagaland 28159 
Odisha 106145 
Puducherry 192899 
Punjab 83336 
Rajasthan 47236 
Sikkim 94004 
Tamil Nadu 120527 
Telangana 94008 
Tripura 88672 
Uttar Pradesh 71071 
Uttarakhand 98784 
West Bengal 46101 
India 83990 

171 
 
Annexure II
BE, RE and AE For last Five Years of Research Councils from 2015-16 to 2019-20 
(Rs. In Crore)  
Sl.
No. 
Schemes / 
Programmes 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE 
Total Total Total Total Total Total 
1. Grant to 
Central 
Council for 
Research in 
Ayurvedic 
Sciences 
144.70 173.00 173.00 170.00 159.00 154.00 175.00 216.07 216.02 252.91 286.41 267.03 292.31 288.50 280.68 
2. Grant to 
Central 
Council for 
Research in 
Unani 
Medicine 
110.63 91.16 92.42 120.00 118.00 111.24 123.00 133.93 133.93 130.00 147.00 145.50 152.65 159.54 159.54 
3. Grant to 
Central 
Council for 
Research in 
Yoga & 
Naturopathy 
15.24 19.29 19.09 30.00 27.00 27.00 32.00 32.00 32.00 29.00 30.56 30.56 41.35 62.45 61.71 
4. Grant to 
Central 
Council for 
Research in 
Homeopathy 
78.00 83.00 83.00 91.00 81.50 79.18 95.50 112.25 112.25 109.50 113.50 109.14 118.53 128.83 128.83 
5. Grant to 
Central 
Council for 
Research in 
Siddha 
21.50 19.29 19.09 30.00 27.00 27.00 32.00 32.00 32.00 29.00 30.56 30.56 41.35 62.45 61.71 
6. Central 
Council for 
Research in 
Sowa-Rigpa 
0.50 83.00 83.00 91.00 81.50 79.18 95.50 112.25 112.25 109.50 113.50 109.14 118.53 128.83 128.83 
 Total  370.57 468.74 469.60 532.00 494.00 477.60 553.00 638.50 638.45 659.91 721.53 691.93 764.72 830.60 821.30 

172 
 
  Annexure III 
S. No. Name of the Study Name of the 
Institute 
State Sample 
Size 
Present Status 
1.  Evaluation of the immuno -stimulatory 
potential of Ayurveda management protocol  
in cohort of Delhi police - An exploratory 
clinical study” 
New Delhi 
AIIA, New 
Delhi 
New 
Delhi 
80,000 
 
78233 persons 
enrolled. 
Follow-up under 
process. 
 
2.  Prophylaxis with Neem capsules 
(Azadirachtaindica) in subjects coming in 
contact with COVID 19 patients 
AIIA ESIC Hospital Faridabad 
AIIA ESIC 
Hospital 
Faridabad 
 
Haryana 200 
 
159 screened 
and 115 enrolled 
3.  Evaluation of Prophylactic Effect of 
Comprehensive Ayurveda and Mindfulness 
Based Yoga Regimen among Quarantined 
Individuals Exposed to COVID-19 Patients -  
A Randomized Controlled Trial 
AIIMS New Delhi 
AIIMS New 
Delhi 
 
New 
Delhi 
 
300 
 
- 
4.  Evaluation of Prophylactic Effect of 
Comprehensive Ayurveda and Mindfulness 
Based Yoga Regimen among Healthcare 
Workers of a tertiary care hospital in Delhi 
during COVID -19 - A Randomized 
Controlled Trial AIIMS New Delhi 
AIIMS New 
Delhi 
New 
Delhi 
300 
 
122 subjects 
enrolled 
5.  Evaluation of the immuno -stimulatory 
potential (ShariraBala) of Ayurveda 
Management Protocol  
in a Cohort of DDA Residents of 
Gautampuri -  An Exploratory Clinical 
Study AIIA 
AIIA, New 
Delhi 
 
New 
Delhi 
900 
 
900 subjects 
enrolled. Study 
under process. 
6.  “Evaluation of the efficacy of Ayurveda 
drugs for enhancing overall strength and 
immunity in health care workers of All India 
institute of Ayurveda - an exploratory 
clinical study” 
 
AIIA, New 
Delhi 
 
New 
Delhi 
425 417 subjects 
enrolled 
7.  Evaluation of prophylactic effect of 
Ayurveda Interventions in the prevention of 
COVID -19 Infections in susceptible general 
population: A single arm clinical exploratory 
Study 
AIIA, New 
Delhi 
 
New 
Delhi 
500 259 subjects 
enrolled 
8.  Identifying the  pathological models of 
COVID-19 in Ayurveda : Shat 
kriyakala&Vikarvighata ; bhavaabhava -  A 
Cross sectional  study 
AIIA, New 
Delhi 
 
New 
Delhi 
75 33 subjects 
enrolled 
9.  Impact of Ayurvedic Interventions in 
prevention of COVID -19 infection in 
identified containment area of Delhi 
CARICD, New 
Delhi 
 
New 
Delhi 
1500 
 
Completed  
Drafting of 
Article is under 
process 

173 
 
S. No. Name of the Study Name of the 
Institute 
State Sample 
Size 
Present Status 
 
10.  A prospective non -randomized open label 
controlled interventional study on the effect 
of Guduchi GhanVati/ 
SudarshanGhanVatias a prophylactic 
measure among high risk population (Health 
Care Workers/ Containment Zone 
population) exposed to COVID 19 
CCRAS 
institutes  
 
16 States 
across the 
India 
40,000 
 
Ongoing 
 
Enrolled: 30000 
11.  Evaluation of the efficacy of an Ayurvedic 
intervention (Chyawanprash) in the 
prevention of COVID -19 pandemic among 
Health Care Personnel – An open label 
single arm prospective study” 
A&U Tibbia 
College Karol 
Bagh, New 
Delhi 
New 
Delhi 
50 
 
Enrolled: 50, 
Completed = 49 
Dropout = 1 
 
12.  Evaluation of protective potential of an 
Ayurvedic Rasayan (Chyawanprash) in the 
prevention of COVID -19 among Health 
Care Personnel – An open label, prospective 
Randomized controlled parallel group study 
CBPACS, 
Najafgarh New 
Delhi 
 
New 
Delhi 
200 
 
Enrolled 200 
completed: 155 
 
13.  Evaluation of Efficacy and Safety of 
Ayurveda Intervention (Ayush -64) in the 
management of COVID -19 infection 
(Asymptomatic & Mild to Moderate 
symptoms)- An open label single arm 
prospective clinical trial” 
A&U Tibbia 
College Karol 
Bagh, New 
Delhi 
New 
Delhi 
40 
 
Enrolled: 40 
Completed: 33 
Dropouts: 4 
Ongoing = 3 
 
14.  A pilot study to assess the efficacy of Ayush 
- 64 in COVID - 19 cases 
CBPACS, 
Najafgarh New 
Delhi  
New 
Delhi 
40 
 
Study completed 
on 20 th August, 
2020. Data 
analysis under 
process. 
15.  Evaluation of Efficacy and Safety of 
Ayurveda Intervention (Ayush -64) add -on-
therapy for patients with Covid -19 infection 
(Stage-I)- A Randomized controlled clinical 
trial  
GMC, Nagpur Maharash
tra 
60 
 
Enrolled: 44 
(Grp 1: 22 and 
Grp 2: 22)  
Completed 36 
(Grp 1: 17 and 
Grp 2: 19) 
 
16.  A Randomized, Open Label, Parallel 
Efficacy, Active Control, Exploratory 
Clinical Trial to Evaluate Efficacy and 
Safety of an Ayurvedic Formulation 
(AYUSH 64) as Adjunct Treatment to 
Standard of Care for the management of 
Mild to Moderate COVID-19 Patients 
Dhanwantri 
Ayurveda 
college, 
Chandigarh 
  
 
Chandigar
h 
80 
 
Enrolled: 80 
Completed 75 
 
17.  Clinical Evaluation of  Chyawanprash for 
the prevention of COVID -19 among Health 
Care Personnel – An open label, prospective 
Randomized controlled study 
KGMU 
Lucknow 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
200 
 
Yet to be 
initiated 
 
18.  A Prospective Randomized Controlled 
Clinical Trial  to evaluate the Efficacy and 
Dhanwantri 
Ayurveda  
Chandigar
h 
60 Yet to be 
initiated 

174 
 
S. No. Name of the Study Name of the 
Institute 
State Sample 
Size 
Present Status 
Safety of Ayurveda Interventions 
(Ashwagandha Tablet and Shunti Capsule) 
in the management of COVID -19 infection 
(Mild to Moderate symptoms) 
College, 
Chandigarh 
  
 
19.  Prospective non randomized open label 
control interventional study on the effect of 
Ayurvedic Raksha Kit (Chavanprash, 
Samsahmanivati&Haritaki) as Prophylactic 
measure among police personal working in 
the vicinity of COVID -19 facilities  
 
CCRAS-
NIIMH, 
Hyderabad 
Telangana 1500 (750 
Trial & 
750) 
Control 
 
Enrolment 
completed;  
Data analysis 
under process. 
20.  Prospective non randomized open label 
control interventional study on the effect of 
Ayurvedic Raksha Kit -1 (Ayush 64, 
Samsahmanivati&Chayvanprasha) as 
Prophylactic measure among Ayush 
healthcare workers working in the vicinity of 
COVID -19 facilities  
CCRAS-
NIIMH, 
Hyderabad 
Telangana 500 (250 
Trial & 
250 
Control) 
 
Enrolment 
completed;  
Data analysis 
under process. 
21.  A prospective non -randomized open labeled 
controlled interventional study on the effect 
of Ashwagandha ( Withaniasomnifera) as a 
prophylactic measure among high risk 
population (Health Care 
Workers/Containment Zone Population) 
exposed to COVID-19 
CCRAS-
NIIMH, 
Hyderabad 
Telangana 3600 
(1800 
trial & 
1800 
control) 
* Due to 
logistic 
reasons 
could not 
target 
sample 
size of 
5000 
(2500 
trial and 
2500 
control as 
planned) 
Enrolment 
completed;  
Data analysis 
under process. 
 
22.  A prospective non -randomized open labeled 
controlled interventional study on the effect 
of Guduchi ( Tinosporacordifolia) as a 
prophylactic measure among high risk 
population (Health C are 
Workers/Containment Zone Population) 
exposed to COVID-19  
CCRAS-
NIIMH, 
Hyderabad 
Telangana 2800 
(1400 
trial + 
1400 
Control) 
* Due to 
logistic 
reasons 
could not 
target 
sample 
size of 
5000 
900 trial & 900 
control group 
completed.  
 

175 
 
S. No. Name of the Study Name of the 
Institute 
State Sample 
Size 
Present Status 
(2500 
trial and 
2500 
control as 
planned) 
23.  A prospective non -randomized open labeled 
controlled interventional study on the effect 
of ChyavanprashLehyam as a prophylactic 
measure among high risk population (Health 
Care Workers/Containment Zone 
Population) exposed to COVID-19 
CCRAS-
NIIMH, 
Hyderabad 
Telangana 1000 (500 
trial+500 
control) 
* Due to 
logistic 
reasons 
could not 
target 
sample 
size of 
5000 
(2500 
trial and 
2500 
control as 
planned) 
 
325 trial and 
300 control 
group 
completed. 
 
24.  Efficacy of Ayurveda Intervention (AYUSH 
64) as add-on therapy in COVID 19 patients 
- An open label randomized controlled trial 
IPGT&RA 
Jamnagar 
 
Gujarat 
 
80 
 
Enrolment 
completed  
Data analysis 
under process. 
 
25.  Clinical outcome of Ayurved treatment on 
COVID 19 patients: a retrospective cohort 
study 
IPGT&RA 
Jamnagar 
 
Gujarat 
 
- 940 screened 
and 
762 included 
Study 
Completed, 
paper drafted. 
26.  An open label, Multi centric, Randomized, 
Comparative, Prospective Interventional 
Community based Clinical Study to 
Evaluate Safety and Efficacy of Guduchi 
Ghana V ati as a Preventive Remedy on 
Healthy Individuals in Pandemic of COVID-
19 (06 containment areas of Rajasthan; 
Jaipur A, Jaipur B, Ajmer, Kota, Jodhpur, 
Tonk) 
National 
Institute of 
Ayurveda, 
Jaipur 
Rajasthan 6000 in 
each arm 
= 12000 
Randomized: 
Ctrl: 4746 
Test: 4746 
Completed: 
Ctrl: 586 
Test:611 
 
27.  Clinical evaluation of DaburChyawanprash 
(DCP) as a preventive remedy in pandemic 
of COVID-19- An Open label, Multi centric, 
Randomized, Comparative, Prospective 
Interventional Community based Clinical 
Study on H ealthy Individuals (At 5 other 
Centres: 
National 
Institute of 
Ayurveda, 
Jaipur 
Rajasthan 600 
[180 at 
NIA] 
 
Milk 
group-87 
Drug 
Screened: 777 
Screen Failure: 
42 
No. of Subjects 
Randomized: 

176 
 
S. No. Name of the Study Name of the 
Institute 
State Sample 
Size 
Present Status 
group-86 
 
Screen 
Failure: 
721 
Total No. of 
Subjects 
completed Day 
45 visit (for 
interim 
analysis): 403 
No. of subjects 
in DCP group: 
201 
No. of subjects 
in Milk group: 
202 
28.  Evaluation of Efficacy and safety of 
Ayurveda Intervention (Ayush -64) add -on 
therapy for patients with COVID -19 
infection (Stage -I)-An Open labelled, 
Parallel Group, Randomized controlled 
clinical trial (In collaboration with All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur) 
National 
Institute of 
Ayurveda, 
Jaipur 
Rajasthan 60 
 
[130 in 
each 
group] 
Total no. of 
subjects 
Recruited: 45 
 
Std. Group-23 
Add on  Drug 
Group-22 
 
Randomized-45 
29.  A cross -sectional retrospective study on 
Immunobooster kit (Chyavanprasha, 
Immunity booster capsules and Kwatha) 
prophylaxis for the prevention of COVID-19 
National 
Institute of 
Ayurveda, 
Jaipur 
Rajasthan 1000 
 
Total number of 
subjects 
Recruited 1000 
Study under 
process. 
30.  A prospective interventional study on the 
effect of Arsenicum album 30 C as a 
prophylactic measure among High risk 
population exposed to COVID-19. 
North eastern 
institute of 
ayurveda and 
homeopathy, 
Shillong 
Meghalay
a 
5000 
 
As on 21 st 
August 2020,  
5000 enrolment  
completed 
Study under 
process. 
31.  A prospective interventional study on the 
effect of ASA -20(Ayush kwath, 
Samsamanivati, Anutaila) as a prophylaxis 
measure among High risk population 
exposed to COVID-19 
North eastern 
institute of 
ayurveda and 
homeopathy, 
Shillong 
Meghalay
a 
5000 
 
As on 21 st 
August 2020,  
3803 enrolment  
till date 
 
32.  A prospective open label randomised 
controlled trial of Ayurvedic intervention in 
asymptomatic and mild symptomatic cases 
of COVID-19 
 
North eastern 
institute of 
ayurveda and 
homeopathy, 
Shillong 
Meghalay
a 
200 As on 26 th of 
August 2020,  
Total enrolment: 
38 
 
33.  A prospective double blind randomised 
controlled trial of Eupatorium perfoliatum 
30 C in asymptomatic and mild symptomatic 
cases of COVID-19. 
 
North eastern 
institute of 
ayurveda and 
homeopathy, 
Shillong 
Meghalay
a 
200 As on 26 th of 
August 2020,  
Total enrolment: 
28  
 

177 
 
S. No. Name of the Study Name of the 
Institute 
State Sample 
Size 
Present Status 
34.  Assessment of efficacy and safety of 
Ayurvedic drug combination in preventing 
the progression of severity of the disease in 
asymptomatic and mild symptomatic cases 
of COVID-19: A randomised controlled trial   
 
North eastern 
institute of 
ayurveda and 
homeopathy, 
Shillong 
Meghalay
a 
200 As on 26 th of 
August 2020,  
Total enrolment: 
32 
 
35.  Homoeopathy as an adjuvant to standard 
treatment protocol in management of corona 
virus infection - a randomised, placebo 
controlled, open label study 
 
CCRH, New 
Delhi 
Maharash
tra 
300 148 patients 
enrolled in study 
Ongoing 
 
36.  Effect of adjuvant homoeopathy with 
standard treatment protocol in management 
of covid -19: a randomised, open label, 
placebo controlled, parallel group study   
CCRH, New 
Delhi 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
100 49 patients are 
enrolled in study 
Ongoing 
 
37.  Effectiveness of Arsenicum Album 30c In 
Prevention of Covid -19 In Individuals 
Residing in Hotspots of Red Zones in Delhi– 
A Comparative Cohort Study 
 
CCRH, New 
Delhi 
New 
Delhi 
10000 10313 enrolled. 
 
38.  Comparative Effectiveness of Pre -Identified 
Homoeopathic Medicines in Asymptomatic 
Covid -19 Individuals Receiving Standard 
Treatment Protocol –An Open Label, 
Randomised, Placebo Controlled Trial 
CCRH, New 
Delhi 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
200 
 
145 cases 
enrolled 
Study ongoing 
 
39.  Effectiveness of individualized 
homoeopathy as an add -on to standard 
treatment of covid -19 – a multicentric, 
randomized, parallel arm, single blind, 
placebo, controlled trial 
CCRH, New 
Delhi 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
300 
 
Sample size 
achieved 
Study ongoing 
 
40.  Effectiveness of Arsenicum Album 30c in 
Prevention of Covid -19 in Individuals 
Residing in Hot Spots of Red Zones – A 
Multicentric, Randomised, Cluster Level, 
Controlled Trial 
CCRH, New 
Delhi 
In 06 
States 
32051 Sample size 
achieved 
 
41.  Community based Cluster Randomized 
Open Level Controlled Field Trial to 
Evaluate the Effectiveness of Homoeopathic 
Prophylaxis and Standard Prophylaxis 
against COVID-19”. 
National 
Institute of 
homeopathy 
West 
Bengal 
7040 Yet to start 
enrolment 
 
42.  Population based prospective stud y on 
effectiveness and outcome of Unani 
medicine prophylactic intervention on 
population at risk of COVID -19 
CCRUM, New 
Delhi  
and  
NIUM 
06 States 
across the 
India 
Total 
Sample 
size = 
40,000 
(Test = 
20,000 + 
Control=2
0,000*)* 
 
Enrolment and 
follow up 
completed 
Data analysis 
under process. 
 

178 
 
S. No. Name of the Study Name of the 
Institute 
State Sample 
Size 
Present Status 
43.  A Study on Prophylactic Interventions of 
Unani Medicine on High / Moderate risk 
Population of Covid-19 
CCRUM, New 
Delhi  
 
New 
Delhi 
Enrolled 
81 ( 
Test=40+ 
Control 
41) 
 
Enrolment 
completed. 
Data analysis 
under process. 
 
 
44.  An Add -on study entitled “A prospective, 
interventional, case control study to observe 
and assess the safety and efficacy of Unani 
regimen in preventing the progression of 
severity of the disease in hospitalized SARS-
CoV2 tested positive asymp tomatic /mild to 
moderate symptomatic COVID -19 cases, 
managed as per Govt of India COVID -19 
management guidelines, at a COVID -19 
management facility 
CCRUM, New 
Delhi  
and  
NIUM 
New 
Delhi 
60 
(Test=30
+ 
Control=3
0) 
Applied 
for CTRI 
Reg. 
 
61enrolled 
Group A 
Intervention: 30 
Group B 
(Control): 31 
 
45.  A prospective Non -randomized Open label 
Controlled Interventional study on the effect 
of Siddha intervention – KabaSura Kudineer 
(KSK) as a Prophylactic measure among 
high risk population (Health Care 
Workers/Containment Zone population) 
exposed to COVID-19 (SIDDHALION) 
CCRS, Chennai Tamil 
Nadu 
20000 Study completed 
Data analysis 
under process. 
 
 
46.  A prospective, single centre randomized 
open labelled comparative clinical study to 
evaluate the effectiveness of Siddha 
medicine, Kabasurakudineer and vitamin c -
zinc supplementation in the management of 
asymptomatic COVID 19 patients.    at 
Government Stanley Medical College 
CCRS, Chennai Tamil 
Nadu 
60 Study completed 
Manuscript 
finalization 
under process. 
47.  A prospective, non -randomized, single -arm 
interventional study to assess the safety and 
efficacy of Siddha Sasthric Medicines – 
Fixed Regimen in the prevention of COVID-
19 disease progression of asymptomatic, and 
mild at Siddha COVID Care Centre, 
Chennai, 
CCRS, Chennai Tamil 
Nadu 
60 50 enrolled, 42 
completed the 
study 
 
48.  A randomized open labelled clinical study to 
compare the effectiveness of 
Kabasurakudineer and Vitamin -C Zinc 
supplementation in the management of 
asymptomatic SARS -CoV-2 patients at 
Govt. Theni Medical College & Hospital, 
Theni 
CCRS, Chennai Tamil 
Nadu 
60 Enrolment 
completed 
On 24/8/2020. 
Follow-up under 
process. 
 
49.  A prospective, non -randomised,  single arm 
observational study to access the safety and 
effectiveness of  Siddha Sast ric Medicines – 
Fixed Regimen intervention in prevention of 
COVID-19 disease progression of severity 
CCRS, Chennai Tamil 
Nadu 
200 70 enrolled and 
completed the 
study  
20 are  currently 
enrolled and 

179 
 
S. No. Name of the Study Name of the 
Institute 
State Sample 
Size 
Present Status 
from COVID -19 Positive asymptomatic, 
mild or moderate to critical with reference to 
the Siddha guidelines of COVID -19 
management, Ministry of AYUSH, Govt. of 
India at a Home Quarantine Chennai 
Containment Zone 
undergoing 
treatment 
 
50.  Retrospective Survival analysis to assess the 
length of stay of novel coronavirus (COVID-
19) patients in GMC & ESIH Coimbatore 
who were under- Integrated Medicine -Zinc, 
Vitamin C &Kabasura Kudineer (ZVcKK) 
CCRS, Chennai Tamil 
Nadu 
251 Study completed 
Data analysis 
under process. 
 
 
51.  An open - label randomized controlled 
clinical trial to evaluate the safety and 
efficacy of selected Siddha formulations in 
patients diagnosed with COVID 19. 
National 
institute of 
siddha, Chennai 
Tamil 
Nadu 
200 Enrolled 122 
cases so far 
 
52.  A prospective non randomized open label 
controlled intervention study on the effect of 
polyherbal Siddha formulation 
KabasuraKudineer as a prophylactic 
measure among high risk population (Health 
care workers / Containment Zone 
Population) exposed to Covid19. 
National 
institute of 
siddha, Chennai 
Tamil 
Nadu 
20000 Enrolment status 
27,400 
Enrolment 
completed  
19.8.2020 
 
53.  An Observational Proof -of-Concept (PoC) 
Retrospective Study to Evaluate the Safety 
and Efficacy in COVID 19 patients treated 
with selected Siddha formulations and 
Standard of care. 
National 
institute of 
siddha, Chennai 
Tamil 
Nadu 
200 Data has been 
captured of 200 
patients 
54.  A Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial to 
determine the complementary effect of 
selected Siddha formulations in facilitating 
the possibility of accelerated recovery in 
COVID 19 patient 
National 
institute of 
siddha, Chennai 
Tamil 
Nadu 
150 132 participants 
enrolled 
 
55.  A Randomized, Open Label, Parallel 
Efficacy, Active Control, Multi -Centre 
Exploratory Drug Trial to Evaluate 
Efficacy and Safety of AYUSH 64 as 
Adjunct Treatment to Standard of Care for 
the management of Mild to Moderate 
COVID-19 Patients. 
AYUSH-CSIR 
Study 
Maharash
tra, Uttar 
Pradesh 
140 140 subjects 
enrolled, follow-
up under 
process. 
56.  A Randomized, Open Label, Parallel 
Efficacy, Active Control, Multi -Centre 
Exploratory Drug Trial to Evaluate 
Efficacy and Safety of Guduchi + Pippali 
as Adjunct Treatment to Standard of Care 
for the management of Mild to Moderate 
COVID-19 Patients. 
 
AYUSH-CSIR 
Study 
 Yet to be 
started 
 
57.  A Randomized, Open Label, Parallel 
Efficacy, Active Control, Multi -Centre 
AYUSH-CSIR 
Study 
Started 
only at 01 
160 02 patients 
enrolled 

180 
 
S. No. Name of the Study Name of the 
Institute 
State Sample 
Size 
Present Status 
Exploratory Drug Trial to Evaluate 
Efficacy and Safety of Yastimadhu as 
Adjunct Treatment to Standard of Care for 
the management of Mild to Moderate 
COVID-19 Patients. 
 
 
centre- 
Maharash
tra 
58.  Ashwagandha for the prophylaxis against 
SARS-CoV-2 Infection: A 
RandomisedHydrochloroquine Controlled 
Clinical Trial in Health Care Providers – 
Under CSIR, AYUSH task force  
AYUSH-CSIR 
Study 
 Yet to be 
initiated 
 
 
59.  Multicentric studies on Yoga Interventions 
in Mild –Moderate severity Covid 19 
patients-BY CCRYN 
CCRYN Chandigar
h, 
Karnataka
, 
New 
Delhi, 
Uttarakha
nd 
Yet to 
start 
 
 
 
 