PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
ONE HUNDRED SECOND REPORT
The Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2017)
(Laid on the Table Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2017/ Shravana, 1939 (Saka)
102
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
ONE HUNDRED SECOND REPORT
The Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2017/ Shravana, 1939 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................... (i)(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION .................................................................................................... (ii)-(iv)
3. A CRONYMS ......................................................................................................... ( V)
4. R EPORT .............................................................................................................. 1-54
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE................................................... 55-73
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................ 75-105
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................ 107-165

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav —   Chairman
  RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
5. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
6. Shri Jairam Ramesh
7. Shri Ashok Siddharth
8. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
9. Shri K. Somaprasad
10. Dr. C. P . Thakur
  LOK SABHA
11. Shri Thangso Baite
$12. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
%13. Shri Gyan Singh
14. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
*15. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
^16. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
17. Dr. (Smt.) Heena Vijay Gavit
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
19. Dr. K. Kamaraj
20. Shri Arjunlal Meena
21. Shri Anoop Mishra
22. Shri J. Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
23. Shri Chirag Paswan
$ ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f 20th October, 2016
% nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 02nd January, 2017
* ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f 02nd January, 2017
^ nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 02nd January, 2017

(ii)
24. Shri C. R. Patil
25. Shri M.K. Raghavan
26. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
27. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
28. Shri R.K. Singh (Arrah)
29. Shri Bharat Singh
30. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
31. Shrimati Rita Tarai
32. Shri Manohar Untwal
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Director
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family
Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One
Hundred Second Report of the Committee on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016*.
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of
States relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha,
referred** the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016 (Annexure I) on the 12th January, 2017 as introduced
in the Lok Sabha on the 21st November, 2016 for examination and report by 11 April, 2017. Subsequently,
Hon’ble Chairman granted extension of time for presentation of Report on the Bill upto 11th July, 2017
and again till 11th September, 2017.
3. The Committee issued a Press Release inviting memoranda/views from individuals and other
stakeholders. In response thereto, a number of Memoranda from individuals/organisations were received.
4. The Committee held ten sittings during the course of examination of the Bill, i.e., on 2nd, 3rd,
17th and 30th March, 27th and 28th April, 24th and 25th May, 4th July and 8th August, 2017. The list
of witnesses heard by the Committee is at Annexure-II.
5. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same on 8th August, 2017.
6. The Committee has relied on the following documents in finalizing the Report:
(i) The Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016;
(ii) Background Note on the Bill received from the Department of Health Research;
(iii) Presentation, clarifications and Oral evidence of Secretary, Department of Health Research;
(iv) Memoranda received on the Bill from various institutes/bodies/associations/organizations/
experts and replies of the Ministry on the memoranda selected by the Committee for
examination.
(v) Oral evidence and written submissions by various stakeholders/experts on the Bill; and
(vi) Replies received from the Department of Health Research to the questions/queries raised by
Members during the meetings on the Bill.
7. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions made by
those who deposed before the Committee and also those who gave their valuable suggestions to the
Committee through their written submissions.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2, dated 21st November, 2016.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No. 56225, dated 13th January, 2017.

8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
NEW DELHI;  PROF. RAM GOPAL YADA V ,
8 August, 2017 Chairman,
Shravana, 17, 1939  (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Family Welfare,
Rajya Sabha.
(iv)

ACORNYMS
ART : Artificial Reproduction Technology
 BVSc : Bachelor of Veterinary Sciences
 CARA : Central Adoption Resource Authority
 CPV : Consular, Passport and Visa
 DNA : Deoxyribonucleic Acid
 ET : Embryo Transfer
 FOGSI : Federation of Obstetric and Gynaecological Societies of India
 FRO : Foreigner’ s Registration Officers 
 HC : High Court
 ICMR : Indian Council of Medical Research
 INSTAR : Indian Society of Third Party Assisted Reproduction
 IRDA : Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
 ISAR : Indian Society for Assisted Reproduction
 IVF : In-vitro Fertilization
 MCI : Medical Council of India
 NCW : National Commission for Women
 NGOs : Non-Government Organizations
 NOC : No Objection Certificate
 NRIs : Non-Resident Indian
 OCI : Overseas Citizen of India
 PGD : Pre-Genetic Diagnosis
 PIO : Persons of Indian Origin
 TB : Tuberculosis
 UK : United Kingdom
 WHO : World Health Organization
(v)

REPORT
I. BRIEF BACKGROUND
1.1 India is called the ‘world capital of surrogacy’. Surrogacy generates 2 billion dollars annually in
India. Despite India being a hub of surrogacy, there are no laws to regulate it. However, commercial
surrogacy has been held legal in India as witnessed in the case of Baby Manaji Vs. Union of India with
the Supreme Court judgment. Similarly, in the case of Jan Balaz vs. Anand Municipality, the Gujarat High
Court reiterated the apex court judgment legalizing commercial surrogacy in India and further elucidated
that commercial surrogacy was held legal in India as there was no law prohibiting womb lending or
surrogacy agreements. Both these judgments directed for the enactment of law on surrogacy in India.
Consequent to this, the ICMR drafted the National Guidelines for Accreditation, Supervision and Regulation
of ART Clinics in India in 2005 as the first ever national guidelines for laying down standards of conduct
for surrogacy in India. Later, the draft ART Bill was formulated in 2008, reviewed and redrafted in 2010
and 2014 but was never passed as law.
1.2 The Law Commission suo-motu took up the subject of the need for legislation to regulate Assisted
Reproductive Technology Clinics as well as rights and obligations of parties to a surrogacy. The Commission
presented its 228th Report in 2009 which stated that the growth in the ART methods was recognition
of the fact that the infertility as a medical condition is a huge impediment in the overall well-being of
couples. Further, the Commission recognized the fact that India had become a favorable destination for
foreign couples who look for a cost effective treatment of infertility leading to a flourishing medical
tourism due to cheap surrogacy services in the country.
1.3 The Law Commission, however, recommended for legalizing altruistic surrogacy and to ban
commercial surrogacy. It recommended measures for better protection of rights of surrogate mother,
securing full informed consent from surrogate mother, insurance cover, life insurance cover, right to
abortion or medical termination of surrogate pregnancy, right to privacy and other health safeguards. The
Commission also recommended for financial support for surrogate child, legitimacy, parentage right to
registration of birth certificate of the surrogate child among others. It further recognized the fact that
the legal issues related with surrogacy were very complex and needed to be addressed by a comprehensive
legislation.
1.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs has attempted to control the misuse of surrogacy services by
foreign nationals through their Guidelines introduced in July, 2012. These guidelines imposed certain
restrictions by redefining the eligibility criteria exclusively for the foreign couples commissioning surrogacy
in India which intended to prohibit foreigners, homosexuals, and singles from commissioning surrogacy
in India and permit only such heterosexual married couples with a marriage subsisting for two years or
more to commission surrogacy in India. Medical visa for commissioning of surrogacy in India was
stopped through the Notification No. 2502/74/2011-F-1 dated 9th July, 2012. The Punjab HC upheld the
Home Ministry guidelines as a binding law.
1.5 Restrictions on surrogacy were also provided in the Ministry of Commerce, Notification No. 25/
2015-2020 dated 26th October, 2015 prohibiting the import of human embryo except for the purpose

2
of research. Another Notification (No. 25022/74/2011-F-1) dated 3rd November, 2015 of the Ministry
of Home Affairs prohibited foreign nationals, PIO and OCI card holders from commissioning surrogacy
in India. The Department of Health Research notification (No. 250211/119/2015-HR) dated 4th November,
2015 validated the notification of the Home Ministry banning commercial surrogacy in India. State
Governments were accordingly advised in this matter.
1.6 On a specific query about the number of IVF/ART Clinics in the country, the Department of Health
Research apprised the Committee that 1035 clinics are registered with ICMR. However, the actual
number of such clinics is likely to be more. 468 IVF/ART Clinics are not registered with ICMR. As per
unconfirmed reports, the number of surrogacy births in the country in the last three years is approximately
2000. The Department also submitted that only 11 complaints of surrogacy clinics have been reported
so far. However, a number of court cases relating to surrogacy can be seen in the list attached in
Annexure III.
1.7 The developments narrated in the preceding paras laid the justifiable grounds for bringing forth a
legislation to regulate surrogacy with a view to safeguard the interests of both surrogate mother and child
and to put a check on the ART clinics running in the country.
II. THE SURROGACY (REGULATION) BILL, 2016- AN INTRODUCTION
2.1 The Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 21st November, 2016
(hereinafter referred to as the Bill) and referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Health and Family Welfare by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha
on the 12th January, 2017 for examination and report.
2.2 The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill reads as follows:
“India has emerged as a surrogacy hub for couples from different countries for past few years.
There have been reported incidents of unethical practices, exploitation of surrogate mothers,
abandonment of children born out of surrogacy and import of human embryos and gametes.
Widespread condemnation of commercial surrogacy in India has been regularly reflected in different
print and electronic media for last few years. The Law Commission of India has, in its 228th
Report, also recommended for prohibition of commercial surrogacy by enacting a suitable legislation.
Due to lack of legislation to regulate surrogacy, the practice of surrogacy has been misused by
the surrogacy clinics, which leads to rampant commercial surrogacy and unethical practices in the
said area of surrogacy. In the light of above, it had become necessary to enact a legislation to
regulate surrogacy services in the country, to prohibit the potential exploitation of surrogate
mothers and to protect the rights of children born through surrogacy.”
2.3  As per information provided by the Department of Health Research, the major objectives of the
Bill are:
(i) to regulate surrogacy services in the country;
(ii) to provide altruistic ethical surrogacy to the needy infertile Indian couples;
(iii) to prohibit commercial surrogacy including sale and purchase of human embryo and gametes;

3
(iv) to prevent commercialization of surrogacy;
(v) to prohibit potential exploitation of surrogate mothers and protect the rights of children born
through surrogacy.
2.4 The Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016 proposes to regulate surrogacy in India by establishing
National Surrogacy Board at Central Level, State Surrogacy Boards and Appropriate Authority in States
and Union Territories. In a nutshell, the proposed legislation ensures effective regulation of surrogacy,
prohibit commercial surrogacy and allow ethical surrogacy to the needy infertile Indian couples.
2.5 According to the Department of Health Research, surrogacy has been in practice in India for last
few decades. However, there is no legislation to regulate it. This has resulted in malpractices ranging
from commercialization of surrogacy, trade in human embryos, exploitation of surrogate mothers and
abandonment of children born through surrogacy. The issue of surrogacy including the exploitation of
surrogate mothers and need for regulation in surrogacy has been raised time and again in the Parliament
since 2010. As on date, there are 11 such Parliament Assurances pending on the matter. The Law
Commission of India has strongly recommended for prohibiting commercial surrogacy . Hon’ble Supreme
Court has been intimated of the commitment of the Government to bring the legislation in this regard.
As per the Affidavit filed in the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, the Government intends to ban
commercial surrogacy through a proper legislation.
2.6 As per the background note received from the Department of Health Research, the proposed Bill
appears to have been conceived on the basis of following parameters laid to achieve the following
objectives:-
• The Bill proposes to allow altruistic ethical surrogacy to intending infertile Indian married
couple between the age of 23-50 years and 26-55 years for female and male respectively.
• The couples should be legally married for at least five years and should be Indian citizens.
• The couples should not have any surviving child biologically or through adoption or through
surrogacy earlier except when they have a child and who is mentally or physically challenged
or suffer from life threatening disorder with no permanent cure.
• The couples shall not abandon the child, born out of a surrogacy procedure under any
condition.
• The child born through surrogacy will have the same rights as are available for the biological
child.
• The surrogate mother should be a close relative of the intending couple and should be
between the age of 25-35 years. She will carry a child which is genetically related to the
intending couple and can act as surrogate mother only once.
• An order concerning the parentage and custody of the child to be born through surrogacy,
is to be passed by a court of the Magistrate of the first class.
• An insurance coverage of reasonable and adequate amount shall be ensured in favour of the
surrogate mother.

4
• The Bill provides for setting up of a National Surrogacy Board and State Surrogacy Boards
which shall exercise the powers and shall perform functions conferred on the Board under
this Act. The National Surrogacy Board shall consist of the Minister in-charge of the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, as the Chairperson, Secretary to the Government
of India in- charge of the Department dealing with the surrogacy matter, as Vice-Chairperson
and three women Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of
the People and one by the Council of State as Members. The total number of members of
National Surrogacy Board will be 24.
• The National Surrogacy Board and State Surrogacy Board shall be the policy making bodies
and Appropriate Authority will be the implementation body for the Act. The total number
of members of State Surrogacy board will be 24.
• The Appropriate Authority shall comprise of an officer of or above the rank of the Joint
Director of Health and Family Welfare Department, as Chairperson and an eminent woman
representing women’s organization, an officer of Law Department of the State or the Union
Territory concerned not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary, and an eminent registered
medical practitioner, as members.
• No person, organization, surrogacy clinic, laboratory or clinical establishment of any kind
shall undertake commercial surrogacy, abandon the child born out of surrogacy, exploit the
surrogate mother, sell human embryo or import embryo for the purpose of surrogacy.
Violation to the said provision shall be an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than ten years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
• The surrogacy clinics shall have to maintain all records for a period of 25 years.
• There will be Transitional provision under this Act providing a gestation period of ten
months from the date of coming into force of this Act to protect the wellbeing of already
existing surrogate mothers.
III. EXAMINATION OF THE BILL BY THE COMMITTEE
3.1 Keeping in view the objectives envisaged in the proposed legislation and their impact on the people,
the Committee decided to elicit the views of various stakeholders and the general public on the Bill
through a Press Release inviting suggestions/views from all concerned people. A good response to the
Press Release from various organizations, stakeholders, individuals, associations was received by the
Committee. The Committee also held extensive interactions with representatives of Associations/
Organizations/Councils/Institutes as well as renowned experts and professionals from the assisted
reproductive industry and the benefactors. These included representatives from Ministry of Women and
Child Development; Ministry of Home Affairs; Ministry of External Affairs; National Commission for
Women; Federation of Obstetric and Gynaecological Societies of India (FOGSI), Indian Society of
Assisted Reproduction (ISAR) and Indian Society of Third Party Assisted Reproduction (INSTAR). The
Committee also interacted with professionals namely Ms. Sonali Kusum, Member, International Surrogacy
Forum, Ms. Pinki Virani, Journalist and Human Rights Activist and Dr. Kamini Rao, Member, National

5
Advisory Committee for Drafting of Guidelines on Assisted Reproductive Technology. The Committee
also got benefit of the views of Smt. Jayshree Wad, Supreme Court Lawyer, Shri Anurag Chawla,
Advocate, Surrogacy Laws India, Ms. Petal Chandok, Advocate, Trust Legal, Advocates and Consultants,
Ms. Aprajita Amar, Student, Amity Law School, surrogate mothers, a commissioning parent and
Dr. Mrinal Satish, Associate Professor of Law, National Law University, Delhi.
IV. VIEWS OF STAKEHOLDERS/EXPERTS
Several important issues were deliberated extensively during interactions with the experts/ stakeholders
which are mentioned briefly hereunder:
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
4.1 During their deposition before the Committee, Shri Chetan B. Sanghi, Joint Secretary, Ministry of
Women and Child Development informed the Committee that though the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare consulted them on ‘Assisted Reproductive T echnology’ Bill, 2014, no sp ecific consultation took
place on the ‘Surrogacy (Regulation)’ Bill, 2016 per se. Their views and comments on the ART Bill have,
however, been incorporated in the Surrogacy Bill. He inter-alia suggested that option of surrogacy should
be made available to every lawfully married infertile couple and also to every Indian woman whether
married or single including not married; separated; widowed irrespective of their ability to bear the child.
According to him, surrogacy should be allowed only after strict screening of intending parents as done
in the case of adoption procedure and a provision of mandatory counseling of intending couple should
be made wherein an option of adoption should also be explored. As regards the ban on foreigners, he
was of the view that all countries that do not allow full citizenship rights to children born out of
surrogacy should be barred from availing the benefit of the Act. In context of the eligibility criteria for
the surrogates, it was pointed out that relatives and friends of intending couple should not serve as
surrogates as it may lead to conflict of interest in the future. He advocated for a system wherein
surrogates are empanelled by the States and should have an option to withdraw their names if they
choose to do so at any point of time after enrolment, before the commencement of the procedure. It
was also suggested that a psychological counseling for such women must be provided before she gives
consent for willingness to become a surrogate. A surrogate mother, if declared medically fit, should be
provided the option of being surrogate twice in her lifetime with 3 years of interval period between two
pregnancies. Reacting to a query on the nature of surrogacy, he clarified that a total ban on commercial
surrogacy might lead to opening of unregulated market for this kind of service which in turn may
adversely affect women offering services as surrogates. He suggested for a comprehensive legally
binding agreement between the intending parent(s) and the surrogate mother providing for monetary
compensation, its pre and post delivery disbursement and the follow up care for surrogates. Considering
the health risk that surrogacy entails, a comprehensive health care should be made an integral part of
the agreement providing coverage to surrogates for a period of 5 years starting from the date she
undergoes the surrogacy procedure. In case of any health complications/ risks and death, provision of
compensation to surrogate and her family should also be incorporated. Six months of breast feeding
should be provided to the child or facilities of Breast Milk Banks may be utilized for the purpose.

6
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN (NCW)
4.2 During her deposition, Smt. Lalitha Kumaramagalam, Chairperson, National Commission for Women
supported the Bill as it prohibits commercial surrogacy in the backdrop of exploitation of surrogate
mother belonging to the poor strata of society. She was of the view that providing education, skill
development training, and jobs to such poor women would empower them more instead of allowing them
to rent out their wombs for money. She also suggested that the Bill should encourage adoption at first
instance. She further cited that surrogate mother should be considered as skilled employee and not just
as a womb on rent and a fair wage should be paid compulsorily along with a wide insurance coverage.
In addition, provision of psychological counseling, post delivery care and related expenses preferably till
three months after delivery should also be provided. She suggested that the object of the Bill needs to
clearly mention that infertility is a medical condition and not a stigma.
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
4.3 Shri Mukesh Mittal, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs apprised the Committee that earlier
foreigners coming to India to commission surrogacy were given tourist visa. Later in the year 2012, it
was decided to give medical visa for the surrogacy purpose. After discussion with Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare and Ministry of External Affairs, it was decided that no visa should be issued by
Indian missions to foreign nationals intending to visit India for commissioning surrogacy. Also, no
permission should be granted by the Foreigners Regional Registration Offices and FROs to Overseas
Citizen of India cardholders to commission surrogacy in Indian and no exit permit to the child who is
born of surrogacy would be issued.
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
4.4 Shri Upender Singh Rawat, Joint Secretary (CPV), Ministry of External Affairs informed the
Committee that foreigners had come to India for surrogacy in the past and to deal with the problems
associated with it, the visa rules were changed during the year 2012. The mission posts abroad were
also instructed to follow the revised instructions. Shri Rawat also clarified that Overseas Citizenship of
India cardholders are foreigners and therefore, they are kept out of the purview of the Bill.
FEDERATION OF OBSTETRIC AND GYNECOLOGICAL SOCIETIES OF INDIA (FOGSI)
4.5 Dr. Rishma Pai, President, FOGSI informed the Committee that India is witnessing a high burden
of infertility, with an estimated 22 to 33 million couples in the reproductive age suffering from infertility.
It is well established that surrogacy cycles constitute approximately 1% of the total number of IVF
Cycles. If 100000 cycles are the projected number of IVF cycles per year in India- the approximate
number of surrogacy cycles in India is around 1000 per year. At a pregnancy rate of 40%, this would
result in 400 pregnancies per year. At a take home baby rate of 32%, this would result in 320 babies
being born from surrogacy a year. According to her, the Bill is biased and unfair to the surrogacy
procedure, its benefits, its seekers, its providers and the women who become surrogates. She suggested
that the Bill should be made more equitable and effective by providing a single window system for
registration and reporting of surrogacy procedures. She wanted a provision of compensation towards
expenses for medically indicated surrogacy.

7
INDIAN SOCIETY OF THIRD PARTY ASSISTED REPRODUCTION (INSTAR)
4.6 Dr. Rita Bakshi, Vice-President, INSTAR drew the Committee’s attention to the concept of altruistic
surrogacy and suggested that there should be some kind of minimum as well as maximum capping on
compensation amount to be paid to a surrogate mother. She was of the view that focus should also be
on rights of intending parents along with the rights of surrogates. She objected to some Clauses of the
Bill relating to the ‘close relative’ and the surrogate being genetically related to the intending couple. She
was in favour of allowing gestational surrogacy only. She pointed out that foreigners, OCI and PIO
cardholders should be allowed to avail surrogacy. To her, the five years duration before commissioning
surrogacy was irrational. Provision of life insurance for surrogate mother and her medical insurance for
one year post-delivery was underlined. She expressed that a national registry of surrogate mother is a
must to curb their exploitation.
4.7 Smt. Jayshree Wad, Supreme Court Lawyer, suggested that a provision of surrogacy agreement
should be added in the Bill to have a binding effect on intending couple to take the delivery of the child
born out of surrogacy irrespective of any abnormalities. Such agreement would also act as proof of
willingness of surrogate mother for the procedure. She also suggested that the word ‘legal’ should be
added before ‘parents’ to have a binding effect on the intending couple. She further highlighted changes
required in the definitions of ‘surrogate mother’  and ‘surrogacy’. She mentioned that the Bill is silent
with regard to live-in relationship, same sex marriages, single parents (divorcee/ widow/ unmarried). She
suggested a provision for depositing the amount in the Court which will take care of the required
expenses of the surrogate regarding her health problem during pregnancy period.
4.8 Ms. Sonali Kusum, Member, International Surrogacy Forum was of the view that there should be
a right based perspective in the Preamble of the Bill itself to ensure the protection of the best interest
of the child born through surrogacy, reproductive health interest of the surrogate mothers and the
intending mother. She advocated a scheme of compensation for surrogacy arrangement which should
include reasonable expenses and the whole procedure should have a legal documentation in form of
surrogacy agreement. The compensation should be fixed by the Government appointed committee instead
of being a matter of bargain. She also suggested that a minimum and a maximum limit should be fixed
in the compensated surrogacy. She pointed out that the Bill was silent on issues of birth certificate of
the child born out of surrogacy, control of sex-selective surrogacy, trafficking, exploitation, inter country
movement of the surrogate mother and child’s right to be breastfed. In her opinion, the Bill fails to
address the twibling cases wherein two surrogates are being hired by same couple, provision of local
guardian appointed for child’s social security, insurance for child and protection of privacy of the
stakeholders of surrogacy arrangement. She suggested that instead of five years, a minimum period of
one year should be specified to determine infertility. She was of the view that the issue of close relative,
genetic connection of the surrogate mother, gamete donation, the quantum of punishment for violation
of surrogacy laws etc. are provided appropriately in draft ART (Regulation) Bill, 2014 in comparison to
the proposed Surrogacy Bill.
4.9 Ms. Pinki Virani, Journalist and Human Rights Activist informed that India is being constantly
referred to as commercial surrogacy capital of the world which amounted to commodification of women

8
and children. She suggested that the Surrogacy Board should be entrusted with the authority to approve
and evaluate surrogacy contracts in detail from home visits of intending couple to psychological evaluation
of stakeholders within a legal framework. She further suggested that an insurance coverage for surrogate
mother should be for six years duration for all purposes. She also expressed her views on issues such
as exploitation of surrogate mothers, five year waiting period, donation of eggs, switching of embryos,
pre-condition of close relative to be surrogate mother, etc.
4.10 Dr. Kamini Rao, Member, National Advisory Committee for Drafting of Guidelines on Assisted
Reproductive Technology pointed out that none of the members of the drafting Committee (ART Bill)
of the Government of India were invited for the drafting of the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill. She was
of the view that surrogacy cannot be done without ART procedures and therefore, the proposed Bill
should not be passed in isolation. On the issue of a period of five years for declaring a couple as infertile,
she submitted that the fundamental right to reproduce must be that of the couple. She was also not in
favour of the Clause of the Bill limiting surrogacy to close relatives. As regards the safeguards to protect
the interest of surrogate mother in the Bill, she referred to the provisions under ART Bill and suggested
that regulation is the answer to all commercialization of these procedures. She, however, also favoured
commercial surrogacy but within a legal structure and regulatory purview. She opined that unlike organ
donation, surrogacy is a kind of service for which consideration should be given. She also suggested
for a National Registry to keep a record of surrogate women which can be linked to their Aadhar Cards
to record details of number of times they have provided such services.
4.11 Shri Anurag Chawla, Advocate, Surrogacy Laws India submitted that the Bill was restricted to
Indian married couples only whereas the ambit of the Bill should be extended to foreigners to enable them
to avail services of medical tourism in India. He felt that since the appropriate authorities are formed to
scrutinize every applicant, the application to commission surrogacy would be rejected if any angle of
commercialization or exploitation is found. He further submitted that the Bill is silent on the definition
of ‘donor’  who is also an essential party in the whole process.
4.12 Ms. Petal Chandok, Advocate, Trust Legal Advocates and Consultants, during her deposition
highlighted certain aspects in the Bill relating to close relative, allowance of altruistic surrogacy arrangement
and ban on commercial surrogacy that are violative of the rights of the surrogates, the rights of the
couple and the rights of the child. She was of the view that although surrogate mothers and child are
being exploited in the country, a complete ban on commercial surrogacy would lead to black market of
this industry.
4.13 Ms. Aprajita Amar, Student, Amity Law School suggested that there should be provision of home
study of intending couple in line with Central Adoption Resource Authority (CARA) guidelines, breastfeeding
for the child and its awareness to ensure child rights. She also underlined the inclusion of provision for
psychological counseling of surrogate mother’ s first child to ensure his/her mental health and supported
compensated surrogacy instead of altruistic or commercial surrogacy.
4.14 The Committee also heard the views of surrogate mothers and a parent who had commissioned
surrogacy. The women who became surrogates informed the Committee that the reason they went ahead
for surrogacy was the need of money as they were from economically weaker sections of the society.

9
From the money they earned out of surrogacy, they were able to send their children to better schools,
provide them with good food and better standard of living. They also informed the Committee that there
was an agency who contacted them and there was a surrogate home which took care of their delivery,
nutritional and medical needs during the entire pregnancy period. They further informed the Committee
that they willfully signed the contract with the consent of their families and were informed about the
contract beforehand. They suggested that the surrogacy should be allowed only for needy couples and
not for completion of an ideal family. For them, it was an honest means to earn and commercial
surrogacy should not be banned rather they suggested that amount to be paid to them should be raised
and a second chance to become surrogate should be given.
4.15 A commissioning parent submitted before the Committee that altruistic surrogacy does not exist
in today’s world. With reference to his personal experience, he shared the financial break-up of a
successful surrogacy arrangement that amounted to ` 20 lakh. He was of the view that Government
should not determine the method of procreation for an individual and number of children for an infertile
couple. He also drew Committee’s attention towards the fact that eggs of female celebrities were available
at a price depending upon the socio-economic background of the lady in question.
4.16 Dr. Mrinal Satish, Associate Professor and Executive Director, Centre for Constitutional Law,
Policy and Governance, National Law University, Delhi submitted that as of now there is no binding legal
framework for the regulation of surrogacy in India and the ICMR Guidelines of 2005 governing surrogacy
are not binding on any of the parties. There are no safeguards for the surrogate mothers and the
contracts signed between the surrogate mother and the commissioning couples do not mention the risks
associated with surrogacy. Prof. Satish suggested that compensated surrogacy should be permitted under
stringent regulatory regime. He also suggested that the surrogates should be given guaranteed payment
from the day they begin use of any medication and there should be limits on the number of embryos
implanted. He underlined the need of a regulatory body for monitoring compliance with the provisions
of this Act, banning of surrogate homes, etc.
V . CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION OF THE BILL
5.1 During the course of the examination of the Bill, the Committee took note of concerns, suggestions
and amendments expressed by various experts/stakeholders on the Bill and duly communicated them to
the Department of Health Research for its response. Committee’s observations and recommendations
contained in the Report reflect an extensive scrutiny of submissions and all the viewpoints put forth
before it. Upon scrutiny of the replies received from the Ministry, the Committee is of the view that
certain provisions of the Bill need to be recast to serve the intended purpose of the Bill better. Various
amendments to the Bill have been suggested by the Committee which are discussed in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Clause 2(a)-Definition of ‘Abandoned Child’
5.2 Clause 2 (a) reads as under:
‘In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “abandoned child” means a child—
(i) born out of surrogacy procedure;

10
(ii) deserted by his intending parents or guardians; and
(iii) who has been declared as abandoned by the appropriate authority after due enquiry;’
Suggestions
5.3 Some stakeholders have sought to modify the definition of ‘abandoned child’ in the proposed Bill.
They suggested that the explanation for the term ‘abandoned child’ should be given in one sentence as
the three points mentioned in Clause 2 (a) (i),(ii)&(iii) are not mutually exclusive and have to be read
together.
Department’s Response
5.4 The Ministry while justifying the Clause has stated that the definition of the ‘abandoned child’ has
been drafted in consultation with Ministry of law.
Recommendation
5.5 The Committee is of the view that since the proposed Bill is an attempt to regulate the
practice of surrogacy and protect the interest of the surrogate mother and child, it is essential
to define the term ‘abandoned child’ appropriately. Protection of the interests and rights of the
child born out of surrogacy is the essence of this proposed legislation. The definition of ‘abandoned
child’ as given in the present form fails to explain the meaning clearly as the three sub Clauses
of Clause 2 (a) in (i), (ii) & (iii) indicate three different conditions which are liable to
misinterpretation. The Committee recommends that the three conditions have to be read together
to make the definition of abandoned child proper and to ensure that there are no ambiguities
in the proposed legislation. Therefore, this Clause should be reframed in the following manner
after legislative vetting:-
‘abandoned child means a child born out of surrogacy procedure, deserted by his intending parents
or guardian and who has been declared as abandoned by the appropriate authority after due
enquiry’.
Clause 2 (b) and Clause 2 (f)- Definition of ‘Altruistic Surrogacy’ and ‘Commercial Surrogacy’
5.6 Clause 2 (b) reads as under :
“altruistic surrogacy” means the surrogacy in which no charges, expenses, fees, remuneration or
monetary incentive of whatever nature, except the medical expenses incurred on surrogate mother
and the insurance coverage for the surrogate mother, are given to the surrogate mother or her
dependents or her representative;
Clause 2 (f) reads as under :
“commercial surrogacy” means commercialisation of surrogacy services or procedures or its
component services or component procedures including selling or buying of human embryo or
trading in the sale or purchase of human embryo or gametes or selling or buying or trading the
services of surrogate motherhood by way of giving payment, reward, benefit, fees, remuneration

11
or monetary incentive in cash or kind, to the surrogate mother or her dependents or her representative,
except the medical expenses incurred on the surrogate mother and the insurance coverage for the
surrogate mother;
Suggestions
5.7 Stakeholders have submitted that the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016 allows altruistic surrogacy
in which no charges, expenses, fees, remuneration or monetary incentive of whatever nature except the
medical expenses incurred on surrogate mother and the insurance coverage for the surrogate mother, are
given to the surrogate mother or her dependents or her representative. The Bill also warrants that the
surrogate mother should be a close relative who is genetically related to the intending couple. The Bill
imposes a “blanket ban on the commercial surrogacy” and imposes stringent “penal sanctions” including
imprisonment upto 10 years and fine upto ` 10 lakhs for violating the provisions of the Bill.
5.8 Stakeholders have also pointed out that the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016 through its altruistic
model promotes ‘forced labour ’  as non-payment of any compensation is against Article 23 of the
Constitution of India. Pure altruistic drive for any substantial and meaningful contribution of someone
else’s life is unreasonable to expect in today’ s economic and social environment. Endorsing altruistic
surrogacy will enforce emotional and social pressure on close female relatives without any compensation
for immense emotional and bodily labour of gestation involved in surrogacy as well as loss of livelihood.
A woman should not be expected to act as a surrogate and go through all the trial and tribulations of
physical and emotional tolls of this arrangement free of cost and only out of compassion. A surrogate
is indeed the most important stakeholder in this whole process who puts her life to risk and thus should
be compensated for doing so. It has also been argued that one cannot guarantee that the altruistic
surrogate who is a ‘close relative’ is not coerced into becoming a surrogate by just removing the
commercial component of the practice. Not every member of a family has the ability to resist a demand
that she be a surrogate for another family member. As such within family, surrogacy might become even
more exploitative than compensated surrogacy.
5.9 Stakeholders in support of commercial surrogacy were of the view that the Bill proceeds on the
incorrect premise that commercial surrogacy is synonymous with purported unethical practices and
seeks to ban commercial surrogacy instead of preparing a positive legislative regime to protect the rights
of surrogate mothers and prohibit any exploitation of such surrogate mothers. The money paid to the
surrogate is a mere compensation for the loss of wages over the period of nine months when they cannot
engage in strenuous occupation. The surrogates use the money they get from surrogacy for education
of their children, construction of their home, treatment of child or spouse, starting a small business or
buying an auto rickshaw or farm or small shop which can make them independent and empower her
whole family.
5.10 It has also been stated that permitting uncompensated surrogacy but prohibiting compensated
surrogacy assumes the women’s inherent role to give birth but it denies women the capacity to earn
wages for this work. By banning compensated surrogacy, there could be a black market in surrogacy
services. The whole surrogacy service could go underground and would lead to increased exploitation
with no mechanism for protection of any of the parties involved in the surrogacy arrangement. There

12
is also the likelihood of surrogacy being driven underground involving illicit inter-country movement of
women to be surrogate mothers into foreign nations or safe surrogacy heavens globally for monetary
returns. This may subject the surrogate to worst sufferings. Hence, a prohibition of commercial sector
is likely to hurt the very people it seeks to protect.
5.11 It has also been pointed out that with small family norms and increase in number of working
women, very few ‘close relatives’ would be interested in helping out by being a surrogate. Also, the
intending parents may not be comfortable sharing their infertility issue with their relatives as it is a private
matter. In the present socio-cultural familial context where impotence and infertility is associated with
social stigma and ridicule, such disclosure of medical incapacity of women to bear child before her in-
laws and family members is breach of her privacy and confidentiality. This will rather put her at greater
risk of domestic violence, abuse, name shaming, loss of respect, eviction of women from home and
annulment of marriage.
5.12 Further, it has also been pointed out that some of the altruistic models across the world include
certain expenses like food / nutrition, medical / legal /psychological counseling charges, reasonable out
of pocket expenses, loss of earning, post delivery care including free health supplements and free
diagnosis, child care support or crèche support for surrogate mother’ s own children, maternity clothing
etc.
5.13 It has been ar gued that instead of putting a blanket ban on commercial surrogacy, a compensated
surrogacy should be permitted and should be viewed as a form of labour that requires adequate labour
protection by granting minimum conditions of work.
5.14 Some stakeholders have argued that the urge for a child cannot be subject to the moral judgment
of politics and society. It needs a safe, regulated and legally binding environment and framework in which
individual choices may be made. It is a private right of an individual to choose a means of attaining
parenthood and family formation. A stringent legal framework is, therefore, required to control the illegal
practices under the ambit of assisted reproduction technology.
5.15 The Chairperson, NCW and few other stakeholders have, however, supported the Surrogacy
(Regulation) Bill, 2016 as it has put a blanket ban on commercial surrogacy which exploits surrogate
mothers. According to NCW, most of the surrogates are poverty stricken, hence they opt for surrogacy.
It was suggested that focus should be on providing education, skill development / training so as to
empower them.
Department’s Response
5.16 The Department of Health Research has not furnished any comments on the issues raised on the
‘altruistic surrogacy’. The Ministry informed that the Bill proposes to ban commercial surrogacy in the
country after detailed deliberation with all Departments/Ministries and other stakeholders and as per
existing legal provisions in most countries. They added that as per the Bill, the sale or purchase of
gametes is also commercial surrogacy.
Recommendation
5.17 The Committee has come across different views of various stakeholders with regard to
altruistic surrogacy. The Committee notes that as of now except for the National Guidelines for

13
Accreditation, Supervision and Regulation of ART Clinics in India 2005 of ICMR, there are no
binding rules or legislation for the protection of surrogates. Since ICMR guidelines do not have
the force of law, they provide little protection for surrogate mothers. The paramount objective
of this Bill is to control the exploitation of poor surrogate mothers and safeguard their interests
by banning commercial surrogacy because surrogate mothers mostly come from the lowest socio-
economic strata who are doing surrogacy for money and are being exploited in the process. It has
been argued before the Committee that poor women who become surrogates are not capable of
exercising real autonomy since they are in such dire economic situations that they are coerced
by their circumstances to engage in surrogacy. The Committee observes that there is no doubt
that as of today there is a potential for exploitation and the surrogacy model that exists today
can and does exploit surrogate women. But this potential for exploitation is linked to the lack
of regulatory oversight and lack of legal protection to the surrogate and can be minimized
through adequate legislative norm-setting and robust regulatory oversight.
5.18 The Committee learnt from the surrogate mothers who appeared before the Committee
that they engaged themselves in surrogacy out of economic necessity and saw surrogacy as a
means of economically uplifting their families. Surprisingly, their other economic options were
equally, if not more, exploitative and nowhere close to being as remunerative as surrogacy. The
Committee is, therefore, of the view that economic opportunities available to surrogates through
surrogacy services should not be dismissed in a paternalistic manner. Permitting women to
provide reproductive labour for free to another person but preventing them from being paid for
their reproductive labour is grossly unfair and arbitrary. The Committee would like to observe
that if many impoverished women are able to provide their children with education, construct
home, start a small business, etc. by resorting to surrogacy, there is no reason to take this away
from them.
5.19 The Committee is of the view that altruistic surrogacy is another extreme and entails high
expectations from a woman willing to become a surrogate without any compensation or reward
but a decision based on noble intentions and kindness. Pregnancy is not a one minute job but
a labour of nine months with far reaching implications regarding her health, her time and her
family. In the altruistic arrangement, the commissioning couple gets a child; and doctors, lawyers
and hospitals get paid. However, the surrogate mothers are expected to practice altruism without
a single penny.
5.20 The Committee, therefore, finds merit in the argument that the proposed altruistic surrogacy
is far removed from the ground realities. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that expecting
a woman, that too, a close relative to be altruistic enough to become a surrogate and endure all
hardships of the surrogacy procedure in the pregnancy period and post partum period is tantamount
to a another form of exploitation.
5.21 The Bill limits the circle of choosing a surrogate mother from within close relatives. Given
the patriarchal familial structure and power equations within families, not every member of a
family has the ability to resist a demand that she be a surrogate for another family member.

14
A close relative of the intending couple may be forced to become a surrogate which might become
even more exploitative than commercial surrogacy. The Committee, therefore, firmly believes
that altruistic surrogacy only by close relatives will always be because of compulsion and coercion
and not because of altruism.
5.22 Based on the analysis of the facts in the preceding paras, the Committee is convinced that
the altruistic surrogacy model as proposed in the Bill is based more on moralistic assumptions
than on any scientific criteria and all kinds of value judgments have been injected into it in a
paternalistic manner. Altruistic surrogacy across the world means compensated surrogacy and a
range of monetary payments to surrogate mothers are permitted as reasonable compensation.
Even the Law Commission Report No. 228 of 2009 recommends reimbursement of all reasonable
expenses to the surrogate mother. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the word
“altruistic” in Clause 2 (b) of the Bill be replaced with the word “compensated” and appropriate
modifications be incorporated in the said Clause and other relevant Clauses of the Bill with a
view to harmonizing the Bill with the compensated surrogacy model.
5.23 The Committee takes note of the view of the Department of Health Research that surrogacy
is a privilege and should be resorted to in exceptional circumstances only and that adoption
should be the first preference for family formation. The Committee is also aware of Central
Adoption Resource Agency (CARA) study of March, 2016 to the extent that only 1600 odd
children were available for adoption while 7700 applications from prospective parents for adoption
were received. Out of the 1600 children available for adoption, 770 were normal and the rest were
those with special needs. Also, the waiting time for adoption in India is one to three years. The
Committee is, therefore, unable to comprehend as to how the adoption route would be an answer
to infertility which is growing in India. The Committee also observes that adoption is a benevolent
choice available to the community at large and the Government cannot force adoption in lieu of
surrogacy. Surrogacy and adoption have to be an equal choice and in the name of adoption, the
Government cannot take away the reproductive rights of couples to have a biologically related
child through surrogacy.
5.24 The proposed Bill has confined the expenses to “medical” and insurance coverage to
surrogate mother during the process of surrogacy which has narrowed down the expenses incurred
on the surrogate mother only. There is no scope for the other reasonable expenses. The Committee
is of the view that medical expenses incurred on surrogate mother and the insurance coverage
for the surrogate mother are not the only expenses incurred during the surrogacy pregnancy. For
any woman who is going through surrogacy, there is a certain cost and certain loss of health
involved. Not only will she be absent from her work, but will also be away from her husband and
would not be able to look after her own children. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
surrogate mother should be adequately and reasonably compensated. The quantum of compensation
should be fixed keeping in mind the surrogacy procedures and other necessary expenses related
to and arising out of surrogacy process. The compensation should be commensurate with the lost
wages for the duration of pregnancy, medical screening and psychological counseling of surrogate;

15
child care support or psychological counseling for surrogate mother’s own child/children, dietary
supplements and medication, maternity clothing and post delivery care. The Committee also
recommends that in case the surrogate mother dies in the course of surrogate pregnancy or
while giving birth to the surrogate child, additional compensation should be given to the kin of
the surrogate mother.
5.25 The Committee observes that the surrogacy industry in India is currently governed by the
private contract model which relies on the bargaining power of the parties in setting the terms
of the contract and its enforcement. Since there are enormous inequalities in the bargaining
power of surrogates vis-à-vis medical clinics and commissioning parents due to surrogate’s illiteracy,
socio-economic marginalization and lack of access to legal representation, the chances of
exploitation of surrogate mothers are immense. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
amount of compensation should be fixed by relevant authorities and the compensation so fixed
should not be the subject matter of bargain between the commissioning couple and the surrogate
mother. The Committee further recommends that the compensation to surrogates should be
guaranteed from the moment they begin any use of medication in connection with surrogacy
procedures and the money should be deposited directly in their bank accounts, by the commissioning
parents.
5.26 The Committee would simultaneously like to observe that surrogacy cannot be a way out
for women opting for surrogacy due to poverty and should not be allowed as a profession. In fact,
the Bill rightly provides that no woman can become a surrogate more than once. It is, indeed,
sad that the burden of the whole poverty striken family falls on the woman who resorts to
becoming a surrogate to earn quick money. As suggested by National Commission for Women,
education and vocational training should be given to women so that they can be financially
empowered. However, the Committee taking cognizance of the harsh realities of the poverty
striken families cannot simply suggest to take away the opportunity surrogacy provides to a
family to better their lives.
Clause 2(g), Clause 2(p), and Clause 4 (iii) (c) - Definition of “couple”, Infertility, and eligibility
certificate for intending couple.
5.27 Clause 2 (g) of the Bill deals with the definition of couple and reads as under:
“couple” means the legally married Indian man and woman above the age of 21 years and 18
years respectively;
Clause 2 (p) of the Bill deals with the definition of “infertility” and reads as under:
“Infertility” means the inability to conceive after five years of unprotected coitus or other proven
medical condition preventing a couple from conception;
Clause 4(iii) (c) of the Bill deals with eligibility certificate for intending couple and reads as under:
(iii) no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted, undertaken, performed or initiated,
unless the Director or in-charge of the surrogacy clinic and the person qualified to do so are

16
satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that the following conditions have been fulfilled,
namely:—
(c) an eligibility certificate for intending couple is issued separately by the appropriate authority
on fulfilment of the following conditions, namely:—
(I) the age of the intending couple is between 23 to 50 years in case of female and between 26
to 55 years in case of male on the day of certification;
(II) the intending couple are married for at least five years and are Indian citizens;
(III) the intending couple have not had any surviving child biologically or through adoption or
through surrogacy earlier:
Provided that nothing contained in this item shall affect the intending couple who have a
child and who is mentally or physically challenged or suffers from life threatening disorder
or fatal illness with no permanent cure and approved by the appropriate authority with due
medical certificate from a District Medical Board;
(IV) such other conditions as may be specified by the regulations.
Suggestions
5.28 The Committee was given to understand by many witnesses/stakeholders that the right to avail
surrogacy services has been limited to Indian married couples only which is not justified. Restricting it
to only Indian married couples is discriminatory and violative of the right to life, personal liberty,
reproductive autonomy and right to equality guaranteed to all persons under the Constitution of India.
5.29  It was also pointed out that the Hon’ble Supreme Court has recognized the status of live-in
partners as a “relationship in the nature of marriage” and the proposed Bill in an unreasonable and
discriminatory manner fails to recognize the rights of live-in partners to surrogacy. Therefore, a mechanism
should be established which can incorporate everyone in the ambit of surrogacy regulatory framework.
5.30 Ministry of Women and Child Development has informed that they are in favour of allowing the
option of surrogacy to foreigners, every lawfully married infertile heterosexual couples, every Indian
woman whether married or single (which include not married/separated/widow etc.) irrespective of their
ability to bear child or not. However, they favored putting restrictions on single men commissioning
surrogacy to make it on par with Juvenile Justice (Care and Prevention of Children) Act, 2015 which
prohibits adoption of girls by single men. Some other stakeholders were also in favor of extending the
option of surrogacy to foreigners, NRIs, PIOs, OCI cardholders, stating that surrogacy should not be
restricted to Indian nationals only.
5.31 Various other stakeholders were in support to allow the individuals who are single including
unmarried, separated, widows, transgenders, single parents to exercise their right to parenthood. They
argued that if single individuals are financially capable of taking care of their children and if they have
family support, they should be fully entitled to have children through surrogacy. They felt that restricting
the people to commission surrogacy on the basis of their marital status, would be violation of human
rights.

17
5.32 Some concerns have been raised with respect to the condition of childlessness as one of the
eligibility criteria to commission surrogacy as proposed in the Bill. It has been argued that there is no
one child policy in our country and therefore, this condition of childlessness may be removed from the
Surrogacy Bill.
5.33 As regards the definition of ‘infertility’, the World Health Organization terms infertility as “a
disease of the reproductive system defined by the failure to achieve a clinical pregnancy after 12 months
or more of regular unprotected sexual intercourse”. The earlier draft Assisted Reproductive Technologies
(ART) Bill 2010 and 2014 also defined Infertility as “the inability to conceive after at least one year of
unprotected coitus”. Majority of the experts/stakeholders have contended that the proposed Bill imposing
the extended time period of five years before commissioning surrogacy seems irrational and arbitrary in
many aspects. They have cited judicial pronouncements in cases like B.K. Parthasarthi vs. Government
of Andhra Pradesh and in Govind vs. State of MP to buttress their argument that the five year waiting
Clause was violative of the right of reproductive autonomy.
5.34 Though the definition of infertility is limited to failure to conceive only, there are other medical
conditions for which surrogacy is availed. For example, TB destroys thousands of uteruses irreversibly.
A large number of girls are born without a uterus or a very under developed uterus. A large number of
women have repeated miscarriages. There are many women who have their uterus removed because of
cancer or because of many tumors. The Bill also ignores medical condition of a woman where she
conceives but is not able to carry the child to the full term.
5.35 The Bill discriminates against medically infertile couples as this condition of five years is applicable
for infertile couples only whereas it is not applicable to other couples who are healthy and free from
medical complications and are free to attain parenthood any time before five years of their wedlock or
without observing the waiting time period of five years. The Committee understands that in the present
context of late marriage (late 30’s), further delay of five years would adversely affect the quality of
gametes of couples or render the couple’s gametes less viable.
5.36 The National Commission for Women has supported the definition of infertility as proposed in the
Bill justifying that in today’s time, due to a gross imbalance of work life ratio, it is essential to give a
couple enough time to try and conceive a child themselves before engaging in external aid. Few other
stakeholders also agree with psychologists that after marriage, it takes one to two years to understand
each other. After that, there is one year of unprotected sex and then, there has to be one year of
continuous trying through fertility clinics.
Department’s Response
5.37  On being asked about the exclusion of homosexual couples, single parents, live-in couples from
Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016, the Department clarified that inclusion of these sections of society
would open the scope of misuse of such facilities and it would be difficult to ensure better future of
the child born through surrogacy. Secondly, upbringing of a child is a big responsibility equally shared
between a father and mother and is a lifelong commitment. A single parent might not be able to fulfil
his/her responsibility completely. In Indian context, both parents, a mother and a father should be there

18
to raise a child. Since, there is no legal liability for gay couples and live-in couples as they can get
separated or get married whenever they decide to. But complication arises when such decisions are taken
in middle of surrogacy procedure.
5.38 The Department while justifying their stand on keeping a period of 5 year duration stated that the
five year period is provided for the couple to avail all assisted reproductive techniques to have a child
of their own. It has also been submitted that the conditions of infertility will be specified in rules and
regulations.
5.39 The Department while justifying its stand on limiting the option of surrogacy to married Indian
couples stated that the single woman or man is not allowed to avail surrogacy as the Bill intends to
provide a complete family to the child born out of surrogacy. Moreover, the single parent needs a donor
for oocytes and sperm from a third party which may lead to legal complications and custody issues at
later stage. Also, the live-in partners are not bound by law and safety of the child born through surrogacy
will be questionable.
Recommendation
5.40 The Committee notes that the Bill limits the option of surrogacy to legally married Indian
couples. The Committee observes that limiting the option to avail surrogacy facilities to an
Indian heterosexual married couple to have their own biological child has overlooked a large
section of the society. Given our sentiments and sensibility, the social status of a woman in our
society is judged by her reproductive life and there is a lot of pressure on her for child bearing.
The Department of Health Research by imposing prohibition on widows and divorced women
seems to have closed its eyes to the ground reality. Besides, the decision to keep live-in partners
out of the purview of the Bill is indicative of the fact that the Bill is not in consonance with the
present day modern social milieu that we live in and is “too narrow” in its understanding. Even
the Supreme Court has given legal sanctity to live-in relationships. Surrogacy is one of the least
used options by childless Indians. If all these categories are to be banned then why have
surrogacy at all. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should broadbase
the eligibility criteria in this regard and widen the ambit of persons who can avail surrogacy
services by including live-in couples, divorced women and widows. Appropriate alterations
accordingly be made in Clause 2(g) and 4(iii)(c) of the Bill.
5.41 The Committee would, however, observe that surrogacy is a privilege and cannot be extended
to foreign nationals indiscriminately. Foreigners come to India for commissioning surrogacy
because the procedure is much cheaper here. The Committee is, therefore, not in favour of
extending the option of commissioning surrogacy to foreign nationals.
5.42 The Committee notes that the proposed Bill has excluded NRIs, PIOs and OCI card holders
from the purview of the Bill. Based on the scrutiny of the facts put forth before the Committee,
it feels that there are adequate provisions in the Bill for the Appropriate Authority to scrutinize
all the documents submitted by the intending couple before commissioning surrogacy and to
reject the application in case of any violation of rules and regulations. The Committee finds no

19
point in restricting NRIs, PIOs and OCI card holders from availing surrogacy services in India.
The Committee is of the view that since the NRIs, PIOs and OCIs cardholders are of Indian
origin only, there should not be any prejudice and discrimination towards them when it comes
to allowing them for opting surrogacy in the country of their origin. The Government has been
extending several concessions to PIOs/OCIs to boost the ties of the Indian diaspora with the
country of their origin. The Committee is of the view that PIOs/OCIs should not be classified
along with other foreign nationals for the purpose of availing surrogacy in India. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that an appropriate mechanism should be made for a complete background
check of the NRIs, PIOs and OCIs cardholders who intend to commission surrogacy and they
be permitted after a thorough scrutiny of their documents submitted to the appropriate authority
designated for granting permission for availing surrogacy services in India. The Committee
further recommends that the intending couple should provide a specific ‘declaration’ or a ‘NOC’
that the child born out of surrogacy would be getting the same citizenship rights as possessed
by the intending couple. The Committee recommends that while foreign nationals be kept out
of the ambit of surrogacy bill, Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs), Overseas Citizens of India
(OCIs) and NRIs should be permitted to avail surrogacy services in the country.
5.43  The Committee also takes note of the submission of the Department of Health Research
that “the five year period has been provided for the couple to avail all assisted reproductive
techniques to have a child of their own”. Five year waiting period for surrogate parenthood
appears to be based on the impression that surrogacy, which is third party reproduction, is being
resorted to as a first choice of family formation which should be checked. However, from the
information made available to the Committee, it notes that surrogacy is a rare practice among
childless Indian couples who try various medical options before they choose surrogacy which costs
them anywhere between Rs. 15 to 20 lakh. Since surrogacy is not well-regulated in the country,
specific and reliable data on surrogacy is not available. However, as per Ernst and Young Study
(Call For Action: expanding IVF treatment in India, July 2015), in India, around 27.5 million
couples in the reproductive age group are infertile and about one percent i.e. about 2,70,000
infertile couples seek infertility evaluation as per the Annexure IV. As per the information made
available to the Committee, of the people seeking remedy for infertility, 20-25% undergo IVF
treatment and of that small group, one percent may require surrogacy. Ten to Twelve per cent
of surrogacy is commissioned because of irreversible destruction of uterus due to TB, 8 per cent
because of absence of uterus, 12 per cent because of multiple failed IVF cycles, 12 per cent
because of multiple miscarriages, 10 per cent because of removal of uterus due to cancers,
fibroids etc.
5.44 The Committee also notes that a lot of people are getting married in their 30’s and 40’s
and the requirement of five year wait would adversely affect the quality of their gametes and
thus impair their chances of attaining parenthood through surrogacy. Besides, this time bar of
five years plausibly violates the right to reproductive autonomy, and an individual’s right to
exercise his choice.

20
5.45 Looking to all these facts there is no gainsaying that the definition of infertility as the
inability to conceive after five years of unprotected coitus and the condition of subsistence of five
years of wedlock as laid down in Clause 2(p) and Clause 4 (iii)(c)(II) of the Bill respectively have
not been stipulated with due diligence and with due regard to the ground reality in society, well-
indicated medical reasons for infertility, curr ent scenario of late marriages and the need for
safeguarding reproductive autonomy.
5.46 It is also worth mentioning that the definition of ‘infertility’ in the Surrogacy (Regulation)
Bill, 2016 is inconsistent with the definition given by WHO and also as in the ART (Regulation)
Bill, 2014 which describe infertility as the inability to conceive after at least “one year of
unprotected coitus”. The Committee is of the view that the fundamental right to reproduce to
have a child is a part of a person’s personal domain and fixing a period of five years will only
cause breach of his/her reproductive rights and delayed or deferred parenthood. In India, infertility
is considered a social stigma and the infertile couples go through a lot of agony and trauma due
to infertility. Since conception has many interplay functions, a five year time bar would add to
the misery of already distressed intending couples. The five year waiting period is therefore
arbitrary, discriminatory and without any definable logic. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the definition of infertility should be made commensurate with the definition given by
WHO. The words “five years” in Clause 2(p) and 4(iii)(c) II, be therefore, replaced with “one
year” and consequential changes be made in other relevant Clauses of the Bill. The Committee
further recommends that in circumstances where the need for surrogacy is absolute due to
medical reasons like absence of uterus, destruction of uterus because of cancers, fibroids etc.,
even the prescribed one year period should be waived-off.
5.47 The Bill provides that for those intending couples who have their own child who is mentally
or physically challenged or suffering from life threatening disorder or fatal illnesses with no
permanent cure can commission surrogacy after the approval from the appropriate authority.
The Committee also notes that the Bill provides prohibition to abandon child born through
surrogacy for the reasons of any genetic defects, birth defects, any other medical conditions.
However, as per provisions of the Bill, a couple who is commissioning surrogacy cannot go for
surrogacy again to have a normal child even in the event of child born through surrogacy having
genetic and birth defects or other life-threatening disorders. The Committee fails to understand
rationale behind such contradictory provisions in the Bill. This appears discriminatory. The
Committee is, accordingly, of the view that all intending couples should have the right to go for
second chance at surrogacy in case of any abnormality in the previous child irrespective of the
fact whether the abnormal child is born through surrogacy or by other means. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that necessary amendment may, accordingly, be made in Clause 4
(iii)(c). Consequential changes in other relevant Clauses of the Bill may also be made.
5.48 The Committee also recommends that Clause 4(c) III should contain an unambiguous
provision to an effect that the intending couple shall produce an affidavit declaring that they do
not have any surviving child.

21
Clause 2(n)-Definition of “Human Embryologist”
5.49 Clause 2 (n) of the Bill deals with the definition of “human embryologist” which reads as:
“human embryologist” means a person who possesses any post-graduate medical qualification in
the field of human embryology recognized under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 or who
possesses a post-graduate degree in human embryology from a recognized university with not less
than two years of clinical experience;
Suggestions
5.50 During the examination of the Bill, the Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that there is
no degree given by the MCI designating as Human Embryologist. Therefore, it was suggested that the
name may be termed as Clinical Embryologist. The Committee understands that a Clinical Embryologist
means a person having either a medical graduate degree or a post graduate degree or a doctorate in an
appropriate area of life science or degree in Bachelor of Veterinary Sciences (BVSc.) and having an
experience in mammalian embryology, reproductive endocrinology, genetics, molecular biology, biochemistry,
microbiology, in-vitro culture techniques and familiar with ART. There is no university in India which
offers a post-graduate medical qualification in the field of human embryology.
Department’s Response
5.51 In response to the concerns raised by the stakeholders on the definition of ‘Human Embryologist’,
the Department of Health Research has stated that there are clinical embryologists working on human
embryo.
Recommendation
5.52 The Committee is surprised to observe the desultory approach of the Department while
drafting the proposed Bill. Interestingly, there is no university offering medical courses across
the country that confers the degree of human embryology. The Committee fails to understand
how the Department would utilize the services of such specialty doctors in every corner of the
country when these doctors do not exist. The Department does not have the data about number
of clinical embryologists working in the country. The Committee feels that in the absence of a
regulatory framework for assisted reproductive technology and surrogacy procedures, dearth of
these specialty doctors would add to the plight of already suffering childless couples who would
be prey to the physical, mental and financial exploitation in the name of these advanced
reproductive medical science facilities. Therefore, the Committee would like the Department to
get their facts correct and collect information regarding the same and rephrase the definition of
Human Embryologist also entailing the qualification of specialty doctors performing surrogacy
and related procedures to avoid any kind of negligent and violatory incidents. Clause 2 (n) and
other relevant Clauses of the Bill may accordingly be modified.
Clause 2(q)-Definition of “insurance”
5.53 Clause 2 (q) of the Bill deals with t he definition of “insurance” and reads as under:
“insurance” means an arrangement by which a company, individual or intending couple undertake
to provide a guarantee of compensation for specified loss, damage, illness or death of surrogate
mother during the process of surrogacy;

22
Suggestions
5.54  The Committee has received various views on the definition of “insurance” as proposed in the
Bill. Stakeholders have submitted that the definition of insurance needs to be more comprehensive and
inclusive of other aspects as well like expenses during the process of surrogacy and after the process
is complete.
5.55 An important suggestion put forth before the Committee was that the insurance coverage should
be for a period of six years. Explaining the rationale behind the six year period, it was submitted that
one year should be for the evaluation of surrogate on medical, psychological, her domestic and other
evaluations and withdrawal if she so desires; and also to evaluate the intending parents. One year
maximum should be for specified IVF cycles on the surrogate. If successful, one year should be for
carrying and delivery, one year for post-delivery recuperation, breastfeeding, two years for health monitoring
for after-effects, if any, of the aggressive-IVF and chemical-hormones. It was argued that the provision
of insurance cover was necessary beyond the period of surrogacy to account for effects of health that
may arise out of surrogacy but manifest thereafter. Substantial evidence exists that point to the possibilities
of such long term health consequences during as well as beyond the period of surrogacy.
5.56 It was also submitted that since the insurance for the purpose of surrogacy pregnancy and related
conditions is a new class of insurance and as of now, there are no insurance products specific to
surrogacy, IRDA, should be involved in developing appropriate insurance product for surrogacy. Insurance
cover must also be provided for the surrogate child/children till they attend the age of majority, so that
in situations like death, disability, sickness of commissioning parents, his interests could be protected.
5.57 It has also been pointed out by witnesses/stakeholders that it is necessary to have more clarity
on who would be responsible and accountable for such insurance. In case of death during pregnancy
or during the time of childbirth, a separate compensation must be paid to her family.
5.58 Another issue that was raised was clarity on Maternity benefits wherein it was submitted that in
case of surrogacy, there are two women – one, the surrogate mother who carries the pregnancy and
two, the commissioning mother who has to rear the new born child. Both women must be entitled for
appropriate part of leave and other maternity benefits.
Department’s Response
5.59 The Department while giving clarification stated that the insurance period will cover post partum
delivery. The insurance coverage will be as per the IRDA dispersal system monitored by the Government
of India. As regards the clarity on maternity benefits the Department was of the view that the proposed
suggestion can be considered while framing the rules.
Recommendation
5.60 The Committee notes that the definition of insurance as given in the Clause 2(q) does not
extend to the surrogate beyond the process of surrogacy. The Committee observes that surrogate
pregnancy is not a disease. However, it is not risk-free and there are certain long-term health-
risks arising out of surrogate pregnancy because surrogate’s complete menstrual cycles have to

23
be altered for an embryo to be transplanted inside her womb and large doses of hormonal
treatment are given. Surrogacy has also resulted in deaths of surrogate mothers in many cases.
The Committee, therefore, recommends a comprehensive insurance cover for the surrogate
mother covering even the after effects of surrogacy. A period of six years of medical insurance
cover along with life insurance of a certain sum of money for the surrogate mother needs to be
determined to cover any health complications that may occur long after delivery. The Committee
is of the view that insurance for surrogate mother should be in two steps. The first step would
provide insurance cover for one year from the date the surrogacy procedure starts. The second
step would provide insurance cover for six years from date of confirmation of pregnancy even
if there is no take home baby. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the definition of
insurance may be revised accordingly.
5.61 The Committee finds that the Bill does not provide for the social security insurance for
the surrogate child in the event of death of commissioning parents during the process of surrogacy.
The earlier ART Bill 2014 provided the social security insurance for all the three stakeholders,
i.e. the surrogate mother, the surrogate child and the egg donor. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Department of Health Research to provide for insurance for the surrogate child in case
of unforeseen contingencies like accidental death of the commissioning parents or divorce during
the process of surrogacy. Accordingly, the definition of insurance for the surrogate child may also
be incorporated in the Bill.
5.62  The Committee would also like to recommend to the Department to consider incorporating
the provision of Maternity Benefits to the surrogate mother as well as the intending mother as
both of them are involved in child birth and child rearing respectively. They both should be
entitled to maternity benefits to ensure the continuity of their service and to cover loss of wages.
Clause 2(r)-Definition of ‘intending couple’
5.63 Clause 2 (r) of the Bill deals with the definition of “intending couple” which reads as under:
“intending couple” means a couple who have been medically certified to be an infertile couple
and who intend to become parents through surrogacy;
Suggestions
5.64  It has been suggested by a stakeholder that after the words, “who intend to become”, the word
“legal” should be added so that the provision may be read as follows:
“who intend to become legal parents through surrogacy by legally adopting the baby/babies born
through surrogacy process and thereafter obtaining parental order from the District Surrogacy
Board”
5.65 There was a suggestion that the words “the intending couple”, be replaced with “the intending
parents” who wish to commission surrogacy to have a child of their own.
Department’s Response
5.66  The Department of Health Research has not commented on this issue.

24
Recommendation
5.67 The Committee is of the view that suggestion of the stakeholders can be considered on the
justification that the word ‘legal’ before the parents in the definition of the ‘intending couple’
will have binding effect on the couple and it will reduce the scope of exploitation of surrogate
mother or the child born out of surrogacy either directly or indirectly. The suggestion on inclusion
of the word “legal” before the word “parents” in Clause 2(r) of the Bill may, therefore, be
examined in consultation with the Legislative Department to explore its inclusion, if necessary.
Clause 2(zb)-Definition of “surrogacy”
5.68 Clause 2 (zb) of the Bill deals with the definition of “surrogacy” and reads as under:
“Surrogacy” means a practice whereby one woman bears and gives birth to a child for an
intending couple with the intention of handing over such child to the intending couple after the
birth;”
Suggestions
5.69 The Committee was given to understand that in the earlier ART Bill 2010 and 2014 “surrogacy”
is defined as “an arrangement in which a woman agrees to a pregnancy, achieved through assisted
reproductive technology, in which neither of gametes belong to her or her husband, with the intention
to carry it and hand over the child to the commissioning couple for whom she is acting as a surrogate”.
This definition of surrogacy provided under the ART Bill is more comprehensive as it enumerates all the
salient features of surrogacy. Hence, it was suggested that the Surrogacy Bill may provide for definition
of surrogacy as provided in the ART Bill 2010 and 2014.
Department’s Response
5.70 The Department did not comment on these changes in definition of surrogacy.
Recommendation
5.71  The Committee notes that the Clause 2(zb) is not clear and explicit in articulating the
procedure of surrogacy holistically. The Clause does not refer to the manner of achieving surrogate
pregnancy by a surrogate mother. It does not mention pregnancy through the assisted reproductive
technology either which is essentially a medical procedure by way of “in-vitro fertilization or
IVF”. Also, there is no mention of origin of gamete either from the intending couples or gamete
donors. The definition of surrogacy provided under the Bill does not specify whether gestational
or traditional surrogacy is permissible, though the Department of Health Research in its written
submissions has submitted that only gestational surrogacy is allowed under the Bill. The Committee
observes that the definition of surrogacy should be precise, explicit and descriptive with no scope
of arbitrary interpretation. The definition of surrogacy in the draft ART Bill is inclusive of all
the relevant ingredients as required to understand the surrogacy in its entirety. The Committee
recommends that the definition of surrogacy as provided in the ART Bill, 2014 be included in
Clause 2(zb) of the Surrogacy Bill, with specific provision for Gestational Surrogacy.

25
Clause 2(ze): Definition of “surrogate mother” and Clause 4: Regulation of surrogacy and
surrogacy procedures
5.72 Clause 2 (ze) of the Bill deals with the definition of “surrogate mother” which reads as under:
“surrogate mother” means a woman bearing a child who is genetically related to the intending
couple, through surrogacy from the implantation of embryo in her womb and fulfils the conditions
as provided in sub-Clause (b) of Clause (iii) of section 4;
Clause 4 (iii) (b) (I), (II), (III) & (IV) deals with the conditions to be fulfilled to be surrogate and reads
as under:
4. On and from the date of commencement of this Act,—
(iii) no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted, undertaken, performed or initiated, unless
the Director or in-charge of the surrogacy clinic and the person qualified to do so are satisfied, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, that the following conditions have been fulfilled, namely:—
“(b) the surrogate mother is in possession of an eligibility certificate issued by the appropriate
authority on fulfilment of the following conditions, namely:—
(i) no woman, other than an ever married woman having a child of her own and between the age
of 25 to 35 years on the day of implantation, shall be a surrogate mother or help in surrogacy
by donating her egg or oocyte or otherwise;
(ii) no person, other than a close relative of the intending couple, shall act as a surrogate mother
and be permitted to undergo surrogacy procedures as per the provisions of this Act;
(iii) no women shall act as a surrogate mother or help in surrogacy in any way, by providing
gametes or by carrying the pregnancy, more than once in her lifetime;
Provided that the number of attempts for surrogacy procedures on the surrogate mother shall be
such as may be prescribed;
(IV) a certificate of medical and psychological fitness for surrogacy and surrogacy procedures from
a registered medical practitioner;”
Suggestions
5.73 The Committee has received several perspectives on the definition of ‘surrogate mother’  and pre-
conditions to be a surrogate mother. Most of the stakeholders have expressed concern over the term
‘genetically related’ to the intending couple as well as the condition of being a ‘close relative’ of the
intending couple as one of the eligibility criteria of a surrogate mother. They sought deletion of the term
‘genetically related’ from the Bill. If a surrogate mother is a close relative of the male member of the
intending couple ( e.g., his sister), and is allowed to donate her egg for the surrogacy, it may result in
congenital anomalies for the surrogate child.
5.74 Majority of the stakeholders expressed objection to the provision relating to ‘close relative’ of the
concerned couple as an eligibility to be a surrogate mother. According to them, this may result into

26
unavailability of women to act as surrogate mother. There are many socio- legal problematic issues with
the “surrogate mother” being the “close relative” and genetically related to Intending couples which are
as follows-
• In case of close family relative acting as surrogate mother, this may give scope for familial
disputes concerning inheritance and property issues. There is also likelihood of custody
disputes over the child.
• The surrogate and couples being close relatives sharing the same ancestry, familial or
kinship ties, there is greater likelihood of surrogate mother developing emotional attachment
to the surrogate child thereby causing emotional wrangles surrounding the custody and
parentage of child.
• Altruistic surrogacy through a close relative has the potential of creating harsh psychological
and emotional implications on child as well as on the parents and surrogate relative as the
child shall grow up within the same family.
• Being a close relative is also no guarantee for non-commercial surrogacy. By limiting
surrogate mothers to ‘close relatives’, an attempt may be made to force women to become
surrogate mother for their relatives.
• Asking or coercing a close relative to be a surrogate mother will make the relations more
complex, shaking apart the very foundation of Indian family.
Department’s Response
5.75  The Department while justifying this Clause stated that the Surrogacy Regulation Bill allows only
Gestational surrogacy as the child has to be related to the intending couple. However, the definition of
the surrogate mother has been drafted in consultation with Ministry of Law. The provision for the
surrogate mother to be a close relative of the intending parents has been kept with a view to avoid
commercialization of surrogacy. The Clause has been incorporated after detailed deliberation with
stakeholders and Ministry of Law. On the definition of ‘close relative’, the Department clarified that the
same will be elaborated after deliberations with the National Surrogacy Board.
Recommendation
5.76 The Committee notes that despite Department’s clarification, the way Clause 2 (ze) is
worded, it would make it appear that the surrogate mother should be genetically related to the
intending couple. The Committee observes that such ambiguity in the Clause would lead to
arbitrariness in interpretation of the law. The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary
drafting modifications be carried out in the said Clause to stipulate that the surrogate child and
not the surrogate mother will be genetically related to the intending couple. It also needs to be
clarified in the Clause that only Gestational surrogacy will be permissible. Other consequential
changes in relevant Clauses of the Bill may also be made.

27
5.77 The Committee is also dismayed to observe that on the one hand the Department asserts
that only Gestational surrogacy is permitted under the Bill, whereas Clause 4(iii)(b)(III) advocates
the concept of Traditional Surrogacy. Thus, there is an apparent contradiction between the
Department assertions and provisions of Clause 4(iii)(b)(III). The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the infirmity in Clause 4(iii)(b)(III) be rectified and the Clause be amended
suitably so as to spell out in unambiguous terms that the surrogate mother will not donate her
eggs for the surrogacy.
5.78 The Committee notes that as per Clause 4 (iii) (b) (II), only a close relative of couples is
permitted to act as a surrogate mother. According to the Department this provision has been
proposed with a view to avoid commercialization and stop exploitation of surrogates. The Committee
is, however, of the view that the proposition of a close relative becoming a surrogate mother
overlooks the various social, legal, emotional and ethical dynamics of this issue and is fraught
with numerous disruptive issues for several reasons.
5.79 Curbing exploitation of surrogates has been touted as the main objective of the proposed
legislation. The Bill seeks to operate from the understanding that just by changing the nature
of surrogacy from commercial to altruistic and confining the practice of surrogacy in the private
domain of family would end the exploitation of surrogates. Such a proposition, however, ignores
the ground reality that in Indian marital homes the decision making power rarely rests with
women and not so privileged or financially weak relatives who can be coerced into becoming
surrogate mothers and the chances of coercion and exploitation are even more in case of close
relatives due to family pressures.
5.80  This Clause also disregards the social and cultural ethos of our country. The restriction
that the surrogate mother must be a close relative of the intending couples may also result in
the surrogate mother and the child developing an emotional bond given that the commissioning
couple and the surrogate are accessible and related and the child is always in proximity. Such
an attachment will not only have the detrimental psychological and emotional impact on the child
who could feel divided between the two mothers, it may also lead to parentage and custody issues
apart from inheritance and property disputes within the family.
5.81 Infertility is a real stigma in our society but undergoing surrogacy and IVF is a taboo even
today in our country. For these reasons, surrogate pregnancy is a private affair and majority of
the patients seeking parenthood through surrogacy want to keep their treatment private and
confidential. This precondition of only close relatives to become surrogate mothers would tend
to compromise their privacy by way of forcing them to declare their infertility within family. This
is violative of the basic rights of privacy and reproductive autonomy of the medically infertile
persons who whilst maintaining the privacy of their medical problems have the right to surrogacy
from women who volunteer to be surrogate mothers.
5.82 In today’s social order of nuclear families, it would be unrealistic to expect that all infertile
persons will have a close relative between 25 and 35 years of age, having one child, satisfying
all conditions as prescribed in the Bill and would voluntarily consent to be a surrogate mother

28
altruistically for the infertile couples. This condition of close relative being surrogate mother will
therefore cause acute dearth and unavailability of women to act as a surrogate mother and shut
all options for the medically infertile for whom surrogacy is the only option to have their
biological child.
5.83 Keeping in view the facts as stated above, the Committee is convinced that limiting the
practice of surrogacy to close relatives is not only non pragmatic and unworkable but also has
no connect with the object to stop exploitation of surrogates envisaged in the proposed legislation.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that this Clause of “close relative” should be removed
to widen the scope of getting surrogate mothers from outside the close confines of the family
of intending couple. In fact, both related and unrelated women should be permitted to become
a surrogate. Appropriate modifications may be carried out in the provisions of Clause 4(iii)(b)(II)
and other relevant Clauses of the Bill to address the concerns as pointed out in the preceding
paras.
Suggestions
5.84 Stakeholders have raised concerns over other requirements stipulated in Clause 4 (iii)(b), (I), (III)
and (IV). The issues raised are as follows:
(i) The age limit of the surrogate mother is prescribed between 25-35 years of age. However,
it has been suggested that it should be raised to 39 years as in today’s life, there is increase
in number of working women who reach the age of 35 years in planning their own family.
(ii) The terms “ever married women” are not defined in the Bill, and it is not clear if the terms
‘ever married’ women would include surrogate mother who may be a widower or a
divorcee. The Bill also fails to mention “Indian nationality” of women to be surrogate
mother.
(iii) The Bill does not clarify about egg donation by women for money.
(iv) There should be provision wherein surrogate mother or egg donor may be sourced from
the surrogacy clinic provided under Bill which includes ART Bank within itself. Such
surrogacy clinic may conduct necessary medical screening and record keeping on the same
as provided under the earlier ART Bill, 2010 and 2014.
(v) The Bill proposes that no woman shall act as a surrogate mother or help in surrogacy in
any way, by providing gametes or by carrying the pregnancy, more than once in her
lifetime. It has been suggested that since the procedure does not guarantee success in first
attempt, the number of attempts for surrogacy procedures on the surrogate mother shall
be three cycles of assisted/artificial reproduction techniques with a fourth, if necessary, as
the last and final “closure” cycle. The ART Bi ll also allows maximum three cycles of
medications for surrogate mother.
(vi) Other experts suggested that a woman should be allowed to be a surrogate mother only two
times with a gap of at least 3 years between the two, whereas the ART allowed minimum

29
2 years of interval between two deliveries. According to Ministry of Women and Child
Development, if surrogate is declared medically fit, then she should be provided with the
option of being surrogate twice in her lifetime with a mandatory period of interval as
prescribed between two pregnancies. It was also pointed out that in ART (Regulation) Bill,
2014, the Clause 60 (5) provided that a surrogate mother should have atleast one child of
her own with minimum age of three years. There is, however, no such condition for the
age requirement of the surrogate mother’ s own child in the proposed Bill that fails to define
the time interval between two pregnancies of surrogate mother.
Department’s Response
5.85 In response to various concerns and suggestions, the Department has stated that the procedures
of surrogacy and the adjuvant hormonal therapy has some side effects which is why the number of times
a woman can be a surrogate is kept only once in her life time. The number of attempts will be as per
rules and regulations. The Clause (iii) b(I) of Section 4 has been incorporated after detailed deliberations
with stakeholders and the Ministry of Law. The Department is, however, silent on the other issues raised
with respect to the conditions mentioned in Clause 4 of the Bill.
Recommendation
5.86 Provisio to Clause 4(iii)(b)(III) mandates that the number of attempts for surrogacy procedure
shall be prescribed. The Committee also takes note of the suggestion that there should not be
more than four cycles of surrogacy procedures on the surrogate mother. The Committee is aware
that there are risks with IVF and fertility medications and the more the cycles, greater the risks.
The Committee, therefore, expresses agreement with the suggestion that ‘the number of attempts
for surrogacy procedures on the surrogate mother should be three cycles of assisted/ artificial
reproduction techniques with a 4th, if necessary, as the last cycle’.
5.87 The Committee would, however, like to emphasize in this regard that this is a procedural
aspect of surrogacy which may require periodic revision depending on the various scientific
advances and progress. The Committee would like this aspect to remain in the domain of
delegated legislation to ensure that frequent amendments are not warranted in the governing
statute.
5.88 Any pregnancy carries with it multiple risks and surrogate pregnancy also involves the
same, even more risks due to potential reaction to fertility drugs. Taking this risk for someone
else is a huge commitment. Taking all factors into account, the Committee is not in favour of
providing the surrogate the option of being the surrogate more than once in her lifetime. The
Committee is, however, inclined to accept the suggestion on raising the upper age limit of the
surrogate mother from 35 years to 39 years.
5.89 The Committee understands that if the pregnancy of a woman, who has acted as a surrogate
mother, does not mature due to abortion, she will be allowed to volunteer to be a surrogate
mother again. However, there are no explicit provisions in the Bill to this effect. It is a cardinal
principle of law that there should be no ambiguity in the law and therefore, suitable changes be

30
made in the definition of the surrogate mother encompassing the above stated position to avoid
any ambiguity on this aspect.
5.90 The Committee notes that there is no mention of egg or sperm donor in the Bill. This
suggests that both gametes should come from the couple. However, this cannot be possible in all
cases of infertility. Clause 4(ii)(a) lays down that surrogacy can be availed “when either or both
members of the couple is suffering from proven infertility”. Needless to say that in case of one
of the commissioning couple being infertile, the gamete will be required to be donated by
somebody. Gamete donation also assumes significance in view of the fact that the option of
surrogate parenthood should also be open to widows and divorced women. Since the lack of
provision for gamete donation will greatly narrow down the category of people who can avail
surrogacy, the Committee recommends that appropriate modifications be made and provision for
gamete donation be incorporated in the Bill.
Clause 2 (zc) : Definition of Surrogacy Clinic
5.91 Clause 2 (zc) of the Bill reads as under:
(zc) “surrogacy clinic” means surrogacy clinic or centre or laboratory, conducting assisted
reproductive technology services, invitro fertilisation services, genetic counselling centre, genetic
laboratory, Assisted Reproductive Technology Banks conducting surrogacy procedure or any clinical
establishment, by whatsoever name called conducting surrogacy procedures in any form;
Suggestions
5.92  The Committee has been given to understand that this Clause is not applicable to IVF clinics not
conducting surrogacy.
Department’s Response
5.93 The Department has stated that the Bill clearly restricts to surrogacy and surrogacy procedures.
Recommendation
5.94 The Committee would like to point out that there are no separate surrogacy clinics as
such. Generally ART clinics offer surrogacy services as well. It would be difficult to monitor ART
clinics as it would not be easy to distinguish between a surrogate pregnancy and other pregnancy
through IVF. The other IVF clinics which are not involved in surrogacy are out of the purview
of the Bill. The need of the hour, hence, is to regulate all ART clinics. The Committee learns
that the Department would be bringing forth the draft ART Bill after the Surrogacy (Regulation)
Bill, 2016 for regulation of ART Clinics. In this context, the Committee opines that bringing ART
Bill before the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016 would have been an ideal attempt for regulation
of such clinics.
Clause 3(vi): Abortion during the period of surrogacy.
5.95 Clause 3 (vi) provides as under:

31
On and from the date of commencement of this Act,—
(vi) no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist, paediatrician, human
embryologist, intending couple or any other person shall conduct or cause abortion during the
period of surrogacy without the written consent of the surrogate mother and on authorisation of
the same by the appropriate authority concerned:
Provided that the authorisation of the appropriate authority shall be subject to, and in compliance
with, the provisions of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971;
Suggestions
5.96 The stakeholders have informed that the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act and Indian Penal
code sufficiently imposes restrictions to safeguard the interests of pregnant woman and child. Therefore,
an additional requirement of approval from the appropriate authority was unreasonable. Further, the Bill
has not provided the time period by which such authorisation for abortion has to be given. It has also
ignored the stake of the intending couple in the event of an abortion. It was also pointed out that this
is different from the provisions of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 which allows
abortion in such circumstances with the consent of the “pregnant woman”. The complication in the case
of surrogacy is that the surrogate mother (who is carrying the child) is different from the intending
couple which has to bring up the child. Another concern expressed was that the “right to seek abortion
or medical termination of pregnancy” is a statutory right of every Indian woman as per the Medical
Termination of Pregnancy Act. It was therefore unreasonable to put a condition of authorization for same
from appropriate authority before performing abortion. Also, in crucial life threatening cases requiring
abortion to save the life of surrogate mother, obtaining authorisation from appropriate authority may not
be pragmatic or workable; rather this may go against the interest of surrogate mother. Therefore, it was
suggested that the condition seeking authorisation from the appropriate authority before conduct of
abortion on surrogate mother should be removed. The written consent of surrogate mother herself
subject to compliance with relevant provision of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 is
adequate safeguard of reproductive right of surrogate mother.
Department’s Response
5.97  The Department has been silent on this issue.
Recommendation
5.98 In view of the concerns raised by the stakeholders, the Committee would like the
Department to review the requirement of approval of the appropriate authority for abortion. The
time factor is crucial in such cases of medical emergencies where there would be no time left
to ask for permission from an authority for performing abortion to save the life of the surrogate.
Since Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act imposes restrictions to safeguard the interests of
pregnant woman and child, the rationale behind seeking permission from appropriate authority
is not clear. The role of appropriate authority can be envisaged where abnormalities of any kind
have been detected in the unborn surrogate child. In such cases, it may be statutorily mandated
upon the appropriate authority to state categorically the reasons for permitting abortion within

32
a specified time-frame taking into account the consent of the intending couple and the physical
well-being of the surrogate mother. The Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable
modifications be made in Clause 3(vi) on the above lines. Consequential changes in other
relevant Clauses of the Bill may also be incorporated.
Clause 3 (vii) : Prohibition of storage of human embryo or gametes
5.99 Clause 3 (vii) reads as under:
On and from the date of commencement of this Act,—
(vii) no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner , gynaecologist, paediatrician, human
embryologist, intending couple or any other person shall store a human embryo or gamete for the
purpose of surrogacy:
Provided that nothing contained in this Clause shall affect such storage for other legal purposes
like sperm banks, IVF and medical research for such period and in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Suggestions
5.100 The stakeholders have informed that the prohibition of storage of embryos and gametes for the
purpose of surrogacy is contrary to the ICMR guidelines which allow the storage of embryos for a
period of five years. It was submitted that in order to initiate surrogacy arrangement, the eggs are
extracted from the intending mother, which are then implanted in the surrogate mother’ s uterus. This
requires multiple implantation attempts on the surrogate mother as the success rate of one implantation
in one single attempt is below 30% under best of circumstances. Therefore, extra eggs are extracted in
order to secure availability of eggs for repeat attempts for implantation in surrogate mother’ s uterus. The
infertile intending mother needs to undergo extensive hormonal treatment for the extraction of eggs to
be successful. This sometime requires repeated stimulation of woman’s periodic cycle to extract eggs
putting her to risk of other diseases. Further, in case of oocyte donor or sperm donor, it will not be
possible to use the donated gametes in creation of embryos in-vitro immediately for surrogacy. Scientifically
also, the donated sperm needs to be quarantined for certain period before use. It has been argued that
human embryo is treated as life in itself and prohibiting its storage will force clinics to discard the
remaining embryos without the consent of the parent, which is apparently unethical. In case the baby
dies at early stages or is born still, parents would not have stored embryos to try again. The procedure
would also become very expensive for the intending infertile couple. Hence, it was suggested that
provision for storage and use as per the need should be made under provisions of law and the procedure
should be on the basis of medical certificate by ART Clinic doctor. One of the stakeholders also pointed
out that in fertility clinics, embryos are being switched to accommodate intending parents which is
unethical.
Department’s Response
5.101 The Department of Health Research, in reply to these suggestions informed that the storage of
embryos will be as per rules and regulations.

33
Recommendation
5.102  The Committee notes that Section 53 of the draft ART Bill, 2014 mandates highest
possible standards in the storage and handling of human gametes and embryos for the duration
of not more than five years on a prescribed fee after which such embryo shall be allowed to
perish or donated to a research organization registered for research purposes. The Committee
understands that generally three or more embryos are created during the process of surrogacy
and in-vitro fertilization. Out of them either two or three embryos are transferred in the womb
of the surrogate mother during one cycle and remaining embryos are cryo-preserved so that if
the first cycle fails, then the remaining embryos can be used in subsequent cycles. The success
rate of implantation of embryos in one singular attempt is around 30% under the best of
circumstances. Gamete (either oocytes or sperm or both) also need to be cryo-preserved before
creating the embryos as the timing of the creation of the embryos in-vitro has to be in line with
the menstrual cycle of the surrogate mother. The Committee notes that repeated extraction of
eggs and fertility medicines that stimulate egg production may lead to the risk of Ovarian
Hyperstimulation for the intending mother or the donor. There may be several situations like
the surrogate mother aborting on the way, the baby being born still or dying early or turning
out to be congenitally abnormal, which may warrant storage of embryos.
5.103  Keeping in view the facts as stated above the Committee fails to comprehend the rationale
behind such limitations on the storage of human gametes and embryos. The Committee feels
that the infertile couple and the surrogate mother should not undergo same trauma repeatedly.
This can be avoided with the storage facilities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
storage of embryos should be permitted and Clause 3(vii) be amended appropriately permitting
storage of embryos on the lines of ART Bill 2014.
Clause 4 - Regulation of surrogacy and surrogacy procedures
5.104 Clause 4 (ii) deals with regulation of surrogacy and surrogacy procedures and reads as under:
On and from the date of commencement of this Act,—
(ii) no surr ogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted, undertaken, performed or availed
of, except for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) when either or both members of the couple is suffering from proven infertility;
(b) when it is only for altruistic surrogacy purposes;
(c) when it is not for commercial purposes or for commercialisation of surrogacy or surrogacy
procedures;
(d) when it is not for producing children for sale, prostitution or any other form of exploitation;
and
(e) any other condition or disease as may be specified by regulations made by the Board;

34
Suggestions
5.105 The Committee was inform ed by the stakeholders that under Clause 4 (ii) (a), it is impossible to
certify infertility as infertility is not an absolute condition. The Bill does not cover the cases where
surrogacy can be commissioned for reasons other than infertility as there may be couples who may not
be infertile but due to medical complications/other diseases, doctors may have advised them not to
conceive or get pregnant.
5.106 The Committee has received a suggestion to include a provision in the Bill for mandatory screening
of the intending couple on the lines of CARA guidelines. This would enable effective screening or
assessment of the couple by qualified social worker, preparation of a home study report after such
assessment before vesting custody of child. The screening would ensure better custody, care arrangement
and effective parental responsibility of intending couples towards the child.
Department’s response
5.107 The Department has submitted that infertility conditions will be elaborated in rules and regulations.
The Department has not responded to the suggestion regarding home study.
Recommendation
5.108 The Committee supports the compensated surrogacy and expects the Department to carry
out necessary amendments to Clause 4(ii)(b) and (c) in consonance with the concept of compensated
surrogacy. The Committee endorses the suggestion seeking a provision in the Bill mandating on
the rights of the surrogate child and the interest of the child so that the child is not ill-treated,
abused, sold or trafficked or exploited in any way. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Surrogacy Bill must incorporate enabling provisions on screening of intending couple seeking
medical assessment of their fitness to be parent, social economic background, criminal records
in past, age, family information and related checks before they are permitted to commission
surrogacy. There should be a provision to ensure that the intending parents have not been
involved in any child trafficking or child abuse.
5.109  The Committee notes that Clause 4(ii)(e) has left certain conditions for surrogacy to be
specified through regulations by the National Surrogacy Board and observes that this Clause is
couched too much in ambiguities and generalities. The Committee is of the considered view that
the substantive purposes for which surrogacy will be allowed should be enshrined in the statute
itself and not left to be covered under regulations. If required, an exhaustive list of purposes for
surrogacy may be provided by way of regulations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Clause 4(ii)(e) may be amended suitably and the substantive purposes for surrogacy be clearly
delineated therein.
Clause 4(iii)(a): Conditions of surrogacy and surrogacy procedures
5.110  Clause 4 (iii) (a) deals with the conditions of surrogacy and surrogacy procedures and reads as
under:
On and from the date of commencement of this Act,—
(iii) no surr ogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted, undertaken, performed or initiated,

35
unless the director or in-charge of the surrogacy clinic and the person qualified to do so
are satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that the following conditions have been
fulfilled, namely:—
(a) the intending couple is in possession of a certificate of essentiality issued by the appropriate
authority, after satisfying for itself, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, about the
fulfillment of the following conditions, namely:—
(i) a certificate of proven infertility in favour of either or both members of the intending
couple from a District Medical Board.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this item, the expression “District Medical Board” means a medical
board under the Chairpersonship of Chief Medical Officer or Chief Civil Surgeon or Joint Director of
Health Services of the district and comprising of at least two other specialists, namely, the chief
gynaecologist or obstetrician and chief paediatrician of the district;
(ii) an or der concerning the parentage and custody of the child to be born through surrogacy,
have been passed by a court of the Magistrate of the first class or above, on an application
made by the intending couple and surrogate mother; and
(iii) an insurance coverage of such amount as may be prescribed in favour of the surrogate
mother from an insurance company or an agent recognised by the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority established under the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
Act, 1999.
Suggestions
5.111  Various stakeholders in their written comments furnished to the Committee, have stated that the
Surrogacy Bill does not define ‘certificate of essentiality’. The maximum time duration, the criteria or
the grounds on which this certificate may be granted or denied, grievance redressal or recourse in case
of rejection or refusal of such certificate is not provided. The purpose behind seeking such certificate
from appropriate authority by couples is not clear and therefore, it was suggested that the certificate of
essentiality may be removed.
5.112  It has also been submitted that the minimum and maximum time duration to be required by the
Magistrate court in issuing an order on parentage and custody of the child born through surrogacy is
not specified. Even the grounds for grant or denial of such order are not prescribed and the recourse
in case of refusal of such order is also not provided in the Bill. Further, it does not mention about any
appellate forum against the order of Magistrate same. These gaps give rise to legal issues in establishing
parentage of child born of surrogacy. It has been suggested that the court order on parentage and
custody may be in the nature of “pre birth court order” which may be applied by the intending couple
after successful conception in surrogate mother before birth of child. Having a pre birth court order
would mean that the couple may take immediate custody of child and there is registration of birth of
child immediately after birth to avoid any legal complications or delay of parentage determination post
birth of child ensuring stability and predictability of surrogacy arrangement.

36
Department’s Response
5.113 The Ministry while justifying the provision stated that the appropriate authority will be the monitoring
and implementing authority in the State and Union Territory. A parental order will be issued through the
Magistrate of the first class or above before commissioning surrogacy.
Recommendation
5.114  The Committee notes that certificate of essentiality is required to be obtained by the
intending couple from the Appropriate authority after giving the reasons to commission surrogacy.
This certificate of essentiality would include three conditions that need to be fulfilled viz. certificate
of proven infertility, order on parentage and custody of child from court. This further requires
an insurance coverage in favour of surrogate mother from an insurance company or an agent
recognized by Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA). The Committee observes
that childless couples in India try various medical treatment options including assisted reproductive
methods before they go for surrogacy as the last resort. Infertility is considered a taboo in our
society and infertile couples go through a lot of mental agony and psychological trauma due to
infertility. The couples who are already reeling under such emotional trauma of infertility and
huge costs of the surrogacy treatment would be additionally burdened with the requirement of
certificate of infertility from appropriate authority causing further distress and hardships. Besides,
certificate of infertility has a negative impact psychologically and is considered derogatory for
women in India. A certificate of infertility may also act as an evidence for filing divorce in case
one partner is certified to be infertile. Hence, the Committee is of the view that once the couple
has had all the procedures under assisted reproductive technology without any success, certificate
of infertility from appropriate authority is unwarranted. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that requirement of having certificate for infertility from an appropriate authority should be
done away with and instead medical reports and prescription of the couple certifying repeated
failures in conception or inability to carry the baby to full term should be allowed as a proof for
their decision to commission surrogacy. Necessary modifications may accordingly be made in
Clause 4(iii)(a)(I).
5.115  The Committee notes that neither any time limit has been prescribed for issuing an
essentiality certificate by the District Medical Board nor there is any appeal or review procedure,
in case the application for surrogacy is rejected. This confers huge discretionary powers to the
District Medical Board for issuance of essentiality certificate. It would, therefore, be in the
fitness of things if suitable safeguards are built in the Bill and it is mandated that the essentiality
certificate will be issued within a specified time frame. Also, there is an imperative need for an
appellate authority to be provided for in case of refusal of such an order. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that suitable enabling amendments may accordingly be made in
Clause 4 and other relevant Clauses of the Bill.
Clause 6: Written informed consent of surrogate mother
5.116  Clause 6 provides that:-

37
No person shall seek or conduct surrogacy procedures unless he has—
(i) explained all known side effects and after effects of such procedures to the surrogate mother
concerned;
(ii) obtained in the prescribed form, the written informed consent of the surrogate mother to
undergo such procedures in the language she understands.
Suggestions
5.117 The stakeholders have pointed out that the term ‘written informed consent’ is not defined in the
Surrogacy Bill. The Bill only provides for written informed consent of the surrogate mother but exempts
her husband and the intending couples from such consent. Secondly, there is no provision for securing
consent under the Surrogacy Bill. There is no competent statutory authority responsible for obtaining
such consent from surrogate mother and the intending couple. There is no mention of counselling to
proceed first in order to provide information and subsequently obtaining consent following the counselling.
The Indian Council of Medical Research, Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research on Human Subjects
2006 and Statement of specific principles of ART, under the principles of Informed Consent provide for
prior counselling with explanation of various risk factors associated with ART procedures to be in simple
language of understanding. There should be an obligation on the assisted reproductive technology clinics
and banks for obtaining written consent from all the parties seeking assisted reproductive technology in
all possible stages of such treatment or procedures as provided under the earlier ART Bill 2010 and 2014.
5.118  It was also suggested to the Committee that a surrogate mother should have a representative who
can attest to the surrogate having informed consent without coercion or family pressure. Such representative
should not be a relative of the intended parents but a relative of the surrogate mother.
5.119 The Ministry of Women and Child Development has suggested that a system should be developed
wherein women willing to provide services are empanelled by the State.
Department’s Response
5.120 The Department has been silent on this issue.
Recommendation
5.121  The Committee observes that there is huge disparity in the bargaining power of surrogates
vis-à-vis commissioning parents due to surrogates’ impoverishment, illiteracy and the resultant
lack of access to legal representation. Surrogate mothers are not informed of the effects of
fertility medications and treatment protocols and as a result thereof, they are left completely
unprotected and vulnerable in the matter. Therefore, mere explaining of all side effects of
surrogacy procedure does not hold good in this context. The Committee, therefore, recommends
an elaborate mechanism for obtaining full informed consent by a competent authority after
comprehensive medical, social and psychological conselling and the risks associated with ART
procedures, fertility medications and surrogate pregnancy. The competent authority should consist
of independent functionaries including civil society members and NGOs working on women’s
health and rights. The Committee also feels that consent from the husband of surrogate mother

38
is also important. The Committee accordingly recommends that suitable amendments be made
in the Bill, incorporating the provisions for mandatory appointment of a competent authority to
obtain full informed consent of surrogate mothers.
5.122  The Committee is also of the view that a mandatory consent from intending couple would
be legally binding on all the stakeholders of the surrogacy arrangement. The Committee endorses
the suggestion of the Ministry of Women and Child Development that a surrogate mother should
have an option to withdraw from the surrogacy arrangement if she chooses to do so before the
start of the procedure. Empanelment of women wanting to be a surrogate by the State is a good
suggestion of the Ministry as the surrogates can be identified, traced and counselled before
giving their consent. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the department to incorporate
the changes in the proposed Bill on the above lines.
Clause 8: Number of oocytes or embryos to be implanted.
5.123  Clause 8 reads as under:
The number of oocytes or embryos to be implanted in the surrogate mother for the purpose of
surrogacy, shall be such as may be prescribed.
Suggestions
5.124 The Committee has received various suggestions regarding the number of embryos to be implanted
in the uterus of surrogate mother. It has been pointed out that it is only the embryo that are transferred
and not the oocytes as provided in the present Bill. More than one embryo are implanted into uterus of
surrogate which increases success rate in IVF/surrogacy avoiding thereby the repetition of IVF cycle
further due to failure. Another viewpoint was that no more than two embryos should be transferred to
the surrogate mother. The risks with embryo transfer (ET) should be explained in detail beforehand. The
process of foetal reduction should not be permitted. The Committee understands that that most countries
have restricted this to two or maximum three.
Department’s Response
5.125 In response to the suggestions related to number of embryos transfer in surrogate mother’ s uterus,
the department stated that the number of embryo to be implanted will be as per rules and regulations
and suggestions would be considered while framing the rules.
Recommendation
5.126  The Committee notes that the proposed Bill does not specify the number of embryo
transfer with respect to the number of attempts or number of cycles or number of embryos that
are implanted in the surrogate’s body. The Committee is of the view that considering the
complexities of the procedures and scope of exploitation of a woman’s body, there should be a
prescribed limit to number of embryo implants. However, the Committee is not in favour of
including the number of embryos to be implanted in the main statute. Since the department has
assured to consider the suggestion while framing rules, the Committee recommends that the
requisite safeguard limiting the number of embryos to be implanted be provided in the Rules.

39
Clause 14: Constitution of National Surrogacy Board
5.127 Clause 14 reads as under:
14. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Board to be known as the National
Surrogacy Board to exercise the powers and perform the functions conferred on the Board under this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) the Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Chairperson,
ex officio;
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in-charge of the Department dealing with the
surrogacy matter, Vice-Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) three women Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of the
People and one by the Council of States, Members, ex officio;
(c) three Members of the Ministries of the Central Government in-charge of Women and Child
Development, Legislative Department in the Ministry of Law and Justice and the Ministry
of Home Affairs not below the rank of Joint Secretary, Members, ex officio;
(e) the Director-General of Health Services of the Central Government, Member, ex officio;
(f) ten expert Members to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed and two each from amongst—
(i) eminent medical geneticists or human embryologists;
(ii) eminent gynaecologists and obstetricians or experts of stri-roga or prasuti-tantra;
(iii) eminent social scientists;
(iv) repr esentatives of women welfare organisations; and
(v) representatives from civil society working on women’ s health and child issues, possessing
of such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed;
(g) four Chairpersons of the State Boards to be nominated by the Central Government by
rotation to represent the States and the Union Territories, two in the alphabetical order and
two in the reverse alphabetical order, Member, ex officio; and
(h) an officer, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Central Government, in-charge
of Surrogacy Division in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, who shall be the
Member-Secretary, ex officio.
Suggestions
5.128  The stakeholders have suggested that the members who have the knowledge and experience in
the field of law or human rights, bioethics and assisted reproduction should be in the National Surrogacy
Board. It has also been pointed out that surrogacy is part of super specialized field and there should be
adequate representation from related professional associations.

40
5.129 There was another suggestion that an independent Registrar having a law degree be appointed in
the Board to explain the implications of the surrogacy agreement to the parties after obtaining their
consent. He should register the surrogacy agreement in the Register to be kept separately by the State
Boards.
Department’s Response
5.130 The Department has clarified that the Bill already incorporates the members from specialized fields
in the National Surrogacy Board and the Appropriate Authority will be the monitoring and implementing
body in the State and Union Territory.
Recommendation
5.131 The Committee notes that there are twenty four members in the Board representing
various Government bodies and specialized fields. They may be from amongst medical geneticists,
human embryologist, gynaecologist, obstetrician, experts from stri-rog, prasuti-tantra, social
science, women welfare organization, and representatives from the civil society working on
women’s health and child issues possessing requisite prescribed qualifications and experience.
The Committee also notes that the National Board of Assisted Reproductive Technology in the
draft ART Bill, 2014 is represented by experts from the field of assisted reproduction, andrology,
mammalian reproduction, biomedical sciences, embryology, bioethics, gynaecology, social science,
law or human rights, public health and civil society representatives apart from the officials from
Government bodies. Since the National Surrogacy Board is a critical instrument for advising the
Government on policy matters relating to surrogacy and supervising various bodies constituted
under the Act, it is important that there should be appropriate mix of different categories of
professionals in the Board who could help the Board play its designated role effectively. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the composition of the National Surrogacy Board may
be modelled on that of the National Board of Assisted Reproductive Technology in the ART Bill,
2014. The Committee also sees logic in having a Registrar at the national level Board having in-
depth legal knowledge of the concerned subject. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the
Department to include a Registrar in the Board who would facilitate the surrogacy procedure
informing the legal implications of the surrogacy agreement to the concerned parties.
Clause 22: Functions of Board.
5.132 Clause 22 deals with functions of Board and reads as under :
22. The Board shall discharge the following functions, namely:—
(a) to advise the Central Government on policy matters relating to surrogacy;
(b) to review and monitor the implementation of the Act, rules and regulations made thereunder
and recommend to the Central Government, changes therein;
(c) to lay down code of conduct to be observed by persons working at surrogacy clinics; to set
the minimum standards of physical infrastructure, laboratory and diagnostic equipment and
expert manpower to be employed by the surrogacy clinics;

41
(d) to oversee the performance of various bodies constituted under the Act and take appropriate
steps to ensure their effective performance;
(e) to supervise the functioning of State Surrogacy Boards; and
(f) such other functions as may be prescribed.
Suggestions
5.133 It has been suggested that the regulatory authority should also maintain a Registry for surrogates,
ART banks and fertility clinics.
Department’s Response
5.134 The Department is silent on the matter.
Recommendation
5.135 Keeping in mind the complexities and ambit of the surrogacy procedures and to effectively
regulate and monitor the entire spectrum of this field, the Committee appreciates the need to
keep a record of all the cases of surrogacy from the beginning of the process till its end. Having
a centralized database at the National level would be a step in right direction so as to monitor
the surrogates, surrogacy clinics and the commissioning parents. All State Surrogacy Boards
should be required to submit to the National Surrogacy Board, data on the surrogacy services and
arrangements. Therefore, the Committee is in unison with the suggestion of keeping a registry
at the national level having details of the registration and conduct of every surrogacy clinic,
surrogacy arrangements, including its stakeholders, taking place across the country. Such a
registry will also help in tracking the surrogate mothers who will act as surrogate only once in
their lifetime. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department that a National Registry
should be maintained on similar lines as in the ART Bill, 2014 which contains details of all the
ART clinics and ART banks, nature and type of services provided, outcome of the services etc.
Clause 23: Constitution of State Surrogacy Board
5.136  Clause 23 deals with Constitution of State Surrogacy Board and reads as under:
23. Each State and Union Territory having Legislature shall constitute a Board to be known as
the State Surrogacy Board or the Union Territory Surrogacy Board, as the case may be, which shall
discharge the following functions, namely:—
(i) to review the activities of the appropriate authorities functioning in the State or Union
Territory and recommend appropriate action against them;
(ii) to monitor the implementation of the provisions of the Act, rules and regulations made
thereunder and make suitable recommendations relating thereto, to the Board;
(iii) to send such consolidated reports as may be prescribed in respect of the various activities
undertaken in the State under the Act to the Board and the Central Government; and
(iv) such other functions as may be prescribed.

42
Suggestions
5.137 It has been pointed out by stakeholders that the State Board is given under Chapter-V titled
National Surrogacy Board whereas the State Board should have been under a separate chapter. The State
Surrogacy Board should have members who have the knowledge and experience in the field of law or
human rights, bioethics and assisted reproduction. It has also been suggested that every State Surrogacy
Board or Union Territory Board shall constitute District Surrogacy Boards for smooth implementation of
the provisions of the Act at the grassroots level. This District Surrogacy Board should consist of an
officer not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Central Government or the State Government, in-
charge of the Surrogacy Division in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. There should also be a
Registrar of the Board in each District Surrogacy Board to explain the implications of the surrogacy
agreement to the parties, obtaining their consent and register the surrogacy agreement in the Register.
5.138 Stakeholders have informed that there is no mention of the reporting mechanism of the Appropriate
Authority. They suggested that the Appropriate Authority should be made responsible to report its activity
to the National and State Surrogacy Board regularly . Furthermore, Board’s accountability to report should
also be specified in the Bill.
Department’s Response
5.139 The Department is silent on these issues.
Recommendation
5.140 The Committee recommends that the State/ Union Territory Surrogacy Board may be
structured on the lines of the Committee’s recommendation made in respect of the National
Surrogacy Board.
Clause 32 : Appointment of appropriate authority.
5.141 Clause 32 reads as under :
32. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of commencement
of this Act, by notification, appoint one or more appropriate authorities for each of the Union
Territories for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The State Government shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of commencement
of this Act, by notification, appoint one or more appropriate authorities for the whole or part of
the State for the purposes of this Act.
(3) The appropriate authority, under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), shall,—
(a) when appointed for the whole of the State or the Union Territory, consist of—
(i) an officer of or above the rank of the Joint Director of Health and Family
Welfare Department—Chairperson;
(ii) an eminent woman representing women’s organisation—Member;

43
(iii) an officer of Law Department of the State or the Union Territory concerned
not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary—Member; and
(iv) an eminent registered medical practitioner—Member:
Provided that any vacancy occurring therein shall be filled within one month of the occurrence
of such vacancy;
(b) when appointed for any part of the State or the Union Territory, be officers of such
other rank as the State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be,
may deem fit.
Suggestions
5.142 The stakeholders have suggested that the Appropriate Authority should consist of members who
have the knowledge and experience in the field of bioethics and assisted reproduction.
5.143  They mentioned that the Bill provides for only one civil society member in Appropriate Authority.
According to them, more civil society members should be included in the Appropriate Authority, the
National Board and also in State Boards in order to bring transparency in implementation. Moreover, the
medical practitioner should be from Government Sector, so that s/he has less or no business interest out
of the surrogacy arrangements.
Department’s response
5.144 According to the Department the provision as suggested has already been incorporated in the Bill.
Recommendation
5.145 The Committee agrees with the suggestion of having a wide representation of members
from surrogacy related fields. The Committee recommends to the Department to include experts
having knowledge and experience of bioethics and assisted reproduction and also have more than
one civil society member as the whole arrangement of surrogacy has social, psychological, physical
and emotional implications for all involved in the procedures. The Committee also recommends
that a single window system should be set up for registration and reporting of surrogacy clinics
so that it is easier for the clinics to follow the law.
Clause 35: Prohibition of commercial surrogacy, exploitation of surrogate mothers and children
born through surrogacy.
5.146 Clause 35 provides as under :
35. (1) No person, organization, surrogacy clinic, laboratory or clinical establishment of any kind
shall—
(a) undertake commercial surrogacy, provide commercial surrogacy or its related component
procedures or services in any form or run a racket or an organized group to empanel or
select surrogate mothers or use individual brokers or intermediaries to arrange for surrogate
mothers and for surrogacy procedures, at such clinics, laboratories or at any other place;

44
(b) issue, publish, distribute, communicate or cause to be issued, published, distributed or
communicated any advertisement in any manner regarding commercial surrogacy by any
means whatsoever, scientific or otherwise;
(c) abandon or disown or exploit or cause to be abandoned, exploited or disowned in any form
the child or children born through surrogacy;
(d) exploit or cause to be exploited the surrogate mother or the child born through surrogacy
in any manner whatsoever;
(e) sell human embryo or gametes for the purpose of surrogacy and run an agency, a racket
or an organisation for selling, purchasing or trading in human embryos or gametes for the
purpose of surrogacy;
(f) import or shall help in getting imported in whatsoever manner, the human embryo or human
gametes for surrogacy or for surrogacy procedures.
Suggestions
5.147 The Committee has received various suggestions for and against commercial surrogacy practices,
which have been dealt with under Clause 2(f) in earlier part of this Report. On some other issues like
exploitation of the surrogate mother, the surrogate child, sex-selective surrogacy, sale of gametes, etc.,
the following suggestions/submissions were received by the Committee:
(a) The Surrogacy Bill prohibits and penalizes “exploitation of surrogate mother” but the term
“exploitation of surrogate mother” is not defined in the Surrogacy Bill. There is no prohibition,
no offense of “human trafficking, abduction or inter country movement of surrogate mother
for bodily exploitation for gestation, extracting oocytes (eggs)/gametes” without their consent
under force or coercion or threat or under deception, for commercial purposes or vested
interest. Therefore, it is suggested that the Surrogacy Bill may include all such possible
means of exploitation and be declared a punishable offense under Surrogacy Bill.
(b) As regards exploitation of surrogate child, it has been pointed out that there is no prohibition,
no offense of “human trafficking, abduction or inter-country movement of child born out
of surrogacy in the proposed Bill.” Though the Surrogacy Bill prohibits “exploitation of
surrogate child,” the term “exploitation of surrogate child” is not described or defined in the
Bill. Considering the illicit practices of child trafficking under the garb of surrogacy at
national and at international level, it has been suggested that the term “exploitation of
surrogate child under surrogacy” should provide for abduction, trafficking or sale, auction
and inter-country movement of child conducted in the guise of surrogacy.
(c) It has also been pointed out that the Surrogacy Bill is silent on incorporating relevant
provisions on the Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex
Selection) Act, 1994. There is no prohibition, no offense of “sex selective surrogacy” or
surrogacy to have child of a pre-determined sex” or no prohibition on conduct of sex
selective techniques (pre-natal, post-natal) in guise of surrogacy to have child of desired

45
sex, no prohibition on “use of pre genetic diagnosis (PGD) for detection of sex-linked
genetic disorders” by screening for carriers of X-linked, Y-linked genetic diseases thereby
causing sex selective surrogacy. It has been suggested that a strict prohibition on such
practices and penalization on the “sex selective surrogacy” needs to be in place.
(d) Another issue that has been raised is that there is no offense, no punishment, no penalization
on the practice of Twiblings i.e “using of two surrogate mothers” for successive embryo
transfers at the same time or simultaneously by the same intending couples. This Twibling
is associated with multiple embryo transfers or multiple pregnancies among surrogate mothers
which is highly dangerous to the health of surrogate mothers and is a grave misuse of
surrogacy. Therefore, it has been suggested that there should be strict prohibition and
penalization on couples who use more than one surrogate at any given time.
(e) Stakeholders have pointed out that prohibition on sale of gametes i.e., human sperm and egg
will also prohibit the availability of human sperm and egg to infertile couples for in-vitro
fertilization and surrogacy.
Department’s Response
5.148 The Department has not addressed the concerns raised in the above suggestions.
Recommendation
5.149 The Committee in the earlier part of this Report has recommended that compensated
surrogacy be permitted. The Committee recommends that the spirit of the Committee’s
recommendation in this regard be captured and Clause 35 be modified accordingly. As regards
the exploitation of surrogate mothers and children born through surrogacy, the Committee notes
that the Bill lacks clarity about certain specific offences like human trafficking, abduction or
inter-country movement of surrogate mother or child for surrogacy purposes. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that the Bill should have explicit provisions prohibiting inter-country
movement of surrogate mother or child.
5.150 The Committee has noticed that although Clause 7 provides for prohibition to abandon the
child born through surrogacy on the reasons of the sex of the child; it nowhere prohibits sex
selective surrogacy. It again does not prohibit conduct of sex selective techniques (pre-natal,
post-natal) in the name of surrogacy to have a child of desired sex and on use of pre-genetic
diagnosis for detection of sex-linked genetic disorder. In view of the above, the Committee feels
that the whole purpose of the Bill would get defeated if there is no provision on sex selective
techniques/surrogacy which may lead to exploitation of surrogate mother and child. Therefore,
the Committee recommends that the provisions of the Bill may be harmonized with relevant
provisions of Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1994
and suitable drafting changes be made in the Bill.
5.151  The Committee treats the practice of twiblings as a grave offence which directly leads to
exploitation of the surrogate mother. Considering the high chances of such misconduct and its

46
associated risks for the well being of the surrogate mother, the Committee recommends that the
Bill should have specific provisions for prohibition of such a practice and penalization of couples
and clinics on utilizing two surrogates for same intending couple at same time.
5.152 The Committee notes that selling and buying human gametes or embryos for surrogacy
is prohibited as per the provisions of the Bill and involvement of a third party i.e. donors who
would donate egg/sperm are nowhere mentioned in the Bill. The Committee has already dealt
with this issue in the earlier part of this Report and therefore, recommends even at the cost of
sounding repetitive that the Bill should include adequate provision of donors for gametes for the
use of intending couple during surrogacy procedure.
Clauses 35(2), 36, 37, 38 : Prohibition of commercial surrogacy, exploitation of surrogate mothers
and children born through surrogacy; Punishment for contravention of provisions of Act;
Punishment for initiation of commercial surrogacy; Penalty for contravention of provisions of Act
or rules for which no specific punishment is provided.
5.153 Clauses 35(2), 36, 37, 38 read as under :
Clause 35(2): Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, contraventions of
the provisions of Clauses (a) to (f) of sub-section (1) (of Clause 35) by any person shall be an
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years and with
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
36. (1) Any registered medical practitioner , gynaecologists, paediatrician, human embryologists or
any person who owns a surrogacy clinic or employed with such a clinic or centre or laboratory
and renders his professional or technical services to or at such clinic or centre or laboratory,
whether on an honorary basis or otherwise, and who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act
(other than the provisions referred to in section 35), rules and regulations made thereunder shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years and with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
(2) In case of subsequent or continuation of the offence referred to in sub-section (1), the name
of the registered medical practitioner shall be reported by the appropriate authority to the State
Medical Council concerned for taking necessary action including suspension of registration for a
period of five years.
37. Any intending couple or any person who seeks the aid of any surrogacy clinic, laboratory or
of a registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist, paediatrician, human embryologist or any other
person for commercial surrogacy or for conducting surrogacy procedures for commercial purposes
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years and with
fine which may extend to five lakh rupees for the first offence and for any subsequent offence
with imprisonment which may extend to ten years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh
rupees.
38. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations made thereunder
for which no penalty has been elsewhere provided in this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment

47
for a term which shall not be less than three years and with fine which may extend to five lakh
rupees and in the case of continuing contravention with an additional fine which may extend to
ten thousand rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for
the first such contravention.
Suggestions
5.154 The Surrogacy Bill enumerates a series of grounds for culpability for couples including commissioning
commercial surrogacy. These provisions of Surrogacy Bill by imposing penal sanctions on intending
parents cause criminalization for exercising reproductive rights, family making choices, privacy rights.
5.155 The nature and quantum of criminal sanctions on Intending Couples under Surrogacy Bill has been
referred as unjustified and unreasonable. The quantum of punishment extends to ten years that is close
to a life time imprisonment and the offences are non bailable. Considering the medical condition and
background of the couples, it may be noted the couples, are not hardened criminals who need reform,
repentance, correction. They neither cause law and order problem nor are they a threat to larger
community if left in society. Hence, such stringent, excessive punishment for the same may not be
justified. It is important to note that there is no element of criminality in a surrogacy arrangement, nor
do the couples or individuals bear any malice or criminal intent. Therefore, making such innocent,
bonafide couples or individuals suffer such severe imprisonment alongwith fine would serve no purpose
of justice or reform, repentance or deterrence but only impose culpability penal sanctions on the innocent.
5.156 It has also been pointed out by stakeholders that the criminal provisions in the current Bill do not
adhere to basic principles of criminal law and basic constitutional guarantees. For instance, Sections
35(2), 36, 37 and 38 provide for minimum punishments without stipulating the maximum punishment.
This clearly violates Article 20 (1) of the Constitution.
5.157  It has been pointed out that imposing criminal sanctions would af fect surrogate child’s interest.
Criminal actions on intending couples or individuals may gravely prejudice interest of child born through
such surrogacy. The rights of child including right to parentage, custody, citizenship would be affected.
Any such punishment would separate the child from its own biological parents, the child would be
abandoned, denied of custody care arrangement which would make the child vulnerable to being declared
parentless, stateless, state orphaned.
Department’s response
5.158 The Department is silent on this issue.
Recommendation
5.159 The Committee notes that Clause 36(1) deals with punishment for surrogacy professionals
or any other person who owns a surrogacy clinic or is employed with such a clinic or centre etc.
and renders his professional or technical services. This Clause stipulates imprisonment for
minimum five years and fine upto ten lakh rupees. The Committee would like to emphasize that
transgressions which are purely procedural or technical in nature should be viewed in a broader
perspective and should not invite stringent provisions. On the other hand, the fraudulent practices

48
and activities should be dealt with severely and in a deterrent fashion. The Committee would
therefore, recommend that the gravity of punishment in Clause 36(1) be modified suitably.
5.160 The Committee agrees with the contention of the stakeholders that surrogacy and its
related procedures are not criminal activities. It is a procedure which is an advancement in the
medical science in the field of assisted reproductive technology to have a biological child for
infertile couple or for those who are unable to have their own child due to medical reasons. It
is also true that the concerned parties are neither criminals nor are they threat to the society.
Moreover, penal sanctions on the commissioning parents would have a definite impact on the
surrogate child. The child would be separated from his/her own biological parents, and would be
denied of custody care arrangement defeating the very purpose of the Bill.
5.161  In view of the above, the Committee is of the view that punishment should be commensurate
with the level or degree of infraction committed. Minor infractions of law should be considered
in mild manner and not carry any criminal liability. Also, if default is unintentional, the same
should be taken into consideration without rigidly giving a harsh punishment. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that Clause 37 may be modified suitably, keeping in view the best
interest of the surrogate child.
5.162 The Committee also notes that the criminal provisions as contained in Clauses 35, 36, 37
and 38 provide for a minimum punishment and no maximum punishment, which is unheard of
in any criminal legislation. This is indicative of the fact that the Department has not exercised
the required due diligence at the time of drafting the Bill. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the necessary modifications relating to the maximum punishment be incorporated in the
Bill.
VI. MISCELLANEOUS POINTS
6.1 The Committee has received many submissions containing issues and concerns that have been
raised by the stakeholders with respect to the proposed Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016 that have not
been considered in the said Bill or have not been given due importance. On examining these issues, the
Committee found them relevant for surrogacy and related procedures and worth incorporating in the Bill.
These are as follows:
(i) SURROGACY AGREEMENT
Suggestions
6.2 The Committee has received various suggestions regarding incorporating a provision of surrogacy
agreement in the proposed Bill in the languages understood by all the stakeholders of the surrogacy
arrangement. It has been suggested that surrogacy agreement should be a duly signed, notarised and
registered written agreement made prior to the initiation of surrogacy procedure between the intending
couple and the woman chosen to be the surrogate to have a binding effect on the intending couple to
take the delivery of baby/babies born out of surrogacy, irrespective of any condition/abnormalities in the
baby. This would also give protection to surrogate in case abnormal baby/babies is/are born.

49
6.3 It has been suggested that instead of two separate agreements first between commissioning
parents and surrogate mother and second between IVF clinic and the surrogate mother, a tripartite
agreement between the commissioning parents, the surrogate mother and the IVF Clinic should be
provided for, because the rights and liabilities of all three parties are intertwined and interdependent on
the performance of the parties.
6.4 Ministry of Women & Child Development is of the opinion that every surrogacy should be backed
by a comprehensive legally binding agreement between the intending parent(s) and surrogate mother.
Department’s Response
6.5 The Department in response to the suggestion of having a provision of surrogacy agreement has
stated that the parental order will be equal to a surrogacy agreement passed by the court of the Magistrate
of the first class or above.
Recommendation
6.6 The Committee is of the view that mere parentage order issued by the first class magistrate
will not suffice. If the intent of the Bill is to protect the surrogate mothers and children, it must
provide a legal framework for a comprehensive surrogacy agreement containing all safeguards.
The agreement should mandatorily provide insurance, monetary compensation to surrogates, the
manner of its disbursement and pre/post delivery care of the surrogates. It should also contain
a provision for nourishment of the surrogates not just during the pregnancy but also in the post
partum period; comprehensive healthcare for a period of five years starting from the date any
medication for surrogacy procedure is begun; legal, medical and psychological counselling etc.
Since the surrogates are predominantly uneducated, the contract should be made available in the
language they fully understand and should be explained properly to them. The surrogacy agreement
should be registered also. The jurisdiction for registration should lie before the Registrar where
surrogate mother resides or where the intending parents reside or where the agreement is
executed. Since a surrogacy agreement is a legal document, it will act as bedrock of the surrogacy
arrangement and shall have a legal binding on all the parties involved in the surrogacy and help
in solidifying the rights and duties of both the participants to the arrangement. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that an agreement of surrogacy among all the stakeholders of the
facility i.e the intending parents, surrogate mother and the surrogacy clinic should be made a
mandatory document for the surrogacy arrangement for them. Necessary amendments/alternate
Clauses may accordingly be incorporated in the Bill.
(ii) CHILD RIGHTS
Suggestions
6.7 It has been submitted that in the development of surrogacy in India the child in the womb is at
the centre of whole surrogacy arrangement, and is as such entitled for legal protection against any acts
of commission and omission by the other parties to the contract. Therefore, an Act for protection of
unborn child is required to be enacted simultaneously. After all, the entire purpose is to complete the

50
family of the infertile couple and bring them joy and happiness. The proposed Bill does not incorporate
sufficient safeguards for the protection of the rights of children born through surrogacy. In UK, Congenital
Disabilities/Civil Liabilities Act 1976 provides for the protection of the rights of the unborn child.
6.8 The fact that the Surrogacy Bill fails to provide for insurance for the child born through surrogacy
proves that it overlooks such situations where commissioning or intending parents may incur death,
disability, sickness during the process of surrogacy leaving the child parentless at birth. It was suggested
that the Bill requires commissioning couples to secure appropriate insurance for child or children the
surrogate delivers, at the time of signing the agreement through an appropriate Insurance Policy like
Jeevan Balya for maintenance of the child up till the age of twenty-one years.
6.9 It has also been suggested that a definition of “Surrogate child” should be added in the Bill which
means: ‘a human life which is conceived in womb of surrogate mother by process of surrogacy. A
surrogate child, on conception till birth and thereafter shall be deemed to be a surrogate child of intended
couple.
Department’s Response
6.10 The Department has stated that rights of child born through surrogacy have already been incorporated
in the Bill.
Recommendation
6.11 The Committee strongly believes that the interest of the surrogate child needs to be
secured in all situations including unforeseen contingencies. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Bill should have a comprehensive provision entailing adequate insurance
coverage for the unborn child. The Committee is of the view that mere insurance for the
surrogate child would not suffice and recommends that the Bill should contain provisions for
Bank guarantees/fixed deposits for taking care of the expenses of the surrogate child in any
emergent situation. Such a cover would ensure financial support for the surrogate child in case
of any eventuality. It would also ensure cover for a child born with any abnormality/disability.
It would also be the responsibility of the State Government to take care of all abandoned children
born out of surrogacy.
6.12 The Committee recommends that surrogate child is defined separately in the Bill so as to
distinguish the surrogate child from a child born to a couple who have undergone ART procedures
themselves.
(iii) PROVISION FOR BREAST MILK FOR SURROGATE CHILD
Suggestions
6.13 Various stakeholders have suggested that the Bill should make provision for breastfeeding after the
delivery of child or provide that the surrogacy agreement should have mandatory provision for the same.
In this regard, the Ministry of Women and Child Development submitted that care should be taken to
monitor that child/children born out of this arrangement are provided with six months of breastfeeding
and for the purpose, facilities of Breast Milk Banks etc. may be utilized.

51
Department’s Response
6.14  The Department has submitted that it would consider to incorporate the suggestions during
framing of rules and regulations.
Recommendation
6.15 The Committee observes that the provision of breastfeeding or making available breast
milk for child born out of surrogacy finds no place in the proposed Bill. It is the right of the
child to have mother’s milk for adequate nutrition for his/her well being. As regards the way
mother’s milk is provided to the child, the Committee is of the view that the provision of breast
milk should be allowed by way of Human Milk Bank services only and not by direct breastfeeding
by surrogate mother as six months of breast feeding will establish an emotional attachment of
surrogate child with the surrogate mother. It would be very difficult for the surrogate mother
to give up the child leading to complications. Therefore, the Committee suggests that the surrogate
child should get mother’s milk for initial six months and recommends the Department to include
a provision in the Bill for providing breast milk to the surrogate child through Human Milk Bank
services only.
(iv) BIRTH CERTIFICATE
Suggestions
6.16 It has also been given to note that The Birth Registration Act provides for recognition of birthing
mother as “natural mother” or “natural parent”. Accordingly, the name of birthing mother is registered
in the birth certificate as mother for all legal purposes.
6.17 It has been pointed out by stakeholders that the Bill has no provision on “birth certificate” of child
born of surrogacy. It is suggested that the Surrogacy Bill may provide for issue of birth certificate to
child born of surrogacy, indicating the names of intending couple who commissioned surrogacy. Therefore,
it has been suggested that the existing Birth Registration Act may be amended by making a provision in
case of child born of surrogacy through assisted reproductive technology by allowing the name of
women commissioning surrogacy to be placed in the birth certificate, not the birthing or surrogate
mother as an exception.
Department’s Response
6.18 The Department has stated that a parental order passed by the court of the Magistrate of the first
class or above will be equal to a birth certificate.
Recommendation
6.19 The Committee notes that there is no such provision regarding birth certificate in the
Surrogacy Bill while such provision is there in the draft ART Bill, 2014. The Committee notes
that the Bill provides for an intending couple to get a parentage order from Court to establish
their parentage over the surrogate child. The Committee recommends that the Bill should also
have the provision of birth certificate which is a legal document for the child born out of

52
surrogacy with the names of the commissioning parents on it and for the requirement of date
of birth of the surrogate child. Since in surrogacy arrangement, the birth mother is not genetically
related to the child, logically her name should not be written on the birth certificate. Therefore,
the Committee agrees with the suggestion of making an amendment in the Birth Registration
Act for the cases of surrogacy arrangements in order to avoid legal complexities related to
parentage of the child born out of surrogacy. Therefore, the Committee recommends to the
Department to incorporate the provision of birth certificate of the surrogate child in the Surrogacy
Bill and to take up the matter with relevant authorities to make necessary amendments in the
existing rules of registration of birth.
(v) DEFINITION OF GAMETE DONORS
Suggestions
6.20 It has been pointed out by some stakeholders that the Surrogacy Bill has not defined the gamete
donors and the process of seeking gamete donors (egg and sperm donors).
Department’s Response
6.21 The Department is silent on this issue.
Recommendation
6.22 The Committee notes that the Bill allows only Gestational surrogacy wherein the surrogate
mother would only assist in carrying pregnancy and hand over the surrogate child to the intending
couple. However, there is no definition of gamete donors in the Bill and no mention of process
of seeking human gamete donors for the purpose of surrogacy. Since gamete donation is part
of surrogacy procedure and may entail huge scope of exploitation associated with the related
procedures, the Committee feels that it is important to specify the role of gamete donors in the
Surrogacy Bill. Also, as recommended earlier, the national registry would have a database of such
donors too. Therefore, the Committee recommends to the Department to include the definition
of gamete donors in the Bill appropriately. The Committee also recommends that egg donation
should not be allowed as a profession and a woman should be permitted to donate her eggs only
once in her lifetime.
(vi) DISPUTE RESOLUTION SYSTEM
Suggestions
6.23 Some stakeholders have raised concern over the absence of provision for dispute resolution in the
proposed Bill. It has been suggested that a mandatory counselor at the Surrogacy Clinic should act as
a mediator for any disputes that arises in the surrogacy arrangement.
Department’s Response
6.24 The Department is silent on this issue.

53
Recommendation
6.25 The Committee notes that the Bill does not provide for any dispute resolution mechanism between
the surrogate mother, intending parents and the clinic. In case of any conflict of interest or disagreement
between the surrogate mother and the intending couple, the surrogate mother has no one to advocate
her case. To handle such issues that can be dealt at the clinic level, there is a need to have an independent
agency for resolution of disputes or redressal of any grievances of any of the parties involved in
surrogacy process. The authority so created should have quasi-judicial powers to get its orders implemented.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Department to have an agency/body for the said
purpose and incorporate enabling provisions to this effect in the Bill.
(vii) PROVISION FOR DNA TESTING
Suggestions
6.26 Some of the stakeholders raised concern over the lack of provision in the Bill to have a scientific
proof of parentage of intending couple about the child born through surrogacy.
Recommendation
6.27 The Committee notes that there is no provision in the proposed Bill to have a scientific
proof to establish parentage of the intending couple over their child born through surrogacy. In
order to avoid any kind of custody disputes between the surrogate mother and the intending
couple or to confirm the genetic connection between the child and intending couple, there should
be a scientific mechanism to establish the fact that the child born through surrogacy is the
biological child of the intending couple which can be done through DNA Testing. The Committee
also feels that DNA testing can help in determining parenthood of intending couple so that
surrogacy clinics do not indulge in any kind of unethical practices. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Department to incorporate the provision allowing DNA testing in the Bill in
circumstances where there is need to have genetic determination of parenthood in any surrogacy
arrangement so that surrogacy clinics do not indulge in any kind of fraud.
(viii) ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY (ART) (REGULATION) BILL
6.28 The Committee has observed that the Assisted Reproductive Technologies (Regulation) Bill, drafted
in 2008, was subjected to frequent reviews and redrafting once in the year 2010, then in the year 2014.
The Bill aimed at proper regulation and supervision of Assisted Reproduction Technology (ART) clinics
and banks in the country and for prevention of misuse of this technology including surrogacy and for
safe and ethical practice of ART services. At present, the ART (Regulation) Bill is under consideration
in the Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India.
6.29 The Committee has been given to understand by the stakeholders that the ART Bill has been
pending before the Government for long and the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016 has been brought by
passing the ART Regulation Bill. On being asked about the reasons for suddenly introducing the Surrogacy
(Regulation) Bill, the Department has stated that they would soon bring the ART Regulation Bill after the
Surrogacy Bill.

54
6.30 One of the stakeholders submitted before the Committee that the very essence of the Surrogacy
(Regulation) Bill, 2016 was explained in the ART Bill and hence there cannot be a Surrogacy Bill without
ART Bill. She was of the view that Surrogacy Bill cannot be passed in isolation as the procedure of
surrogacy cannot take place without Assisted Reproductive Technology. Surrogacy Bill was already
included in ART Bill and by not passing the ART Bill along with the Surrogacy Bill, many problems could
come to surface. She also pointed out while drafting the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, that no one from
the Drafting Committee of Government of India were consulted.
6.31 It has also been pointed by stakeholders that the Surrogacy Bill does not touch various points
related to ART like surrogacy agreement, gamete donor, ART banks and clinics, records, foetal reduction,
provision of National Registry of ART Banks and clinics, duties of ART clinics etc. Further, many
provisions of the ART Bill have been drafted with more clarity and precision when compared with the
Surrogacy Bill like definitions of surrogacy, surrogate mother & infertility, organization structure, powers
and functions of the regulatory bodies etc.
6.32 The Committee observes that the Assisted Reproductive Technologies (Regulation) Bill,
2008 had been drafted in 2008 and revised in 2010 and 2014. Since then, it has been lying with
the Government. Moreover, the draft ART Bill also included provisions on regulation of surrogacy
facilities. The Committee takes note of the inordinate delay in bringing forth the draft ART Bill
especially in view of the fact that there has been mushrooming of ART clinics across the country
offering various services from IVF to surrogacy etc. The Committee fails to comprehend the
reasons behind bringing a fresh Bill specifically on surrogacy, when a detailed, comprehensive
and all en-compassing Bill on ART services had already been drafted by the Department. The
Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised of the reasons behind such prompt decision to
bring a separate legislation for surrogacy without the ART Bill.
6.33 The Committee strongly believes that with the rapid advancement of science and technology
in all spheres of life, there is an urgent need to regulate the use of modern techniques especially
w.r.t. assisted reproduction and use of ART for surrogacy. Hence, the Committee feels that along
with surrogacy regulation, there is urgent need to regulate the ART clinics across the country.
It is a fact that surrogacy procedures cannot be conducted without assisted reproduction techniques
and therefore, mere enactment of the Surrogacy Bill would not serve the purpose of controlling
commercialization of the surrogacy facilities across the country in the absence of regulation of
assisted reproductive clinics and banks where surrogacy is being conducted as ART Clinics and
Surrogacy Clinics are not separate. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
ART Bill should be brought forth before the Surrogacy (Regulation), Bill, 2016.

55
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS —  AT A GLANCE
V CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION OF THE BILL
The Committee is of the view that since the proposed Bill is an attempt to regulate the
practice of surrogacy and protect the interest of the surrogate mother and child, it is essential
to define the term ‘abandoned child’ appropriately. Protection of the interests and rights of the
child born out of surrogacy is the essence of this proposed legislation. The definition of ‘abandoned
child’ as given in the present form fails to explain the meaning clearly as the three sub Clauses
of Clause 2 (a) in (i), (ii) & (iii) indicate three different conditions which are liable to
misinterpretation. The Committee recommends that the three conditions have to be read together
to make the definition of abandoned child proper and to ensure that there are no ambiguities
in the proposed legislation. Therefore, this Clause should be reframed in the following manner
after legislative vetting:-
‘abandoned child means a child born out of surrogacy procedure, deserted by his intending parents
or guardian and who has been declared as abandoned by the appropriate authority after due
enquiry’. (Para 5.5)
The Committee has come across different views of various stakeholders with regard to
altruistic surrogacy. The Committee notes that as of now except for the National Guidelines for
Accreditation, Supervision and Regulation of ART Clinics in India 2005 of ICMR, there are no
binding rules or legislation for the protection of surrogates. Since ICMR guidelines do not have
the force of law, they provide little protection for surrogate mothers. The paramount objective
of this Bill is to control the exploitation of poor surrogate mothers and safeguard their interests
by banning commercial surrogacy because surrogate mothers mostly come from the lowest socio-
economic strata who are doing surrogacy for money and are being exploited in the process. It
has been argued before the Committee that poor women who become surrogates are not capable
of exercising real autonomy since they are in such dire economic situations that they are coerced
by their circumstances to engage in surrogacy. The Committee observes that there is no doubt
that as of today there is a potential for exploitation and the surrogacy model that exists today
can and does exploit surrogate women. But this potential for exploitation is linked to the lack
of regulatory oversight and lack of legal protection to the surrogate and can be minimized
through adequate legislative norm-setting and robust regulatory oversight. (Para 5.17)
The Committee learnt from the surrogate mothers who appeared before the Committee
that they engaged themselves in surrogacy out of economic necessity and saw surrogacy as a
means of economically uplifting their families. Surprisingly, their other economic options were
equally, if not more, exploitative and nowhere close to being as remunerative as surrogacy. The
Committee is, therefore, of the view that economic opportunities available to surrogates through
surrogacy services should not be dismissed in a paternalistic manner. Permitting women to
provide reproductive labour for free to another person but preventing them from being paid for
55

56
their reproductive labour is grossly unfair and arbitrary. The Committee would like to observe
that if many impoverished women are able to provide their children with education, construct
home, start a small business, etc. by resorting to surrogacy, there is no reason to take this away
from them. (Para 5.18)
The Committee is of the view that altruistic surrogacy is another extreme and entails high
expectations from a woman willing to become a surrogate without any compensation or reward
but a decision based on noble intentions and kindness. Pregnancy is not a one minute job but
a labour of nine months with far reaching implications regarding her health, her time and her
family. In the altruistic arrangement, the commissioning couple gets a child; and doctors, lawyers
and hospitals get paid. However, the surrogate mothers are expected to practice altruism without
a single penny. (Para 5.19)
The Committee, therefore, finds merit in the argument that the proposed altruistic surrogacy
is far removed from the ground realities. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that expecting
a woman, that too, a close relative to be altruistic enough to become a surrogate and endure all
hardships of the surrogacy procedure in the pregnancy period and post partum period is tantamount
to a another form of exploitation. (Para 5.20)
The Bill limits the circle of choosing a surrogate mother from within close relatives. Given
the patriarchal familial structure and power equations within families, not every member of a
family has the ability to resist a demand that she be a surrogate for another family member.
A close relative of the intending couple may be forced to become a surrogate which might become
even more exploitative than commercial surrogacy. The Committee, therefore, firmly believes
that altruistic surrogacy only by close relatives will always be because of compulsion and coercion
and not because of altruism. (Para 5.21)
Based on the analysis of the facts in the preceding paras, the Committee is convinced that
the altruistic surrogacy model as proposed in the Bill is based more on moralistic assumptions
than on any scientific criteria and all kinds of value judgments have been injected into it in a
paternalistic manner. Altruistic surrogacy across the world means compensated surrogacy and a
range of monetary payments to surrogate mothers are permitted as reasonable compensation.
Even the Law Commission Report No. 228 of 2009 recommends reimbursement of all reasonable
expenses to the surrogate mother. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the word
“altruistic” in Clause 2 (b) of the Bill be replaced with the word “compensated” and appropriate
modifications be incorporated in the said Clause and other relevant Clauses of the Bill with a
view to harmonizing the Bill with the compensated surrogacy model. (Para 5.22)
The Committee takes note of the view of the Department of Health Research that surrogacy
is a privilege and should be resorted to in exceptional circumstances only and that adoption
should be the first preference for family formation. The Committee is also aware of Central
Adoption Resource Agency (CARA) study of March, 2016 to the extent that only 1600 odd
children were available for adoption while 7700 applications from prospective parents for adoption
were received. Out of the 1600 children available for adoption, 770 were normal and the rest were

57
those with special needs. Also, the waiting time for adoption in India is one to three years. The
Committee is, therefore, unable to comprehend as to how the adoption route would be an answer
to infertility which is growing in India. The Committee also observes that adoption is a benevolent
choice available to the community at large and the Government cannot force adoption in lieu of
surrogacy. Surrogacy and adoption have to be an equal choice and in the name of adoption, the
Government cannot take away the reproductive rights of couples to have a biologically related
child through surrogacy. (Para 5.23)
The proposed Bill has confined the expenses to “medical” and insurance coverage to
surrogate mother during the process of surrogacy which has narrowed down the expenses incurred
on the surrogate mother only. There is no scope for the other reasonable expenses. The Committee
is of the view that medical expenses incurred on surrogate mother and the insurance coverage
for the surrogate mother are not the only expenses incurred during the surrogacy pregnancy. For
any woman who is going through surrogacy, there is a certain cost and certain loss of health
involved. Not only will she be absent from her work, but will also be away from her husband and
would not be able to look after her own children. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
surrogate mother should be adequately and reasonably compensated. The quantum of compensation
should be fixed keeping in mind the surrogacy procedures and other necessary expenses related
to and arising out of surrogacy process. The compensation should be commensurate with the lost
wages for the duration of pregnancy, medical screening and psychological counseling of surrogate;
child care support or psychological counseling for surrogate mother’s own child/ children, dietary
supplements and medication, maternity clothing and post delivery care. The Committee also
recommends that in case the surrogate mother dies in the course of surrogate pregnancy or
while giving birth to the surrogate child, additional compensation should be given to the kin of
the surrogate mother. (Para 5.24)
The Committee observes that the surrogacy industry in India is currently governed by the
private contract model which relies on the bargaining power of the parties in setting the terms
of the contract and its enforcement. Since there are enormous inequalities in the bargaining
power of surrogates vis-à-vis medical clinics and commissioning parents due to surrogate’s illiteracy,
socio-economic marginalization and lack of access to legal representation, the chances of
exploitation of surrogate mothers are immense. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
amount of compensation should be fixed by relevant authorities and the compensation so fixed
should not be the subject matter of bargain between the commissioning couple and the surrogate
mother. The Committee further recommends that the compensation to surrogates should be
guaranteed from the moment they begin any use of medication in connection with surrogacy
procedures and the money should be deposited directly in their bank accounts, by the commissioning
parents. (Para 5.25)
The Committee would simultaneously like to observe that surrogacy cannot be a way out
for women opting for surrogacy due to poverty and should not be allowed as a profession. In fact,
the Bill rightly provides that no woman can become a surrogate more than once. It is, indeed,
sad that the burden of the whole poverty striken family falls on the woman who resorts to

58
becoming a surrogate to earn quick money. As suggested by National Commission for Women,
education and vocational training should be given to women so that they can be financially
empowered. However, the Committee taking cognizance of the harsh realities of the poverty
striken families cannot simply suggest to take away the opportunity surrogacy provides to a
family to better their lives. (Para 5.26)
The Committee notes that the Bill limits the option of surrogacy to legally married Indian
couples. The Committee observes that limiting the option to avail surrogacy facilities to an
Indian heterosexual married couple to have their own biological child has overlooked a large
section of the society. Given our sentiments and sensibility, the social status of a woman in our
society is judged by her reproductive life and there is a lot of pressure on her for child bearing.
The Department of Health Research by imposing prohibition on widows and divorced women
seems to have closed its eyes to the ground reality. Besides, the decision to keep live-in partners
out of the purview of the Bill is indicative of the fact that the Bill is not in consonance with the
present day modern social milieu that we live in and is “too narrow” in its understanding. Even
the Supreme Court has given legal sanctity to live-in relationships. Surrogacy is one of the least
used options by childless Indians. If all these categories are to be banned then why have
surrogacy at all. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should broadbase
the eligibility criteria in this regard and widen the ambit of persons who can avail surrogacy
services by including live-in couples, divorced women and widows. Appropriate alterations
accordingly be made in Clause 2(g) and 4 (iii) (c) of the Bill. (Para 5.40)
The Committee would, however, observe that surrogacy is a privilege and cannot be extended
to foreign nationals indiscriminately. Foreigners come to India for commissioning surrogacy
because the procedure is much cheaper here. The Committee is, therefore, not in favour of
extending the option of commissioning surrogacy to foreign nationals. (Para 5.41)
The Committee notes that the proposed Bill has excluded NRIs, PIOs and OCI card holders
from the purview of the Bill. Based on the scrutiny of the facts put forth before the Committee,
it feels that there are adequate provisions in the Bill for the Appropriate Authority to scrutinize
all the documents submitted by the intending couple before commissioning surrogacy and to
reject the application in case of any violation of rules and regulations. The Committee finds no
point in restricting NRIs, PIOs and OCI card holders from availing surrogacy services in India.
The Committee is of the view that since the NRIs, PIOs and OCIs cardholders are of Indian
origin only, there should not be any prejudice and discrimination towards them when it comes
to allowing them for opting surrogacy in the country of their origin. The Government has been
extending several concessions to PIOs/OCIs to boost the ties of the Indian diaspora with the
country of their origin. The Committee is of the view that PIOs/OCIs should not be classified
along with other foreign nationals for the purpose of availing surrogacy in India. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that an appropriate mechanism should be made for a complete background
check of the NRIs, PIOs and OCIs cardholders who intend to commission surrogacy and they
be permitted after a thorough scrutiny of their documents submitted to the appropriate authority
designated for granting permission for availing surrogacy services in India. The Committee

59
further recommends that the intending couple should provide a specific ‘declaration ’ or a ‘NOC’
that the child born out of surrogacy would be getting the same citizenship rights as possessed
by the intending couple. The Committee recommends that while foreign nationals be kept out
of the ambit of surrogacy bill, Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs), Overseas Citizens of India
(OCIs) and NRIs should be permitted to avail surrogacy services in the country. (Para 5.42)
The Committee also takes note of the submission of the Department of Health Research
that “the five year period has been provided for the couple to avail all assisted reproductive
techniques to have a child of their own”. Five year waiting period for surrogate parenthood
appears to be based on the impression that surrogacy, which is third party reproduction, is being
resorted to as a first choice of family formation which should be checked. However, from the
information made available to the Committee, it notes that surrogacy is a rare practice among
childless Indian couples who try various medical options before they choose surrogacy which costs
them anywhere between ````` 15 to 20 lakh. Since surrogacy is not well-regulated in the country,
specific and reliable data on surrogacy is not available. However, as per Ernst and Young Study
(Call For Action: expanding IVF treatment in India, July 2015), in India, around 27.5 million
couples in the reproductive age group are infertile and about one percent i.e. about 270,000
infertile couples seek infertility evaluation as per the Annexure IV. As per the information made
available to the Committee, of the people seeking remedy for infertility, 20-25% undergo IVF
treatment and of that small group, one percent may require surrogacy. Ten to Twelve percent
of surrogacy is commissioned because of irreversible destruction of uterus due to TB, 8 percent
because of absence of uterus, 12 percent because of multiple failed IVF cycles, 12 percent
because of multiple miscarriages, 10 percent because of removal of uterus due to cancers,
fibroids etc. (Para 5.43)
The Committee also notes that a lot of people are getting married in their 30’s and 40’s
and the requirement of five year wait would adversely affect the quality of their gametes and
thus impair their chances of attaining parenthood through surrogacy. Besides, this time bar of
five years plausibly violates the right to reproductive autonomy, and an individual’s right to
exercise his choice. (Para 5.44)
Looking to all these facts there is no gainsaying that the definition of infertility as the
inability to conceive after five years of unprotected coitus and the condition of subsistence of five
years of wedlock as laid down in Clause 2(p) and Clause 4 (iii)(c)(II) of the Bill respectively have
not been stipulated with due diligence and with due regard to the ground reality in society, well-
indicated medical reasons for infertility, curr ent scenario of late marriages and the need for
safeguarding reproductive autonomy. (Para 5.45)
It is also worth mentioning that the definition of ‘infertility’ in the Surrogacy (Regulation)
Bill, 2016 is inconsistent with the definition given by WHO and also as in the ART (Regulation)
Bill, 2014 which describe infertility as the inability to conceive after at least “one year of
unprotected coitus”. The Committee is of the view that the fundamental right to reproduce to
have a child is a part of a person’s personal domain and fixing a period of five years will only

60
cause breach of his/her reproductive rights and delayed or deferred parenthood. In India, infertility
is considered a social stigma and the infertile couples go through a lot of agony and trauma due
to infertility. Since conception has many interplay functions, a five year time bar would add to
the misery of already distressed intending couples. The five year waiting period is therefore
arbitrary, discriminatory and without any definable logic. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the definition of infertility should be made commensurate with the definition given by
WHO. The words “five years” in Clause 2(p) and 4 (iii) (c) II, be therefore, replaced with “one
year” and consequential changes be made in other relevant Clauses of the Bill. The Committee
further recommends that in circumstances where the need for surrogacy is absolute due to
medical reasons like absence of uterus, destruction of uterus because of cancers, fibroids etc.,
even the prescribed one year period should be waived off. (Para 5.46)
The Bill provides that for those intending couples who have their own child who is mentally
or physically challenged or suffering from life threatening disorder or fatal illnesses with no
permanent cure can commission surrogacy after the approval from the appropriate authority.
The Committee also notes that the Bill provides prohibition to abandon child born through
surrogacy for the reasons of any genetic defects, birth defects, any other medical conditions.
However, as per provisions of the Bill, a couple who is commissioning surrogacy cannot go for
surrogacy again to have a normal child even in the event of child born through surrogacy having
genetic and birth defects or other life-threatening disorders. The Committee fails to understand
rationale behind such contradictory provisions in the Bill. This appears discriminatory. The
Committee is, accordingly, of the view that all intending couples should have the right to go for
second chance at surrogacy in case of any abnormality in the previous child irrespective of the
fact whether the abnormal child is born through surrogacy or by other means. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that necessary amendment may, accordingly, be made in Clause 4 (iii)
(c). Consequential changes in other relevant Clauses of the Bill may also be made. (Para 5.47)
The Committee also recommends that Clause 4(c) III should contain an unambiguous
provision to an effect that the intending couple shall produce an affidavit declaring that they do
not have any surviving child. (Para 5.48)
The Committee is surprised to observe the desultory approach of the Department while
drafting the proposed Bill. Interestingly, there is no university offering medical courses across
the country that confers the degree of human embryology. The Committee fails to understand
how the Department would utilize the services of such specialty doctors in every corner of the
country when these doctors do not exist. The Department does not have the data about number
of clinical embryologists working in the country. The Committee feels that in the absence of a
regulatory framework for assisted reproductive technology and surrogacy procedures, dearth of
these specialty doctors would add to the plight of already suffering childless couples who would
be prey to the physical, mental and financial exploitation in the name of these advanced
reproductive medical science facilities. Therefore, the Committee would like the Department to
get their facts correct and collect information regarding the same and rephrase the definition of
Human Embryologist also entailing the qualification of specialty doctors performing surrogacy

61
and related procedures to avoid any kind of negligent and violatory incidents. Clause 2 (n) and
other relevant Clauses of the Bill may accordingly be modified. (Para 5.52)
The Committee notes that the definition of insurance as given in the Clause 2(q) does not
extend to the surrogate beyond the process of surrogacy. The Committee observes that surrogate
pregnancy is not a disease. However, it is not risk-free and there are certain long-term health-
risks arising out of surrogate pregnancy because surrogate’s complete menstrual cycles have to
be altered for an embryo to be transplanted inside her womb and large doses of hormonal
treatment are given. Surrogacy has also resulted in deaths of surrogate mothers in many cases.
The Committee, therefore, recommends a comprehensive insurance cover for the surrogate
mother covering even the after effects of surrogacy. A period of six years of medical insurance
cover along with life insurance of a certain sum of money for the surrogate mother needs to be
determined to cover any health complications that may occur long after delivery. The Committee
is of the view that insurance for surrogate mother should be in two steps. The first step would
provide insurance cover for one year from the date the surrogacy procedure starts. The second
step would provide insurance cover for six years from date of confirmation of pregnancy even
if there is no take home baby. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the definition of
insurance may be revised accordingly. (Para 5.60)
The Committee finds that the Bill does not provide for the social security insurance for
the surrogate child in the event of death of commissioning parents during the process of surrogacy.
The earlier ART Bill 2014 provided the social security insurance for all the three stakeholders,
i.e. the surrogate mother, the surrogate child and the egg donor. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Department of Health Research to provide for insurance for the surrogate child in case
of unforeseen contingencies like accidental death of the commissioning parents or divorce during
the process of surrogacy. Accordingly, the definition of insurance for the surrogate child may also
be incorporated in the Bill. (Para 5.61)
 The Committee would also like to recommend to the Department to consider incorporating
the provision of Maternity Benefits to the surrogate mother as well as the intending mother as
both of them are involved in child birth and child rearing respectively. They both should be
entitled to maternity benefits to ensure the continuity of their service and to cover loss of wages.
(Para 5.62)
The Committee is of the view that suggestion of the stakeholders can be considered on the
justification that the word ‘legal’ before the parents in the definition of the ‘intending couple’
will have binding effect on the couple and it will reduce the scope of exploitation of surrogate
mother or the child born out of surrogacy either directly or indirectly. The suggestion on inclusion
of the word “legal” before the word “parents” in Clause 2(r) of the Bill may, therefore, be
examined in consultation with the Legislative Department to explore its inclusion, if necessary.
(Para 5.67)
The Committee notes that the Clause 2(zb) is not clear and explicit in articulating the
procedure of surrogacy holistically. The Clause does not refer to the manner of achieving surrogate

62
pregnancy by a surrogate mother. It does not mention pregnancy through the assisted reproductive
technology either which is essentially a medical procedure by way of “in-vitro fertilization or
IVF”. Also, there is no mention of origin of gamete either from the intending couples or gamete
donors. The definition of surrogacy provided under the Bill does not specify whether gestational
or traditional surrogacy is permissible, though the Department of Health Research in its written
submissions has submitted that only gestational surrogacy is allowed under the Bill. The Committee
observes that the definition of surrogacy should be precise, explicit and descriptive with no scope
of arbitrary interpretation. The definition of surrogacy in the draft ART Bill is inclusive of all
the relevant ingredients as required to understand the surrogacy in its entirety. The Committee
recommends that the definition of surrogacy as provided in the ART Bill, 2014 be included in
Clause 2(zb) of the Surrogacy Bill, with specific provision for gestational surrogacy.
(Para 5.71)
The Committee notes that despite Department’s clarification, the way Clause 2 (ze) is
worded, it would make it appear that the surrogate mother should be genetically related to the
intending couple. The Committee observes that such ambiguity in the Clause would lead to
arbitrariness in interpretation of the law. The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary
drafting modifications be carried out in the said Clause to stipulate that the surrogate child and
not the surrogate mother will be genetically related to the intending couple. It also needs to be
clarified in the Clause that only gestational surrogacy will be permissible. Other consequential
changes in relevant Clauses of the Bill may also be made. (Para 5.76)
The Committee is also dismayed to observe that on the one hand the Department asserts
that only gestational surrogacy is permitted under the Bill, whereas Clause 4(iii)(b)(III) advocates
the concept of Traditional Surrogacy. Thus, there is an apparent contradiction between the
Department assertions and provisions of Clause 4(iii)(b)(III). The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the infirmity in Clause 4(iii)(b)(III) be rectified and the Clause be amended
suitably so as to spell out in unambiguous terms that the surrogate mother will not donate her
eggs for the surrogacy. (Para 5.77)
The Committee notes that as per Clause 4 (iii) (b) (II), only a close relative of couples is
permitted to act as a surrogate mother. According to the Department this provision has been
proposed with a view to avoid commercialization and stop exploitation of surrogates. The Committee
is, however, of the view that the proposition of a close relative becoming a surrogate mother
overlooks the various social, legal, emotional and ethical dynamics of this issue and is fraught
with numerous disruptive issues for several reasons. (Para 5.78)
Curbing exploitation of surrogates has been touted as the main objective of the proposed
legislation. The Bill seeks to operate from the understanding that just by changing the nature
of surrogacy from commercial to altruistic and confining the practice of surrogacy in the private
domain of family would end the exploitation of surrogates. Such a proposition, however, ignores
the ground reality that in Indian marital homes the decision making power rarely rests with
women and not so privileged or financially weak relatives who can be coerced into becoming

63
surrogate mothers and the chances of coercion and exploitation are even more in case of close
relatives due to family pressures. (Para 5.79)
This Clause also disregards the social and cultural ethos of our country. The restriction
that the surrogate mother must be a close relative of the intending couples may also result in
the surrogate mother and the child developing an emotional bond given that the commissioning
couple and the surrogate are accessible and related and the child is always in proximity. Such
an attachment will not only have the detrimental psychological and emotional impact on the child
who could feel divided between the two mothers, it may also lead to parentage and custody issues
apart from inheritance and property disputes within the family. (Para 5.80)
Infertility is a real stigma in our society but undergoing surrogacy and IVF is a taboo even
today in our country. For these reasons, surrogate pregnancy is a private affair and majority of
the patients seeking parenthood through surrogacy want to keep their treatment private and
confidential. This precondition of only close relatives to become surrogate mothers would tend
to compromise their privacy by way of forcing them to declare their infertility within family. This
is violative of the basic rights of privacy and reproductive autonomy of the medically infertile
persons who whilst maintaining the privacy of their medical problems have the right to surrogacy
from women who volunteer to be surrogate mothers. (Para 5.81)
In today’s social order of nuclear families, it would be unrealistic to expect that all infertile
persons will have a close relative between 25 and 35 years of age, having one child, satisfying
all conditions as prescribed in the Bill and would voluntarily consent to be a surrogate mother
altruistically for the infertile couples. This condition of close relative being surrogate mother will
therefore cause acute dearth and unavailability of women to act as a surrogate mother and shut
all options for the medically infertile for whom surrogacy is the only option to have their
biological child. (Para 5.82)
Keeping in view the facts as stated above, the Committee is convinced that limiting the
practice of surrogacy to close relatives is not only non pragmatic and unworkable but also has
no connect with the object to stop exploitation of surrogates envisaged in the proposed legislation.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that this Clause of “close relative” should be removed
to widen the scope of getting surrogate mothers from outside the close confines of the family
of intending couple. In fact, both related and unrelated women should be permitted to become
a surrogate. Appropriate modifications may be carried out in the provisions of Clause 4(iii)(b)(II)
and other relevant Clauses of the Bill to address the concerns as pointed out in the preceding
paras. (Para 5.83)
Provisio to Clause 4(iii)(b)(III) mandates that the number of attempts for surrogacy procedure
shall be prescribed. The Committee also takes note of the suggestion that there should not be
more than four cycles of surrogacy procedures on the surrogate mother. The Committee is aware
that there are risks with IVF and fertility medications and the more the cycles, greater the risks.
The Committee, therefore, expresses agreement with the suggestion that ‘the number of attempts
for surrogacy procedures on the surrogate mother should be three cycles of assisted/ artificial
reproduction techniques with a 4th, if necessary, as the last cycle’. (Para 5.86)

64
The Committee would, however, like to emphasize in this regard that this is a procedural
aspect of surrogacy which may require periodic revision depending on the various scientific
advances and progress. The Committee would like this aspect to remain in the domain of
delegated legislation to ensure that frequent amendments are not warranted in the governing
statute. (Para 5.87)
Any pregnancy carries with it multiple risks and surrogate pregnancy also involves the
same, even more risks due to potential reaction to fertility drugs. Taking this risk for someone
else is a huge commitment. Taking all factors into account, the Committee is not in favour of
providing the surrogate the option of being the surrogate more than once in her lifetime. The
Committee is, however, inclined to accept the suggestion on raising the upper age limit of the
surrogate mother from 35 years to 39 years. (Para 5.88)
The Committee understands that if the pregnancy of a woman, who has acted as a surrogate
mother, does not mature due to abortion, she will be allowed to volunteer to be a surrogate
mother again. However, there are no explicit provisions in the Bill to this effect. It is a cardinal
principle of law that there should be no ambiguity in the law and therefore, suitable changes be
made in the definition of the surrogate mother encompassing the above stated position to avoid
any ambiguity on this aspect. (Para 5.89)
The Committee notes that there is no mention of egg or sperm donor in the Bill. This
suggests that both gametes should come from the couple. However, this cannot be possible in all
cases of infertility. Clause 4(ii)(a) lays down that surrogacy can be availed “when either or both
members of the couple is suffering from proven infertility”. Needless to say that in case of one
of the commissioning couple being infertile, the gamete will be required to be donated by
somebody. Gamete donation also assumes significance in view of the fact that the option of
surrogate parenthood should also be open to widows and divorced women. Since the lack of
provision for gamete donation will greatly narrow down the category of people who can avail
surrogacy, the Committee recommends that appropriate modifications be made and provision for
gamete donation be incorporated in the Bill. (Para 5.90)
The Committee would like to point out that there are no separate surrogacy clinics as
such. Generally ART clinics offer surrogacy services as well. It would be difficult to monitor ART
clinics as it would not be easy to distinguish between a surrogate pregnancy and other pregnancy
through IVF. The other IVF clinics which are not involved in surrogacy are out of the purview
of the Bill. The need of the hour, hence, is to regulate all ART clinics. The Committee learns
that the Department would be bringing forth the draft ART Bill after the Surrogacy (Regulation)
Bill, 2016 for regulation of ART Clinics. In this context, the Committee opines that bringing ART
Bill before the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016 would have been an ideal attempt for regulation
of such clinics. (Para 5.94)
In view of the concerns raised by the stakeholders, the Committee would like the
Department to review the requirement of approval of the appropriate authority for abortion. The
time factor is crucial in such cases of medical emergencies where there would be no time left

65
to ask for permission from an authority for performing abortion to save the life of the surrogate.
Since Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act imposes restrictions to safeguard the interests of
pregnant woman and child, the rationale behind seeking permission from appropriate authority
is not clear. The role of appropriate authority can be envisaged where abnormalities of any kind
have been detected in the unborn surrogate child. In such cases, it may be statutorily mandated
upon the appropriate authority to state categorically the reasons for permitting abortion within
a specified time-frame taking into account the consent of the intending couple and the physical
well-being of the surrogate mother. The Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable
modifications be made in Clause 3(vi) on the above lines. Consequential changes in other
relevant Clauses of the Bill may also be incorporated. (Para 5.98)
The Committee notes that Section 53 of the draft ART Bill, 2014 mandates highest possible
standards in the storage and handling of human gametes and embryos for the duration of not
more than five years on a prescribed fee after which such embryo shall be allowed to perish or
donated to a research organization registered for research purposes. The Committee understands
that generally three or more embryos are created during the process of surrogacy and in-vitro
fertilization. Out of them either two or three embryos are transferred in the womb of the
surrogate mother during one cycle and remaining embryos are cryo-preserved so that if the first
cycle fails, then the remaining embryos can be used in subsequent cycles. The success rate of
implantation of embryos in one singular attempt is around 30% under the best of circumstances.
Gamete (either oocytes or sperm or both) also need to be cryo-preserved before creating the
embryos as the timing of the creation of the embryos in-vitro has to be in line with the
menstrual cycle of the surrogate mother. The Committee notes that repeated extraction of eggs
and fertility medicines that stimulate egg production may lead to the risk of Ovarian
Hyperstimulation for the intending mother or the donor. There may be several situations like
the surrogate mother aborting on the way, the baby being born still or dying early or turning
out to be congenitally abnormal, which may warrant storage of embryos. (Para 5.102)
 Keeping in view the facts as stated above the Committee fails to comprehend the rationale
behind such limitations on the storage of human gametes and embryos. The Committee feels
that the infertile couple and the surrogate mother should not undergo same trauma repeatedly.
This can be avoided with the storage facilities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
storage of embryos should be permitted and Clause 3(vii) be amended appropriately permitting
storage of embryos on the lines of ART Bill 2014. (Para 5.103)
The Committee supports the compensated surrogacy and expects the Department to carry
out necessary amendments to Clause 4 (ii) (b) and (c) in consonance with the concept of
compensated surrogacy. The Committee endorses the suggestion seeking a provision in the Bill
mandating on the rights of the surrogate child and the interest of the child so that the child is
not ill-treated, abused, sold or trafficked or exploited in any way. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Surrogacy Bill must incorporate enabling provisions on screening of intending
couple seeking medical assessment of their fitness to be parent, social economic background,
criminal records in past, age, family information and related checks before they are permitted

66
to commission surrogacy. There should be a provision to ensure that the intending parents have
not been involved in any child trafficking or child abuse. (Para 5.108)
The Committee notes that Clause 4(ii)(e) has left certain conditions for surrogacy to be
specified through regulations by the National Surrogacy Board and observes that this Clause is
couched too much in ambiguities and generalities. The Committee is of the considered view that
the substantive purposes for which surrogacy will be allowed should be enshrined in the statute
itself and not left to be covered under regulations. If required, an exhaustive list of purposes for
surrogacy may be provided by way of regulations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Clause 4(ii)(e) may be amended suitably and the substantive purposes for surrogacy be clearly
delineated therein. (Para 5.109)
The Committee notes that certificate of essentiality is required to be obtained by the
intending couple from the Appropriate authority after giving the reasons to commission surrogacy.
This certificate of essentiality would include three conditions that need to be fulfilled viz. certificate
of proven infertility, order on parentage and custody of child from court. This further requires
an insurance coverage in favour of surrogate mother from an insurance company or an agent
recognized by Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA). The Committee observes
that childless couples in India try various medical treatment options including assisted reproductive
methods before they go for surrogacy as the last resort. Infertility is considered a taboo in our
society and infertile couples go through a lot of mental agony and psychological trauma due to
infertility. The couples who are already reeling under such emotional trauma of infertility and
huge costs of the surrogacy treatment would be additionally burdened with the requirement of
certificate of infertility from appropriate authority causing further distress and hardships. Besides,
certificate of infertility has a negative impact psychologically and is considered derogatory for
women in India. A certificate of infertility may also act as an evidence for filing divorce in case
one partner is certified to be infertile. Hence, the Committee is of the view that once the couple
has had all the procedures under assisted reproductive technology without any success, certificate
of infertility from appropriate authority is unwarranted. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that requirement of having certificate for infertility from an appropriate authority should be
done away with and instead medical reports and prescription of the couple certifying repeated
failures in conception or inability to carry the baby to full term should be allowed as a proof for
their decision to commission surrogacy. Necessary modifications may accordingly be made in
Clause 4(iii) (a)(I). (Para 5.114)
The Committee notes that neither any time-limit has been prescribed for issuing an
essentiality certificate by the District Medical Board nor there is any appeal or review procedure,
in case the application for surrogacy is rejected. This confers huge discretionary powers to the
District Medical Board for issuance of essentiality certificate. It would, therefore, be in the
fitness of things if suitable safeguards are built in the Bill and it is mandated that the essentiality
certificate will be issued within a specified time-frame. Also, there is an imperative need for an
appellate authority to be provided for in case of refusal of such an order. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that suitable enabling amendments may accordingly be made in Clause
4 and other relevant Clauses of the Bill. (Para 5.115)

67
The Committee observes that there is huge disparity in the bargaining power of surrogates
vis-à-vis commissioning parents due to surrogates’ impoverishment, illiteracy and the resultant
lack of access to legal representation. Surrogate mothers are not informed of the effects of
fertility medications and treatment protocols and as a result thereof, they are left completely
unprotected and vulnerable in the matter. Therefore, mere explaining of all side effects of
surrogacy procedure does not hold good in this context. The Committee, therefore, recommends
an elaborate mechanism for obtaining full informed consent by a competent authority after
comprehensive medical, social and psychological conselling and the risks associated with ART
procedures, fertility medications and surrogate pregnancy. The competent authority should consist
of independent functionaries including civil society members and NGOs working on women’s
health and rights. The Committee also feels that consent from the husband of surrogate mother
is also important. The Committee accordingly recommends that suitable amendments be made
in the Bill, incorporating the provisions for mandatory appointment of a competent authority to
obtain full informed consent of surrogate mothers. (Para 5.121)
The Committee is also of the view that a mandatory consent from intending couple would
be legally binding on all the stakeholders of the surrogacy arrangement. The Committee endorses
the suggestion of the Ministry of Women and Child Development that a surrogate mother should
have an option to withdraw from the surrogacy arrangement if she chooses to do so before the
start of the procedure. Empanelment of women wanting to be a surrogate by the State is a good
suggestion of the Ministry as the surrogates can be identified, traced and counselled before
giving their consent. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to incorporate
the changes in the proposed Bill on the above lines. (Para 5.122)
The Committee notes that the proposed Bill does not specify the number of embryo
transfer with respect to the number of attempts or number of cycles or number of embryos that
are implanted in the surrogate’s body. The Committee is of the view that considering the
complexities of the procedures and scope of exploitation of a woman’s body, there should be a
prescribed limit to number of embryo implants. However, the Committee is not in favour of
including the number of embryos to be implanted in the main statute. Since the Department has
assured to consider the suggestion while framing rules, the Committee recommends that the
requisite safeguard limiting the number of embryos to be implanted, be provided in the Rules.
(Para 5.126)
The Committee notes that there are twenty four members in the Board representing
various Government bodies and specialized fields. They may be from amongst medical geneticists,
human embryologist, gynaecologist, obstetrician, experts from stri-rog, prasuti-tantra, social
science, women welfare organization, and representatives from the civil society working on
women’s health and child issues possessing requisite prescribed qualifications and experience.
The Committee also notes that the National Board of Assisted Reproductive Technology in the
draft ART Bill, 2014 is represented by experts from the field of assisted reproduction, andrology,
mammalian reproduction, biomedical sciences, embryology, bioethics, gynaecology, social science,
law or human rights, public health and civil society representatives apart from the officials from

68
Government bodies. Since the National Surrogacy Board is a critical instrument for advising the
Government on policy matters relating to surrogacy and supervising various bodies constituted
under the Act, it is important that there should be appropriate mix of different categories of
professionals in the Board who could help the Board play its designated role effectively. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the composition of the National Surrogacy Board may
be modelled on that of the National Board of Assisted Reproductive Technology in the ART Bill,
2014. The Committee also sees logic in having a Registrar at the national level Board having in-
depth legal knowledge of the concerned subject. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the
Department to include a Registrar in the Board who would facilitate the surrogacy procedure
informing the legal implications of the surrogacy agreement to the concerned parties.
(Para 5.131)
Keeping in mind the complexities and ambit of the surrogacy procedures and to effectively
regulate and monitor the entire spectrum of this field, the Committee appreciates the need to
keep a record of all the cases of surrogacy from the beginning of the process till its end. Having
a centralized database at the National level would be a step in right direction so as to monitor
the surrogates, surrogacy clinics and the commissioning parents. All State Surrogacy Boards
should be required to submit to the National Surrogacy Board, data on the surrogacy services and
arrangements. Therefore, the Committee is in unison with the suggestion of keeping a registry
at the national level having details of the registration and conduct of every surrogacy clinic,
surrogacy arrangements, including its stakeholders, taking place across the country. Such a
registry will also help in tracking the surrogate mothers who will act as surrogate only once in
their lifetime. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department that a National Registry
should be maintained on similar lines as in the ART Bill, 2014 which contains details of all the
ART clinics and ART banks, nature and type of services provided, outcome of the services etc.
(Para 5.135)
The Committee recommends that the State/Union Territory Surrogacy Board may be
structured on the lines of the Committee’s recommendation made in respect of the National
Surrogacy Board. (Para 5.140)
The Committee agrees with the suggestion of having a wide representation of members
from surrogacy related fields. The Committee recommends to the Department to include experts
having knowledge and experience of bioethics and assisted reproduction and also have more than
one civil society member as the whole arrangement of surrogacy has social, psychological, physical
and emotional implications for all involved in the procedures. The Committee also recommends
that a single window system should be set up for registration and reporting of surrogacy clinics
so that it is easier for the clinics to follow the law. (Para 5.145)
The Committee in the earlier part of this Report has recommended that compensated
surrogacy be permitted. The Committee recommends that the spirit of the Committee’s
recommendation in this regard be captured and Clause 35 be modified accordingly. As regards
the exploitation of surrogate mothers and children born through surrogacy, the Committee notes

69
that the Bill lacks clarity about certain specific offences like human trafficking, abduction or
inter-country movement of surrogate mother or child for surrogacy purposes. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that the Bill should have explicit provisions prohibiting inter-country
movement of surrogate mother or child. (Para 5.149)
The Committee has noticed that although Clause 7 provides for prohibition to abandon the
child born through surrogacy on the reasons of the sex of the child; it nowhere prohibits sex
selective surrogacy. It again does not prohibit conduct of sex selective techniques (pre-natal, post
natal) in the name of surrogacy to have a child of desired sex and on use of pre-genetic diagnosis
for detection of sex-linked genetic disorder. In view of the above, the Committee feels that the
whole purpose of the Bill would get defeated if there is no provision on sex selective techniques/
surrogacy which may lead to exploitation of surrogate mother and child. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that the provisions of the Bill may be harmonized with relevant provisions of Pre-
natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1994 and suitable drafting
changes be made in the Bill. (Para 5.150)
The Committee treats the practice of twiblings as a grave offence which directly leads to
exploitation of the surrogate mother. Considering the high chances of such misconduct and its
associated risks for the well being of the surrogate mother, the Committee recommends that the
Bill should have specific provisions for prohibition of such a practice and penalization of couples
and clinics on utilizing two surrogates for same intending couple at same time. (Para 5.151)
The Committee notes that selling and buying human gametes or embryos for surrogacy
is prohibited as per the provisions of the Bill and involvement of a third party i.e. donors who
would donate egg/sperm are nowhere mentioned in the Bill. The Committee has already dealt
with this issue in the earlier part of this Report and therefore, recommends even at the cost of
sounding repetitive that the Bill should include adequate provision of donors for gametes for the
use of intending couple during surrogacy procedure. (Para 5.152)
The Committee notes that Clause 36(1) deals with punishment for surrogacy professionals
or any other person who owns a surrogacy clinic or employed with such a clinic or centre etc and
renders his professional or technical services. This Clause stipulates imprisonment for minimum
five years and fine upto ten lakh rupees. The Committee would like to emphasize that
transgressions which are purely procedural or technical in nature should be viewed in a broader
perspective and should not invite stringent provisions. On the other hand, the fraudulent practices
and activities should be dealt with severely and in a deterrent fashion. The Committee would
therefore, recommend that the gravity of punishment in Clause 36(1) be modified suitably.
(Para 5.159)
The Committee agrees with the contention of the stakeholders that surrogacy and its
related procedures are not criminal activities. It is a procedure which is an advancement in the
medical science in the field of assisted reproductive technology to have a biological child for
infertile couple or for those who are unable to have their own child due to medical reasons. It
is also true that the concerned parties are neither criminals nor are they threat to the society.

70
Moreover, penal sanctions on the commissioning parents would have a definite impact on the
surrogate child. The child would be separated from his/her own biological parents, and would be
denied of custody care arrangement defeating the very purpose of the Bill. (para 5.160)
In view of the above, the Committee is of the view that punishment should be commensurate
with the level or degree of infraction committed. Minor infractions of law should be considered
in mild manner and not carry any criminal liability. Also, if default is unintentional, the same
should be taken into consideration without rigidly giving a harsh punishment. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that Clause 37 may be modified suitably, keeping in view the best
interest of the surrogate child. (Para 5.161)
The Committee also notes that the criminal provisions as contained in Clauses 35, 36, 37
and 38 provide for a minimum punishment and no maximum punishment, which is unheard of
in any criminal legislation. This is indicative of the fact that the Department has not exercised
the required due diligence at the time of drafting the Bill. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the necessary modifications relating to the maximum punishment be incorporated in the
Bill. (Para 5.162)
VI. MISCELLANEOUS POINTS
(i) SURROGACY AGREEMENT
The Committee is of the view that mere parentage order issued by the first class magistrate
will not suffice. If the intent of the Bill is to protect the surrogate mothers and children, it must
provide a legal frame-work for a comprehensive surrogacy agreement containing all safeguards.
The agreement should mandatorily provide insurance, monetary compensation to surrogates, the
manner of its disbursement and pre/post delivery care of the surrogates. It should also contain
a provision for nourishment of the surrogates not just during the pregnancy but also in the post
partum period; comprehensive healthcare for a period of five years starting from the date any
medication for surrogacy procedure is begun; legal, medical and psychological counselling etc.
Since the surrogates are predominantly uneducated, the contract should be made available in the
language they fully understand and should be explained properly to them. The surrogacy agreement
should be registered also. The jurisdiction for registration should lie before the Registrar where
surrogate mother resides or where the intending parents reside or where the agreement is
executed. Since a surrogacy agreement is a legal document, it will act as bedrock of the surrogacy
arrangement and shall have a legal binding on all the parties involved in the surrogacy and help
in solidifying the rights and duties of both the participants to the arrangement. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that an agreement of surrogacy among all the stakeholders of the
facility i.e the intending parents, surrogate mother and the surrogacy clinic should be made a
mandatory document for the surrogacy arrangement for them. Necessary amendments/alternate
Clauses may accordingly be incorporated in the Bill. (Para 6.6)
(ii) CHILD RIGHTS
The Committee strongly believes that the interest of the surrogate child needs to be
secured in all situations including unforeseen contingencies. The Committee, therefore,

71
recommends that the Bill should have a comprehensive provision entailing adequate insurance
coverage for the unborn child. The Committee is of the view that mere insurance for the
surrogate child would not suffice and recommends that the Bill should contain provisions for
Bank guarantees/fixed deposits for taking care of the expenses of the surrogate child in any
emergent situation. Such a cover would ensure financial support for the surrogate child in case
of any eventuality. It would also ensure cover for a child born with any abnormality/disability.
It would also be the responsibility of the State Government to take care of all abandoned children
born out of surrogacy. (Para 6.11)
The Committee recommends that surrogate child is defined separately in the Bill so as to
distinguish the surrogate child from a child born to a couple who have undergone ART procedures
themselves. (Para 6.12)
(iii) PROVISION FOR BREAST MILK FOR SURROGATE CHILD
The Committee observes that the provision of breastfeeding or making available breast
milk for child born out of surrogacy finds no place in the proposed Bill. It is the right of the
child to have mother’s milk for adequate nutrition for his/her well being. As regards the way
mother’s milk is provided to the child, the Committee is of the view that the provision of breast
milk should be allowed by way of Human Milk Bank services only and not by direct breastfeeding
by surrogate mother as six months of breast feeding will establish an emotional attachment of
surrogate child with the surrogate mother. It would be very difficult for the surrogate mother
to give up the child leading to complications. Therefore, the Committee suggests that the surrogate
child should get mother’s milk for initial six months and recommends the Department to include
a provision in the Bill for providing breast milk to the surrogate child through Human Milk Bank
services only. (Para 6.15)
(iv) BIRTH CER TIFICATE
The Committee notes that there is no such provision regarding birth certificate in the
Surrogacy Bill while such provision is there in the draft ART Bill, 2014. The Committee notes
that the Bill provides for an intending couple to get a parentage order from Court to establish
their parentage over the surrogate child. The Committee recommends that the Bill should also
have the provision of birth certificate which is a legal document for the child born out of
surrogacy with the names of the commissioning parents on it and for the requirement of date
of birth of the surrogate child. Since in surrogacy arrangement, the birth mother is not genetically
related to the child, logically her name should not be written on the birth certificate. Therefore,
the Committee agrees with the suggestion of making an amendment in the Birth Registration
Act for the cases of surrogacy arrangements in order to avoid legal complexities related to
parentage of the child born out of surrogacy. Therefore, the Committee recommends to the
Department to incorporate the provision of birth certificate of the surrogate child in the Surrogacy
Bill and to take up the matter with relevant authorities to make necessary amendments in the
existing rules of registration of birth. (Para 6.19)

72
(v) DEFINITION OF GAMETE DONORS
The Committee notes that the Bill allows only Gestational surrogacy wherein the surrogate
mother would only assist in carrying pregnancy and hand over the surrogate child to the intending
couple. However, there is no definition of gamete donors in the Bill and no mention of process
of seeking human gamete donors for the purpose of surrogacy. Since gamete donation is part
of surrogacy procedure and may entail huge scope of exploitation associated with the related
procedures, the Committee feels that it is important to specify the role of gamete donors in the
Surrogacy Bill. Also, as recommended earlier, the national registry would have a database of such
donors too. Therefore, the Committee recommends to the Department to include the definition
of gamete donors in the Bill appropriately. The Committee also recommends that egg donation
should not be allowed as a profession and a woman should be permitted to donate her eggs only
once in her lifetime. (Para 6.22)
(vi) DISPUTE RESOLUTION SYSTEM
The Committee notes that the Bill does not provide for any dispute resolution mechanism
between the surrogate mother, intending parents and the clinic. In case of any conflict of interest
or disagreement between the surrogate mother and the intending couple, the surrogate mother
has no one to advocate her case. To handle such issues that can be dealt at the clinic level, there
is a need to have an independent agency for resolution of disputes or redressal of any grievances
of any of the parties involved in surrogacy process. The authority so created should have quasi-
judicial powers to get its orders implemented. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the
Department to have an agency/body for the said purpose and incorporate enabling provisions to
this effect in the Bill. (Para 6.25)
(vii) PROVISION FOR DNA TESTING
The Committee notes that there is no provision in the proposed Bill to have a scientific
proof to establish parentage of the intending couple over their child born through surrogacy. In
order to avoid any kind of custody disputes between the surrogate mother and the intending
couple or to confirm the genetic connection between the child and intending couple, there should
be a scientific mechanism to establish the fact that the child born through surrogacy is the
biological child of the intending couple which can be done through DNA testing. The Committee
also feels that DNA testing can help in determining parenthood of intending couple so that
surrogacy clinics do not indulge in any kind of unethical practices. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Department to incorporate the provision allowing DNA testing in the Bill in
circumstances where there is need to have genetic determination of parenthood in any surrogacy
arrangement so that surrogacy clinics do not indulge in any kind of fraud. (Para 6.27)
(viii) ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY (ART) (REGULATION) BILL
The Committee observes that the Assisted Reproductive Technologies (Regulation) Bill,
2008 had been drafted in 2008 and revised in 2010 and 2014. Since then, it has been lying with
the Government. Moreover, the draft ART Bill also included provisions on regulation of surrogacy

73
facilities. The Committee takes note of the inordinate delay in bringing forth the draft ART Bill
especially in view of the fact that there has been mushrooming of ART clinics across the country
offering various services from IVF to surrogacy etc. The Committee fails to comprehend the
reasons behind bringing a fresh Bill specifically on surrogacy, when a detailed, comprehensive
and all en-compassing Bill on ART services had already been drafted by the Department. The
Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised of the reasons behind such prompt decision to
bring a separate legislation for surrogacy without the ART Bill. (Para 6.32)
The Committee strongly believes that with the rapid advancement of science and technology
in all spheres of life, there is an urgent need to regulate the use of modern techniques especially
w.r.t. assisted reproduction and use of ART for surrogacy. Hence, the Committee feels that along
with surrogacy regulation, there is urgent need to regulate the ART clinics across the country.
It is a fact that surrogacy procedures cannot be conducted without assisted reproduction techniques
and therefore, mere enactment of the Surrogacy Bill would not serve the purpose of controlling
commercialization of the surrogacy facilities across the country in the absence of regulation of
assisted reproductive clinics and banks where surrogacy is being conducted as ART Clinics and
Surrogacy Clinics are not separate. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
ART Bill should be brought forth before the Surrogacy (Regulation), Bill, 2016. (Para 6.33)

MINUTES

*V
FIFTH MEETING
(2017-18)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 2nd March, 2017 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh
5. Shri Ashok Siddharth
6. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
7. Dr. C. P . Thakur
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Dr. K. Kamaraj
11. Shri Arjunlal Meena
12. Shri J. Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
13. Shri M. K. Raghavan
14. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
15. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
16. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
17. Shrimati Rita Tarai
18. Shri Manohar Untwal
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Director
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Director
77
* Minutes of I to IV meetings relate to other matters.

78
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
WITNESSES
** *
Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and stated that a Bill viz. the Surrogacy
(Regulation) Bill, 2016 has been referred to the Committee on 12th January, 2017 for examination and
report within three months and the relevant papers received from the Department of Health Research had
been circulated by the Secretariat to the Members vide its letter dated 24th January, 2017. He apprised
the Members that the Committee would have the initial presentation of the Secretary, Department of
Health Research on the Bill tomorrow i.e. 03rd March, 2017. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.53 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 3rd March, 2017
*** relate to other matters.

79
VI
SIXTH MEETING
(2017-18)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 3rd March, 2017 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
3. Shri Jairam Ramesh
4. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
5. Shri K. Somaprasad
6. Dr. C. P . Thakur
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. (Smt.) Heena Vijay Gavit
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Dr. K. Kamaraj
10. Shri Arjunlal Meena
11. Shri J. Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
12. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
13. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
14. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Director
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
79

80
WITNESSES
Representatives from the Department of Health Research
1. Dr. Soumya Swaminathan, Secretary & Director General, ICMR
2. Shri Manoj Pant, Joint Secretary
3. Shri V. K. Gauba, Joint Secretary
4. Ms. Bharati Das, Chief Controller of Accounts
5. Shri Sachin Mittal, Director (Budget)
Representatives from Legislative Department
1. Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Additional Secretary
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Additional Legislative Counsel
3. Shri I. C. Sharma, Deputy Legislative Counsel
4. Shri T. K. Malik, Deputy Legislative Assistant
Representatives from Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Additional Secretary
Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and briefed them about the
agenda of the meeting i.e. * * * and presentation on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016 by the
representatives of Department of Health Research. The Committee decided to issue a Press Release on
the Bill to elicit the views of the general public.
3. * * *
4. * * *
Presentation on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016
5. The Secretary then made a presentation on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016. The Joint
Secretary, Department of Health Research gave a brief background of the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill,
2016. He apprised the Committee that there are nearly 2000 centres rendering surrogacy services in the
country wherein females rent their womb to give birth to a child for a childless couple. In the last three
years, it was estimated that around 2000 babies were born out of surrogacy. He also informed the
Committee that surrogacy has been regulated all over the world except in India. The National Law
Commission has strongly recommended to introduce Surrogacy Regulation Bill. The Joint Secretary
submitted that 90% of surrogacy services beneficiaries are foreigners as it costs them 5-6 times lesser
as compared to the rest of the world. Since there is no regulatory framework for surrogacy services
*** relate to other matters.

81
in India; there is no check over medical care, post delivery of the surrogate mother. He further submitted
that while drafting the said Bill, two things were kept in mind i.e. (i) interest of surrogate mother like
rights and insurance, and (ii) security of baby born out of surrogacy apart from other factors like
responsibilities of intended couple, responsibilities of society , legal provisions to secure child’s future etc.
(The Committee then adjourned at 1.20 P.M. for lunch and assembled again at 2.10 P.M.)
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.
*** relate to other matters.

82
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
(2017-18)
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 17th March, 2017 in Room “62”, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
 1. Prof. Ram Gopal Y adav  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
3. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
4. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
6. Shri Ashok Siddharth
8. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
9. Shri K. Somaprasad
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Thangso Baite
11. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
12. Dr. (Smt.) Heena Vijay Gavit
13. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
14. Dr. K. Kamaraj
15. Shri Arjunlal Meena
16. Shri M.K. Raghavan
17. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
18. Shri R.K. Singh (Arrah)
19. Shrimati Rita Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shimati Arpana Mendiratta, Director
82

83
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
Opening Remarks
2. * * *
3. * * *
Examination of the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016 and * * *
4. The Chairman, thereafter, informed that since the Committee has been busy in the examination of
Demands for Grants (2017-18), it has not been able to hear the views of various stakeholders on the
Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016 referred to the Committee for examination and report by 11th April,
2017. As the Bill is very crucial for regulating commercial surrogacy and in protecting the interests of
surrogate mother and child, the Committee decided that it may also hear the views of some experts/
stakeholders on it. The Committee also felt that it would not be possible for it to complete all stages of
examination of the Bill and present its Report thereon by 11th April, 2017. The Committee, accordingly,
decided to seek extension of time upto 11th July, 2017 for presentation of Report on the Bill and
authorized its Chairman to approach the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the purpose.
5. The Committee also decided that the views of the State Governments may be sought on (i) the
Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2017; and (ii) * * * which is being examined by the Committee. * * *
6. * * *
7. The Committee then adjourned at 10:30 
A.M.
*** relate to other matters.

84
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
(2017-18)
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 30th March, 2017 in Room “63”, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
3. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
4. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
5. Shri K. Somaprasad
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Thangso Baite
7. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
8. Dr. (Smt.) Heena Vijay Gavit
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
11. Shri R.K.Singh (Arrah)
12. Shri Bharat Singh
13. Shrimati Rita Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
84

85
WITNESSES
Representatives from the Department of Health Research
1. Dr. Soumya Swaminathan, Secretary and Director General, ICMR
2. Shri Manoj Pant, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. R S Sharma, Scientist ‘G’, ICMR
Representatives from Legislative Department
1. Shri R. Sreenivas, Additional Legislative Counsel
Representatives from Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri Inder Kumar, Additional Secretary
Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them about
the agenda of the meeting, i.e. oral evidence of the representatives of Department of Health Research
in connection with examination of the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016.
Oral Evidence of the Secretary, Department of Health Research on the Surrogacy (Regulation)
Bill, 2016
3. Thereafter, the Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Health
Research. At the outset, the Joint Secretary, Department of Health Research made a power point
presentation on the genesis of the Bill and its salient features.
4. During the course of the power point presentation, the Joint Secretary inter-alia highlighted the
fact that though surrogacy was being practised in India for past few years, in the absence of a proper
legislation, a large number of surrogacy clinics had come up offering surrogacy services mostly to
foreigners. However, serious complaints regarding malpractices / commercialisation of surrogacy,
exploitation of surrogate mothers and abandonment of children through surrogacy have been raised. The
issue had resonated in Supreme Court in 2015, and the Court had been informed of the commitment of
the Government to bring a Legislation early in this regard. He also apprised the Committee about:-
(i) details of IVF / ART clinics in India; (ii) number of surrogacy births in the country in last 3 years;
(iii) several reported cases of exploitation and reported complaints of surrogacy clinics; (iv) court cases
in India regarding surrogacy; (v) issues related to surrogacy by Foreign Nationals viz. abandoning the
baby, citizenship issues, etc. (vi) international scenario with respect to different countries where surrogacy
(commercial / altruistic) was legal / or was allowed; (viii) process of drafting of Surrogacy Regulation
Bill which involved inter-ministerial consultations with a cross section of stakeholders etc.
5. Apart from these, the Joint Secretary apprised the Committee about the proposed provisions of
the Bills and submitted that the Bill proposes to ban commercial surrogacy and allow altruistic surrogacy
only to infertile Indian married couples.

86
6. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries on the Bill. The Secretary, Department of Health
Research and other officials replied to some of the queries raised by the Members. The
Chairman directed the Secretary to furnish detailed written replies to the queries left unanswered within
a week.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5:45 
P.M.

87
IX
NINTH MEETING
(2017-18)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 27th April, 2017 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
5. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
6. Shri Jairam Ramesh
7. Shri Ashok Siddharth
8. Shri K. Somaprasad
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Thangso Baite
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
11. Dr. K. Kamaraj
12. Shri C. R. Patil
13. Shri M. K. Raghavan
14. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
15. Shri R.K.Singh (Arrah)
16. Shri Bharat Singh
17. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
18. Shrimati Rita Tarai
19. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Director
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Additional Director
87

88
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Women and Child Development
1. Shri Chetan B. Sanghi, Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Shipra Roy, Deputy Secretary
3. Ms. Risha Syed, Senior Consultant
Ministry of External Affairs
Shri Upender Singh Rawat, Joint Secretary (CPV)
Ministry of Home Affairs
Shri Mukesh Mittal, Joint Secretary
National Commission for Women
1. Smt. Lalitha Kumaramangalam, Chairperson
2. Smt. Vandana Gupta, Joint Secretary
Legislative Department
1. Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Additional Secretary
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Additional Legislative Counsel
Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri Inder Kumar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri O. Venkateswarlu, Deputy Legal Adviser
Department of Health Research
1. Smt. Indira Sharma, Deputy Secretary
2. Dr. Kavitha Rajsekar, Scientist-D
Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them about
the agenda of the meeting, i.e. to hear the views of the representatives of the Ministries of Women and
Child Development, External Affairs, Home Affairs and National Commission for Women in connection

89
with the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016. He also informed that representatives of Ministry of Law and
Justice and Department of Health Research were also present for assisting the Committee in its
deliberations.
3. Before calling in the witnesses, the Chairman informed the Members that in pursuance of the
directions of the Hon. Supreme Court passed on 2nd May, 2016, an Oversight Committee was constituted
for a period of one year to oversee the functioning of the Medical Council of India in all matters
considered by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare in its 92nd Report
on functioning of Medical Council of India (MCI). He was of the view that even though the period was
going to expire on 02nd May, 2017, the Committee has not been apprised of any further movement in
this regard. In view thereof, the Chairman felt that a questionnaire may be sent to the Department for
seeking the factual position on the functioning of MCI, which was agreed upon by the Committee.
Oral Evidence of the representatives of Ministries of Women and Child Development, External
Affairs, Home Affairs and National Commission for Women on the Surrogacy (Regulation)
Bill, 2016
4. Thereafter, the Committee first heard the views of the representatives of Ministry of Women and
Child Development on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016. The Joint Secretary of the Ministry informed
the Committee that when the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had circulated the cabinet note on
the Assisted Reproductive Technology Bill (ART Bill) to the Ministry of Women and Child Development
(WCD), it had furnished its views on the said Bill. He further submitted that even though his Ministry
had not been consulted on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016, the inputs provided by Ministry of
WCD on ART Bill had been used as inputs in the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016. On being asked
specifically about the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016, he was of the view that though Surrogacy needs
to be regulated, its ambit should be widened to include single women, divorced female and widows.
Further, the Bill should include both genetic and gestational surrogacy. He felt that the altruistic surrogacy
proposed in the Bill would defeat the purpose of the Bill as in India familial ties would jeopardize the
future of the surrogate child and even lead to property disputes.
5. The Committee then heard the views of the Chairperson of the National Commission for Women.
The Chairperson while articulating the views of the Commission on the said Bill was per se against
commercial surrogacy as it meant exploitation of poor by the rich and just another byname for
commodification of poor and hapless women.
6. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of the Ministry of External
Affairs and Home Affairs. The Joint Secretary of the Ministry of External Affairs while explaining his
Ministry’s stand on the Bill, stated that role of the Ministry was to control ‘foreigners’ from availing
surrogacy services in India by bringing about a change in visa rules. The Joint Secretary of the Ministry
of Home Affairs apprised the Committee that earlier foreigners were coming on tourist visa and availing
surrogacy services. However, guidelines were issued that Indian Missions in foreign countries should not
grant visa to foreign nationals for commissioning surrogacy. Further, the missions were also advised that

90
no permission should be granted by Foreigners Regional Registration Offices (FRROs) to Overseas
Citizen cardholders to commission surrogacy in India. Also, directions were given for not allowing any
‘exit permits’ to child born out of surrogacy.
7. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries on the Bill. The officials replied to some of the queries
raised by the Members. The Chairman directed the officials to furnish detailed written replies to the
queries left unanswered within a week.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 4:15 
P.M. to meet at 11.00 A.M. on 28th April, 2017.

91
X
TENTH MEETING
(2017-18)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 28th April, 2017 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
3. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
4. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
5. Shri Jairam Ramesh
6. Shri Ashok Siddharth
7. Shri K. Somaprasad
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Thangso Baite
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri Arjunlal Meena
11. Shri J. Jayasingh Thiyangaraj Natterjee
12. Shri C. R. Patil
13. Shri M. K. Raghavan
14. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
15. Shri R.K.Singh (Arrah)
16. Shri Bharat Singh
17. Shrimati Rita Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Director
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Additional Director
91

92
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives from Indian Society of Third Party Assisted Reproduction (INSTAR)
1. Dr. Rita Bakshi, Vice-President
2. Dr. Shivani Sachdev Gour, General Secretary
3. Mr. Saurabh Kumar
4. Dr. Samit Shekhar
Indian Society for Assisted Reproduction (ISAR) and Federation of Obstetric and Gynaecological
Societies of India (FOGSI)
1. Dr. Rishma Pai, President, FOGSI and Vice-President, ISAR
2. Dr. Sarita Sukhija, Vice President, Delhi Chapter, ISAR
3. Dr. Nandita Palshetkar
4. Dr. Jaydeep Tank
5. Mr. Amit Karkhanis
Expert
1. Mrs. Jayashree Wad, Supreme Court Lawyer
Legislative Department
1. Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Additional Secretary
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Additional Legislative Counsel
Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri Inder Kumar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri O. Venkateswarlu, Deputy Legal Adviser
Department of Health Research
1. Shrimati Indira Sharma, Deputy Secretary
2. Dr. Kavitha Rajsekar, Scientist-D
Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them about
the agenda of the meeting, i.e. to hear the views of representatives of the (i) Indian Society of Third

93
Party Assisted Reproduction (INSTAR); (ii) Federation of Obstetric and Gyaecological Societies of India
(FOGSI) and Indian Society for Assisted Reproduction and (iii) Mrs. Jayashree Wad, Supreme Court
Lawyer in connection with the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016.
Oral Evidence of the stakeholders/experts on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016
3. The Committee first heard the views of Dr. Rishma Pai, President, Federation of Obstetric and
Gyaecological Societies of India (FOGSI) and Vice President, Indian Society for Assisted Reproduction
on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016. She informed about medical and social indications/reasons to
opt for surrogacy. Thereafter, Dr. Jaydeep Tank, FOGSI explained the following points like (i) Report
of Ernest & Young (July, 2015) highlighting the fact that surrogacy cycles constituted approximately 1%
of the total IVF cycles indicating expanding IVF treatment in India; (ii) approximate expenditure involved
in full term surrogacy procedure; and (iii) pros and cons of surrogacy; etc. They requested that a well
meaning and balanced regulation is preferable to the current legal vacuum. The need of the hour is to
focus on data collection, situational analysis, meeting with stakeholders for dissemination and discussions
to arrive at a consensus in this regard.
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of representatives of INSTAR. Dr. Rita Bakshi, Vice
President, Indian Society of Third Party Assisted Reproduction (INSTAR) pointed out various Clauses
of the Bill and inter alia gave suggestions thereon like (i) altruistic surrogacy is practically not possible;
(ii) close relative should not be the only choice but only an option; (iii) permission to OCI/PIO cardholders/
foreigners/single parents for surrogacy; (iv) arbitrary and unreasonable punishment for doctors;
(v) storage of embryos/gametes should be allowed with the consent of the parents, etc. Dr. Shivani
Sachdev Gour, General Secretary (INSTAR) further elaborated on the statistics of surrogacy from
northern, southern and western India, number of babies born through surrogacy till date, ways in which
compensation is used by surrogate mothers, reasons of surrogacy and details of questionnaire based
survey of 170 women who opted for surrogacy.
5. The Committee then heard the views of Mrs. Jayashree Wad, Supreme Court Lawyer. She further
drew the Committee’s attention on technicalities of the Bill from legal point of view like abandonment
of child, definition of adoption, surrogacy agreement etc. Apart from this, she also suggested that some
provision of depositing the amount in the court to take care of health related expenses of surrogate during
the pregnancy period should be there and emphasized the need of having surrogacy agreement registered
in a court of law.
6. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries on the Bill. The witnesses replied to some of the
queries raised by the Members. The Chairman directed the witnesses to furnish detailed written replies
to the queries left unanswered within a week.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 12.58 
P.M.

94
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
(2017-18)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 24th May, 2017 in Committee Room ‘C’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh
5. Shri Ashok Siddharth
6. Shri K. Somaprasad
7. Dr. C. P . Thakur
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Dr. K. Kamaraj
11. Shri Arjunlal Meena
12. Shri J. Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
13. Shri C. R. Patil
14. Shri R. K.Singh (Arrah)
15. Shri Bharat Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Additional Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
94

95
WITNESSES
1. Dr. Kamini Rao, Member, National Advisory Committee for Drafting of
Guidelines on Assisted Reproductive Technology
2. Ms. Pinki Virani, Journalist and Human Rights Activist
3. Ms. Sonali Kusum, Member, International Surrogacy Forum
Department of Health Research
1. Ms. Sarita Mittal, Joint Secretary
2. Ms. Indira Sharma, Deputy Secretary
3. Dr. Kavitha Rajsekar, Scientist ‘D’
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Additional Secretary
Legislative Department
1. Dr. N. R. Battu, Joint Secretary
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Additional Legislative Counsel
Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them about
the agenda of the meeting, i.e. to hear the views of: (i) Dr. Kamini Rao, Member, National Advisory
Committee for Drafting of Guidelines on Assisted Reproductive Technology; (ii) Ms. Pinki Virani, Journalist
and Human Rights Activist; and (iii) Ms. Sonali Kusum, Member, International Surrogacy Forum, on the
Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016.
Oral Evidence of the stakeholders/experts on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016
3. The Committee first heard the views of Ms. Sonali Kusum, Member, International Surrogacy
Forum on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016. She informed about the gaps in the Bill and also gave
a comparative analysis of the surrogacy laws in Australia and Canada. She inter alia highlighted the
following points namely (i) need for inclusion of rights based perspective in the Preamble of the Bill for
stakeholders (child as well as surrogate mother); (ii) need to expand the insurance coverage for altruistic
surrogacy (section 2 of the Bill) to include other expenses as specified in the Law Commission Report
of 2009 such as nutrition, maternity clothing, crèches and other facilities for the child of surrogate
mother; (iii) compensated surrogacy more suitable where standard amount of money may be fixed to
be provided to surrogate mother; (iv) in the definition of infertility, the five years of waiting period may
be reduced to one year as per World Health Organisation (WHO) guidelines as five years of waiting
period is a breach of reproductive rights of the intending couple; (v) surrogacy agreement should be
notarised; (vi) rights of children born out of surrogacy should be ensured by setting up breast banks
for providing breast milk to surrogate child; (vii) need to include single mothers/unmarried/divorced/

96
widowed females in the ambit of the Bill; (viii) need to include a provision on strict control over sex
determination; (ix) need to include provision relating to switching of gametes or mixing to prevent such
malpractices, etc.
4. Thereafter, Ms. Pinki Virani, Journalist and Human Rights Activist made her submissions. She
inter alia highlighted the following points like (i) There should be no commodification of women and
children; (ii) the 5 year Clause for certifying infertility is suitable and should stay; (iii) embryos are being
switched to accomodate intending parents which is unethical and should not be allowed; (iv) donor
should agree for surrogacy only for altruistic reasons; (v) Insurance cover for surrogate mother should
be for a period of six years because there have been medical complications like surrogate mothers
developing cancers and child developing eye cancer, etc; (vi) Only one embryo should be allowed to be
inserted.
5. Thereafter, Dr. Kamini Rao, Member, National Advisory Committee for Drafting of Guidelines on
Assisted Reproductive Technology made her submissions and highlighted the following points namely
(i) ART Bill needs to be passed before Surrogacy Bill; (ii) need to reduce the five year Clause for proving
infertility as the period is too long; (iii) the term ‘close relative’ needs to be properly defined with proper
safeguards as it may lead to exploitation of surrogate mother and also result in emotional insecurity of
the intending mother; (iv) genetic determination of parenthood needs to be established; (v) provision to
ensure that two surrogate mothers for the same intending couple may not be used.
6. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries on the Bill. The witnesses replied to some of the
queries raised by the Members. The Chairman directed the witnesses to furnish detailed written replies
to the queries left unanswered within a week.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 25th May, 2017.

97
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
(2017-18)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 25th May, 2017 in Committee Room ‘C’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
3. Shri Jairam Ramesh
4. Shri Ashok Siddharth
5. Shri K. Somaprasad
6. Dr. C. P . Thakur
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
8. Dr. K. Kamaraj
9. Shri Arjunlal Meena
10. Shri C. R. Patil
11. Shri R.K.Singh (Arrah)
12. Shri Manohar Untwal
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Additional Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives from Surrogacy Laws India
1. Shri Anurag Chawla, Advocate
2. Ms. Diksha Bhatia, Advocate
97

98
Representatives from Trust Legal, Advocates and Consultants
1. Ms. Petal Chandhok, Advocate
Representatives from Amity Law School, Delhi
1. Ms. Aparajita Amar, Student
2. Shri Arjun Aggarwal, Student
Surrogate Mothers
1. * * *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
Commissioning Parent
* * *
Department of Health Research
1. Ms. Sarita Mittal, Joint Secretary
2. Ms. Indira Sharma, Deputy Secretary
3. Dr. Kavita Raj Shekhar, Scientist ‘D’
Legislative Department
1. Dr. N.R. Battu, Joint Secretary
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Additional Legislative Counsel
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Additional Secretary
Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them about
the agenda of the meeting, i.e. to hear the views of: (i) Shri Anurag Chawla, Advocate, Surrogacy Laws
India; (ii) Ms.Petal Chandhok, Trust Legal, Advocates and Consultants; (iii) Ms. Aparajita Amar and Shri
Arjun Aggarwal, Amity Law School, Delhi; (iv) * * *, Commissioning Parent and (v) four Surrogate
Mothers, namely * * * to hear their views on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016.
Oral Evidence of the stakeholders/experts on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016
3. The Committee first heard the views of Shri Anurag Chawla, Advocate, Surrogacy Laws India on
the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016. He inter-alia highlighted the following points namely (i) limiting
the Bill to Indian married couples, Indian citizens is not good; (ii) need to expand the definition of close
*** Identities withheld to protect privacy

99
relative; (iii) need to expand the surrogacy services to foreigners also subject to a set of conditions and
subject to the approval by National Law Board; (iv) NRIs, OCIs holders are part of India; they should
not be deprived of surrogacy services.
4. Thereafter, Ms.Petal Chandhok, Trust Legal, Advocates and Consultants submitted that (i) Provisions
of the Bill are violative of privacy rights like provision of close relative would lead to two mothers in
a home which could lead to unpleasant situation; (ii) the Bill is violative of Fundamental Rights like Article
14 and 22 as singles cannot avail surrogacy; (iii) commercial surrogacy industry needs to be regulated
and not banned as it will lead to a black market leading to exploitation; etc.
5. Thereafter, Ms. Aparajita Amar, Amity Law School highlighted the following points (i) the Bill
should incorporate a provision for ‘Home Study” which would help in a background check of the
intending parents; (ii) only gestational surrogacy should be allowed; (iii) provision for breast milk banks
should be made in the Bill; (iv) the five years waiting period was arbitrary; (v) compensatory surrogacy
is feasible and the formula in Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) Bill regarding the remuneration/
compensation to the surrogate mother should be adopted.
6. Thereafter the surrogate mothers viz. * * * shared their experiences as surrogate mother and
highlighting the reasons for adopting surrogacy stated that surrogacy provided the right avenue for people
who want to earn money for their family and education of their children, but the present remuneration
of ` 3.50 lakhs for surrogacy needs to be increased. Thereafter, one Commissioning Parent, namely, *
* * shared his experiences as a commissioning parent and inter-alia highlighted the following points (i)
close relatives are not ready to be surrogates; (ii) state should not have a right on the number of children
to be born; (iii) The price of egg varies from ` 30,000 to ` 6 lakhs based on the socio- economic
background of the donor and premium egg costs up to ` 6 lakhs; etc.
7. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries on the Bill. The witnesses replied to some of the
queries raised by the Members. The Chairman directed the witnesses to furnish detailed written replies
to the queries left unanswered within a week.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 12.22 
P.M.
*** Identities withheld to protect privacy.

100
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
(2017-18)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 04th July, 2017 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
3. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh
5. Shri Ashok Siddharth
6. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
7. Shri K. Somaprasad
8. Dr. C. P . Thakur
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Thangso Baite
10. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
11. Dr. (Smt.) Heena Vijay Gavit
12. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
13. Dr. K. Kamaraj
14. Shri Arjunlal Meena
15. Shri J. Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
16. Shri C. R. Patil
17. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
18. Shri Bharat Singh
19. Shri R.K.Singh (Arrah)
20. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
21. Shrimati Rita Tarai
100

101
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Director
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
WITNESSES
Representative from National Law University, Delhi
Dr. Mrinal Satish, Associate Professor of Law, Executive Director, Centre for
Constitutional Law, Policy and Governance, National Law University, Delhi
Department of Health Research
1. Dr.(Mrs.) Soumya Swaminathan, Secretary
2.  Ms. Sarita Mittal, Joint Secretary
3.  Ms. Indira Sharma, Deputy Secretary
4. Dr. Kavitha Rajshekar, Scientist-D
Legislative Department
1. Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Additional Secretary
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Additional Legislative Counsel
Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri Ramayan Yadav, Additional Secretary
2. Shri O. Venkateswarlu, Deputy Legal Adviser
Opening Remarks
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them about
the agenda of the meeting, i.e. to hear the views of: (i) Dr. Mrinal Satish, Associate Professor of Law,
Executive Director, Centre for Constitutional Law, Policy and Governance, National Law University,
Delhi and (ii) concluding evidence of the Secretary , Department of Health Research on ‘The Surrogacy
(Regulation) Bill, 2016’.
2. The Chairman, thereafter, apprised that though the Committee had held extensive deliberations with
a cross section of experts and stakeholders including the Secretary, Department of Health Research in

102
order to examine the entire spectrum of views on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016. The Department
of Health Research has been asked to furnish detailed clarifications on the numerous concerns/queries
raised by experts and Members of the Committee. The Department is yet to furnish its clarifications on
a large number of Clauses of the Bill. On receipt of clarifications, a detailed and comprehensive examination
of the Bill will need to be carried out and thereafter the Committee will consider the Bill Clause-by-Clause
and finalise its report on the Bill. The Committee, therefore, felt it would not be possible for it to complete
all stages of consideration of the Bill and present its Report before 11th July, 2017. The Committee,
accordingly, decided to seek extension of time for two months i.e. upto 11th September, 2017 for
presentation of Report on the Bill and authorized its Chairman to approach the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha for the purpose.
3. *  * *
Oral Evidence of the stakeholder/expert on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016
4. The Committee thereafter heard the views of Dr. Mrinal Satish, Associate Professor of Law,
Executive Director, Centre for Constitutional Law, Policy and Governance, National Law University,
Delhi on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016. He submitted that National Law University in collaboration
with Cornell University, United States of America had conducted a study on the Surrogacy practice in
India as well as in New York State and the report on the same was in the final stages of drafting.
Regarding the methodology adopted for research, he informed that it was a mix of desk research
involving legal cases in the country and legal cases outside the country and field visits in Delhi, Haryana
and Anand, Gujarat. He inter-alia highlighted the following findings based on the study namely (i) need
to regulate surrogacy by means of law as there was inconsistent application of ICMR guidelines in the
country; (ii) lack of informed consent of the surrogate as they are unaware of the terms of agreements
as well as the entire process of surrogacy including probable side effects of medication, etc. (iii) the
contract entered into with the surrogate followed the ‘free market principle’ which meant that each
contract was negotiated separately and the contract was devoid of the post natal care, life insurance
coverage and informed consent provision thereby entailing huge bargaining power disparity between the
intending parents / clinics and the surrogate mothers.
5. As regards the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016, he was of the view that banning commercial
surrogacy was not the way forward. The practice of surrogacy was being exploited due to the lack of
a binding regulatory regime. He suggested that instead of banning commercial surrogacy, a stringent
regulatory framework should be put in place to protect the rights of surrogates. He was also of the view
that the Bill was mostly based on moralistic assumptions and beliefs thereby placing a burden on the
infertile couples and surrogate mothers. On the provision regarding ‘altruistic surrogacy’, he stated that
the term compensatory should be included in the Bill instead of the term ‘altruistic’. He also highlighted
the fact that in the process of framing the present Bill, the voices of surrogates were not heard. He also
delineated certain issues in the current Bill like (i) absence of the definition of ‘close relative’ in the Bill;
(ii) the complications altruistic surrogacy could create in the Indian family set-up. He concluded by
submitting that owing to the issues pointed out by him, the Bill in the present form needed to be rejected.
Thereafter, Members raised certain queries on the Bill. The witness replied to some of the queries raised
by the Members.
***relate to others matter.

103
Oral Evidence of the Secretary, Department of Health Research on the Surrogacy (Regulation)
Bill, 2016
6. The Committee, thereafter had the concluding evidence of Smt. Soumya Swaminathan, Secretary
and other officials of the Department of Health Research on the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016. She
apprised the Committee about the rationale behind bringing altruistic surrogacy as proposed in the Bill.
To a query on why the Surrogacy Bill was introduced in isolation of the Assisted Reproductive Technology
Bill, she submitted that the Department would shortly move the ART Bill which had overlapping features
with the Surrogacy Bill.
7. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries regarding lack of consultation with the Ministry of
Women and Child Development, condition of close relative to become a surrogate mother, rationale
behind the five year waiting Clause for infertile couples, etc. The Secretary/Officials of the Department
replied to some of the queries raised by the Members. The Chairman directed the witnesses to furnish
detailed written replies to the queries left unanswered within a week.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 11th July, 2017.

104
*XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
(2017-18)
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 8th August, 2017 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
3. Dr. Vikas Mahatme
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh
5. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
6. Shri K. Somaprasad
7. Dr. C.P. Thakur
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Thangso Baite
9. Dr. (Smt.) Heena Vijay Gavit
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
11. Shri J. Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
12. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
13. Shri Bharat Singh
14. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
15. Shrimati Rita Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
Shrimati Gunjan Parashar, Research Officer
* Minute of XIVth meeting relate to other matters.
104

105
Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and briefed them about the
agenda of the meeting i.e., to consider and adopt draft 102nd Report of the Committee on the Surrogacy
(Regulation) Bill, 2016.
Consideration and adoption of draft 102nd Report of the Committee
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the draft 102nd Report of the Committee on the
Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016. The Chairman briefed the Members regarding the salient issues dealt
with in the Report viz. altruistic vs. commercial surrogacy, safeguarding the interest of the surrogate
mother, feasibility of having a close relative as a surrogate, need for a legally binding surrogacy agreement,
need for a National Registry for the surrogates and the surrogacy clinics across the country, issue of
inclusion or exclusion of Foreigners, NRIs, PIOs, OCIs within the ambit of the Bill.
4. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the said Report with the following additions/
modifications as suggested by Members for incorporation in the Report: (i) ART Bill should come forth
before the Surrogacy Bill; (ii) 2 step comprehensive insurance for the surrogate; (iii) upper age of
surrogate should be raised to 39 years; (iv) Bank Guarantee/Fixed Deposits for safeguarding interests of
surrogate child in emergent situations; (v) some modifications were suggested in the definition of the
term ‘eligibility certificate’, etc.
5. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Report may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid
on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 10th August, 2017. The Committee authorized its
Chairman, Shri Jairam Ramesh and Dr. Vikas Mahatme to present the Report in Rajya Sabha, and
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal and Dr. Manoj Rajoria to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
6. * * *
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.54 
P.M.
***relate to other matters

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE I
To be introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 257 of 2016
THE SURROGACY (REGULATION) BILL, 2016
109
A
BILL
to constitute National Surrogacy Board, State Surrogacy Boards and
appointment of appropriate authorities for regulation of the
practice and process of surrogacy and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “abandoned child” means a child —
(i) born out of surrogacy procedure;
(ii) deserted by his intending parents or guardians; and
(iii) who has been declared as abandoned by the appropriate
authority after due enquiry;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.

110
(b) “altruistic surrogacy” means the surrogacy in which no
charges, expenses, fees, remuneration or monetary incentive of whatever
nature, except the medical expenses incurred on surrogate mother and
the insurance coverage for the surrogate mother, are given to the surrogate
mother or her dependents or her representative;
(c) “appropriate authority” means the appropriate authority
appointed under section 32;
(d) “Board” means the National Surrogacy Board constituted under
section 14;
(e) “clinical establishment” shall have the same meaning as assigned
to it in the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act,
2010;
(f) “commercial surrogacy” means commercialisation of surrogacy
services or procedures or its component services or component
procedures including selling or buying of human embryo or trading in
the sale or purchase of human embryo or gametes or selling or buying
or trading the services of surrogate motherhood by way of giving
payment, reward, benefit, fees, remuneration or monetary incentive in
cash or kind, to the surrogate mother or her dependents or her
representative, except the medical expenses incurred on the surrogate
mother and the insurance coverage for the surrogate mother;
(g) “couple” means the legally married Indian man and woman
above the age of 21 years and 18 years respectively;
(h) “egg” includes the female gamete;
(i) “embryo” means a developing or developed organism after
fertilisation till the end of fifty-six days;
(j) “fertilisation” means the penetration of the ovum by the
spermatozoan and fusion of genetic materials resulting in the development
of a zygote;
(k) “foetus” means a human organism during the period of its
development beginning on the fifty-seventh day following fertilisation or
creation (excluding any time in which its development has been suspended)
and ending at the birth;
(l) “gamete” means sperm and oocyte;
(m) “gynaecologist” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in the Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition
of Sex Selection) Act, 1994;
23 of 2010.
57 of 1994

111
(n) “human embryologist” means a person who possesses any
post-graduate medical qualification in the field of human embryology
recognised under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 or who possesses
a post-graduate degree in human embryology from a recognised university
with not less than two years of clinical experience;
(o) “implantation” means the attachment and subsequent penetration
by the zona-free blastocyst, which starts five to seven days following
fertilisation;
(p) “infertility” means the inability to conceive after five years of
unprotected coitus or other proven medical condition preventing a couple
from conception;
(q) “insurance” means an arrangement by which a company,
individual or intending couple undertake to provide a guarantee of
compensation for specified loss, damage, illness or death of surrogate
mother during the process of surrogacy;
(r) “intending couple” means a couple who have been medically
certified to be an infertile couple and who intend to become parents
through surrogacy;
(s) “Member” means a Member of the National Surrogacy Board
or a State Surrogacy Board, as the case may be;
(t) “notification” means a notification published in the Official
Gazette;
(u) “oocyte” means naturally ovulating oocyte in the female genetic
tract;
(v) “Paediatrician” means a person who possess a post-graduate
qualification in paediatrics as recognised under the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956;
(w) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this
Act;
(x) “registered medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner
who possesses any recognised medical qualification as defined in clause
(h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and whose
name has been entered in a State Medical Register;
(y) “regulation” means regulations made by the Board under this
Act;
(z) “State Board” means the State Surrogacy Board constituted
under section 23;
102 of 1956
102 of 1956
102 of 1956

112
(za) “State Government” in relation to Union territory with
Legislature, means the Administrator of the Union territory appointed by
the President under Article 239 of the Constitution;
(zb) “surrogacy” means a practice whereby one woman bears and
gives birth to a child for an intending couple with the intention of
handing over such child to the intending couple after the birth;
(zc) “surrogacy clinic” means surrogacy clinic or centre or
laboratory, conducting assisted reproductive technology services, invitro
fertilisation services, genetic counselling centre, genetic laboratory, Assisted
Reproductive Technology Banks conducting surrogacy procedure or any
clinical establishment, by whatsoever name called conducting surrogacy
procedures in any form;
(zd) “surrogacy procedures” means all gynaecological or obstetrical
or medical procedures, techniques, tests, practices or services involving
handling of human gametes and human embryo in surrogacy;
(ze) “surrogate mother” means a woman bearing a child who is
genetically related to the intending couple, through surrogacy from the
implantation of embryo in her womb and fulfils the conditions as provided
in sub-clause (b) of clause (iii) of section 4;
(zf) “zygote” means the fertilised oocyte prior to the first cell
division.
CHAPTER II
R
EGULA TION OF SURROGACY CLINICS
3. On and from the date of commencement of this Act,—
(i) no surrogacy clinic, unless registered under this Act, shall
conduct or associate with, or help in any manner, in conducting activities
relating to surrogacy and surrogacy procedures;
(ii) no surrogacy clinic, paediatrician, gynaecologist, human
embryologist, registered medical practitioner or any person shall conduct,
offer, undertake, promote or associate with or avail of commercial
surrogacy in any form;
(iii) no surrogacy clinic shall employ or cause to be employed or
take services of any person, whether on honorary basis or on payment
who does not possess such qualifications as may be prescribed;
(iv) no registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist, paediatrician,
human embryologist or any other person shall conduct or cause to be
conducted or aid in conducting by himself or through any other person
surrogacy or surrogacy procedures at a place other than a place registered
under this Act;
Prohibition
and regulation
of surrogacy
clinics.

113
(v) no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner,
gynaecologist, paediatrician, human embryologist or any other person
shall promote, publish, canvass, propagate or advertise or cause to be
promoted, published, canvassed, propagated or advertised which—
(a) is aimed at inducing or is likely to induce a woman to
act as a surrogate mother;
(b) is aimed at promoting a surrogacy clinic for commercial
surrogacy or promoting commercial surrogacy in general;
(c) seeks or aimed at seeking a woman to act as a surrogate
mother;
(d) states or implies that a woman is willing to become a
surrogate mother; or
(e) advertises commercial surrogacy in print or electronic
media or in any other form;
(vi) no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner,
gynaecologist, paediatrician, human embryologist, intending couple or
any other person shall conduct or cause abortion during the period of
surrogacy without the written consent of the surrogate mother and on
authorisation of the same by the appropriate authority concerned:
Provided that the authorisation of the appropriate authority shall be
subject to, and in compliance with, the provisions of the Medical
Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971;
(vii) no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner,
gynaecologist, paediatrician, human embryologist, intending couple or
any other person shall store a human embryo or gamete for the purpose
of surrogacy:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall affect such
storage for other legal purposes like sperm banks, IVF and medical
research for such period and in such manner as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
R
EGULATION OF SURROGACY AND SURROGACY PROCEDURES
4. On and from the date of commencement of this Act,—
(i) no place including a surrogacy clinic shall be used or caused
to be used by any person for conducting surrogacy or surrogacy
procedures, except for the purposes specified in clause (ii) and after
satisfying all the conditions specified in clause (iii);
34 of 1971
Regulation of
surrogacy and
surrogacy
procedures.

114
(ii) no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted,
undertaken, performed or availed of, except for the following purposes,
namely:—
(a) when either or both members of the couple is suffering
from proven infertility;
(b) when it is only for altruistic surrogacy purposes;
(c) when it is not for commercial purposes or for
commercialisation of surrogacy or surrogacy procedures;
(d) when it is not for producing children for sale, prostitution
or any other form of exploitation; and
(e) any other condition or disease as may be specified by
regulations made by the Board;
(iii) no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted,
undertaken, performed or initiated, unless the Director or in-charge of
the surrogacy clinic and the person qualified to do so are satisfied, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, that the following conditions have
been fulfilled, namely:—
(a) the intending couple is in possession of a certificate of
essentiality issued by the appropriate authority, after satisfying for
itself, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, about the fulfilment
of the following conditions, namely:—
(I) a certificate of proven infertility in favour of either or
both members of the intending couple from a District Medical
Board.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this item, the
expression “District Medical Board” means a medical board
under the Chairpersonship of Chief Medical Officer or Chief
Civil Surgeon or Joint Director of Health Services of the
district and comprising of at least two other specialists, namely,
the chief gynaecologist or obstetrician and chief paediatrician
of the district;
(II) an order concerning the parentage and custody of
the child to be born through surrogacy, have been passed by
a court of the Magistrate of the first class or above, on an
application made by the intending couple and surrogate
mother;

115
(III) an insurance coverage of such amount as may be
prescribed in favour of the surrogate mother from an insurance
company or an agent recognised by the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority established under the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999;
(b) the surrogate mother is in possession of an eligibility
certificate issued by the appropriate authority on fulfilment of the
following conditions, namely:—
(I) no woman, other than an ever married woman
having a child of her own and between the age of 25 to 35
years on the day of implantation, shall be a surrogate mother
or help in surrogacy by donating her egg or oocyte or
otherwise;
(II) no person, other than a close relative of the intending
couple, shall act as a surrogate mother and be permitted to
undergo surrogacy procedures as per the provisions of this
Act;
(III) no women shall act as a surrogate mother or help
in surrogacy in any way, by providing gametes or by carrying
the pregnancy, more than once in her lifetime:
Provided that the number of attempts for surrogacy
procedures on the surrogate mother shall be such as may be
prescribed;
(IV) a certificate of medical and psychological fitness
for surrogacy and surrogacy procedures from a registered
medical practitioner;
(c) an eligibility certificate for intending couple is issued
separately by the appropriate authority on fulfilment of the following
conditions, namely:—
(I) the age of the intending couple is between 23 to 50
years in case of female and between 26 to 55 years in case
of male on the day of certification;
(II) the intending couple are married for at least five
years and are Indian citizens;
(III) the intending couple have not had any surviving
child biologically or through adoption or through surrogacy
earlier:
41 of 1999

116
Provided that nothing contained in this item shall affect
the intending couple who have a child and who is mentally or
physically challenged or suffers from life threatening disorder
or fatal illness with no permanent cure and approved by the
appropriate authority with due medical certificate from a
District Medical Board;
(IV) such other conditions as may be specified by the
regulations.
5. No person including a relative or husband of a surrogate
mother or intending couple shall seek or encourage to conduct any
surrogacy or surrogacy procedures on her except for the purpose
specified in clause (ii) of section 4.
6. No person shall seek or conduct surrogacy procedures unless
he has—
(i) explained all known side effects and after effects of
such procedures to the surrogate mother concerned;
(ii) obtained in the prescribed form, the written informed
consent of the surrogate mother to undergo such procedures in the
language she understands.
7. The intending couple shall not abandon the child, born out of
a surrogacy procedure, whether within India or outside, for any reason
whatsoever, including but not restricted to, any genetic defect, birth
defect, any other medical condition, the defects developing subsequently,
sex of the child or conception of more than one baby and the like:
Provided that any child born out of surrogacy procedure, shall be
deemed to be a biological child of the intending couple and the said child
shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges available to a natural child
under any law for the time being in force.
8. The number of oocytes or embryos to be implanted in the
surrogate mother for the purpose of surrogacy, shall be such as may be
prescribed.
9. No person, organisation, surrogacy clinic, laboratory or clinical
establishment of any kind shall force the surrogate mother to abort at
any stage of surrogacy except in such conditions as may be
prescribed.
Prohibition of
conducting
surrogacy.
Written
informed
consent of
surrogate
mother.
Prohibition
to abandon
child born
through
surrogacy.
Number of
oocytes or
embryos to be
implanted.
Prohibition of
abortion.

117
CHAPTER IV
REGISTRATION OF SURROGACY CLINICS
10. (1) No person shall establish any surrogacy clinic for
undertaking surrogacy or to render surrogacy procedures in any form
unless such clinic is duly registered under this Act.
(2) Every application for registration under sub-section (1) shall
be made to the appropriate authority in such form, manner and shall be
accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.
(3) Every surrogacy clinic which is conducting surrogacy or
surrogacy procedures, partly or exclusively, referred to in clause (ii) of
section 4 shall, within a period of sixty days from the date of appointment
of appropriate authority, apply for registration:
Provided that such clinic shall cease to conduct any such counselling
or procedures on the expiry of six months from the date of
commencement of this Act, unless such clinic has applied for registration
and is so registered separately or till such application is disposed of,
whichever is earlier.
(4) No surrogacy clinic shall be registered under this Act, unless
the appropriate authority is satisfied that such clinic is in a position to
provide such facilities and maintain such equipment and standards
including specialised manpower, physical infrastructure and diagnostic
facilities as may be prescribed.
11. (1) The appropriate authority shall after holding an enquiry
and after satisfying itself that the applicant has complied with all the
requirements of this Act, rules and regulations made thereunder, grant a
certificate of registration to the surrogacy clinic, within a period of
ninety days from the date of application received by it, in such form,
on payment of such fees and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) Where, after the enquiry and after giving an opportunity of
being heard to the applicant, the appropriate authority is satisfied that the
applicant has not complied with the requirements of this Act or the rules
or regulations made thereunder, it shall, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, reject the application for registration.
(3) Every certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of
three years and shall be renewed in such manner and on payment of
such fees as may be prescribed.
Registration
of surrogacy
clinics.
Certificate of
registration.

118
(4) The certificate of registration shall be displayed by the
surrogacy clinic at a conspicuous place.
12. (1) The appropriate authority may, suo motu, or on receipt
of a complaint, issue a notice to the surrogacy clinic to show cause as
to why its registration should not be suspended or cancelled for the
reasons mentioned in the notice.
(2) If after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the
surrogacy clinic, the appropriate authority is satisfied that there has been
a breach of the provision of the Act or the rules or regulations made
thereunder, it may, without prejudice to any criminal action that it may
take against such clinic, suspend its registration for such period as it
may think fit or cancel its registration, as the case may be.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and
(2), if the appropriate authority is of the opinion that it is necessary or
expedient to do so in the public interest, it may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, suspend the registration of any surrogacy clinic
without issuing any notice under sub-section (1).
13. The surrogacy clinic may, within a period of thirty days from
the date of receipt of the communication relating to order of rejection
of application, suspension or cancellation of registration passed by the
appropriate authority under section 12, prefer an appeal against such
order to—
(a) the State Government, where the appeal is against the
order of the appropriate authority of a State;
(b) to the Central Government, where the appeal is against
the order of the appropriate authority of a Union Territory, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER V
N
ATIONAL S URROGACY B OARD
14. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute
a Board to be known as the National surrogacy Board to exercise the
powers and perform the functions conferred on the Board under this
Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) the Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, the Chairperson, ex officio;
Cancellation or
suspension of
registration.
Appeal.
Constitution
of National
Surrogacy
Board.

119
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in-charge of
the Department dealing with the surrogacy matter, Vice-Chairperson,
ex officio ;
(c) three women Members of Parliament, of whom two
shall be elected by the House of the People and one by the Council
of States, Members, ex officio;
(d) three Members of the Ministries of the Central
Government in-charge of Women and Child Development, Legislative
Department in the Ministry of Law and Justice and the Ministry
of Home Affairs not below the rank of Joint Secretary, Members,
ex officio;
(e) the Director-General of Health Services of the Central
Government, Member, ex officio ;
(f) ten expert Members to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed and two each
from amongst—
(i) eminent medical geneticists or human
embryologists;
(ii) eminent gynaecologists and obstetricians or experts
of stri-roga or prasuti-tantra;
(iii) eminent social scientists;
(iv) representatives of women welfare organisations;
and
(v) representatives from civil society working on
women’s health and child issues, possessing of such
qualifications and experience as may be prescribed;
(g) four Chairpersons of the State Boards to be nominated
by the Central Government by rotation to represent the States and
the Union territories, two in the alphabetical order and two in the
reverse alphabetical order, Member, ex officio;
(h) an officer, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the
Central Government, in-charge of Surrogacy Division in the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, who shall be the Member-
Secretary, ex officio.

120
15. (1) The term of office of a Member, other than an ex officio
Member, shall be—
(a) in case of nomination under clause (c) of sub-section (2)
of section 14, three years:
Provided that the term of such Member shall come to an end
as soon as the Member becomes a Minister or Minister of State or
Deputy Minister, or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the
House of the People, or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of
States or ceases to be a Member of the House from which she was
elected; and
(b) in case of appointment under clause (f) of sub-section
(2) of section 14, one year:
Provided that the person to be appointed as Member under
this clause shall be of such age as may be prescribed.
(2) Any vacancy occurring in the office whether by reason of his
death, resignation or inability to discharge his functions owing to illness
or other incapacity, shall be filled by the Central Government by making
a fresh appointment within a period of one month from the date on
which such vacancy occurs and the Member so appointed shall hold
office for the remainder of the term of office of the person in whose
place he is so appointed.
(3) The Vice-Chairperson shall perform such functions as may be
assigned to him by the Chairperson from time to time.
16. (1) The Board shall meet at such places and times and shall
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business
at its meetings (including the quorum at its meetings) as may be
determined by the regulations:
Provided that the Board shall meet at least once in six months.
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Board and
if for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend the meeting of the
Board, the Vice-Chairperson shall preside at the meetings of the Board.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board
shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the Members present and
voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in
his absence, the Vice-Chairperson shall have and exercise a second or
casting vote.
Term of office
of Members.
Meetings of
Board.

121
(4) The Members, other than ex officio Members, shall receive
only compensatory travelling expenses for attending the meeting of the
Board.
17. No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by
reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the
Board; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a
Member of the Board; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting
the merits of the case.
18. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being appointed and
continued as a Member if, he—
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence, which in the opinion
of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as
a Member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest, as is likely
to affect prejudicially his functions as a Member; or
(e) has so abused his position, as to render his continuance
in office prejudicial to the public interest; or
(f) is a practicing member or an office bearer of any
association representing surrogacy clinics, having financial or other
interest likely to affect prejudicially, his function as a Member; or
(g) is an office bearer, heading or representing, any of the
professional bodies having commercial interest in surrogacy or
infertility.
(2) The Members referred to in clause (f) of section 14 shall not
be removed from his office except by an order of the Central Government
on the ground of his proved misbehaviour or incapacity after the Central
Government, has, on an inquiry, held in accordance with the procedure
prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government, come to the
conclusion that the Member ought on any such ground to be
removed.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of Board.
Disqualifications
for appointment
as Member.

122
(3) The Central Government may suspend any Member in respect
of whom an inquiry under sub-section (2) is being initiated or pending
until the Central Government has passed an order on receipt of the
report of the inquiry.
19. (1) The Board may associate with itself, in such manner and
for such purposes as may be determined by the regulations, any person
whose assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out any of the
provisions of this Act.
(2) A person associated with the Board under sub-section (1)
shall have a right to take part in the discussions relevant to that purpose,
but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting of the Board and shall not
be a Member for any other purpose.
20. All orders and decisions of the Board shall be authenticated by
the signature of the Chairperson and all other instruments issued by the
Board shall be authenticated by the signature of the Member-Secretary
of the Board.
21. Subject to the other terms and conditions of service as may
be prescribed, any person ceasing to be a Member shall be eligible for
re-appointment as such Member:
Provided that no Member other than an ex officio Member shall be
appointed for more than two consecutive terms.
22. The Board shall discharge the following functions, namely:—
(a) to advise the Central Government on policy matters
relating to surrogacy;
(b) to review and monitor the implementation of the Act,
rules and regulations made thereunder and recommend to the Central
Government, changes therein;
(c) to lay down code of conduct to be observed by persons
working at surrogacy clinics; to set the minimum standards of
physical infrastructure, laboratory and diagnostic equipment and
expert manpower to be employed by the surrogacy clinics;
(d) to oversee the performance of various bodies constituted
under the Act and take appropriate steps to ensure their effective
performance;
(e) to supervise the functioning of State Surrogacy Boards;
and
(f) such other functions as may be prescribed.
Temporary
association of
persons with
Board for
particular
purposes.
Authentication
of orders and
other instruments
of Board.
Eligibility of
Member for re-
appointment.
Functions of
Board.

123
23. Each State and Union territory having Legislature shall
constitute a Board to be known as the State Surrogacy Board or the
Union Territory Surrogacy Board, as the case may be, which shall
discharge the following functions, namely:—
(i) to review the activities of the appropriate authorities
functioning in the State or Union Territory and recommend
appropriate action against them;
(ii) to monitor the implementation of the provisions of the
Act, rules and regulations made thereunder and make suitable
recommendations relating thereto, to the Board;
(iii) to send such consolidated reports as may be prescribed
in respect of the various activities undertaken in the State under the
Act to the Board and the Central Government; and
(iv) such other functions as may be prescribed.
24. The State Board shall consist of—
(a) the Minister in-charge of Health and Family Welfare in
the State, Chairperson, ex officio ;
(b) the Secretary in-charge of the Department of Health and
Family Welfare, Vice-Chairperson, ex officio ;
(c) Secretaries or Commissioners in-charge of the
Departments of Women and Child Development, Social Welfare,
Law and Justice and Home Affairs or their nominees, Members,
ex officio ;
(d) the Director-General of Health and Family Welfare of the
State Government, Member, ex officio ;
(e) three women Members of the State Legislative Assembly
or Union Territory Legislative Council, Members, ex officio ;
(f) ten expert Members to be appointed by the State
Government in such manner as may be prescribed, two each from
amongst—
(i) eminent medical geneticists or human embryologists;
(ii) eminent gynaecologists and obstetricians or experts
of stri-roga or prasuti-tantra;
(iii) eminent social scientists;
Constitution of
State Surrogacy
Board.
Composition of
State Board.

124
(iv) representatives of women welfare organisations; and
(v) representatives from civil society working on
women’s health and child issues, possessing of such
qualifications and experiences as may be prescribed;
(g) an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the
State Government in-charge of Family Welfare, who shall be the
Member-Secretary, ex officio.
25. (1) The term of office of a Member, other than an ex officio
Member, shall be—
(a) in case of nomination under clause (e) of section 24,
three years:
Provided that the term of such Member shall come to an end
as soon as the Member becomes a Minister or Minister of State or
Deputy Minister, or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly, or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative
Council or ceases to be a Member of the House from which she
was elected; and
(b) in case of appointment under clause (f) of section 24,
one year:
Provided that the person to be appointed as Member under
this clause shall be of such age, as may be prescribed.
(2) Any vacancy occurring in the office whether by reason of his
death, resignation or inability to discharge his functions owing to illness
or other incapacity, shall be filled within a period of one month from the
date on which such vacancy occurs by the State Government by making
a fresh appointment and the Member so appointed shall hold office for
the remainder of the term of office of the person in whose place he is
so appointed.
(3) The Vice-Chairperson shall perform such functions as may be
assigned to him by the Chairperson from time to time.
26. (1) The State Board shall meet at such places and times and
shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of
business at its meetings (including the quorum at its meetings) as may
be determined by the regulations:
Provided that the State Board shall meet at least once in four
months.
Term of
office of
Members.
Meetings of
State Board.

125
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Board and
if for any reason the Chairman is unable to attend the meeting of the
State Board, the Vice-Chairperson shall preside at the meetings of the
State Board.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the State
Board shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members
present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the
Chairperson, or in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson shall have and
exercise a second or casting vote.
(4) The Members, other than, ex officio Members, shall receive
only compensatory travelling expenses for attending the meetings of the
State Board.
27. No act or proceeding of the State Board shall be invalid
merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the
State Board; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a
Member of the State Board; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the State Board not
affecting the merits of the case.
28. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being appointed and
continued as a Member if, he—
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence, which in the opinion
of the State Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as
a member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest, as is likely
to affect prejudicially his functions as a Member; or
(e) has so abused his position, as to render his continuance
in office prejudicial to the public interest; or
(f) is a practicing Member or an office bearer of any
association representing surrogacy clinics, having financial or
other interest likely to affect prejudicially, his function as a
Member; or
Vacancies, etc.,
not to invalidate
proceedings of
State Board.
Disqualifications
for appointment
as Member.

126
(g) is an office bearer, heading or representing, any of the
professional bodies having commercial interest in surrogacy or
infertility.
(2) The Members referred to in clause (f) of section 24 shall not
be removed from his office except by an order of the State Government
on the ground of his proved misbehaviour or incapacity after the State
Government, has, on an inquiry, held in accordance with the procedure
prescribed in this behalf by the State Government, come to the conclusion
that the Member ought on any such ground to be removed.
(3) The State Government may suspend any Member in respect
of whom an inquiry under sub-section (2) is being initiated or pending
until the State Government has passed an order on receipt of the report
of the inquiry.
29. (1) The State Board may associate with itself, in such manner
and for such purposes as may be determined by the regulations, any
person whose assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out any of
the provisions of this Act.
(2) A person associated with it by the State Board under sub-
section (1) shall have a right to take part in the discussions relevant to
that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting of the State
Board and shall not be a Member for any other purpose.
30. All orders and decisions of the State Board shall be
authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson and all other instruments
issued by the State Board shall be authenticated by the signature of the
Member-Secretary of the State Board.
31. Subject to the other terms and conditions of service as may
be prescribed, any person ceasing to be a Member shall be eligible for
re-appointment as such Member:
Provided that no Member other than an ex officio Member shall be
appointed for more than two consecutive terms.
CHAPTER VI
A
PPROPRIA TE AUTHORITY
32. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of ninety
days from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification,
appoint one or more appropriate authorities for each of the Union
Territories for the purposes of this Act.
Temporary
association
of persons
with State
Board for
particular
purposes.
Authentication
of orders
and other
instruments
of State
Board.
Eligibility
of Member
for re-
appointment.
Appointment
of appropriate
authority.

127
(2) The State Government shall, within a period of ninety days
from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification, appoint one
or more appropriate authorities for the whole or part of the State for the
purposes of this Act.
(3) The appropriate authority, under sub-section (1) or sub-section
(2), shall,—
(a) when appointed for the whole of the State or the Union
territory, consist of—
(i) an officer of or above the rank of the Joint Director
of Health and Family W elfare Department—Chairperson;
(ii) an eminent woman representing women’s
organisation—Member;
(iii) an officer of Law Department of the State or the
Union Territory concerned not below the rank of a Deputy
Secretary—Member; and
(iv) an eminent registered medical practitioner—Member:
Provided that any vacancy occurring therein shall be
filled within one month of the occurrence of such vacancy;
(b) when appointed for any part of the State or the Union
Territory, be officers of such other rank as the State Government
or the Central Government, as the case may be, may deem fit.
33. The appropriate authority shall discharge the following
functions, namely:—
(a) to grant, suspend or cancel registration of a surrogacy
clinic;
(b) to enforce the standards to be fulfilled by the surrogacy
clinics;
(c) to investigate complaints of breach of the provisions of
this Act, rules and regulations made thereunder and take legal action
as per provision of this Act;
(d) to take appropriate legal action against the use of
surrogacy by any person at any place other than prescribed, suo
motu or brought to its notice, and also to initiate independent
investigations in such matter;
Functions of
appropriate
authority.

128
(e) to supervise the implementation of the provisions of this
Act, rules and regulations made thereunder;
(f) to recommend to the Board and State Boards about the
modifications required in the rules and regulations in accordance
with changes in technology or social conditions;
(g) to take action after investigation of complaints received
by it against the surrogacy clinics; and
(h) to consider and grant or reject any application under
clause (vi) of section 3 and sub-clauses (a) to (c) of clause (iii)
of section 4.
34. (1) The appropriate authority shall exercise the powers in respect
of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning of any person who is in possession of any
information relating to violation of the provisions of this Act, rules
and regulations made thereunder;
(b) production of any document or material object relating
to clause (a);
(c) search any place suspected to be violating the provisions
of this Act, rules and regulations made thereunder; and
(d) such other powers as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate authority shall maintain the details of
registration of surrogacy clinics, cancellation of registration, renewal of
registration, grant of certificates to the intending couple and surrogate
mothers or any other matter pertaining to grant of licence, etc., of the
surrogacy clinics in such format as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
35. (1) No person, organisation, surrogacy clinic, laboratory or
clinical establishment of any kind shall—
(a) undertake commercial surrogacy, provide commercial
surrogacy or its related component procedures or services in any
form or run a racket or an organised group to empanel or select
surrogate mothers or use individual brokers or intermediaries to
arrange for surrogate mothers and for surrogacy procedures, at
such clinics, laboratories or at any other place;
Powers of
appropriate
authority.
Prohibition of
commercial
surrogacy,
exploitation
of surrogate
mothers and
children born
through
surrogacy.

129
(b) issue, publish, distribute, communicate or cause to be
issued, published, distributed or communicated any advertisement
in any manner regarding commercial surrogacy by any means
whatsoever, scientific or otherwise;
(c) abandon or disown or exploit or cause to be abandoned,
exploited or disowned in any form the child or children born through
surrogacy;
(d) exploit or cause to be exploited the surrogate mother or
the child born through surrogacy in any manner whatsoever;
(e) sell human embryo or gametes for the purpose of
surrogacy and run an agency, a racket or an organisation for
selling, purchasing or trading in human embryos or gametes for the
purpose of surrogacy;
(f) import or shall help in getting imported in whatsoever
manner, the human embryo or human gametes for surrogacy or for
surrogacy procedures.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code,
contraventions of the provisions of clauses (a) to (f) of sub-section (1)
by any person shall be an offence punishable with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than ten years and with fine which may
extend to ten lakh rupees.
(3) For the purposes of this section, the expression “advertisement”
includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper or any other document
including advertisement through internet or any other media, in electronic
or print form and also includes any visible representation made by
means of any hoarding, wall-painting, signal light, sound, smoke or gas.
36. (1) Any registered medical practitioner, gynaecologists,
paediatrician, human embryologists or any person who owns a surrogacy
clinic or employed with such a clinic or centre or laboratory and renders
his professional or technical services to or at such clinic or centre or
laboratory, whether on an honorary basis or otherwise, and who
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act (other than the provisions
referred to in section (35), rules and regulations made thereunder shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
(2) In case of subsequent or continuation of the offence referred
to in sub-section (1), the name of the registered medical practitioner
Punishment for
contravention of
provisions of Act.
45 of 1860

130
shall be reported by the appropriate authority to the State Medical Council
concerned for taking necessary action including suspension of registration
for a period of five years.
37. Any intending couple or any person who seeks the aid of any
surrogacy clinic, laboratory or of a registered medical practitioner,
gynaecologist, paediatrician, human embryologist or any other person
for commercial surrogacy or for conducting surrogacy procedures for
commercial purposes shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than five years and with fine which may extend
to five lakh rupees for the first offence and for any subsequent offence
with imprisonment which may extend to ten years and with fine which
may extend to ten lakh rupees.
38. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, rules
or regulations made thereunder for which no penalty has been elsewhere
provided in this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three years and with fine which may extend
to five lakh rupees and in the case of continuing contravention with an
additional fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees for every day
during which such contravention continues after conviction for the first
such contravention.
39. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, the court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that
the woman or surrogate mother was compelled by her husband, the
intending couple or any other relative, as the case may be, to render
surrogacy services, procedures or to donate gametes for the purpose
other than those specified in clause (ii) of section 4 and such person
shall be liable for abetment of such offence under section 37 and shall
be punishable for the offence specified under that section.
40. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, every offence under this Act shall be cognizable, non-
bailable and non-compoundable.
41. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable
under this Act except on a complaint in writing made by—
(a) the appropriate authority concerned, or any officer or an
agency authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be, or the appropriate authority;
or
(b) a person including a social organisation who has given
notice of not less than fifteen days in the manner prescribed, to the
Punishment
for initiation
of commercial
surrogacy.
Penalty for
contravention
of provisions
of Act or rules
for which no
specific
punishment is
provided.
Presumption
in case of
surrogacy.
Offence to be
cognizable,
non-bailable
and non-
compoundable.
Cognizance of
offences.
2 of 1974.
1 of 1872.

131
appropriate authority, of the alleged offence and of his intention to
make a complaint to the court.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a
Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable
under this Act.
42. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, Chapter XXIA of the said Code relating to plea of
bargaining shall not apply to the offences under this Act.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
43. (1) The surrogacy clinic shall maintain all records, charts,
forms, reports, consent letters, agreements and all the documents under
this Act and they shall be preserved for a period of twenty-five years
or such period as may be prescribed:
Provided that, if any criminal or other proceedings are instituted
against any surrogacy clinic, the records and all other documents of
such clinic shall be preserved till the final disposal of such proceedings.
(2) All such records shall, at all reasonable times, be made available
for inspection to the appropriate authority or to any other person authorised
by the appropriate authority in this behalf.
44. (1) If the appropriate authority has reason to believe that an
offence under this Act has been or is being committed at any surrogacy
clinic or any other place, such authority or any officer authorised in this
behalf may, subject to such rules as may be prescribed, enter and
search at all reasonable times with such assistance, if any, as such
authority or officers considers necessary, such surrogacy clinic or any
other place and examine any record, register, document, book, pamphlet,
advertisement or any other material object found therein and seize and
seal the same if such authority or officer has reason to believe that it
may furnish evidence of the commission of an offence punishable under
this Act.
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 relating
to search and seizure shall apply, as far as may be, to all action taken
by the appropriate authority or any officer authorised by it under this
Act.
45. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against
the Central Government or the State Government or the appropriate
Certain
provisions of
the Code of
Criminal
Procedure, 1973
not to apply.
Maintenance
of records.
Power to search
and seize records,
etc.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

132
authority or any officer authorised by the Central Government or the
State Government or by the appropriate authority for anything which is
in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provision
of this Act.
46. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in
derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in
force.
47. (1) The Central Government may, by notification and subject
to the condition of pre-publication, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for—
(a) the minimum qualifications for persons employed at a
registered surrogacy clinic under clause (iii) of section 3;
(b) the manner in which a person shall store human embryo
or gamete under clause (vii) of section 3;
(c) the insurance coverage in favour of the surrogate mother
from an insurance company under item (iii) of sub-clause (a) of
clause (iii) of section 4;
(d) the number of attempts of surrogacy or providing of
gametes under the proviso to item (iii) of sub-clause (b) of clause
(iii) of section 4;
(e) the form in which consent of a surrogate mother has to
be obtained under clause (ii) of section 6;
(f) the number of oocytes or embryos to be implanted in the
surrogate mother under section 8;
(g) the conditions under which the surrogate mother may be
allowed for abortion during the process of surrogacy under
section 9;
(h) the form and manner in which an application shall be
made for registration and the fee payable thereof under sub-section
(2) of section 10;
(i) the facilities to be provided, equipment and other standards
to be maintained by the surrogacy clinics under sub-section (4) of
section 10;
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Power to
make rules.

133
(j) the period, manner and form in which a certificate of
registration shall be issued under sub-section (1) of section 11;
(k) the manner in which the certificate of registration shall
be renewed and the fee payable for such renewal under sub-
section (3) of section 11;
(l) the manner in which an appeal may be preferred under
section 13;
(m) the qualifications and experiences to the Members as
admissible under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 14;
(n) the procedures for conducting an inquiry against the
Members under sub-section (2) of section 18;
(o) the conditions under which a Member of the Board
eligible for re-appointment under section 21;
(p) the other functions of the Board under clause (e) of
section 22;
(q) the manner in which reports shall be furnished by the
State and Union territory Boards to the Board and the Central
Government under clause (iii) of section 23;
(r) the other functions of the State Board under clause (iv)
of section 23;
(s) the qualifications and experiences to the Members as
admissible under clause (f) of section 24;
(t) the age of the person to be appointed as a Member,
referred to in clause (f) of section 24, under the proviso to clause
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 25;
(u) the procedures for conducting an inquiry against the
members under sub-section (2) of section 28;
(v) the conditions under which the members of the State
Board eligible for re-appointment under section 31;
(w) empowering the appropriate authority in any other matter
under clause (d) of section 33;
(x) the other powers of appropriate authority under clause
(d) of sub-section (1) of section 34;
(y) the particulars of the details of registration of surrogacy

134
clinics, cancellation of registration, etc., in such format under sub-
section (2) of section 34;
(z) the manner of giving notice by a person under clause (b)
of sub-section (1) of section 41;
(za) the period up to which records, charts, etc., shall be
preserved under sub-section (1) of section 43;
(zb) the manner in which the seizure of documents, records,
objects, etc., shall be made and the manner in which seizure list
shall be prepared and delivered under sub-section (1) of section
44; and
(zc) any other matter which is to be, or may be, or in respect
of which provision is to be made by rules.
48. The Board may, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder to provide for—
(a) the fulfilment of any other condition under which eligibility
certificate to be issued by the appropriate authority under Item
(IV) of sub-clause (c) of clause (iii) of section 4;
(b) the time and place of the meetings of the Board and the
procedure to be followed for the transaction of business at such
meetings and the number of Members which shall form the quorum
under sub-section (1) of section 16;
(c) the manner in which a person may be temporarily
associated with the Board under sub-section (1) of section 19;
(d) the time and place of the meetings of the State Board
and the procedure to be followed for the transaction of business
at such meetings and the number of Members which shall form the
quorum under sub-section (1) of section 26;
(e) the manner in which a person may be temporarily
associated with the Board under sub-section (1) of section 29;
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
specified by regulations.
49. Every rules and every regulations made under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
Power to make
regulations.
Rules and
regulations to be
laid before
Parliament.

135
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule
or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule or regulation or notification.
50. Subject to the provisions of this Act, there shall be provided
a gestation period of ten months from the date of coming into force of
this Act to existing surrogate mothers’ to protect their well being.
51. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the
official Gazette make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions
of the said Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of a period of two years from the date of commencement of this
Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Transitional
provision.
Power to remove
difficulties.

136
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has emerged as a surrogacy hub for couples from different countries for past few years.
There have been reported incidents of unethical practices, exploitation of surrogate mothers, abandonment
of children born out of surrogacy and import of human embryos and gametes. Widespread condemnation
of commercial surrogacy in India has been regularly reflected in different print and electronic media for
last few years. The Law Commission of India has, in its 228th Report, also recommended for prohibition
of commercial surrogacy by enacting a suitable legislation. Due to lack of legislation to regulate surrogacy,
the practice of surrogacy has been misused by the surrogacy clinics, which leads to rampant of
commercial surrogacy and unethical practices in the said area of surrogacy.
2. In the light of above, it had become necessary to enact a legislation to regulate surrogacy services
in the country, to prohibit the potential exploitation of surrogate mothers and to protect the rights of
children born through surrogacy.
3. The Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016, inter alia, provides for the following, namely:—
(a) to constitute the Surrogacy Boards at National and State level;
(b) to allow ethical altruistic surrogacy to the intending infertile Indian married couple between
the age of 23-50 years and 26-55 years for female and male respectively;
(c) the intending couples should be legally married for at least five years and should be Indian
citizens to undertake surrogacy or surrogacy procedures;
(d) to provide that the intending couples shall not abandon the child, born out of a surrogacy
procedure, under any condition and the child born out of surrogacy procedure shall have
the same rights and privileges as are available to the biological child;
(e) the surrogate mother should be a close relative of the intending couple and should be an
ever married woman having a child of her own and between the age of 25-35 years;
(f) to provide that the surrogate mother shall be allowed to act as surrogate mother only once;
(g) to constitute the Surrogacy Board at National level which shall exercise and perform
functions conferred on it under the Act. It is also proposed to constitute Surrogacy Boards
at the State and Union Territory level to perform similar functions in respective States and
Union Territories;
(h) to appoint one or more appropriate authorities at State and Union Territory level which shall
be the executive bodies for implementing the provisions of the Act;
(i) to provide that the surrogacy clinics shall be registered only after the appropriate authority
is satisfied that such clinics are in a position to provide facilities and can maintain equipments
and standards including specialised manpower, physical infrastructure and diagnostic facilities
as may be provided in the rules and regulations;
136

137
(j) to provide that no person, organisation, surrogacy clinic, laboratory or clinical establishment
of any kind shall undertake commercial surrogacy, issue advertisements regarding commercial
surrogacy, abandon the child born through surrogacy, exploit the surrogate mother, sell
human embryo or import human embryo for the purpose of surrogacy and contravention
of the said provisions shall be an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than ten years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
4. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Surrogacy (Regulation)
Bill, 2016.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW D ELHI; JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA
The 28 th October, 2016.

138
Notes on clauses
Clause 1.—This clause relates to Short title, Extent and Commencement of the proposed legislation.
Clause 2 .—This clause contains the definitions of various expressions used in the proposed
legislation.
Clause 3.— This clause relates to prohibition and regulation of surrogacy clinics.
Sub-clause (i) of this clause provides that no surrogacy clinic, unless registered under this Act,
shall conduct or associate with, or help in any manner, in conducting activities relating to surrogacy and
surrogacy procedures.
Sub-clause (ii) of this clause provides that no surrogacy clinic, pediatrician, gynaecologist, human
embryologist, registered medical practitioner or any person shall conduct, offer, undertake, promote or
associate with or avail of commercial surrogacy in any form.
Sub-clause (iii) of this clause provides that no surrogacy clinic shall employ or cause to be
employed or take services of any person, whether on honorary basis or on payment who does not
possess such qualifications as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause (iv) of this clause provides that no registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist,
pediatrician, human embryologist or any other person shall conduct or cause to be conducted or aid in
conducting by himself or through any other person surrogacy or surrogacy procedures at a place other
than a place registered under this Act.
Sub-clause (v) of this clause provides that no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner,
gynaecologist, pediatrician, human embryologist or any other person shall promote, publish, canvass,
propagate or advertise or cause to be promoted, published, canvassed, propagated or advertised
which —
(a) is aimed at inducing or is likely to induce a woman to act as a surrogate mother;
(b) is aimed at promoting a surrogacy clinic for commercial surrogacy or promoting commercial
surrogacy in general;
(c) seeks or aimed at seeking a woman to act as a surrogate mother;
(d) states or implies that a woman is willing to become a surrogate mother; or
(e) advertises commercial surrogacy in print or electronic media or in any other form.
Sub-clause (vi) of this clause provides that no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner,
gynaecologist, pediatrician, human embryologist, intending couple or any other person shall conduct or
cause abortion during the period of surrogacy without the written consent of the surrogate mother and
on authorisation of the same by the appropriate authority concerned. However, that the authorisation of
the appropriate authority shall be subject to, and in compliance with, the provisions of the Medical
Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971.
138

139
Sub-clause (vii) of this clause provides that no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner,
gynaecologist, pediatrician, human embryologist, intending couple or any other person shall store a
human embryo or gamete for the purpose of surrogacy. However, that nothing contained in this sub-
clause shall affect such storage for other legal purposes like sperm banks, IVF and medical research for
such period and in such manner as may be prescribed.
Clause 4 .—This clause relates to regulation of surrogacy and surrogacy procedures.
Sub-clause (i) of this clause provides that no place including a surrogacy clinic shall be used or
caused to be used by any person for conducting surrogacy or surrogacy procedures, except for the
purposes specified in sub-clause (ii) and after satisfying all the conditions specified in sub-clause (iii).
Sub-clause (ii) of this clause provides that no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted,
undertaken, performed or availed of, except for the following purposes, namely:— (a) when either or both
members of the couple is suffering from proven infertility; (b) when it is only for altruistic surrogacy
purposes; (c) when it is not for commercial purposes or for commercialisation of surrogacy or surrogacy
procedures; (d) when it is not for producing children for sale, prostitution or any other form of
exploitation; and (e) any other condition or disease as may be specified by regulations made by the Board.
Sub-clause (iii) of this clause provides that no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be
conducted, undertaken, performed or initiated, unless the Director or in-charge of the surrogacy clinic
and the person qualified to do so are satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that the following
conditions have been fulfilled, namely:—
(a) the intending couple is in possession of a certificate of essentiality issued by the
appropriate authority, after satisfying for itself, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, about
the fulfilment of the following conditions, namely:—
(I) a certificate of proven infertility in favour of either or both members of the
intending couple from a District Medical Board;
(II) an order concerning the parentage and custody of the child to be born through
surrogacy, have been passed by a court of the Magistrate of the first class or above, on
an application made by the intending couple and surrogate mother;
(III) an insurance coverage of such amount as may be prescribed in favour of the
surrogate mother from an insurance company or an agent recognised by the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority established under the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority Act, 1999;
(b) the surrogate mother is in possession of an eligibility certificate issued by the appropriate
authority on fulfilment of the following conditions, namely:—
(I) no woman, other than an ever married woman having a child of her own and
between the age of 25 to 35 years on the day of implantation, shall be a surrogate mother
or help in surrogacy by donating her egg or oocyte or otherwise;

140
(II) no person, other than a close relative of the intending couple, shall act as a
surrogate mother and be permitted to undergo surrogacy procedures as per the provisions
of this Act;
(III) no women shall act as a surrogate mother or help in surrogacy in any way,
by providing gametes or by carrying the pregnancy, more than once in her lifetime. However,
that the number of attempts for surrogacy procedures on the surrogate mother shall be such
as may be prescribed;
(IV) a certificate of medical and psychological fitness for surrogacy and surrogacy
procedures from a registered medical practitioner;
(c) an eligibility certificate for intending couple is issued separately by the appropriate
authority on fulfilment of the following conditions, namely:—
(I) the age of the intending couple is between 23 to 50 years in case of female
and between 26 to 55 years in case of male on the day of certification;
(II) the intending couple are married for at least five years and are Indian citizens;
(III) the intending couple have not had any surviving child biologically or through
adoption or through surrogacy earlier. However, that nothing contained in this item shall
affect the intending couple who have a child and who is mentally or physically challenged
or suffers from life threatening disorder or fatal illness with no permanent cure and approved
by the appropriate authority with due medical certificate from a District Medical Board; and
(IV) such other conditions as may be specified by the regulations.
Clause 5.— This clause relates to prohibition of conducting surrogacy.
This clause provides that no person including a relative or husband of a surrogate mother or
intending couple shall seek or encourage to conduct any surrogacy or surrogacy procedures on her
except for the purpose specified in sub-clause (ii) of clause 4.
Clause 6 .—This clause relates to written informed consent of surrogate mother.
This clause provides that no person shall seek or conduct surrogacy procedures unless he has —
(i) explained all known side effects and after effects of such procedures to the surrogate mother
concerned; (ii) obtained in the prescribed form, the written informed consent of the surrogate mother
to undergo such procedures in the language she understands.
Clause 7.— This clause relates to prohibition to abandon child born through surrogacy.
This clause provides that the intending couple shall not abandon the child, born out of a surrogacy
procedure, whether within India or outside, for any reason whatsoever, including but not restricted to,
any genetic defect, birth defect, any other medical condition, the defects developing subsequently, sex
of the child or conception of more than one baby and the like. However, that any child born out of
surrogacy procedure, shall be deemed to be a biological child of the intending couple and the said child

141
shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges available to a natural child under any law for time being
in force.
Clause 8.— This clause relates to number of oocytes or embryos to be implanted.
This clause provides that the number of oocytes or embryos to be implanted in the surrogate
mother for the purpose of surrogacy, shall be such as may be prescribed.
Clause 9.— This clause relates to prohibition of abortion.
This clause provides that no person, organisation, surrogacy clinic, laboratory or clinical establishment
of any kind shall force the surrogate mother to abort at any stage of surrogacy except in such conditions
as may be prescribed.
Clause 10.— This clause relates to registration of surrogacy clinics.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that no person shall establish any surrogacy clinic for
undertaking surrogacy or to render surrogacy procedures in any form unless such clinic is duly registered
under this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that every application for registration under sub-clause (1)
shall be made to the appropriate authority in such form, manner and shall be accompanied by such fees
as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that every surrogacy clinic which is conducting surrogacy
or surrogacy procedures, partly or exclusively, referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause 4 shall, within a
period of sixty days from the date of appointment of appropriate authority, apply for registration.
However, that such clinic shall cease to conduct any such counseling or procedures on the expiry of
six months from the date of commencement of this Act, unless such clinic has applied for registration
and is so registered separately or till such application is disposed of, whichever is earlier.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that no surrogacy clinic shall be registered under this Act,
unless the appropriate authority is satisfied that such clinic is in a position to provide such facilities and
maintain such equipment and standards including specialised manpower, physical infrastructure and
diagnostic facilities as may be prescribed.
C1ause 11.— This clause relates to certificate of registration.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the appropriate authority shall after holding an enquiry
and after satisfying itself that the applicant has complied with all the requirements of this Act, rules and
regulations made thereunder, grant a certificate of registration to the surrogacy clinic, within a period
of ninety days from the date of application received by it, in such form, on payment of such fees and
in such manner, as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that where, after the inquiry and after giving an opportunity
of being heard to the applicant, the appropriate authority is satisfied that the applicant has not complied
with the requirements of this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, it shall, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, reject the application for registration.

142
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that every certificate of registration shall be valid for a
period of three years and shall be renewed in such manner and on payment of such fees as may be
prescribed.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the certificate of registration shall be displayed by the
surrogacy clinic at a conspicuous place.
Clause 12.— This clause relates to cancellation or suspension of registration.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the appropriate authority may, suo motu or on receipt
of a complaint, issue a notice to the surrogacy clinic to show cause as to why its registration should
not be suspended or cancelled for the reasons mentioned in the notice.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that if after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard
to the surrogacy clinic, the appropriate authority is satisfied that there has been a breach of the provision
of the Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, it may, without prejudice to any criminal action
that it may take against such clinic, suspend its registration for such period as it may think fit or cancel
its registration, as the case may be.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the sub-clauses
(1) and (2) of clause 12, if the appropriate authority is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient
to do so in the public interest, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, suspend the registration
of any surrogacy clinic without issuing any notice under sub-section (1) of clause 12.
Clause 13.— This clause relates to appeal.
This clause provides that the surrogacy clinic may, within a period of thirty days from the date
of receipt of the communication relating to order of rejection of application, suspension or cancellation
of registration passed by the appropriate authority under clause 12, prefer an appeal against such order
to— (a) the State Government, where the appeal is against the order of the appropriate authority of a
State; (b) to the Central Government, where the appeal is against the order of the appropriate authority
of a Union territory, in such manner as may be prescribed.
Clause 14.— This clause relates to constitution of National Surrogacy Board.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government shall, by notification, constitute
a Board to be known as the National Surrogacy Board to exercise the powers and perform the functions
conferred on the Board under this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Board shall consist of— (a) the Minister in-charge
of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Chairperson, ex officio;  (b) the Secretary to the
Government of India in-charge of the Department dealing with the surrogacy matter, Vice-Chairperson,
ex officio;  (c) three women Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of the
People and one by the Council of States, Members, ex officio;  (d) three Members of the Ministries of
Central Government in charge of Women and Child Development, Legislative Department in the Ministry
of Law and Justice and the Ministry of Home Affairs not below the rank of Joint Secretary, Members,

143
ex officio; (e) the Director General of Health Services of the Central Government, Member, ex officio;
(f ten expert Members to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed
and two each from amongst— (i) eminent medical geneticists or human embryologists; (ii) eminent
gynaecologists and obstetricians or experts of stri-roga or prasuti-tantra; (iii) eminent social scientists;
(iv) representatives of women welfare organisations; and (v) representatives from civil society working
on womens’ health and child issues, possessing of such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed;
(g) four Chairpersons of the State Boards to be nominated by the Central Government by rotation to
represent the States and the Union territories, two in the alphabetical order and two in the reverse
alphabetical order, Member, ex officio; (h) an officer, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the
Central Government, in charge of Surrogacy Division in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, who
shall be the Member-Secretary, ex officio.
Clause 15.— This clause relates to term of office of Members.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the term of office of a Member, other than an ex officio
Member, shall be— (a) in case of nomination of three women Members of Parliament, three years.
However, that the term of such Member shall come to an end as soon as the Member becomes a Minister
or Minister of State or Deputy Minister, or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the
People, or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or ceases to be a Member of the House from
which she was elected; (b) in case of appointment of ten expert Members, one year. However, that the
person to be appointed as Member under this clause shall be of such age as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that any vacancy occurring in the office whether by reason
of his death, resignation or inability to discharge his functions owing to illness or other incapacity, shall
be filled by the Central Government by making a fresh appointment within a period of one month from
the date on which such vacancy occurs and the Member so appointed shall hold office for the remainder
of the term of office of the person in whose place he is so appointed.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Vice-Chairperson shall perform such functions as
may be assigned to him by the Chairperson from time to time.
Clause 16.— This clause relates to meetings of Board.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Board shall meet at such places and times and shall
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the
quorum at its meetings) as may be determined by the regulations. However, that the Board shall meet
at least once in six months.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the
Board and if for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend the meeting of the Board, the Vice-
Chairperson shall preside at the meetings of the Board.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that all questions which come up before any meeting of
the Board shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the Members present and voting, and in the event
of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson shall have and exercise
a second or casting vote.

144
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Members, other than ex officio Members, shall
receive only compensatory travelling expenses for attending the meeting of the Board.
Clause 17 .—This clause relates to vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board.
This clause provides that no act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Board; or (b) any defect in the appointment
of a person acting as a Member of the Board; or (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not
affecting the merits of the case.
Clause 18.— This clause relates to disqualifications for appointment as Member.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a person shall be disqualified for being appointed and
continued as a Member if, he— (a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or (b) has been convicted of an
offence, which in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or (c) has become
physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or (d) has acquired such financial or other
interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a Member; or (e) has so abused his position,
as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest; or (f) is a practicing Member or
an office bearer of any association representing surrogacy clinics, having financial or other interest likely
to affect prejudicially, his function as a Member; or (g) is an office bearer, heading or representing, any
of the professional bodies having commercial interest in surrogacy or infertility.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Members referred to in item (f) of sub-clause (2)
of clause 14 shall not be removed from his office except by an order of the Central Government on the
ground of his proved misbehaviour or incapacity after the Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held
in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government, come to the
conclusion that the Member ought on any such ground to be removed.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Central Government may suspend any Member in
respect of whom an inquiry under sub-clause (2) of clause 18 is being initiated or pending until the
Central Government has passed an order on receipt of the report of the inquiry.
Clause 19.— This clause relates to temporary association of persons with Board for particular
purposes.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Board may associate with itself, in such manner
and for such purposes as may be determined by the regulations, any person whose assistance or advice
it may desire in carrying out any of the provisions of this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a person associated with the Board under sub-clause
(1) of clause 19 shall have a right to take part in the discussions relevant to that purpose, but shall not
have a right to vote at a meeting of the Board and shall not be a Member for any other purpose.
Clause 20 .—This clause relates to authentication of orders and other instruments of Board.
This clause provides that all orders and decisions of the Board shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Chairperson and all other instruments issued by the Board shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Member-Secretary of the Board.

145
Clause 21.— This clause relates to eligibility of Member for reappointment.
This clause provides that subject to the other terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed,
any person ceasing to be a Member shall be eligible for reappointment as such Member. However, that
no Member other than an ex officio Member shall be appointed for more than two consecutive terms.
Clause 22.— This clause relates to functions of Board.
This clause provides that the Board shall discharge the following functions, namely:— (a) to advise
the Central Government on policy matters relating to surrogacy; (b) to review and monitor the
implementation of the Act, rules and regulations made thereunder and recommend to the Central Government,
changes therein; (c) to lay down code of conduct to be observed by persons working at surrogacy
clinics; to set the minimum standards of physical infrastructure, laboratory and diagnostic equipment and
expert manpower to be employed by the surrogacy clinics; (d) to oversee the performance of various
bodies constituted under the Act and take appropriate steps to ensure their effective performance; (e)
to supervise the functioning of State Surrogacy Boards; and (f) such other functions as may be
prescribed.
Clause 23 .—This clause relates to Constitution of State Surrogacy Board.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the each State and Union territory having Legislature
shall constitute a Board to be known as the State Surrogacy Board or the Union territory Surrogacy
Board, as the case may be, which shall discharge the following functions, namely:— (i) to review the
activities of the appropriate authorities functioning in the State or Union territory and recommend
appropriate action against them; (ii) to monitor the implementation of the provisions of the Act, rules
and regulations made thereunder and make suitable recommendations relating thereto, to the Board; (iii)
to send such consolidated reports as may be prescribed in respect of the various activities undertaken
in the State under the Act to the Board and the Central Government; and (iv) such other functions as
may be prescribed.
Clause 24.— This clause relates to composition of State Board.
This clause provides that the State Board shall consist of— (a) the Minister in-charge of Health
and Family Welfare in the State, Chairperson, ex officio ; (b) the Secretary in-charge of the Department
of Health and Family Welfare, Vice-Chairperson, ex officio; (c) Secretaries or Commissioners in charge
of the Departments of Women and Child Development, Social Welfare, Law and Justice and Home Affairs
or their nominees, Members, ex officio;  (d) Director General of Health and Family Welfare of the State
Government, Member, ex officio; (e)  three women Members of the State Legislative Assembly or Union
territory Legislative Council, Members, ex officio; (f)  ten expert Members to be appointed by the State
Government in such manner as may be prescribed, two each from amongst— (i) eminent medical
geneticists or human embryologists; (ii) eminent gynaecologists and obstetricians or experts of stri-roga
or prasuti-tantra; (iii) eminent social scientists; (iv) representatives of women welfare organisations; and
(v) representatives from civil society working on womens’ health and child issues, possessing of such
qualifications and experiences as may be prescribed; (g) an officer not below the rank of Joint
Secretary to the State Government in charge of Family Welfare, who shall be the Member-Secretary, ex
officio .

146
Clause 25 .—This clause relates to term of office of Members.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the term of office of a Member, other than an ex officio
Member, shall be— (a) in case of nomination of three women Members of the State Legislative Assembly
or Union Territory Legislative Council, Members, ex officio, three years. However, that the term of such
Member shall come to an end as soon as the Member becomes a Minister or Minister of State or Deputy
Minister, or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, or the Deputy Chairman of
the Legislative Council or ceases to be a Member of the House from which she was elected; (b) in case
of appointment of ten expert Members, one year. However, that the person to be appointed as Member
under this clause shall be of such age, as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that any vacancy occurring in the office whether by reason
of his death, resignation or inability to discharge his functions owing to illness or other incapacity, shall
be filled within a period of one month from the date on which such vacancy occurs by the State
Government by making a fresh appointment and the Member so appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of the term of office of the person in whose place he is so appointed.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Vice-Chairperson shall perform such functions as
may be assigned to him by the Chairperson from time to time.
Clause 26.— This clause relates to meetings of State Board.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Board shall meet at such places and times
and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including the quorum at its meetings) as may be determined by the regulations. However, that the State
Board shall meet at least once in four months.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the
Board and if for any reason the Chairman is unable to attend the meeting of the State Board, the Vice-
Chairperson shall preside at the meetings of the State Board.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that all questions which come up before any meeting of
the State Board shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the Members present and voting, and in
the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson shall have and
exercise a second or casting vote.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Members, other than ex officio Members, shall
receive only compensatory travelling expenses for attending the meetings of the State Board.
Clause 27.— This clause relates to vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of State Board.
This clause provides that no act or proceeding of the State Board shall be invalid merely by reason
of— (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the State Board; or (b) any defect in the
appointment of a person acting as a Member of the State Board; or (c) any irregularity in the procedure
of the State Board not affecting the merits of the case.
Clause 28 .—This clause relates to disqualifications for appointment as Member.

147
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a person shall be disqualified for being appointed and
continued as a Member if, he— (a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or (b) has been convicted of an
offence, which in the opinion of the State Government, involves moral turpitude; or (c) has become
physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or (d) has acquired such financial or other
interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a Member; or (e) has so abused his position,
as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest; or (f) is a practicing Member or
an office bearer of any association representing surrogacy clinics, having financial or other interest likely
to affect prejudicially, his function as a Member; or (g) is an office bearer, heading or representing, any
of the professional bodies having commercial interest in surrogacy or infertility.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Members referred to in sub-clause (f) of clause
24 shall not be removed from his office except by an order of the State Government on the ground of
his proved misbehaviour or incapacity after the State Government, has, on an inquiry, held in accordance
with the procedure prescribed in this behalf by the State Government, come to the conclusion that the
Member ought on any such ground to be removed.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the State Government may suspend any Member in
respect of whom an inquiry under sub-clause (2) of clause 28 is being initiated or pending until the State
Government has passed an order on receipt of the report of the inquiry.
Clause 29.—This clause relates to temporary association of persons with State Board for particular
purposes.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Board may associate with itself, in such
manner and for such purposes as may be determined by the regulations, any person whose assistance
or advice it may desire in carrying out any of the provisions of this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a person associated with it by the State Board under
sub-clause (1) of clause 29 shall have a right to take part in the discussions relevant to that purpose,
but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting of the State Board and shall not be a Member for any
other purpose.
Clause 30.— This clause relates to authentication of orders and other instruments of State Board.
This clause provides that all orders and decisions of the State Board shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Chairperson and all other instruments issued by the State Board shall be authenticated
by the signature of the Member-Secretary of the State Board.
Clause 31 .—This clause relates to eligibility of Member for reappointment.
This clause provides that subject to the other terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed,
any person ceasing to be a member shall be eligible for reappointment as such Member. However, that
no Member other than an ex officio Member shall be appointed for more than two consecutive terms.
Clause 32.— This clause relates to appointment of appropriate authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government shall, within a period of ninety
days from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification, appoint one or more appropriate
authorities for each of the Union Territories for the purposes of this Act.

148
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the State Government shall, within a period of ninety
days from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification, appoint one or more appropriate
authorities for the whole or part of the State for the purposes of this Act.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the appropriate authority, under sub-clause (1) or sub-
clause (2) of clause 32, shall,— (a) when appointed for the whole of the State or the Union Territory,
consist of— (i) an officer of or above the rank of the Joint Director of Health and Family Welfare
Department— Chairperson; (ii) an eminent woman representing womens’ organisation—Member; and
(iii) an officer of Law Department of the State or the Union Territory concerned not below the rank
of a Deputy Secretary— Member; (iv) an eminent registered medical practitioner — Member. However,
that any vacancy occurring therein shall be filled within one month of the occurrence of such vacancy;
(b) when appointed for any part of the State or the Union Territory, be officers of such other rank as
the State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be, may deem fit.
Clause 33.— This clause relates to functions of appropriate authority.
This clause provides that the appropriate authority shall discharge the following functions, namely:—
(a) to grant, suspend or cancel registration of a surrogacy clinic; (b) to enforce the standards to be
fulfilled by the surrogacy clinics; (c) to investigate complaints of breach of the provisions of this Act,
rules and regulations made thereunder and take legal action as per provision of this Act; (d) to take
appropriate legal action against the use of surrogacy by any person at any place other than prescribed,
suo motu or brought to its notice, and also to initiate independent investigations in such matter; (e) to
supervise the implementation of the provisions of this Act, rules and regulations made thereunder; (f) to
recommend to the Board and State Boards about the modifications required in the rules and regulations
in accordance with changes in technology or social conditions; (g) to take action after investigation of
complaints received by it against the surrogacy clinics; and (h) to consider and grant or reject any
application under the provisions of this Act.
Clause 34 .—This clause relates to powers of appropriate authorities.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the appropriate authority shall exercise the powers in
respect of the following matters, namely:— (a) summoning of any person who is in possession of any
information relating to violation of the provisions of this Act, rules and regulations made thereunder; (b)
production of any document or material object relating to sub-clause (a); (c) search any place suspected
to be violating the provisions of this Act, rules and regulations made thereunder; and (d) such other
powers as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the appropriate authority shall maintain the details of
registration of surrogacy clinics, cancellation of registration, renewal of registration, grant of certificates
to the intending couple and surrogate mothers or any other matter pertaining to grant of licence, etc.,
of the surrogacy clinics in such format as may be prescribed.
Clause 35.— This clause relates to prohibition of commercial surrogacy, exploitation of surrogate
mothers and children born through surrogacy.

149
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the no person, organisation, surrogacy clinic, laboratory
or clinical establishment of any kind shall —(a) undertake commercial surrogacy, provide commercial
surrogacy or its related component procedures or services in any form or run a racket or an organised
group to empanel or select surrogate mothers or use individual brokers or intermediaries to arrange for
surrogate mothers and for surrogacy procedures, at such clinics, laboratories or at any other place; (b)
issue, publish, distribute, communicate or cause to be issued, published, distributed or communicated any
advertisement in any manner regarding commercial surrogacy by any means whatsoever, scientific or
otherwise; (c) abandon or disown or exploit or cause to be abandoned, exploited or disowned in any form
the child or children born through surrogacy; (d) exploit or cause to be exploited the surrogate mother
or the child born through surrogacy in any manner whatsoever; (e) sell human embryo or gametes for
the purpose of surrogacy and run an agency, a racket or an organisation for selling, purchasing or trading
in human embryos or gametes for the purpose of surrogacy; (f) import or shall help in getting imported
in whatsoever manner, the human embryo or human gametes for surrogacy or for surrogacy procedures.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian
Penal Code, contraventions of the provisions of sub-clause (1) of clause 35 by any person shall be an
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years and with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the for the purposes of this section, the expression
“advertisement” includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper or any other document including advertisement
through internet or any other media, in electronic or print form and also includes any visible representation
made by means of any hoarding, wall-painting, signal light, sound, smoke or gas.
Clause 36.— This clause relates to punishment for contravention of provisions of Act.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the any registered medical practitioner, gynaecologists,
pediatrician, human embryologists or any person who owns a surrogacy clinic or employed with such
a clinic or centre or laboratory and renders his professional or technical services to or at such clinic or
centre or laboratory, whether on an honorary basis or otherwise, and who contravenes any of the
provisions of this Act (other than the provisions referred to in clause 35), rules and regulations made
thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years and
with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the in case of subsequent or continuation of the offence
referred to in sub-clause (1) of clause 36, the name of the registered medical practitioner shall be
reported by the appropriate authority to the State Medical Council concerned for taking necessary action
including suspension of registration for a period of five years.
Clause 37.— This clause relates to punishment for initiation of commercial surrogacy.
This clause provides that any intending couple or any person who seeks the aid of any surrogacy
clinic, laboratory or of a registered medical practitioner, gynecologist, pediatrician, human embryologist
or any other person for commercial surrogacy or for conducting surrogacy procedures for commercial
purposes shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years and

150
with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees for the first offence and for any subsequent offence with
imprisonment which may extend to ten years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
Clause 38.— This clause relates to penalty for contravention of provisions of Act or rules for
which no specific punishment is provided.
This clause provides that whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations
made thereunder for which no penalty has been elsewhere provided in this Act, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years and with fine which may extend to
five lakh rupees and in the case of continuing contravention with an additional fine which may extend
to ten thousand rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for the
first such contravention.
Clause 39.— This clause relates to presumption in the case of surrogacy.
This clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, the
court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the women or surrogate mother was compelled
by her husband, the intending couple or any other relative, as the case may be, to render surrogacy
services, procedures or to donate gametes for the purpose other than those specified in sub-clause (ii)
of clause 4 and such person shall be liable for abetment of such offence under clause 37 and shall be
punishable for the offence specified under that clause.
Clause 40.— This clause relates to offence to be cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable.
This clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, every offence under this Act shall be cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable.
Clause 41.— This clause relates to cognizance of offences.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable
under this Act except on a complaint in writing made by— (a) the appropriate authority concerned, or
any officer or an agency authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or the State Government,
as the case may be, or the appropriate authority; or (b) a person including a social organisation who has
given notice of not less that fifteen days in the manner prescribed, to the appropriate authority, of the
alleged offence and of his intention to make a complaint to the court.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate
or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
Clause 42.—This clause relates to certain provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 not
to apply.
This clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, Chapter XXI A of the said Code relating to plea of bargaining shall not apply to the offences under
this Act.
Clause 43.— This clause relates to maintenance of records.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the surrogacy clinic shall maintain all records, charts,
forms, reports, consent letters, agreements and all the documents under this Act and they shall be

151
preserved for a period of twenty-five years or such period as may be prescribed: However, that, if any
criminal or other proceedings are instituted against any surrogacy clinic, the records and all other
documents of such clinic shall be preserved till the final disposal of such proceedings.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that all such records shall, at all reasonable times, be made
available for inspection to the appropriate authority or to any other person authorised by the appropriate
authority in this behalf.
Clause 44 .—This clause relates to power to search and seize records, etc.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that if the appropriate authority has reason to believe that
an offence under this Act has been or is being committed at any surrogacy clinic or any other place,
such authority or any officer authorised in this behalf may, subject to such rules as may be prescribed,
enter and search at all reasonable times with such assistance, if any, as such authority or officers
considers necessary, such surrogacy clinic or any other place and examine any record, register, document,
book, pamphlet, advertisement or any other material object found therein and seize and seal the same
if such authority or officer has reason to believe that it may furnish evidence of the commission of an
offence punishable under this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
relating to search and seizure shall apply, as far as may be, to all action taken by the appropriate authority
or any officer authorised by it under this Act.
Clause 45.— This clause relates to protection of action taken in good faith.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Central Government or the State Government or the appropriate authority or any officer
authorised by the Central Government or the State Government or by the appropriate authority for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provision of this Act.
Clause 46.— This clause relates to application of other laws not barred.
This clause provides that the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation
of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 47.— This clause relates to power to make rules.
This clause provides that the Central Government may, by notification and subject to the condition
of pre-publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Clause 48.— This clause relates to power to make regulations.
This clause provides that the Board may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, by
notification, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder.
Clause 49.— This clause provides that every rule, regulation and notification made under the
proposed legislation shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the House of Parliament.

152
Clause 50.— This clause relates to transitional provision.
This clause provides that subject to the provisions of this Act, there shall be provided a gestation
period of ten months from the date of coming into force of this Act to existing surrogate mothers’ to
protect their well being.
Clause 51.— This clause relates to power to remove difficulties.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of the said Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty. However, that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the every order made under this clause shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.

153
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause (4) of section 16 and section 26 of the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016 provides that for
meetings of the National Surrogacy Board and State Surrogacy Board, the Members, other than ex officio
Members, shall receive only compensatory travelling expenses for attending the meetings of such Boards.
There will not be any financial implications except for the meetings of the National, State Surrogacy
Boards and appropriate authorities which will be met out of the regular budget of the Central Government
and State Governments.
2. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
153

154
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 47 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government, by notification and subject to the
condition of pre-publication, to make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. In particular, and
without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— (a) the minimum
qualifications for persons employed at a registered surrogacy clinic under clause (iii) of section 3; (b)
the manner in which a person shall store human embryo or gamete under clause (vii) of section 3; (c)
the insurance coverage in favour of the surrogate mother from an insurance company under item (III)
of sub-clause (a) of clause (iii) of section 4; (d) the number of attempts of surrogacy or providing of
gametes under the proviso to item (III) of sub-clause (b) of clause (iii) of section 4; (e) the form in
which consent of a surrogate mother has to be obtained under clause (ii) of section 6; (f) the number
of oocytes or embryos to be implanted in the surrogate mother under section 8; (g) the conditions under
which the surrogate mother may be allowed for abortion during the process of surrogacy under section
9; (h) the form and manner in which an application shall be made for registration and the fee payable
thereof under sub-section (2) of section 10; (i) the facilities to be provided, equipment and other
standards to be maintained by the surrogacy clinics under sub-section (4) of section 10; (j) the, manner
and form in which a certificate of registration shall be issued under sub-section (1) of section 11; (k)
the manner in which the certificate of registration shall be renewed and the fee payable for such renewal
under sub-section (3) of section 11; (l) the manner in which an appeal may be preferred under section
13; (m) the qualifications and experiences to the Members as admissible under clause (f) of sub-section
(2) of section 14; (n) the procedures for conducting an inquiry against the Members under sub-section
(2) of section 18; (o) the terms and conditions under which a Member of the Board eligible for re-
appointment under section 21; (p) the other functions of the Board under clause (f) of section 22; (q)
the reports to be sent by the State and Union Territory Boards to the Board and the Central Government
under clause (iii) of section 23; (r) the other functions of the State Board under clause (iv) of section
23; (s) the qualifications and experiences to the members and the manner of their appointment under
clause (f) of section 24; (t) the age of the person to be appointed as a member, referred to in clause
(f) of section 24, under the proviso to clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 25; (u) 
the procedures
for conducting an inquiry against the members under sub-section (2) of section 28; (v) the conditions
under which the members of State Board eligible for re-appointment under section 31; (w) appropriate
legal action by appropriate authority under clause (d) of section 33; (x) the other powers of appropriate
authority under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 34; (y) the particulars of the details of registration
of surrogacy clinics, cancellation of registration etc. in such format under sub-section (2) of section 34;
(z) the manner of giving notice by a person under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 41; (za) the
period up to which records, charts, etc., shall be preserved under sub-section (1) of section 43; (zb)
the manner in which the seizure of documents, records, objects, etc., shall be made and the manner in
which seizure list shall be prepared and delivered under sub-section (1) of section 44; and (zc) any other
matter which is to be, or may be, or in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
2. Clause 48 of the Bill empowers the Board, with the prior approval of the Central Government,
by notification, to make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made
154

155
thereunder to provide for— (a) the fulfilment of any other condition under which eligibility certificate to
be issued by the appropriate authority under Item (IV)  sub-clause (c) of clause (iii) of section 4; (b) the
time and place of the meetings of the Board and the procedure to be followed for the transaction of
business at such meetings and the number of Members which shall form the quorum under sub-section
(1) of section 16; (c) the manner in which a person may be temporarily associated with the Board under
sub-section (1) of section 19; (d) the time and place of the meetings of the State Board and the procedure
to be followed for the transaction of business at such meetings and the number of members which shall
form the quorum under sub-section (1)  of section 26; (e) the manner in which a person may be
temporarily associated with the Board under sub-section (1) of section 29; and (f) any other matter
which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations.
3. The matters in respect of which the said rules and regulations may be made are matters
of procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practicable to provide for them in the
proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

156
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to constitute National Surrogacy Board, State Surrogacy Boards and appointment of appropriate
authorities for regulation of the practice and process of surrogacy and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)
GMGIPMRND—3014LS(S3)—11-
156

157
LOK SABHA
CORRIGENDA
To
THE SURROGACY (REGULATION) BILL, 2016
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha]
1. Page 3, line 12,-
for “regulation” means regulations’
read ‘ “regulations” means the regulations’
2. Page 21, line 18,-
for “pediatrician”
read “paediatrician”
3. Page 21, line 22,-
for “pediatrician”
read “paediatrician”
4. Page 21, line 32,-
for “pediatrician”
read “paediatrician”
5. Page 21, line 38,-
for “pediatrician”
read “paediatrician”
6. Page 23, line 5 from the bottom,-
for “counseling”
read “counselling”
7. Page 27, line 6,-
for “Sub-clause (1) of this clause”
read “This clause”
8. Page 27, line 34,-
for “in case of”
read “in the case of”
157

158
9. Page 28, line 23,-
for “that the a person”
read “that a person”
10. Page 30, line 28,-
for “that the for the”
read “that for the”
11. Page 30, line 2 from the bottom,-
for “gynecologist”
read “gynacologist”
12. Page 31, line 31,-
for “not less that”
read “not less than”
13. Page 32, line 17,-
for “Sub-clause (1) of this clause”
read “This clause”
NEW DELHI;
November 16, 2016
Kartika 25, 1938 (Saka)

159
ANNEXURE-II
List of Witnesses Heard by the Committee
3rd March, 2017
WITNESSES
Representatives from the Department of Health Research
1. Dr. Soumya Swaminathan, Secretary & Director General, ICMR
2. Shri Manoj Pant, Joint Secretary
3. Shri V . K. Gauba, Joint Secretary
4. Ms. Bharati Das, Chief Controller of Accounts
5. Shri Sachin Mittal, Director (Budget)
Ministry of Law and Justice
Representatives from Legislative Department
1. Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Additional Secretary
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Additional Legislative Counsel
3. Shri I. C. Sharma, Deputy Legislative Counsel
4. Shri T. K. Malik, Deputy Legislative Assistant
Representatives from Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Additional Secretary
28th April, 2017
WITNESSES
Representatives from Indian Society of Third Party Assisted Reproduction (INSTAR)
1. Dr. Rita Bakshi, Vice-President
2. Dr. Shivani Sachdev Gour, General Secretary
3. Mr. Saurabh Kumar
4. Dr. Samit Shekhar
Indian Society for Assisted Reproduction (ISAR) and Federation of Obstetric and Gynaecological
Societies of India (FOGSI)
1. Dr. Rishma Pai, President, FOGSI and Vice-President, ISAR
2. Dr. Sarita Sukhija, Vice President, Delhi Chapter, ISAR
3. Dr. Nandita Palshetkar
159

160
4. Dr. Jaydeep Tank
5. Mr. Amit Karkhanis
Expert
Mrs. Jayashree Wad, Supreme Court Lawyer
Department of Health Research
1. Shrimati Indira Sharma, Deputy Secretary
2. Dr. Kavitha Rajsekar, Scientist-D
Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
1. Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Additional Secretary
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Additional Legislative Counsel
Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri Inder Kumar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri O. Venkateswarlu, Deputy Legal Adviser
24th May, 2017
WITNESSES
1. Dr. Kamini Rao, Member, National Advisory Committee for Drafting of Guidelines
             on Assisted Reproductive Technology
2. Ms. Pinki Virani , Journalist and Human Rights Activist
3. Ms. Sonali Kusum, Member, International Surrogacy Forum
Department of Health Research
1. Ms. Sarita Mittal, Joint Secretary
2. Ms. Indira Sharma, Deputy Secretary
3. Dr. Kavita Raj Shekhar, Scientist ‘D’
Ministry of Law and Justice
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Additional Secretary
Legislative Department
1. Dr. N.R. Battu, Joint Secretary
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Additional Legislative Counsel

161
25th May, 2017
WITNESSES
Representatives from Surrogacy Laws India
1. Shri Anurag Chawla, Advocate
2. Ms. Diksha Bhatia, Advocate
Representatives from Trust Legal, Advocates and Consultants
Ms. Petal Chandhok, Advocate
Representatives from Amity Law School, Delhi
1. Ms. Aparajita Amar, Student
2. Shri Arjun Aggarwal, Student
Surrogate Mothers
1. * * *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
Commissioning Parent
** *
Department of Health Research
1. Ms. Sarita Mittal, Joint Secretary
2. Ms. Indira Sharma, Deputy Secretary
3. Dr. Kavita Raj Shekhar, Scientist ‘D’
Ministry of Law and Justice
Legislative Department
1. Dr. N.R. Battu, Joint Secretary
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Additional Legislative Counsel
Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Ramayan Yadav, Additional Secretary
4th July, 2017
WITNESSES
Representative from National Law University, Delhi
1. Dr. Mrinal Satish, Associate Professor of Law, Executive Director, Centre for Constitutional Law,
            Policy and Governance, National Law University, Delhi
***Identities withheld to protect privacy.

162
Department of Health Research
1. Dr.(Mrs.) Soumya Swaminathan, Secretary
2.  Ms. Sarita Mittal, Joint Secretary
3.  Ms. Indira Sharma, Deputy Secretary
4. Dr. Kavitha Rajshekar, Scientist-D
Legislative Department
1. Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Additional Secretary
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Additional Legislative Counsel
Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri Ramayan Yadav, Additional Secretary
2. Shri O. Venkateswarlu, Deputy Legal Adviser

163
ANNEXURE-III
Court Cases – Surrogacy in India
Sl.No Date Place of Country Country Brief of the matter Court’s intervention
Country of of
of Surrogate Commissio-
occurrence Mother  ning
Parents
1 2 3 4    5 6 7
1. April, 2015 India, India India WP (C) No. 95/2015 PIL filed by Smt. Jayashree Hon’ble Court have accepted
New Delhi Wad in the Supreme Court of India for protecting the actions of the Government
the surrogate mothers and with prayer to ban to ban commercial surrogacy in
commercial surrogacy in India. Govt. of India have India.
issued necessary Notifications dated 04.11.2015 for
surrogacy in India. Commercial surrogacy is not
supported and banned in India.
2. January, India, India Germany Civil Appeal No.8714/2010 filed by Jan Balaz in the Court intervened into the matter
2008 Gujarat Supreme Court of India. Two baby boys were born and directed the authorities to
out of Indian surrogate mother. Commissioning parents issue Passports in the name of
applied for citizenship but the authorities denied because both the babies as Indian
in the Birth Certificate, name of the father was the citizens.
German national and name of the mother was the
surrogate mother. Both the surrogate children were
left without citizenship.
3. July, 2008 India, India Japan W.P.(C)369/2008 filed by Manji Yamada in the Court intervened into the matter
Gujarat Supreme Court of India. The commissioning parents and directed the custody of the
refused to accept the surrogate child born out of child to the grandmother of the
surrogacy due to divorce and break of marriage surrogate child to take care.
between them. The surrogate mother was also not

164
12 3 4 5 6 7
capable to accept the child. The child was left
without parents and no one to take care.
4. September, India, India India OP (FC) No.2488/2012 filed by Shri Harihara Vaarma The Court intervened into the
2012 Kerala in the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam. A surrogate matter to protect the surrogate
mother was harassed by claiming that a verbal mother and dismissed such
agreement of surrogacy was executed with her for claim.
amount of ` 5 lakh and advance of ` l lakh was
given to her. The surrogate mother denied.
5. December , India, India Australia Nat ional Inquiry was initiated by the Hon’ble Chief The Chief Justice of the Family
2012 Delhi Justice of the Family Court, Sydney. Australian couple Court, Diana Bryant, has called
arbitrarily rejected one of the twins born out of Indian for a national inquiry into
surrogate mother and took home only one sibling. The commercial surrogacy after
Australian couple mislead the Indian authorities and highlighting the case.
applied for Australian citizenship for only one child.
The other child was left behind by the Australian
couple without official parents or citizenship of elher
country.
6. June, 2013 India, India Sudan CWP No.26485/2014 filed by Shihabeldin in the Court intervened into the matter
Chandigarh Hon’ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana. Surrogacy and stopped the surrogacy
was tried to be executed with surrogate mother by a process with immediate effect.
single parent of Sudan which was not disclosed to
the surrogate mother.
7. March, 2014 India, India United WP No. 26485/2014 filed by Smt. Anandhi in the Court intervened into the matter
Chennai States High Court of Chennai. During the surrogacy process and directed the clinic to take
and after delivery of the surrogate child, no medical care of the surrogate mother.
attention was given to the surrogate mother when she
suffered from various complications.

165
ANNEXURE-IV
(1) Ernst and young study (CALL FOR ACTION:
expanding IVF treatment in India, July 2015)
• 10-15% of the indian couple are infertile that amounts to 27.5 million couple.
• 1%, that is about 270,000 infertile couples come forward for infertility evaluation.
• 20-25% of these total couples registering at an infertility center undergo IVF treatment (this
represents only 10% of the total infertile couple seeking to opt for a fertility treatment).
• So, if we advice the infertile couples to opt for adoption- is adoption system in our country strong
enough to cater to as many as 27.5 million infertile couples? Do we have enough babies for so
many desperate infertile couple in our country?
• The waiting time in India for adoption varies from 1-3 years.
165