Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2015/Sravana, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
 
 
REPORT NO. 
88
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th August, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th August, 2015)
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Seventy First Report on
the functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)
EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Seventy First Report on the functioning of
Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  13 th August, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  13 th August, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August,2015/Sravana,1937(Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)—(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 43
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have been accepted by the Committee ................. 5
Chapter-II Rec ommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .................... 6—15
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ......... 16—37
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ..................................................... 38—43
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — AT A G LANCE ...................................................... 44—51
6. M INUTES ........................................................................................................................ 53—65
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................ 67—77
Annexure I - Composition of the Committee (2013-14) ................................... 69 —70
Annexure II - List of experts/ stakeholders heard by the Committee ............ 71
Annexure III - Details of the new locations for CGHS own buildings ........... 72 —73
Annexure IV - Indian Medical Association viewpoint on CGHS and replies
furnished by the Department of Health and Family Welfare.. 74 —77

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15)
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
%4. Shri Vijay Goel
^5. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde
6. Shrimati B. Jayashree
7. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
8. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
&9. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
10. Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem
11. Dr. T.N. Seema
@12. Shri Jairam Ramesh
LOK SABHA
13. Shri Thangso Baite
14. Dr. Subhash Bhamre
15. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chouhan (Nandu Bhaiya)
16. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
17. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
19. Dr. K. Kamaraj
20. Shri Arjunlal Meena
21. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
22. Shri Chirag Paswan
23. Shri M.K. Raghavan
24. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
^^25. Shri Alok Sanjar
#26. Dr. Mahesh Sharma
27. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
28. Shri Raj Kumar Singh
29. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
30. Shrimati Rita Tarai
31. Shri Manohar Untwal
32. Shri Akshay Yadav
*33. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
**34. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
+35. Shri C. R. Patil
++ 36. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh
% Resigned from the membership of the Committee  w.e.f . 2 nd December, 2014
/\Nominated as a member of the Committee  w.e.f.  19 th December, 2014
&Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f. 28 th November, 2014.
@ Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 28 th November. 2014.
/\/\Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f. 11 th August, 2015.
# Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f 9 th November , 2014.
*Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 22 nd December, 2014.
** Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 22nd December, 2014 and ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f. 11th August, 2015.
+Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 11 th August, 2015.
++Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 11 th August, 2015.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, present this Eighty eighth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on
the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the Committee’s Seventy-first Report on “The
Functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)”
2. The Seventy first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok
Sabha on 6 th August, 2013. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Report, received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare were examined by the
previous Committee (Annexure-I). However, the previous Committee could not finalise its
Report due to dissolution of the 15th Lok Sabha. The replies were further examined by the
Committee after its reconstitution on the 1st September, 2014. The Committee also heard the
views of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare on 16th October, 2014 and
Additional Secretary and Director General, CGHS on 16th January, 2015. The Committee also
heard the views of certain stakeholders/ experts on 19th November, 2014. (List of experts/
stakeholders heard is Annexure-II).
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held
on the 12th August, 2015.
 SATISH CHANDRA MISRA
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
12th August, 2015 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Sravana 21, 1937 (Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare
Rajya Sabha

ACRONYMS
ADs : Additional Directors
ALC : Authorised Local Chemist
AMA : Authorised Medical Attendant
AFMS : Armed Forces Medical Services
BCA : Bill Clearing Agency
CGHS : Central Government Health Scheme
CMO I/C : Chief Medical Officer, Incharge
CPGRAMS : Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System
CSMA : Central Services Medical Attendance
CHS : Central Health Service
DGHS : Directorate General of Health Services
ESIC : Employee State Insurance Corporation
ECHS : Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme
ECG : Electrocardiogram
GDMOs : General Duty Medical Officers
GMSDs : Government Manufacturing Store Depots
GMP : Good Manufacturing Practices
HCOs : Health Care Organisations
IR : Indian Railways
IMA : Indian Medical Association
KVS : Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangthan
MOA : Memorandum of Agreement
MSO : Medical Store Organisation
NCR : National Capital Region
NABH/NABL : National Accreditation Board for Hospitals/ National Accreditation Board
for Laboratories
NICSI : National Informatics Centre Service Inc.
PSU : Public Sector Units
PRO : Public Relations Officer
PPP : Public Private Partnership
QCI : Quality Council of India
UTI-ITSL : Unit Trust of India-Information Technology Services Limited
UPSC : Union Public Service Commission
(iv)

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the Committee’s Seventy-first Report on “The
Functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)”
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have been accepted by the Committee: 37, 54, 57, 73, 88, 94, 95, 124, 125
TOTAL -9 (Chapter-I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies: 26, 29, 40, 44, 45, 46, 47, 69, 76, 86,
89, 101, 111, 113, 116, 120, 130, 133
TOTAL -18 (Chapter-II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee: 23, 24, 32, 50, 52, 64, 67, 77, 82,
83, 84, 85, 98, 99, 100, 103, 105, 114, 121, 135, 136
TOTAL -21 (Chapter-III)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited: -33, 48, 56, 61, 71, 72, 74, 91, 109, 131
TOTAL -10 (Chapter-IV)

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
PROBLEMS FACED BY SENIOR CITIZENS
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 The Committee suggests that the Department should consider the matter and take
necessary measures to provide domiciliary services for the senior citizens in all Wellness
Centres. The Committee also impresses upon the Department to ensure that the instructions
issued by it for paying special attention to senior citizens/pensioners are implemented in letter
and spirit and strict compliance of the instructions along with devising a system for fixing
responsibility for non-compliance thereof must be ensured without further delay. If need be,
a ‘Committee for Senior Citizens’ can be constituted at every Wellness centre which would
ensure compliance of the relevant instructions. In addition to this, the Committee suggests that
geriatric sensitization should be ingrained in the minds of doctors and staff in Wellness
Centres. It also recommends for appointing Geriatric specialist doctors for the elderly CGHS
beneficiaries who may visit various CGHS wellness Centres on designated dates. The
Committee also impresses upon ‘the Department to further strengthen the CGHS facilities
available in Government Hospitals/Private Hospitals empanelled under CGHS to ensure
hassle-free treatment for beneficiaries. (para 37)
Action Taken
1.2 Instructions are already in place for contacting senior citizens aged 80 and above over
telephone to enquire about their well being. It is being followed by the respective dispensaries
and also the CGHS help desk.
1.3 It has also been decided to introduce a system of issuing priority cards to the CGHS
beneficiaries above 80 years in age so that they get priority over others in getting medical
consultation and medicines in dispensaries.
1.4 Instructions will be reiterated to CMOs I/C to allot identified beneficiaries to different
Medical Officers to contact and make domiciliary visits to the beneficiaries aged 80 and
above.
1.5 Ministry is exploring the options of engaging private Medical Specialists/Practitioners in
several specialties on part time basis at a fixed remuneration at the CGHS dispensaries to
facilitate CGHS beneficiaries, especially the senior citizens to get specialist medical consultation
conveniently near their residence and also to save them from visiting distantly located
Government hospitals.
2

3
LOCATIONS OF WELLNESS CENTRES
Recommendation/Observation
1.6 The Committee, strongly recommends that all Wellness Centres located at remote or on
the outskirts of the city should be shifted to convenient centrally located places at the earliest.
State Government/ other concerned authorities may be approached to allot/ provide plot/
premises at convenient and central locations for housing these centres. (para 54)
Action Taken
1.7 Powers have already been delegated to the field ADs for relocation of dispensaries, if
necessary, to a more suitable place which is more convenient to the CGHS beneficiaries.
PREVENTIVE HEALTH CHECK-UP SCHEME
Recommendation/Observation
1.8 The Committee also recommends that medical details of patients should also be kept
online and made available if required. (para 57)
Action Taken
1.9 The treatment history and details of medicines issued in the Wellness Centre are
available in computer module of CGHS and can be viewed by the treating CGHS doctor and
the beneficiary online.
COMPUTERISATION
Recommendation/Observation
1.10 The Committee observes that the integration of panel hospitals and Wellness Centres for
online transmission of data is yet to be done. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
immediate steps be taken to formulate policy in this regard and develop and operationalise
appropriate software for the purpose. (para 73)
Action Taken
1.11 Action has been initiated to integrate panel hospitals through UTI-ITSL software with
CGHS dispensaries.
EMPANELMENT OF CANCER HOSPITAL
Recommendation/Observation
1.12 Keeping in mind the number of treatment options available for cancer afflicted patients
in private hospitals and the associated treatment cost, the Committee would like to suggest that
more hospital with such facilities should be considered for empanelment. The Committee would
like to emphasize that the kind of specialized services being offered by a hospital, especially

4
for terminal diseases like cancer, should be the basic criteria for selection of a hospital for
empanelment. (para 88)
Action Taken
1.13 The continuous empanelment scheme was revived with effect from 14.02.2013 for
empanelment of more hospitals including cancer hospitals. Many new cancer hospitals have
since joined CGHS and as on today there are about 20 exclusive cancer hospitals on CGHS
panel in different locations. In addition, a CGHS beneficiary has the option to obtain cancer
treatment from any Government hospital including Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai. As per OM
dated 02.09.2008 beneficiaries can also obtain treatment from regional cancer centres and any
private hospital where facilities are available and reimbursement will be restricted to CGHS
rates.
BILL SETTLEMENT
Recommendations/Observations
1.14 The Committee, accordingly, suggests that the Department should once again review
the online bill submission and approval process so that the online bills submitted by the
hospitals can be approved by the Bill Blearing Agency and then the hospitals should submit the
bills as this will minimize the reconciliation/ disputes and reduce bill payment cycle. The
Committee also suggests that the department should once again review the reimbursement
process and make it simpler and transparent in view of the concerns put forth by the
beneficiaries. Besides, the Department should ensure that the claim adalats meant for settling
pending claims are held regularly. (para 94)
1.15 The Committee further recommends that since, one Bill Clearing Agency is not able to
clear all the bills in time, the Department should appoint more agencies and specify the time
period within which the bills have to be cleared. (para 95)
Action Taken
1.16 The Bill Clearing Agency receives information online from empanelled hospitals and
queries, if any, are raised online. The processing of bills is done online and provisional
payments to hospitals are made by BCA on receipt of physical bills. The bills are again
scrutinised by CGHS subsequently for final settlement. Therefore, online system is already in
place. However, to address payment related issues, appropriate mechanism to expedite
payments to empanelled hospitals are being put in place.
GRIEVANCES REDRESSAL SYSTEM
Recommendations/Observations
1.17 The Committee observes that merely taking initiatives for effective functioning of
CGHS without making them efficacious will not serve the intended purpose. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that wide publicity through local and print media needs to be given in

5
this regard and priority should also be given to making the Grievance Redressal Mechanism
efficient and effective. In addition to this, every letter/request should be acknowledged; status
of complaints should be posted on CGHS website and also data from DGHS should be
reviewed yearly to know the real picture and enable the CGHS to deliver quality healthcare
services to the beneficiaries. (para 124)
1.18 The Committee would also like the Department to identify the problem areas on the
basis of the grievances/ complaints received and take appropriate remedial measures
accordingly. (para 125)
Action Taken
1.19 CGHS has a Nodal Officer in each CGHS city for Grievance Redressal of the CGHS
beneficiaries. In addition, the beneficiaries’ grievances are also received online through
CPGRAM which are attended to online by the designated officers. Every effort is made to
address these grievances timely.
1.20 A time slot of 11.00 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. on every Wednesday has been fixed for meeting
with Additional Directors who will hear the grievances of beneficiaries and take urgent
necessary action for their redressal. Local Advisory Committees at dispensaries also meet on
monthly basis to discuss local issues which are sorted out locally by the CMO in charge.
Larger issues are referred to Additional Director concerned for appropriate action.
1.21 This Department had ascertained from the CGHS beneficiaries, the problem areas in
CGHS which in their opinion require attention of the Government. Most of the beneficiaries
were of the view that there is shortage of doctors and paramedical staff in CGHS dispensaries.
There is need to open more dispensaries in each city to cover more Central Government
employees and pensioners. Further expansion of CGHS to other cities was also demanded. A
large number of beneficiaries also complained about behavioral aspect of the CGHS staff in the
dispensaries. Government is aware of all these grievances and is taking appropriate action to
redress the same within the resources available with it.

CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
PUNCTUALITY
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee conveys its anguish at the absence of work discipline in the discharge
of duties by the doctors and other supporting staff in the Wellness Centres. The complaints
from various stakeholders imply that due to lack of punctuality on the part of doctors and
paramedical staff, the beneficiaries have to wait for hours for getting registered and examined.
Through written as well as the oral representations, suggestions of undertaking surprise visit
to check the punctuality of the staff members by the concerned authorities and introduction
of biometric system of attendance have been given by various experts and stakeholders. The
Committee, therefore, emphasizes that the above mentioned measures must be introduced to
abate this problem of late comers. Besides, period of tea/lunch breaks should be restricted and
notified on the Notice Board in the Wellness Centres so that the beneficiaries do not have to
wait for longer period. (para 26)
Action Taken
2.2 Inspections are carried out regularly by the senior officers in CGHS to ensure
punctuality, cleanliness, availability of basic amenities etc. in the CGHS Wellness Centres.
Flying Squad has also been formed to carry out surprise inspections. In addition, Biometric
attendance system has already been introduced in three zones in CGHS, Delhi and is under
implementation in South Zone, Delhi. The same will be introduced in other cities in phased
manner. Instructions have already been issued to the doctors and dispensary staff to observe
the lunch time strictly from 1.00 to 1.30 p.m. as has been notified.
BEHAVIORAL ISSUES
Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Ministry to address the issues
relating to punctuality and behavioral aspects but feels that still much more need to be done
in this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the frequency of surprise
inspections should be increased and feedback of the beneficiaries gathered regularly. The
Committee also recommends that immediate necessary remedial measures should also be taken
on the shortcomings pointed out in the Inspection Reports and feedback. (para 29)
6

7
Action Taken
2.4 Meetings are being held by AS&DG, CGHS with the CGHS beneficiaries from time to
time to discuss the problems and obtain their feedback and suggestions to further improve the
functioning of CGHS. Based on their feedback, the requirement of permissions for
investigations/tests has been done away with, which has been widely appreciated by the
beneficiaries.
2.5 Special training modules on CGHS Rules, procedures and guidelines including behavioral
aspects have been introduced to  educate and sensitize the officers and staff of CGHS. Training
programmes for CMOs In-charge are being conducted regularly and they are being advised to
counsel their staff to  be more polite and responsive towards the CGHS beneficiaries. A training
session was held recently in Delhi to focus  on behavioral aspects of dispensary staff and
doctors. The session was also addressed by a Supreme Court Lawyer.
2.6 Regular inspections are also being carried out by the senior officers to  ensure proper
service delivery to  CGHS beneficiaries at CGHS Wellness Centres.
2.7 The Department has further admitted that punctuality and behavioral issues need to  be
improved. The CGHS is examining the option to  replace the biometric attendance system with
an Aadhar-based system in consultation with NIC. Also, due  attention has been given to
complaints regarding absence of staff including doctors, as well as those of misbehavior with
the patients and the instructions have been reiterated through the meeting of the Additional
Directors, Additional Secretary and Director General, CGHS on 5-6
th January, 2015.
SHIFT SYSTEM AT CGHS WELLNESS CENTRES
Recommendation/Observation
2.8 The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s efforts in starting double shift system in
some of the Wellness Centres and proposes that feasibility of introducing double shift system
in other Wellness Centres in Delhi, be explored so that beneficiaries need not have to take leave
from their offices to consult the doctors in morning hours. Further, patients’ load in morning
hours at Wellness Centres would also get evenly distributed. As regards the tepid response to
the second shift, the Committee recommends that to increase the patient inflow in evening shift
in the Wellness Centres, wide publicity may be given through local newspapers and official
website of CGHS and other print and electronic media channels. To address the issues relating
to availability of staff and doctors for evening shift, the Committee proposes that their services
can be utilized on rotation basis. The Committee is of the firm view that these efforts would
certainly strengthen the scheme. (para 40)
Action Taken
2.9 After revision of time schedule of wellness centres from 8.00 a.m. to 3.00 p.m. to
make it more beneficiary friendly, the second shifts in NCR areas have been discontinued.
There were very few beneficiaries for the second shifts in spite of having the message spread
widely. The manpower and other logistic problems also compelled CGHS to withdraw this
service. However, the extended hours of the centres have been accepted by the beneficiaries

8
positively. Considering the resource constraints and practical difficulties, it would not be
feasible to reintroduce double shifts in CGHS dispensaries which were withdrawn long back
to optimise utilisation of available scarce resources.
EMERGENCY SERVICES
Recommendations/Observations
2.10 The Committee is of the view that Emergency services are meant to stabilize a
suffering patient by providing initial treatment so that he gets time to reach the hospital for
further management. If a patient gets emergency first aid at the wellness centre only, then he
can be shifted to hospital in a given time. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to
explore the possibility of starting evening and the emergency services at all these Wellness
Centres pending upon the number of the beneficiaries catered by the Centres. The Committee
suggests that the services of the CGHS Wellness Centres should be made available round the
clock on 24 hour basis on the lines of hospitals. There should be at least one doctor available
at the wellness centre at all times. The staff can be appointed to work in shifts on rotation
basis. Initially the scheme to introduce emergency services in CGHS Wellness Centres on round
the clock basis can be started as pilot project in a few Wellness Centres and based on the
feedback received from them, the scheme can be extended throughout the country. (para 44)
2.11 The Committee was of the opinion that all the emergency units of CGHS should have
ambulance service to attend the Committee, accordingly, recommends that each emergency unit
of CGHS should be equipped with ambulance service. (para 45)
2.12 Further, the Committee also feels that the suggestion of opening mini-casualty entre for
every 6-8 Wellness Centres to offload the hospital casualty wards as submitted by some of the
witnesses may also be considered by the Department. (para 46)
2.13 The Committee is also of the opinion that a Control Room/Call Centre should be set
up to provide important information to the beneficiaries in dire need of emergency
treatment. (para 47)
Action Taken
2.14 CGHS is essentially providing basic medical facilities comprising of medical
consultation by GDMOs and dispensing of medicines as prescribed by the doctors. There are
some other paramedical staff in the dispensary to support the above function. The patients
are referred to Government hospitals for expert medical consultation wherever required. In
other words, the CGHS dispensaries are not well equipped to handle emergency cases and
it is always advisable to approach hospitals which are well equipped to handle such cases.
It is also most important to save the precious time/vital minutes to save life of a patient in
case of an emergency.
2.15 CGHS has empanelled a large number of private hospitals in Delhi and other places
(where it is in operation) which can be approached by the CGHS beneficiaries in case of
emergency. Moreover, in case of emergency, a CGHS beneficiary can go to any hospital, even
a non-empanelled hospital, to obtain required medical attendance without losing any time to

9
save the precious life and claim reimbursement subsequently, from CGHS or his employer, as
the case may be. Lastly, it is said that in real emergencies like heart attack and road accidents,
the initial vital minutes must not be wasted by going to the dispensaries and getting first aid
and then to attend hospitals.
2.16 CGHS had introduced emergency services in many Wellness Centres in Delhi in last
decade; however, the emergency services from those Wellness Centres have since been
withdrawn long back except the 6 Wellness Centres where it is still in operation. The
emergency services from other Wellness Centres were withdrawn in view of the reasons such
as the number of emergency cases were very negligible, shortage of doctors and paramedical
staff in CGHS, financially non-viable proposition, availability of a large number of hospitals in
Delhi and other CGHS cities which can be approached by CGHS beneficiaries in case of
emergency.
2.17 The other proposal of having ambulance to all Wellness Centres and the mini casualty
centres is not practically feasible keeping in view the logistic and financial constraints in
CGHS.
2.18 A CGHS helpline (No. 155224) service is already available to CGHS beneficiaries. In
addition, a CGHS help desk has also been set up in Delhi to provide relevant information about
CGHS and the facilities available to CGHS beneficiaries.
PLASTIC IDENTITY CARDS
Recommendation/Observation
2.19 The Committee takes a serious view of such malpractices and impresses upon the
Department to take necessary action in this regard. The Department may fix a timeline for
collection of the plastic cards by the beneficiary so that the unclaimed cards are
surrendered to the issuing authority, if they remain uncollected beyond a specified period
of time. (para 69)
Action Taken
2.20 To ensure that plastic cards are received by genuine person, the cards are dispatched
by speed post to the residence. Any undelivered cards are kept under lock and key at the office
of Additional Director. SMS alert system has also been introduced to inform the beneficiary
that their cards have been prepared.
Recommendation/Observation
2.21 Keeping in view the numerous requests received from various stakeholders, the
Committee would appreciate if the Department undertakes an urgent review of the poly-
clinics presently functioning especially with regard to provision of specialty services in
these poly-clinics and at the same time explore the possibility of opening more poly-clinics
at other places also so as to ensure good health care to greater number of CGHS
beneficiaries. (para 76)

10
Action Taken
2.22 There is acute shortage of specialists in Government sector and therefore there is no
proposal for opening more poly-clinics at this juncture. Ministry is exploring the options of
engaging private specialist practitioners as honorary visiting specialists on part time basis at a
fixed remuneration in the CGHS Wellness Centres in Delhi NCR. If the experiment is found
successful, then the same will be replicated in other cities also. It will address the shortage
of medical specialists in main specialties significantly.
Recommendation/Observation
2.23 The Committee observes that the beneficiaries in the districts where there is no
CGHS dispensary or empanelled Hospitals, face lots of difficulties. The Committee, therefore
recommends that there should be at least one empanelled hospital under CGHS in every
district of the country for the service of the beneficiaries and thus save them from
unnecessary hassle. ( para 86)
Action Taken
2.24 As a matter of policy CGHS empanels private hospitals only in the cities where it is
in operation. This is because of the operational necessities as CGHS follows a referral system
for allowing medical treatment in private empanelled hospitals. The hospitals are under
contractual obligation to follow CGHS norms and guidelines and they are to provide credit
facility to eligible CGHS beneficiaries. The area beyond the 25 CGHS covered cities are
covered under CS(MA) Rules, 1944. The Ministry empanels private hospitals in those locations
also but not under CGHS, they are empanelled under CS(MA) Rules, 1944 for providing
medical facilities to the Central Government employees residing in those areas. CGHS
beneficiaries can also avail inpatient medical treatment and follow up treatment in such CS(MA)
recognised hospitals or ECHS empanelled private hospitals on a proper referral from CGHS
dispensary. In case of emergency, they can go to any private hospital whether empanelled or
not. The pensioner CGHS beneficiaries residing in these locations can also obtain treatment
from Government hospitals (including PSU hospitals) in non CGHS locations.
INSURANCE SCHEME FOR CANCER AND OTHER TERMINAL DISEASES
Recommendation/Observation
2.25 The Committee takes note of the fact that prevalence of terminal diseases such as
cancer is increasing in the country and their treatment involves huge cost. Though the Central
Government employees are covered under CGHS and have the coverage of treatment of cancer
and other terminal diseases, but they have to meet huge amount of expenditure out of their
pocket. CGHS/Department concerned also incur heavy financial burden on account of these
diseases. For ensuring better and timely treatment and for avoiding heavy financial burden on
the beneficiaries as well as the Department concerned, the Committee is of the view that there
should be a separate insurance policy to cover the entire expenditure involved in the treatment
of cancer and other terminal diseases for CGHS beneficiaries. The premium can be shared by
the CGHS and the beneficiaries in a ratio that can be decided by the Government. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may examine this suggestion seriously and
come out with a concrete proposal. (para 89)

11
Action Taken
2.26 The CGHS empanelled hospitals cannot charge more than CGHS rates from the CGHS
beneficiaries and in case of pensioners, they are to provide credit/cashless facilities for medical
treatment. The serving employees has the option to obtain Medical Advance from their
department, therefore, as of now there is no proposal for separate health insurance scheme for
cancer treatment. Government has already mooted a proposal for introduction of a Health
Insurance Scheme for Central Government employees and pensioners on pan India basis which
will include cancer treatment also. Exclusive health insurance policy for cancer and other
terminal diseases may not be financially viable and practically feasible to introduce and
implement.
IMPLANTS/KITS/STENTS
Recommendation/Observation
2.27 The Committee observes that some hospitals have set up a plant to manufacture
stents, which are very economical. The Committee suggests that CGHS should tie up
with such manufacturers and procure stents at wholesale rates for the use of
beneficiaries. (para 101)
Action Taken
2.28 Quite often the requirement of the type of stent and size of stent are decided by
the treating doctor during the medical treatment procedure in the OT /Cath lab. Procuring
stents by CGHS for further distribution to the beneficiaries at the time of treatment may
not serve the purpose. Government has no proposal to procure and supply implants like
stents etc.
2.29 Subsequently, in reply to a query about the possibility of procuring essential implants
and kits through Medical Store Organisations for treatment of beneficiaries, the Department
through a written reply submitted that there is no proposal to procure implants and kits
through MSO for CGHS empanelled hospitals for the treatment of beneficiaries as it would not
be possible to stock implants/kits centrally as the specifications and type of implant/kit suitable
for individual case varies. It will not be possible to stock all possible types and sizes; it is also
not possible to make accurate estimate of inventory to be maintained. Moreover, under CGHS
Government fixes ceiling rates for reimbursement and the beneficiary has the option to choose
a particular brand of implant of his/her choice and to bear the difference in the price between
ceiling rate and cost of specific brand. On being asked about the rationale behind fixing the
ceiling rates for various coronary stents at `25000/-, it was further informed that the ceiling
rates for various types of coronary stents for CGHS/CSMA beneficiaries are fixed based on the
recommendations of an ‘Expert Committee’ specifically constituted to examine and recommend
the same. The rates for drug eluting stents were further revised to `23650/- in April 2014 on
the basis of the rate contract entered by M/s Abbot and M/s Medtronic with State Government
of Maharashtra. It was not based on any feedback from beneficiaries or empanelled hospitals.
2.30 Government notifies only ceiling rates at which the cost of implants including stents are
reimbursable. Government does not fix sale price of stents. If a beneficiary opts for a

12
coronary stent of a specific brand, he/she has to bear the difference in cost in case the sale
price is more than the ceiling price.
Recommendation/Observation
2.31 The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in achieving the smooth
operation of drug procurement system. The Committee is of the view that CMOs of all the
Wellness Centres should ensure that all the medicines listed in the formulary are always
available in the dispensary. (para 111)
Action Taken
2.32 After computerization, CMO In-charge have the facility to view online the availability
of medicines at MSD. In reply to a query, the Department has informed that CGHS procures
its bulk supply of formulary medicines (both branded and generic) through the Medical Store
Organization (MSO), which is under the administrative control of DGHS. Addl. Directors,
CGHS of different cities place their indents for formulary drugs to the MSO which are
supplied by MSO to various CGHS units through their respective Government Medical Stores
Depots (GMSDs). In addition to the above, 268 commonly prescribed drugs, which include
essential drugs used by patients of diabetes/hypertension and other common diseases are being
procured by the dispensaries directly from the manufacturers through the rate contract (with
discount in the range of 33-38%on MRP) on a monthly requirement basis. The rate contract
has been entered into with the manufacturers by the MSO on behalf of CGHS. The project has
considerably increased the availability of drugs in Wellness Centres and also red used the local
purchase of medicines.
Recommendation/Observation
2.33 The Committee however, impresses upon the Department to monitor the quality and
efficacy of the drugs supplied to the beneficiaries regularly. (para 113)
Action Taken
2.34 The central procurement of medicines is made only after lab tests. Random samples of
medicines are picked up from the dispensaries and are tested through laboratories to ensure
supply of quality medicines
2.35 The Department further informed that all batches of drugs received in GMSDs/MSO get
tested from two Government approved testing labs, before the supply is accepted.
The details of sample tests conducted in last three years were also intimated as follows:
Financial Year No. of Found of Found of
samples drawn Standard Quality Sub-Standard Quality
2011-12 1481 1468 13
2012-13 1446 1441 5
2013-14 2066 2066 nil

13
2.36 Dwelling further on the quality aspect, the Department, in a written submission, stated
that the consignment is accepted only when it passes the following checks:-
For pilot project consisting 268 medicines which are delivered directly at the
dispensary provision is there for random sampling and quality testing of medicines
supplied; bar coding has been made compulsory for quality assurance; qualifying criteria
enhanced for registration of manufacturers with MSO to ensure quality of medicines;
minimum turnover should be `50 crore per annum; valid GMP (Good Manufacturing
Practices) certificate; three years experience in manufacturing and marketing; non
conviction certificate and satisfactory performance certificate from their bankers.
In case of failure of a sample, not only is the firm blacklisted but also reported
to Drug Control Authorities.
Recommendation/Observation
2.37 In view of a large number of complaints regarding the quality aspect of the drugs
supplied to the beneficiaries, the Committee observes that there is an imperative need for an
efficient mechanism of quality assurance of the drugs supplied through CGHS. The quality of
the medicines is the bedrock for health care services and if it gets compromised, it will erode
the credibility of the whole health care delivery system. The Committee, accordingly, directs
that suitable measures be taken to ensure that only good qualities tested drugs are supplied to
CGHS beneficiaries. (para 116)
Action Taken
2.38 The central procurement of medicines is made only after prescribed lab tests. Random
samples of medicines are drawn from the dispensaries and are tested through accredited
laboratories to ensure supply of quality medicines to CGHS.
MALPRACTICES
Recommendation/Observation
2.39 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should seriously consider
the option of setting up strong surveillance system with emphasis on surprise
inspections. (para 120)
Action Taken
2.40 Government has introduced SMS alert system in CGHS wherein the beneficiary receives
system generated message on his/her mobile number whenever a medicine is issued from the
CGHS dispensary against the CGHS card of his or his family members. Similarly, provisions
have also been made in the software for online verification by beneficiaries of the records of
medicines received by them. These measures act as deterrent against pilferage of medicines.
2.41 Computerization has made the CGHS system more transparent and accountable and any
data can be retrieved.

14
2.42 Ministry has also set up a monitoring cell for monitoring different activities in CGHS
with a view to identify the areas for focused attention and urgent necessary action to improve
the functioning of CGHS.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF FACILITIES PROVIDED BY EMPLOYEES STATE
INSURANCE CORPORATION (ESIC), INDIAN RAIL W AYS (IR) AND ARMED FORCES
MEDICAL SERVICES (AFMS)
Recommendation/Observation
2.43 In the light of the above, the Committee proposes the following for further
strengthening the services provided under CGHS:
(i) Mobile Dispensaries should be started at the earliest, for underserved areas.
(ii) Special sessions may be organized and special cells may be maintained in all the
offices for redressal of public grievances and prompt action should be taken,
so that the same is not repeated in future.
(iii) Separate service window may be provided to all the senior citizens for availing
medical facilities viz . Registration/Consultation/medicine distribution etc. in
hospitals/dispensaries wherever feasible.
(iv) To monitor the procurement of drugs, a periodically updated vocabulary of
drugs and equipments may be maintained.
(v) A framework may be designed to monitor timely modernisation of infrastructure
and facilities provided under CGHS. (para 130)
Action Taken
2.44 The Ministry has examined the suggestions of Hon’ble Committee and the point-wise
comments of the Ministry are offered as under:
(i) CGHS is catering to the healthcare needs of its beneficiaries primarily through
its large network of dispensaries scattered in the 25 cities where it is in
operation. It is facing resource crunch, especially of the medical and
para-medical professionals and is finding it exceedingly difficult to manage even
its ongoing operations. In view of the same, it would not be possible to start
mobile dispensaries which will require further logistics and manpower.
(ii) Appropriate Grievance Redressal Machinery is in place at all CGHS cities.
However, it needs to be given focussed attention for expeditious disposal of
grievances. It would be more important to identify and remove the root cause
giving rise to such grievances.
(iii) There are standing instructions to all CGHS dispensaries to accord priority to
senior citizens in medical consultation and at pharmacy counter. CGHS is also
in process of issuing priority cards to senior citizens above 80 years in age to
enable them to enjoy priority over others in CGHS dispensaries.

15
(iv) The inventory of medicines is computerized and is updated regularly.
(v) Periodical meetings with Addl. Directors are held to take stock of the state of
affairs in CGHS and to address issues related to infrastructure development in
CGHS with a view to improve its functioning and also the level of satisfaction
in the CGHS beneficiaries.
SEPARATE SUPER SPECIALITY HOSPITALS EXCLUSIVELY FOR CGHS BENEFICIARIES
Recommendation/Observation
2.45 Keeping in view the above facts, the Committee strongly recommends that separate
super speciality hospitals exclusively for CGHS beneficiaries, on the lines of Ministry of
Railways, Defence and ESIC, one each in each metro city, where a considerable number of
CGHS beneficiaries are residing along with their families, should be established so that the
CGHS beneficiaries can avail super speciality treatment in these hospitals as per their
convenience. (para 133)
Action Taken
2.46 There is no proposal to open a super-speciality hospital under CGHS.

CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
SHORTAGE OF DOCTORS AND STAFF
Recommendations/Observations
3.1 The Committee fails to understand as to why there still exists a huge gap between in-
position strength and sanctioned posts of doctors and supporting staff despite the Departments’
claim that the contractual appointments of retired doctors is being made to fill up the
vacancies. The fact about this mismatch was brought to the notice of the Committee by the
beneficiaries while deposing before it as also during the study visit to some of the Wellness
Centres. The same holds true for vacancies in paramedical and other staff also. If all the
vacancies had been filled up by contractual appointments as claimed by the Department, the
vacancies would have ceased to exist. The Committee is of the opinion that vacancies,
irrespective of any category cause overstressing of the existing manpower and directly or
indirectly are bound to affect the quality of services rendered to the beneficiaries by the
Wellness Centres. CGHS has been established with the vision to cater to health needs of the
beneficiaries and shortage of manpower will handicap the successful running of CGHS. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should reassess the strategies adopted
to fill up the vacancies and come up with realistic measures so that the shortage of doctors
and paramedical staff in CGHS Wellness Centres can be overcome. Efforts should also be made
to increase the availability of specialist doctors or consultants in various fields at these
Wellness Centres keeping in mind the alarming increase in the number of patients suffering
from high blood pressure, diabetes, and other critical illnesses. Adequate provision for leave
reserve vacancies for all posts should be made so that substitutes could be provided in case
of anyone proceeding on leave.
(para 23)
3.2 The Committee recommends that vigorous efforts should be made by the Department
for filling up of all the existing vacancies of GDMOs and specialists and other paramedical
staff. The Committee also recommends that adequate provision of leave reserve should be
made for doctors and other assisting staff so that the beneficiaries do not have to suffer due
to absence of doctors and other assisting staff. (para 24)
Action Taken
3.3 CGHS provides comprehensive medical care facilities to its beneficiaries predominantly
in the allopathic system of medicine. It has about 273 CGHS Wellness Centres (Allopathic) in
25 locations across the country providing medical facilities in allopathic system. It requires
doctors, pharmacists etc. to run the services of these dispensaries/W ellness Centres. While
16

17
doctors are appointed through UPSc, the paramedical staffs are recruited locally. It takes
considerable time in recruitment of doctors and many doctors recommended by UPSC decline
the offer of appointment and some leave the job soon after joining to pursue higher studies,
resulting in vacancies on perennial basis.
The following steps have been taken to address the shortage of Medical and
Paramedical staff in CGHS Wellness Centres.
• Powers have been delegated to field Additional Directors to engage retired
Government doctors including PSU retirees on short term contract basis.
• The upper age limit for contractual appointments has been enhanced from 62 to
65. This will help in getting more number of retired Government doctors on
contractual basis to meet the shortage.
• Data Entry Operators are also appointed through NICSI in dispensaries against
vacant post of LDCs.
• Ministry is exploring the options of engaging private medical specialists on part
time basis at a fixed remuneration.
• Government has requested UPSC for recruitment of more doctors under CHS
(Central Health Service).
• Special drives to fill up the vacant para-medical and administrative posts are
being taken up in a time-bound manner.
3.4 Subsequently, the representatives of the Department during evidence on the 16th
October, 2014 informed the Committee that out of sanctioned strength of 1620 GDMOs and
Specialists, there are 1378 in position, leaving 282 vacant. The Secretary on being asked about
the steps taken to tackle the problem of staff shortage, submitted that the recruitment of
doctors and specialists was being done by UPSC and a constant problem being faced by them
was that very few doctors and specialists recruited by UPSC join CGHS and large number of
them leave for greener pastures.
Further, the Department furnished the following detail as regards the number of
requisitions sent to UPSC during last 5 years and the number of doctors who had joined
CGHS:-
Sl.No. year Requisition sent Candidates No. of candidates
to UPSC for Central provided by UPSC joined (CHS)
Health Service (CHS)
1. 2009 210 167 42
2. 2010 80 80 09
3. 2011 100 100 15
4. 2012 150 150 45
5. 2013 720 538 33 (till date out of
this 14 joined CGHS)

18
3.5 The Secretary further submitted that he had reviewed the matter with other senior
officers in a meeting held on 26.11.2014 and it has been decided to go for appointment on
contract basis till a suitable number of regular doctors join CGHS. It was also submitted that
a proposal to take recruitment of doctors out of the purview of the UPSC would be mooted
to the Department of Personnel and Training.
3.6 It was further informed that the shortage of GDMOs has largely been met through
engagement of doctors on contractual basis. As far as Specialists are concerned, an
advertisement has been issued on 28.11.2014 for recruitment of Specialists on part time basis.
Six applications have been received in response to this, and are being processed. The Ministry
has also formulated the scheme for full time employment of specialists on contract basis
wherein the specialists can be recruited @ `70,000/- per month for the first year and `80,000/
- per month for the subsequent years. As regards the proposal for recruitment of doctors
without the involvement of UPSC, the DoPT has been requested to tender advice as to whether
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may consider recruiting doctors without the
procedure of recruitment through UPSC.
Further Recommendation
3.7 The Committee is constrained to note that out of sanctioned strength of 1620
General Duty Medical Officers and Specialists, as many as 282 posts are lying vacant
and 240 have been filled on contract basis. The Committee understands that the
Department of Health and Family Welfare has attempted to bridge the gap by appointing
doctors and specialists on contract as a stop gap arrangement. But the Committee is of
the opinion that this could not be a long term solution to the problem of chronic
shortage of doctors and the Department needs to address it with urgency since without
the availability of doctors, all existing infrastructure of CGHS will not guarantee
healthcare to the beneficiaries. From the information shared with the Committee, it is
evident that even if UPSC makes selection of doctors, very few join CGHS. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department undertake a thorough study to
find out the reasons behind this trend and take remedial action accordingly. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department to
attract doctors and paramedical staff to join CGHS.
INFRASTRUCTURE
Recommendation/Observation
3.8 The Committee expresses its anguish over the sorry state of the many of the buildings
housing the Wellness Centres which are in dilapidated condition. The Committee also notes that
in many centres there is inadequate space, seating arrangement and facility of drinking water.
One of the parameters judging the success of any health care delivery system is the hygiene
it maintains and availability of basic amenities like wastrel electricity to support proper
infrastructure. The Committee feels that the unhygienic environmental improper sanitation in
Wellness Centres would erode the credibility of the healthcare services. The Committee
therefore recommends that the Ministry should understand the exigency of proper

19
infrastructure and cleaning staff in CGHS Wellness Centres all over the country as a
pre-requisite to provide the health facilities for the beneficiaries. The Committee has also noted
that the Ministry has outsourced the cleaning work to a private agency which is handling the
mechanized cleaning for the last one year. The Committee desires that the work of private
agencies handling cleaning work under CGHS should be frequently monitored. (para 32)
Action Taken
3.9 The Department agrees with the observations of the Hon’ble Committee about the
difficulties faced by the CGHS beneficiaries due to inadequate space and facilities at several
places. These problems are being faced mainly in places where the dispensary is functioning
in a rented accommodation. CGHS has therefore taken initiatives to construct its own building
specially designed for dispensary purpose with all facilities.
3.10 CGHS is following a prototype building plan for wellness centres keeping in view all
the healthy and eco-friendly parameters and the statutory requirements of different civic
authorities.
3.11 For rented accommodations where CGHS does not have its own building or plot to
construct the dispensary building general guidelines have been issued to all the CGHS cities to
be followed as far as practicable depending on the local compulsions with a view to provide
adequate facilities to CGHS beneficiaries.
3.12 Powers have been delegated to field ADs to shift dispensaries to a better non-
commercial location, wherever required, subject to the availability of suitable accommodation
at the same or lower rent.
3.13 Potable drinking water is provided in dispensaries. During inspections of dispensaries
by Additional Directors, hygiene and cleanliness are also given due importance.
3.14 Further, monitoring of the performance of the house keeping agencies is being
done by the CMOs in-Charge of respective wel1ness centres. It has also been decided to
enforce a system in which the payment to the agency would be allowed only when the
performance is certified by 2 members of the Advisory Committee apart from the CMO
In-charge (I/C).
3.15 In response to a query of the Committee regarding lack of proper maintenance at CGHS
Wellness Centres, the Department has submitted that for the maintenance work of the CGHS
Wellness Centres, the power has been delegated to the local Additional Directors. The CMO
I/Cs have been instructed to ensure proper maintenance of the buildings. Addl. Directors of
Zonesl Cities conduct regular inspections of CGHS Wellness Centres. In addition periodic
meetings are taken by Addl. Directors with CMO I/C to discuss with them the issues pertaining
to the CGHS Wellness Centres. In addition, Advisory Committee meetings are held once a
month at CGHS Wellness Centres.
3.16 The Department has further informed that the improvement of the infrastructure in the
CGHS W ellness Centres is an ongoing concern. The CGHS has been working upon the
construction of its own buildings specially designed for the dispensary purpose with all
facilities. The details of the new locations for CGHS own buildings are at  Annexure-III.

20
Further Recommendation
3.17 Complaints like frequent failure of electricity, non-operational generator, age old
furniture, irregular supply of sanitation materials have been brought to the notice of
the Committee in some of the Wellness Centres running through rented
accommodation. The Committee is dismayed to know the sorry state of affairs in such
centres. The Committee is of the opinion that urgent interim measures are required for
proper maintenance of basic infrastructure in dispensaries functioning in rented
accommodations till buildings specially designed for dispensary are constructed. Basic
amenities should be ensured in the dispensaries working through rented accommodation.
The Committee is of the opinion that thorough inspection of the accommodation
proposed to be taken on rent for opening CGHS Wellness Centre should be made to see
whether it meets the desired parameters so as to avoid any inconvenience at later stage.
In the own buildings, rain water harvesting and solar energy panels should be provided
to ensure regular water and electricity supply.
HOMOEOPATHY AND UNANI CENTRES
Recommendations/Observations
3.18 The Committee is of the view that homoeopathy is widely popular because of no
or minimal side effects. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that the Ministry
should strive towards providing regular homoeopathy services at all the Wellness Centres.
The Committee also suggests that the Ministry should take necessary steps to address the
above problems as highlighted by then Vice-president, All India Homoeopathic Doctors
Association. (para 50)
3.19 The Committee is of view that the Ministry should look into the matter and take
necessary remedial measures to fill up the vacant posts of doctors and other allied staff in
Unani Wellness Centres to ensure smooth functioning of the Unani Wellness Centres. The
delays reported in procurement of Unani medicines should also be looked into and necessary
action be taken. (para 52)
Action Taken
3.20 Department of AYUSH has already taken steps to fill up the vacant posts of
Homoeopathic doctors in consultation with Upsc. Moreover, retired Government doctors in
AYUSH system of medicines are being engaged on short term contract basis to address the
shortage of doctors in CGHS till the posts are filled up on regular basis by Department of
AYUSH.
Further Recommendation
3.21 The Committee is constrained to observe that the Ministry has not commented
upon the issue of providing regular homoeopathy services at all Wellness Centres, as
recommended in para 50 of the 71st Report. The Committee would have desired an
action plan from the Ministry in this regard and is perturbed to note the evasive reply
in the matter. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation on the
need of providing regular Homoeopathy services at all the Wellness Centres. The
Committee would appreciate a time bound action in the matter from the Department.

21
SEPARATE WING FOR CGHS BENEFICIARIES
Recommendation/Observation
3.22 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should explore the
possibility of opening a separate CGHS wing in all the Government hospitals covering all
disciplines of medical facilities to make it more convenient for the CGHS beneficiaries to
consult the specialist doctors. (para 64)
Action Taken
3.23 CGHS has its dedicated wing manned by specialist doctors and paramedical staff in
Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi. The wing has recently been renovated and it is providing OPD
medical care to the CGHS beneficiaries in almost all specialties.
3.24 The CGHS wing in Dr. RML Hospital has to be made operational in its true sense by
providing a dedicated earmarked wing in the same way as in Safdurjung hospital.
3.25 CGHS does not have the sanctioned posts of Super specialists. It would not be
practically feasible to open super specialty wings under CGHS.
3.26 Delhi state health authority has been requested for providing separate wing for CGHS
beneficiaries in their hospitals. However, all the Government, quasi-Government hospitals are
approved for taking treatment by CGHS beneficiaries.
Further Recommendation
3.27 The Committee recommends that expeditious measures be taken to make the
CGHS wing in Dr. RML Hospital operational in a dedicated time frame.
PLASTIC IDENTITY CARDS
Recommendation/Observation
3.28 The Committee has been given to understand that though the plastic card entitles a
beneficiary to avail treatment at any CGHS Wellness Centre, this rule is not being implemented
on the ground. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should make
efforts to ensure that the instructions issued by it regarding plastic cards are followed at all
the Wellness Centres across the country. The Department should also look into the reasons for
delay in issuing the plastic cards and address the same on priority basis. (para 67)
Action Taken
3.29 The instruction has already been reiterated in this regard.
3.30 The pendency of issuance of plastic cards in Delhi has been effectively addressed and
the cards are now being sent to the residential address by speed post. The process of issuing
CGHS plastic cards in other cities has also started.

22
Further Recommendation
3.31 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry and impresses upon it to
check the ground realities, since many complaints regarding pendency of issuance of CGHS
cards are being brought before it. The Committee recommends that the Ministry needs to
address all the issues which are coming in the way of smooth delivery of CGHS cards.
AUTHORIZED MEDICAL A TTENDANT FOR BENEFICIARIES
Recommendation/Observation
3.32 The Committee has been given to understand that the CGHS cardholders are entitled to
cashless treatment and diagnostic facilities at CGHS empanelled hospitals/ diagnostic centres.
However, these facilities are not extended to those who are not covered under a CGHS
Dispensary and avail the services of the Authorised Medical Attendant under Central Services
(Medical Attendance) Ru1es. The Committee is of the view that such an arrangement is
patently unfair and recommends that cashless benefits both for consultation and diagnostic
services be extended to the AMA beneficiaries. (para 77)
Action Taken
3.33 The cashless medical treatment facility in CGHS empanelled private hospitals is not
available to all CGHS beneficiaries. This facility is available only to the MPs, Ex MPs, Freedom
fighters, pensioner, CGHS beneficiaries etc. It is not available to the serving employees of
various Government Ministries and Departments / offices in non-emergency cases. They are
entitled for reimbursement from their respective offices /departments. Each department / office
has its own budget for providing medical treatment to its employees whether they are covered
under CGHS or CS(MA) Rules. The employees pay first and claim reimbursement later from
their office. It is practically not feasible for the private hospitals to extend credit facility to
the serving CGHS/CS(MA) beneficiaries and seek reimbursement from their administrative
offices which are very large in homber and spread all over. It is therefore practically not
feasible to extend credit facility to the serving employees whether they are CGHS beneficiaries
or covered under CS(MA) Rules, 1944. Pensioners are however, not covered under CS(MA)
Rules.
Further Recommendation
3.34 The Committee is unable to reconcile itself with the arguments advanced by the
Department that “It is practically not feasible for the private hospitals to extend
credit facility to the serving CGHS / CS (MA) beneficiaries and seek reimbursement
from their administrative offices which are very large in number and spread all over”.
The Committee is well aware that the grievances of the private empanelled hospitals
predominantly relate to the delay on the part of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare in payment/non-payment of reimbursements of bills preferred by them. The
Committee is of the considered view that if a robust grievance redressed mechanism
is put in place to take care of the genuine concerns of the private empanelled
hospitals in this regard, they would be too happy to extend credit facilities to all CGHS

23
and AMA beneficiaries. Given the IT resources currently available, this should not be
a problem. The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of dilly-dallying on the
issue, the Department should put in place a credible mechanism for settlement of bills
preferred by the empanelled hospitals and make arrangements for reimbursement of
medical expenses on a real time basis. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates its
earlier recommendation that credit facility be extended to all CGHS and AMA
beneficiaries.
EMPANELMENT OF HOSPITALS
Recommendation/Observation
3.35 The Committee takes note of the fact that flexibility of allowing empanelment without
prior accreditation has been given in view of the lack of sufficient empanelled hospitals in
certain cities and strongly recommends that the Department should ensure NABH/NABL
accreditation of such hospitals/diagnostic Centres within six months of their empanelment and
no further relaxation on this account should be given. (para 82)
Action Taken
3.36 The number of NABH/ NABL accredited hospitals and diagnostic centres in the country
is not very large and therefore, Government is examining the option of empanelling not only
NABH/NABL accredited hospitals and diagnostic labs but also non NABH/ NABL accredited
hospitals and diagnostic labs for providing adequate number of hospitals and diagnostic centres
under CGHS to provide greater coverage. However, such hospitals and diagnostic labs will be
inspected by Quality Council of India (QCI) to ensure that the standards are as per CGHS
requirements.
Further Recommendation
3.37 The Committee desires that an early decision may be taken to empanel non
NABH/NABL hospitals/diagnostic labs. However, there should not be any compromise on
the quality.
Recommendation/Observation
3.38 The Committee would like the Department to do a comparative analysis of the CGHS
rates  vis-a-vis  the rates fixed and paid by the health insurance companies to private hospitals/
diagnostic centres so that a reasoned decision regarding the rates could be arrived at. The
Committee is aware that the private hospitals are driven by profit motives and charge
exorbitant rates for treatment and diagnostic procedures and therefore, they should not be
allowed to dictate terms in this regard. (para 83)
Action Taken
3.39 The private Health Insurance companies have adopted a slab system for providing
health facilities whereas CGHS is by and large a welfare scheme and therefore it is not possible

24
to compare both the systems. CGHS has not fixed the package rates on its own; these have
been fixed through tender process and the L1 rates were treated as benchmark rates for
respective treatment procedures and the same were offered to the hospitals; those who
accepted were empanelled as per the terms and conditions of Memorandum of Agreement. The
tender process for revision of rates and fresh empanelment of hospitals has been initiated.
Recommendation/Observation
3.40 The Committee, accordingly, recommends framing of a more rational policy for
revision of rates. The Committee would also like the Department to ensure that the bills
preferred by the private hospitals/diagnostic centres are processed promptly and genuine
claims are settled without hassles within a specified time-frame and the empanelled hospitals/
diagnostic centres are not subjected to unnecessary delays in reimbursement of their claims
of expenditure. ( para 84)
Action Taken
3.41 The Government intends to address the payment related issues in the new tender
process. There is a proposal for releasing payment of 70% of the claimed amount in the
hospital bill on submission of physical bills to the Bill Clearing Agency and the balance
admissible amount within 30 days. Any adjustments in terms of recovery, if any shall be made
against future bills.
3.42 To have a better perspective of the problems being faced by the private hospitals, the
Committee, at its meeting held on 19th November, 2014, heard the representatives of the IMA.
It was submitted before the Committee that the main problems being faced by the private
hospitals to enroll under empanelment were (a) low and unviable rates for many procedures;
(b) package rates did not take care of co-morbidities and complications; (c) no provision of
annual revision of rates or even price index increase; (d) in-ordinate delay in re-imbursement
spanning months and years; (e) unjustified deductions ranging from 25-30% without assigning
any reasons and (f) harassment by CGHS officials and sometimes by beneficiaries who demand
extended stay beyond stipulated time. Further it was also informed that most leading private
tertiary care hospitals and diagnostic centres were facing huge problems in providing care to
CGHS beneficiaries because category of super-specialty hospital rates have been withdrawn in
the current MOU.
3.43 As regards fixing the rates for various treatments/processes, the IMA informed the
Committee that rates of medical procedures were fixed by calling, tenders from hospitals/
nursing homes having 50-beds and above. The lowest quoted rates were fixed and applied to
all including the tertiary care super-specialist hospitals. Rates had been revised recently after
a gap of 4 years. During these years operating expenses had increased manifold on account
of salary, consumables/tariffs/taxations etc. but revised rates for many procedures were lower
than from those in the year 2010. The Committee took up the matter with the Department of
Health and Family Welfare and in response thereto, the Department has furnished their written
replies which are given in ANNEXURE-IV.
3.44 Acknowledging that there were certain anomalies in rates fixed for specific procedures
listed out by IMA, the Department of Health and Family Welfare informed that these anomalies

25
were considered by a Committee headed by Special DG, Directorate General of Health Services
on 21st January, 2015. The Committee took up the specialties of urology and nephrology and
agreed to revise the rates of kidney transplant surgery only. The Committee felt that the rates
needed to be revisited but did not make any specific recommendations. In view of this
experience, it has been decided that any removal of anomalies in the remaining specialties of
surgery may be decided by an internal committee headed by Director, CGHS. This Committee
has given its recommendations in the light of which new rates have been proposed for 19
treatments procedures/investigations which include kidney transplantation, Double Valve
Replacement (DVR), Ureteric Catheterization besides others. Formal orders will be issued after
concurrence of Internal Finance Division is obtained.
Further Recommendation
3.45 From a perusal of Annexure-IV , the Committee finds that even though the
anomalies have been acknowledged in the replies furnished, most of the replies lack
clarity and are evasive in nature. The Committee would like to make it plain to the
Department of Health and Family Welfare that the Committee System is a device of
ensuring the accountability of the Executive to the Legislature and the Department’s
attempt to indulge in prevarication would not be viewed favorably. The Committee,
therefore, impresses upon the Department to use all care and circumspection while
furnishing the information as asked for and ensure that such instances do not recur in
future.
3.46 The Committee notes that the rates for various procedures were finalized by the
Additional Director of CGHS in 2014. The Committee also takes note of the
Department’s admission that certain anomalies had crept in and a committee headed by
DG, CGHS considered the anomalies on 21st January, 2015 and agreed to revise the
rates for kidney surgery only. Though this committee felt that the rates needed to be
revisited, it did not make any recommendation. Another Interim Committee headed by
Director, CGHS was, accordingly, set up, which recommended new rates for 19 treatment
procedures/ Investigations. Formal orders were, however, awaiting concurrence of
Internal Finance Division. The Committee expects the Department to pursue the matter
vigorously, obtain approval of IFD for the recommended rate revision, finalise the rates
and place them in the public domain. The Committee is constrained to observe that
despite the fact that very robust information technology resources are nowadays
available, such glaring anomalies have been allowed to creep in which is indicative of
the cavalier fashion with which the revision of rates has been dealt. Had due diligence
been done by the authorities concerned, and computerised database maintained for
analysis, such a state of affairs could have been easily avoided.
3.47 Taking note of the shortcomings in the rates fixed for various procedures as
highlighted by the representatives of IMA, the Committee feels that they can seriously
impinge the interests of CGHS beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, is of the view
that the current system of rate fixation suffers from certain inadequacies and needs to
be critically analysed through an independent evaluation agency so that the realistic, but
not exorbitant, rates are arrived at.

26
3.48 Another grievance put forth by the representatives of IMA was non-settlement of Bills
creating huge pendency. It has also been informed that till 30 th September, 2014, the agreement
between CGHS and the empanelled hospitals provided that payment to hospitals will be made
within 10 days of submission of bills and in lieu of such early payments a 10% cut will be
made. However, payments were never made in 10 days and 10% of the total bill amount was
always deducted as a norm. The outstanding dues for many hospitals run in the range of
`2-20 crore. The total outstanding at one time during Jan-Feb 2014 was as high as `200 crore.
The IMA also informed the Committee that in new agreement signed w.e.f. 1st October, 2014,
it was stipulated that 70% of the payment would be made within the first five working days
without even scrutinizing the bills and the rest would be paid in one month. However, no
payment has been received by anyone under this MoU.
3.49 The Committee is perturbed to note the sorry state of affairs as regards the
reimbursement of Bills preferred by the Hospitals and diagnostic Centres. The
Committee feels that this could be one of the factors for withdrawal of renowned
hospitals from CGHS empanelment across the country. The casual and desultory
approach of the Department towards prompt bill settlement reflects poorly on the
functioning of the Department. The Committee feels that in this age of digitization,
such delay is unacceptable. The Committee, therefore, deprecates the Department for its
inept handling of the matter and recommends that the Department should address the
issue seriously and devise a fool-proof mechanism to overcome the deficiencies in the
existing system of bill settlement within a specified time-frame.
3.50 The Committee notes that many State Governments have digitized system in
operation for on-line submission of hospital bills. The Department informed the
Committee that introduction of e-processing of hospital bills in Delhi/NCR had been
proposed. The Committee appreciates the Department’s proposal and feels that in the
present times of digitization, the e-processing of bills would be a progressive move which
would result in saving upon time and resources. The Committee would also like to
suggest to the Department to peruse the Tamil Nadu Scheme and Arogyashree in Andhra
Pradesh as suggested during the course of its meeting held on 19th November, 2014 for
on-line system of bill submissions. The Committee would like the Department to
expedite introduction of e-processing of hospital bills.
3.51 In response to the Committee’s queries regarding settlement of hospital bills by CGHS,
the Department vide  its communication dated 3rd February, 2015, informed that as of now bills
received upto 2nd December, 2014 had been cleared by UTI-ITSL. It was further informed
that from now onwards for the purpose of expeditious clearance of bills, scrutiny of bills by
CGHS would be done on a sample basis which was otherwise being done to the extent of
100%.
3.52 The Committee observes that seamless settlement of hospital bills is critical to
the efficient delivery of healthcare services by the empanelled hospitals. The Committee
notes that a new set of guidelines have been formulated and implemented to streamline
the process of bill settlement. The Committee sincerely hopes that the new arrangement
would help iron out the hindrances coming in the way of hassle-free process of bill
settlement. The Committee’s only advice to the Department in this regard would be to
ensure that the checks and balances are maintained between the empanelled hospitals

27
and the CGHS beneficiaries and the beneficiaries are not forced to make any
inappropriate payment to the empanelled hospitals.
3.53 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may sit with the
representatives of the Association of Health Care Providers, India, a nodal body of
Private empanelled hospitals for arriving at an amicable solution for all the above said
issue. As regards fixing the rates for various treatment/procedures, the Ministry should
review the rates of the National Accreditation Board for Hospitals & Health Care
Providers. The Committee is of the opinion that there should be some rationale while
fixing rate of various packages keeping in view various components involved therein as
also the rate of doctor’s consultation charges. Besides, all efforts should be made for
clearing outstanding dues of the empanelled hospitals well in time so that unnecessary
hardships are not caused to the honest private empanelled hospitals and CGHS
beneficiaries are not deprived of quality health care facilities being provided by the
private empanelled hospitals.
3.54 The Committee is dismayed to note that many Hospitals/Diagnostic Centres are
opting out of the CGHS. A serious introspection is required for finding out the cause
for such a phenomenon. The Committee apprehends that if all the issues of dispute
with the Hospitals/Diagnostic Centres are not resolved in a time-bound manner then
there is every possibility that many more Hospitals/Diagnostic Centres may opt out of
CGHS.
Recommendation/Observation
3.55 The Committee has been given to understand that some of the CGHS empanelled
Hospitals have been refusing admission to the CGHS beneficiaries on the ground that CGHS
beds were not available to accommodate them. The Committee takes a serious note of this.
The Committee is unable to understand as to how a CGHS empanelled hospital can refuse
admission to the CGHS beneficiary merely on the ground that CGHS bed was not available.
Any refusal of admission by an empanelled hospital amounts to discrimination towards the
CGHS beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should
look into the matter to find out the reasons for which empanelled hospitals are avoiding
treatment of CGHS beneficiaries and take remedial measures so that the CGHS beneficiaries are
not put to any such discrimination in the CGHS empanelled hospitals. There should be a
mechanism in place to look into such instances. Further, measures should be taken to increase
the number of empanelled hospitals. (para 85)
Action Taken
3.56 Powers have already been delegated to field Additional Directors for empanelment of
hospitals and diagnostic centres as they are in a better position to monitor the empanelled
hospitals and diagnostic centres. In case of non compliance with the terms and conditions of
empanelment they can take suitable penal action including the de-empanelment of such hospitals
whenever they are found deficient on service delivery or discriminatory towards CGHS
beneficiaries.

28
3.57 Continuous empanelment scheme has already been initiated on 14.02.2013 for
empanelment of more hospitals and diagnostic centres. 312 new hospitals/diagnostic/centres
imaging centres/eye/clinics/dental clinics, etc., joined CGHS after revival of continuous
empanelment scheme across the country in all CGHS cities. However, new tender process has
also been initiated for revision of rates and empanelment of hospitals as per revised rates. The
process will take some time to complete.
3.58 During the course of the oral evidence tendered on 16 th  October, 2014, the
representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare informed the Committee that a new
empanelment process had been notified on 1st October, 2014 for Delhi/NCR and for other
cities, it was in final stages and likely to be done on 1st November, 2014. Subsequently, the
Department also informed that notifications regarding new empanelment process had already
been issued in 21 other cities on 17 th November, 2014. It was also informed that since there
were no bidders in Shillong, no technically qualified bidders in Lucknow and no e-tender in
Mumbai, earlier arrangements are continuing in these places.
Further Recommendation
3.59 The Committee would rather like the Department to dwell on the issue of refusal
of admission/treatment to CGHS beneficiaries by private empanelled hospitals more
seriously. The Department should find out the reasons for which empanelled Hospitals
are refusing/avoiding treatment to CGHS beneficiaries and come out with remedial
measures to check instances of such discrimination. The Committee feels that some of
the rates offered to the empanelled Hospitals for various procedures and treatment are
unrealistic and hence result in denial of treatment to CGHS beneficiaries. The whole
procedure of empanelment, as being pursued by the Department for empanelment of
Hospitals/diagnostic centres, also needs to be relooked into as mere adoption of L1 rates
without going into the quality of services offered results in pushing for non-realistic
rates for other Hospitals and Diagnostic Centres who otherwise are willing to offer
services to CGHS beneficiaries. The Department should also spell out the mechanism
available with the beneficiary to report such instances of refusal by the empanelled
Hospitals. The Committee would like the Department to put in place a strong
monitoring mechanism to ensure that the empanelled hospitals/Diagnostic centres
violating the terms of memorandum of agreement should be penalized in a deterrent
manner.
EXPANSION OF CGHS
Recommendation/Observation
3.60 The Committee feels that by merely accepting that there is no room for further
expansion does not relieve the Department of its commitment to provide required health care
to the existing Government employees and former employees. At a time when the avowed
objective of the Government is to bridge the gaps in health infrastructure and human resources
for health, the Committee is at a loss to understand as to why such a retrograde step has been
taken, especially in view of the dismal health infrastructure in the country. The Committee

29
recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may take up the matter with
Ministry of Finance again for expansion of CGHS. (para 98)
Action Taken
3.61 Government has already initiated a proposal to open at least one CGHS dispensary in
the Capital city of those States which do not have CGHS presence as yet. If approved, every
State will have the presence of CGHS at least in there State Capital. Moreover, there is also
a proposal to implement Health Insurance Scheme for Central Government employees and
pensioners on pan India basis with special focus on non - CGHS covered areas to provide
comprehensive healthcare facilities to the serving and retired employees across the country.
EFC Note on the proposed health insurance scheme has already been circulated to the
departments concerned for obtaining their comments/suggestions on the said scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
3.62 The Committee understands that the Government has its own limitations and CGHS
Wellness Centres cannot be opened in every corner of the country. In areas where there is no
CGHS W ellness Centre, the nearest hospital/diagnostic centre may be empanelled as per the
defined empanelment procedure. (para 99)
Action Taken
3.63 The CGHS empanels private hospitals only in the cities where it is in operation. This
is because of the operational necessities as CGHS follows a referral system for allowing
medical treatment in private empanelled hospitals. The CGHS authorities also exercise requisite
checks on the empanelled hospitals to ensure proper service delivery and transparency in
transactions by the hospitals. It would not be possible for CGHS to empanel hospitals in non
CGHS locations where CGHS is not in operation. However, pensioner CGHS beneficiaries
residing in these locations can obtain treatment from Government hospitals (including PSU
hospitals), CS(MA) approved hospitals and ECHS empanelled hospitals.
Recommendation/Observation
3.64 The Committee is also of the opinion that the number of CGHS Wellness Centres needs
to be Commensurate with the number of beneficiaries & geographical spread of the cities. It
should reach out to the beneficiaries/cardholders rather than making them to travel long
distances. (para 100)
Action Taken
3.65 The powers have already been delegated to field Additional Directors to relocate the
dispensaries within the city for optimal utilization of facilities, manpower and resources keeping
in view the beneficiaries interest and convenience.
3.66 In the meeting held on 16th October, 2014, the representative of the Department
informed that CGHS has taken over 19 dispensaries of Department of Posts in the 12 cities
where CGHS is in operation viz. Ahemdabad, Bhopal, Bhubaneshwar, Dehradun, Guwahati,
Jammu, Jabalpur, Jaipur, Lucknow, Pune, Ranchi and Shillong w.e.f 1st August, 2013.

30
3.67 The Committee was also informed that there is not even a single CGHS Wellness centre
in Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh and some of the North-Eastern States. In reply to, a
question regarding the proposal of setting up of a least one dispensary in the capital city of
each of those States where CGHS is not currently in operation, the Department has informed
that the Department of Expenditure has conveyed its approval for opening at least one
dispensary in the capital city of each of those States where CGHS is not currently in operation
i.e.  Shimla, Kohima, Gangtok, Raipur, Aizawal, Panaji, Gandhinagar, Imphal, Puducherry,
Itanagar, Agartala, & Indore and orders have been issued in this regard on 19.11.2014. Also,
the concerned Additional Directors (ADs) have been directed to take necessary steps to
establish these Wellness Centres and the Principal Secretary (Health) of all the States have been
requested to extend all possible help in providing suitable accommodation for opening of the
Wellness Centres. In addition, a proposal for opening of CGHS wellness centre in Indore was
also submitted as per the directions of Hon’ble High Court. Moreover, for the cities where no
CGHS center is available, private hospitals ate empanelled under CS(MA) and CGHS
beneficiaries within 25 citie or outside can avail facilities from any hospital empanel1ed under
CS(MA).
3.68 The Committee while considering the Action Taken received representation that all
employees of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangthan (KVS), both currently employed and pensioners are.
getting the benefits of CGHS facilities in Bangalore, Chennai, Kolkata, Hyderabad,
Secunderabad, Mumbai and Delhi only. A proposal of making available equal CGHS facilities to
all employees and pensioners of KVS across the country is still pending with the Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare. The Committee sought the comments of the Department in the matter
and in response thereto, the Department informed that the Committee of Secretaries on 23rd
December, 2008 had decided that CGHS would not be extended to any new organization since
the performance of CGHS had started deteriorating under the ever-increasing workload and
dwindling resources. Subsequent to this decision, these facilities have been extended to such
organizations only through orders of various courts. As regards availability of CGHS services
to other autonomous organisations, it was informed that, a total of 61 autonomous
organizations are already covered under the CGHS Delhi area only. CGHS in process of
formulating a uniform policy for including more autonomous organizations within the CGHS
ambit, rather than deciding on a case to case basis. It was also informed that since the number
of autonomous organizations is increasing quite rapidly, resources available with CGHS will not
be enough to cater to all such organizations.
Further Recommendation
3.69 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department towards expansion
of CGHS by opening at least one dispensary in the capital city of those States where
CGHS is not in operation till now. The Committee recommends that all out measures
be adopted to ensure that all necessary approvals are obtained in time so that there is
no time overrun and the resultant cost escalation. The Committee would like to suggest
that the Department should ensure that CGHS Wellness Centres, which are to be
established at these places, should have state-of-art equipments and facilities with
adequate staff to cater to the health needs of the patients serviced by these Wellness

31
Centres. The Committee would like to be apprised of the broad roadmap drawn for the
purpose.
3.70 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should give shape to its
proposed uniform policy for including autonomous organisation within the CGHS ambit
expeditiously to address the grievances of those who are not covered so far under it.
3.71 The Committee feels that there should not be any biased approach in the
treatment of same organisation such as KVS in the matter of extending CGHS facilities
and the Department should frame a well reasoned policy regarding the provision of
CGHS facilities to the employees of Kendriya Vidyalaya. The Committee is of the view
that such an unfair arrangement breeds corruption. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Department to take a balanced and humanitarian view towards addressing the
demand of KVS employees for inclusion under CGHS so that CGHS facilities are
provided to all KVS employees across the country. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the decision taken by the Department in this regard.
DENTAL SERVICES UNDER EMPANELMENT
Recommendation/Observation
3.72 The Committee would like to suggest that the dental services should be made
available in all the Wellness Centres and not just in a few selected Centres in Delhi. The
same procedure of outsourcing could be utilized in other Centres so that all the beneficiaries
across the country can avail dental facilities. The quality, efficacy and adequacy of dental
services should be closely monitored. The Department should ensure that the outsourced
dentist are not engaged in Commercial exploitation of the facilities being provided by the
Government. The Committee impresses upon the Department to have a stringent monitoring
mechanism in this regard. (para 103)
Action Taken
3.73 The suggestion will be examined after evaluating the functioning of outsourced dental
units in Delhi.
3.74 Subsequently in reply to a query, the Department vide  its OM dated 14 th October,
2014 submitted that Services of Private Dental Doctors are not permitted in CGHS Wellness
Centres. However, Dental Services have been made available in 13 Wellness Centres under
CGHS Delhi-NCR under a Public Private Partnership (PPP) Mode for 22 dental procedures
on credit. CGHS Delhi has signed a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) with a Private
agency with detailed terms and conditions which includes timings, guidelines and list of
procedures along with rates. The MOA is valid for 5 years from 2010. Each centre has been
allotted a closed space of about 300 square feet area and licensed to the private agency. The
services provided by the Outsourced Dental Clinics is exclusively for CGHS patients upto
1.30 a.m. The Clinics are given facility to entertain private patients and CGHS patients on
appointment/ first-come-first-served basis during the timings from 13.30 to 19.30 hrs. The
Department informed that the rates were finalized based on the rates quoted by bidding

32
hospitals and that Government has constituted a Technical Committee to update the
procedures. As regards unethical practice by private dentists, 42 complaints have been
received so far and the matter is under examination.
3.75 In reply to another query, the Department vide  its subsequent communication inter-alia
informed that the dental services are provided by M/s Forsan Dental Life which was selected
by a tender process in which no other bidder participated. It was also informed that there have
been complaints regarding overcharging and non-payment of electricity bills by the private
service provider. The Private agency has also submitted various representations about
reimbursement at NABH rates instead of non-NABH rates at present and the matter is under
examination.
Further Recommendation
3.76 The Committee feels that dental care plays a significant role in overall
healthcare and there is need to expand dental care facilities to all CGHS Wellness
Centres. The Committee notes from the information furnished to it that 300 square feet
area had been provided for the dental unit within the CGHS Wellness Centres. The
Dental Clinics run by M/s Forsan Dental Life had been allowed to entertain private
patients between 13.30 hrs to 19.30 hrs. If, despite extending these facilities, 42
complaints of unethical practice have been received, it is a disquieting matter. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the complaints received may be looked into
expeditiously and resolved in a transparent manner. The Committee would once again
emphasise that probability of providing dental services in other CGHS Wellness Centres
should be looked into by resolving all the issues with the current service provider.
Alternatively, the Department may have a fresh bidding done for the provision of the
facility. The Committee also recommends that the Department should be cautious that
these private operators do not use the facilities provided by the CGHS for commercial
purpose, ignoring the CGHS beneficiaries.
NABH/NABL ACCREDITATION
Recommendation/Observation
3.77 The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to be cautions on this move
and take necessary steps to ensure that the quality as per accreditation status of empanelled
hospitals and diagnostic labs is maintained. (para 105)
Action Taken
3.78 The number of NASH/ NABL accredited hospitals and diagnostic centres in the country
is not very large and therefore, Government is examining the option of empanelling not only
NABH/NABL accredited hospitals and diagnostic but also non NABH/ NABL accredited hospitals
and diagnostic labs for providing adequate number of hospitals and diagnostic centres under
CGHS to provide greater coverage and options to CGHS beneficiaries. However, such hospitals
and diagnostic labs will be inspected by Quality Council of India (QCI) to ensure that they
conform to the laid down standard parameters for the private hospitals for empanelment under
CGHS.

33
3.79 Subsequently, in reply to a query regarding NABH/ NABL accreditation, the Department
in a written submission stated as under:-
“with a view to provide quality health care services to CGHS beneficiaries, Government
decided to prescribe NABH (National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare
Providers) Accreditation for hospitals/ Imaging Centres and NABL (National
Accreditation Board for Laboratories) Accreditation for diagnostic laboratories. To retain
the accreditation the accredited Health Care Organizations (HCOs) are kept under
surveillance by the accreditation bodies to ensure the quality of services being provided
by them. Non-accredited HCOs empanelled under CGHS are to be inspected by Quality
Council of India (QCI) within one year of their empanelment for the facilities available,
as per the terms and conditions of empanelment. In case they are not recommended by
QCI, they are liable to be removed from CGHS panel. Regular inspection by CGHS
personnel is not resorted to. However, any complaints received are inquired into for
their redressed.”
3.80 On being asked about the procedure for evaluating the capacity of hospitals and
diagnostic facilities who apply for empanelment under CGHS, the representatives of Department
of Health and Family Welfare during their oral evidence before the Committee on the 16th
January, 2015 explained that a double-bid system involving technical bid evaluation and
financial bid evaluation is followed. On being asked about physical inspections, if any, of the
facilities after they qualify financial bidding, the Committee was informed that no physical
inspections are carried out, and the qualification for financial bidding is based on the
documents submitted by the hospitals/ diagnostic facilities. Subsequently, the Department in a
written reply submitted that, “however, it is now proposed that any facility which is not on
the existing list would be physically inspected by a qualified team before empanelment. Also,
the facilities in Delhi can be inspected by an internal team of CGHS and for outside Delhi,
assistance of State Government staff would be obtained wherever necessary”.
Further Recommendation
3.81 The Committee notes from the submission that there is still no mechanism to
ensure that the existing empanelled hospitals and diagnostic labs are subjected to
institutionalised checks/ scrutiny from time to time so that non-compliance of quality
parameters and misinformation about capacity by empanelled hospitals/ diagnostic labs
are detected and corrective follow-up action taken expeditiously. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that concrete measures should be initiated to ensure that the
disclosures made by the already empanelled hospitals and diagnostic centres are checked
and validated through physical inspection.
3.82 The Committee welcomes the new proposal of the Department for inspection of
facilities before empanelment in future. The Committee observes that the prior physical
inspection would help filter dubious hospitals and diagnostic centres. The Committee
sincerely hopes that the operation libation of the new proposal will be pursued
vigorously.

34
DRUG PROCUREMENT SYSTEM
Recommendation/Observation
3.83 The Committee observes with concern that the whole process of buying medicines
from empanelled chemists is time consuming and difficult as the number of chemists in panel
within the specified radius is very less. The Committee, therefore, recommends that at least
three chemists should be included within the specified radius of concerned CGHS Dispensary
to make it convenient for the beneficiaries. (para 114)
Action Taken
3.84 Computerization and better inventory management have helped CGHS in reducing the
percentage of indented medicines through authorised local chemists. Indents are placed online
to the Authorised Local Chemists (ALC) so there is currently not much problems in procuring
indented medicines. The Authorised Local Chemists are appointed through tender process and
the chemist offering highest rate of discount on MRP is awarded the contract for supply of
medicines. The system adopted in CGHS for obtaining supplies through ALCs has in-built
mechanism to ensure supply of the indented medicines in the dispensary the next morning for
further dispensing it to the beneficiaries. This is a labour oriented job and therefore, the
response to tenders for appointment of ALCs floated by CGHS in all cities including Delhi,
have not been encouraging in past. The tender process is quite often repeated many times for
want of sufficient number of bidders. CGHS finds it difficult to appoint ALC in many cities
and dispensaries due to poor response from chemists. However, the suggestion of Hon’ble
Committee will be examined.
Further Recommendation
3.85 The Committee takes notes of the reply furnished by the Department that the
“suggestion of Hon’ble Committee would be examined”. However, it fails to indicate the
time period by which the suggestion will be examined. The Committee is not in position
to accept such a routine and cursory reply. The Committee does not find any merit in
the contention that “CGHS finds it difficult to appoint ALC in many cities due to poor
response from chemists.” The Committee feels that if procedural hurdles are removed
and the appointment of ALC is anchored on the principle of mutual commitment to
agreed objectives, there is no reason why sufficient number of chemists would not be
willing to be appointed as ALC. The Committee, therefore, again recommends that tile
Department should explore the possibility of including three ALCs within the specified
radius of CGHS Wellness Centre.
Recommendation/Observation
3.86 The Committee is also of the opinion that the specialists should be made aware of all
the medicines listed in the Formulary, so that the specialist could prescribe medicines listed in
the Formulary which would ensure cutting down of the quantity of local purchase resulting in
cost control. In addition to this, orientation in material management should be provided to the
in-charge of the Medical store depots from National Institute of Health & Family Welfare, run

35
by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare who could supervise & guide the lower staff in
store activities. Maintaining proper inventory would help in controlling the length of indent list
in the CGHS Wellness Centres. (para 121)
Action Taken
3.87 The CGHS specialists are aware of the medicines listed in the formulary. In case, a
medicine of same composition and strength is available in dispensary, the same is supplied to
the beneficiaries instead of the specific brand name indicated by the specialists in the
prescription. Only those medicines which are not available in the dispensaries are indented.
3.88 On being asked about the norms for revision of CGHS formulary and the reasons for
non-revision of the formulary for a considerable period of time, the Department in a written
reply submitted that the Ministry maintains a list of drugs called drug formulary, separately for
Branded and Generic drugs, for Government hospitals, Medical Store Organization and CGHS.
The drug formulary is prepared by Medical Stores Organization (MSO) under DGHS in
consultation with the committee of experts comprising inter-alia , of senior doctors from
Government hospitals, representatives from CGHS etc. A Group of Experts has been
constituted on 25.9.2014 for review of CGHS formulary to avoid denial of essential medicines
to CGHS beneficiaries and revising the formulary. CGHS formulary was last revised on 27
th
June, 2013. Orders stand issued for constitution of ‘Technical Committee’ to consider
inclusion/ exclusion of medicines/ investigations/ treatment procedures/ implants, etc., under
CGHS. Approved formulary consists of 1447 generic and 622 branded medicines. However,
anti cancer and other related life saving medicines are continued to be supplied, subject to the
condition that they are approved by DCGI for use in India.
3.89 It was further stated that CGHS ensures that all medicines listed under formulary and
approved for use in India by DCGI are supplied by the same brand / available brand or by
generic name. In case any such listed medicine is not available at CGHS Wellness Centre they
are indented through Authorized Local Chemist.
3.90 V arious insulins, anti diabetics and other essential medicines, which were not there in
the formulary, but were prescribed by the specialists have been permitted to ensure continuity
of the treatment of beneficiaries as an interim measure till revision of the CGHS formulary by
Medical Stores Organization (MSO) under DGHS.
3.91 The Committee was also informed that an Expert Committee has been constituted by
the Ministry on 25
th September 2014 for review of CGHS formulary and to define the term
‘life saving medicines’.
3.92 It was further stated that in the meantime ECHS (Ex-service Men Contributory Health
Scheme) and ESIC formularies have also been adopted to avoid hardship to beneficiaries.
Instructions have also been issued to CMOs I/c vide  Office Memorandum No 2-2/2014/CGHS/
PPT/CGHS-P dated 1.10.2014 to use their discretion to supply essential medicines to CGHS
beneficiaries even though they do not figure in the formularies CGHS/ECHS/ESIC. Also, some
medicines approved by competent authority were recommended for issue to CGHS beneficiary
as they were not there in formulary but are essential for management of diabetes mellitus such
as various insulins and anti-diabetics to enable CGHS beneficiary to continue their treatment.
This is an interim measure till the formulary is revised.

36
3.93 On being asked about the criteria of essential medicines, it was stated by the
Department that essential medicines are considered those without which the disease profile of
the patients would deteriorate. CMO I/C can use discretion in cases where the medicines were
continuing in chronic treatment without which the condition of the patient may deteriorate and
procure them through local purchase even though they are not in the existing Formulary. The
financial criterion for such procurement is upto a ceiling of `1500/- for 7 days purchase.
Further Recommendation
3.94 The Committee observes that the availability of quality and essential drugs to
patients is sine-qua-non for their recuperation and well being. It is in this context that
the expeditious finalization of revision of the formulary by the expert Committee set up
in September, 2014 assumes added significance. The Committee, therefore, urges upon
the Department to play proactive role and help expedite revision of the formulary in
such a way that the health needs of CGHS beneficiaries are not’ adversely affected and
a coherent and effective drug dispensing policy offering the desired flexibility is
formulated forthwith.
MEDICAL CENTRE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE (PHA)
Recommendation/Observation
3.95 The Committee is unable to understand the reasons for which the Medical Centre, PHA
has not been computerized so far whereas all the CGHS Wellness Centres have been
computerized and are connected with network. The Committee, therefore, feels that the
Medical Centre is required to be computerized immediately for keeping check and control on
availability/dispensing of medicines and other activities. The Committee strongly recommends
that all vacant posts at the Medical Centre, Parliament House Annexe should be filled up
immediately. There is need to strengthen the mechanism for provision of replacement of
specialists in case of leave. A panel of specialists for replacement duties at the Medical Centre,
PHA may be drawn up for this purpose. Old and outdated equipments should be replaced by
the latest equipments and gadgets. Keeping in view the utility of physiotherapy unit and the
increasing number of patients visiting there, the Physiotherapy Unit of the Centre is required
to be expanded further by providing adequate manpower and the latest gadgets and equipments.
In order to fill-up vacancies of the supporting staff temporarily till a permanent replacement
thereof is provided in different categories, a panel of retired and experienced staff members
may be prepared for the purpose. (para 135)
Action Taken
3.96 The Views of Committee are noted and will be examined and appropriate action will be
taken on the same.
Recommendation/Observation
3.97 The Committee recommends the Department to explore the feasibility of appointing a
PRO for the convenience of Members of Parliament. (para 136)

37
Action Taken
3.98 Necessary action will be taken in this regard.
Further Recommendation
3.99 The Committee notes that the Ministry has agreed to the suggestions/
recommendations pertaining to improving functioning of the Medical Centre, PHA and
assured to take appropriate action for implementation of the suggestions/
recommendations in this regard. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to take
necessary action at the earliest for smooth functioning of the Medical Centre.
3.100 The existing computer equipments are old and outdated. These should be replaced
by the new efficient machines. Besides, the Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendation that computerization of the Medical Centre should be taken up on
priority basis.
3.101 The Committee is constrained to observe that two regular posts at the
physiotherapy centre at PHA have not been filled for the last two years despite the fact
that the Centre caters to the physiotherapy treatment of the Members of Parliament.
If this is the state of affairs at such a high profile Centre, the plight of other centres
can be well imagined. The Committee, therefore, recommends that immediate steps may
be taken to fill up the two regular vacancies at the physiotherapy centre at PHA. As it
is evident from the reply of the Ministry, the physiotherapists are being posted at the
centre on rotation basis without provision of any incentives. The Committee feels that
this stop-gap arrangement is counter- productive to professional motivation of the
physiotherapists. The Committee, therefore, recommends that till the time the vacancies
are filled up on a regular basis, the physiotherapists working at the PHA physiotherapy
centre on loan basis should be given some incentives. The Committee has also been
given to understand that the Physiotherapy Centre at PHA is not equipped with state-
of-art equipments which hinders the delivery of high quality physiotherapy facilities to
the Members of Parliament. The Committee, therefore, recommends that urgent steps
may be taken to upgrade the Centre to the higher level and equip it with latest
equipments. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made on the
above issues.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
BEHAVIORAL ISSUES
Recommendation/Observation
4.1 The Committee observes with concern that basic infrastructure like ECG machine,
Glucometre etc. are not available in the Wel1ness Centres. The Committee recommends that such
basic medical instruments should be made available in all Wel1ness Centres. (para 33)
Action Taken
4.2 A Standard list of basic medical instruments and apparatus for dispensary is being
prepared which should be made compulsorily available in every dispensary.
AYURVEDA, YOGA CENTRE
Recommendation/Observation
4.3 The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s efforts in co-locating Ayurvedic and Yoga
therapies with the allopathic system of medicine at CGHS Wellness Centres. The Committee,
however, observes that a lot more is still required to be done for giving due thrust and place
to these alternative therapies. The Committee also takes note of the shortage of Ayurvedic
doctors and yoga trainers in many of the CGHS Wellness Centres and exhorts the Ministry to
take required action to fill up the existing vacancies in a time bound manner. The Committee
also suggests that steps may be initiated to extend yoga and Ayurvedic systems of therapies
to other CGHS Wellness Centres as well. (para 48)
Action Taken
4.4 The issue of expanding AYUSH dispensaries /units in CGHS will be taken up for
consideration in consultation with Department of A YUSH. Moreover, action has already been
initiated to fill up vacant posts in AYUSH units of CGHS.
PREVENTIVE HEALTH CHECK-UP SCHEME
Recommendation/Observation
4.5 The Committee appreciates the Department’s efforts for starting Preventive Health
Check-up Scheme and feels that such schemes would benefit the CGHS in the long run as
38

39
preventive measures are more economical as compared to the curative measures. Further, the
Committee is of the opinion that such services should be made available to all the CGHS
beneficiaries and not limited to specified Centres. (para 56)
Action Taken
4.6 The Department will explore the possibilities of replicating it in other CGHS cities.
DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES
Recommendation/Observation
4.7 The Committee feels that the Department needs to address all the shortcomings existing
in the facilities provided at the diagnostic Centres under CGHS. The Committee understands
that correct diagnosis is imperative for getting the right treatment. Unless adequate diagnostic
and laboratory benchmarks are not only set but also complied with at CGHS Wellness Centres,
there will be serious implications for the patients. The Committee, accordingly, suggests that
in order to ensure the efficiency of labs and diagnostic Centres, it is imperative that diagnostic
Centres and labs are well equipped with state-of-the art technology equipments so as to
facilitate quality medical care at CGHS Wellness Centres. The Committee would, therefore, like
the Department to initiate action in this regard. Further, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the progress made in the process of NAB L accreditation of labs and diagnostic
centres under CGHS. (para 61)
Action Taken
4.8 One laboratory under CGHS at Pusa Road, New Delhi is NABL accredited. In order to
provide quality diagnostic services to the CGHS beneficiaries through its in-house laboratories,
the options for consolidation are being explored. In Delhi, many laboratories are in operation
with skeleton facilities at dispensary level which are conducting very few tests and therefore
not proving to be cost effective and efficient in providing desired level of services to the
CGHS beneficiaries. The option of restructuring them through merger and opening of zonal
Laboratories with more facilities and equipments will be considered so that they could be
useful to the beneficiaries as well with a higher level of capacity utilisation and cost reduction
to CGHS. These labs may be equipped with modem machines and technology and can be
converted into NABL accredited ones.
COMPUTERISATION
Recommendation/Observation
4.9 The Committee recommends to the Department to look into the causes of this delay and
draw concrete action plan to ensure smooth functioning of software and to put in place an
efficient mechanism to promptly handle network issues so that the benefits of computerization,
can be reaped. (para 71)

40
Action Taken
4.10 In Delhi, the connectivity of 12 dispensaries has been upgraded to 4 Mbps through
optical fiber for better connectivity. Similar action will be taken for other locations. The
programmers at NIC centre regularly update and maintain CGHS software.
Recommendation/Observation
4.11 The Committee also took note of a few suggestions given by the beneficiaries such as
making available health education articles on home page of the CGHS website for educating
people about prevention of commonly prevalent diseases and illnesses. Some health related do’s
and don’ts may be put on the CGHS website and publicity may be given on this at the
Wellness Centres. Further, making available the facility of booking prior appointment online for
the specialists on the lines of private hospitals was also mooted for the benefit of beneficiaries
especially for senior citizens. The Committee recommends that the Department may explore the
possibility of utilizing such inputs for making CGHS more people friendly. (para 72)
Action Taken
4.12 CGHS website is under reconstruction and it is being improved. The suggestion of the
Hon’ble Committee to provide IEC material on Health related issues on CGHS website to
educate the beneficiaries about prevention of commonly prevalent diseases is very good and
will be implemented in the near future.
4.13 The other suggestion about introduction of a system of having prior appointment online
with the CGHS doctors to save time will be examined from operational point of view.
Recommendation/Observation
4.14 The Committee is also of the opinion that the Department should take measures for on-
line empanelment with tariffs to maximise the utility of computerization of the system and
make it more transparent and accessible. (para 74)
Action Taken
4.15 CGHS has initiated e-tender process for fresh empanelment of private hospitals,
diagnostic/imaging centres. The suggestion will be examined after empanelment process is
over.
BILL SETTLEMENT
Recommendation/Observation
4.16 The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department to immediately address this
issue and extend the same facilities to those covered under M.A. Rules. The Committee also
calls upon the Department to issue a fresh circular clarifying the procedures in this regard and
dispelling misgivings, if any. (para 91)

41
Action Taken
4.17 The proposal to do away with essentiality certificate to be signed, and issued by the
treating doctor/ Medical superintendent of hospital as in case of CGHS will be examined.
DRUG PROCUREMENT SYSTEM
Recommendation/Observation
4.18 The Committee feels that the key gap lies in the absence of close & sustained
supervision of day to day arrangement for indenting, procurement, storage, and distribution of
drugs in Medical Store Depots and within CGHS. For this purpose, the Committee would
emphasize that the Department should review the system to streamline and revamp it so as to
remove the delay in supply of medicines. (para 109)
Action Taken
4.19 All the processes are computerised and Government is exploring the possibilities for
setting up a monitoring unit in this regard.
Further Recommendation
4.20 The Committee would like to be apprised of the current status in this regard.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF FACILITIES PROVIDED BY EMPLOYEES STATE
INSURANCE CORPORATION (ESIC), INDIAN RAIL W AYS (IR) AND ARMED FORCES
MEDICAL SERVICES (AFMS)
Recommendation/Observation
4.21 The Committee observes that there are several other government players in the field of
providing health services e.g. ESI, AFMS, IRMS etc. The Committee would like the Ministry
to explore the possibility of covering all such players including CGHS under one umbrella, as
an apex organisation. (para 131)
Action Taken
4.22 The beneficiary profile, scope, extent and stretch of facilities under CGHS, ESIC,
ECHS and Railways are different and it may not be practically feasible to bring all the schemes
under one umbrella. However, the Government is open to examining the areas where
co-operation among different health schemes is possible.
4.23 The representatives from CGHS during deposition before the Committee, submitted
that discussion was held on convergence of CGHS with Railways, ESIC and ECHS and all
of them refused to come under one umbrella as an apex organisation. The Committee was
of the view that if the Department of Health and Family Welfare feels that convergence with
other services like Railways, ECHS, ESI etc. would be better in catering to the health needs

42
of the people, then Department should go ahead with their plan and as promised by Health
Secretary, the matter may be put forth before Cabinet Secretary and final outcome may be
informed to the Committee.
4.24 Subsequently the Department informed the Committee that a Committee of Secretaries
under the Cabinet Secretary has appointed an Inter-Ministerial Committee under the
Chairmanship of Secretary, DOPT examination to examine the issues raised in the Planning
Commission’s note ‘CGHS-Road Map for Reform and Expansion’. The Inter-Ministerial
Committee is examining the feasibility of convergence of different Government Health
Schemes, as one of the issues under the study. The report is being finalized for submission
to the Committee of Secretaries.
4.25 The Committee would like to be apprised of the final outcome of the study.
NEW ISSUES
V. Referral System
4.26 The Committee was given to understand by reply of IMA that the referral system for
CGHS beneficiaries is complex and unclear. This was pursued with the Department in
response to which it was clarified that the beneficiaries have to be referred by the
Dispensary to a Government specialist only. The Government specialist decides upon the line
of treatment to be followed and the beneficiary thereafter has the option of undergoing this
procedure/treatment in any empanelled hospital of his choice / Government hospital. It was
also submitted that Private hospitals are empanelled under CGHS for inpatient treatment only.
Limited facilities are provided for OPD consultation in empanelled hospitals. Post-operative
OPD follow up treatment is permitted for six conditions, where the initial treatment was
taken with prior permission and permission was obtained for post-operative. These are
cancer treatment, cardiac surgery, Kidney transplantation, Hip/Knee joint replacement and
post trauma cases. In addition, beneficiaries of satellite towns of DeIhi- Noida, Faridabad,
Ghaziabad and Gurgaon are also permitted OPD consultation since there is dearth of
Government hospitals/specialists in these towns. In all such cases, where OPD consultation
is permitted the advice of the specialist of empanelled hospital is treated like that of a
Government specialist.
4.27 It was also informed that orders have also been issued whereby beneficiaries who
have taken inpatient medical treatment from a CGHS empanelled hospital will be issued
medicines from the treating private hospital at the time of discharge, for a period upto seven
(7) days.
Further Recommendation
4.28 The Committee is of the view that the referral system in CGHS is a time
consuming process and the Department, therefore, needs to simplify the procedure so
that precious time is not lost in getting all the permissions and approvals repeatedly.
The Committee suggests that the beneficiary should be given the option to choose from
getting treatment done from Government Hospital Empanelled Hospitals after consulting
the doctor at CGHS wellness centres.

43
VI. Cashless Facilities to CGHS Pensioners
4.29 The Committee came to know from a recent Media report that the Ministry has now
decided to stop CGHS cashless scheme presently available to the pensioners and their
dependents from March 7, 2014. Due to this the pensioners and their dependants are going to
suffer the most, keeping in view the higher cost of different packages, as most of the
pensioners cannot afford such a huge amount for their treatment. The Committee taking a
serious view of the above developments observes that the Ministry cannot escape from its
social responsibility of providing free health care facilities to the CGHS beneficiaries,
particularly the pensioners and their dependents. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends the Ministry to withdraw the decision of stopping cashless facilities to the
pensioners immediately.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS - AT A GLANCE
The Committee is constrained to note that out of sanctioned strength of 1620
General Duty Medical Officers and Specialists, as many as 282 posts are lying vacant
and 240 have been filled on contract basis. The Committee understands that the
Department of Health and Family Welfare has attempted to bridge the gap by appointing
doctors and specialists on contract as a stop gap arrangement. But the Committee is of
the opinion that this could not be a long term solution to the problem of chronic
shortage of doctors and the Department needs to address it with urgency since without
the availability of doctors, all existing infrastructure of CGHS will not guarantee
healthcare to the beneficiaries. From the information shared with the Committee, it is
evident that even if UPSC makes selection of doctors, very few join CGHS. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department undertake a thorough study to
find out the reasons behind this trend and take remedial action accordingly. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department to
attract doctors and paramedical staff to join CGHS.  (Para 3.7)
Complaints like frequent failure of electricity, non-operational generator, age old
furniture, irregular supply of sanitation materials have been brought to the notice of
the Committee in some of the Wellness Centres running through rented accomodation.
The Committee is dismayed to know the sorry state of affairs in such centres. The
Committee is of the opinion that urgent interim measures are required for proper
maintenance of basic infrastructure in dispensaries functioning in rented
accommodations till buildings specially designed for dispensary are constructed. Basic
amenities should be ensured in the dispensaries working through rented accommodation.
The Committee is of the opinion that thorough inspection of the accommodation
proposed to be taken on rent for opening CGHS Wellness Centre should be made to see
whether it meets the desired parameters so as to avoid any inconvenience at later stage.
In the own buildings, rain water harvesting and solar energy panels should be provided
to ensure regular water and electricity supply. (Para 3.17)
The Committee is constrained to observe that the Ministry has not commented
upon the issue of providing regular homoeopathy services at all Wellness Centres, as
recommended in para 50 of the 71
st  Report. The Committee would have desired an
action plan from the Ministry in this regard and is perturbed to note the evasive
reply in the matter. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation
on the need of providing regular Homoeopathy services at all the Wellness Centres.
The Committee would appreciate a time bond action in the matter from the
Department.  (para 3.21)
44

45
The Committee recommends that expeditious measures be taken to make the
CGHS wing in Dr. RML Hospital operational in a dedicated time-frame. (Para 3.27)
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry and impresses upon
it to check the ground realities, since many complaints regarding pendency of issuance
of CGHS cards are being brought before it. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry needs to address all the issues which are coming in the way of smooth delivery
of CGHS cards. (para 3.31)
The Committee is unable to reconcile itself with the arguments advanced by the
Department that “It is practically not feasible for the private hospitals to extend
credit facility to the serving CGHS / CS (MA) beneficiaries and seek reimbursement
from their administrative offices which are very large in number and spread all over”.
The Committee is well aware that the grievances of the private empanelled hospitals
predominantly relate to the delay on the part of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare in payment/non -payment of reimbursements of bills preferred by them. The
Committee is of the considered view that if a robust grievance redressal mechanism
is put in place to take care of the genuine concerns of the private empanelled
hospitals in this regard, they would be too happy to extend credit facilities to all CGHS
and AMA beneficiaries. Given the IT resources currently available, this should not be
a problem. The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of dilly-dallying on the
issue, the Department should put in place a credible mechanism for settlement of bills
preferred by the empanelled hospitals and make arrangements for reimbursement of
medical expenses on a real time basis. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates its
earlier recommendation that credit facility be extended to all CGHS and AMA
beneficiaries. (para 3.34)
The Committee desires that an early decision may be taken to empanel non
NABH/NABL hospitals/diagnostic labs. However, there should not be any compromise on
the quality. (Para 3.37)
From a perusal of Annexure-IV , the Committee finds that even though the
anomalies have been acknowledged in the replies furnished, most of the replies lack
clarity and are evasive in nature. The Committee would like to make it plain to the
Department of Health and Family Welfare that the Committee System is a device of
ensuring the accountability of the Executive to the Legislature and the Department’s
attempt to indulge in prevarication would not be viewed favorably. The Committee,
therefore, impresses upon the Department to use all care and circumspection while
furnishing the information as asked for and ensure that such instances do not recur in
future. (Para 3.45)
The Committee notes that the rates for various procedures were finalised by the
Additional Director of CGHS in 2014. The Committee also takes note of the

46
Department’s admission that certain anomalies had crept in and a committee headed by
DG, CGHS considered the anomalies on 21st January, 2015 and agreed to revise the
rates for kidney surgery only. Though this committee felt that the rates needed to be
revisited, it did not make any recommendation. Another Interim Committee headed by
Director, CGHS was, accordingly, set up, which recommended new rates for 19 treatment
procedures/investigations. Formal orders were, however, awaiting concurrence of
Internal Finance Division. The Committee expects the Department to pursue the matter
vigorously, obtain approval of IFD for the recommended rate revision, finalise the rates
and place them in the public domain. The Committee is constrained to observe that
despite the fact that very robust information technology resources are nowadays
available, such glaring anomalies have been allowed to creep in which is indicative of
the cavalier fashion with which the revision of rates has been dealt. Had due diligence
been done by the authorities concerned, and computerised database maintained for
analysis, such a state of affairs could have been easily avoided. (Para 3.46)
Taking note of the shortcomings in the rates fixed for various procedures as
highlighted by the representatives of IMA, the Committee feels that they can seriously
impinge the interests of CGHS beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, is of the view
that the current system of rate fixation suffers from certain inadequacies and needs to
be critically analysed through an independent evaluation agency so that the realistic, but
not exorbitant, rates are arrived at. (para 3.47)
The Committee is perturbed to note the sorry state of affairs as regards the
reimbursement of Bills preferred by the hospitals and diagnostic centres. The
Committee feels that this could be one of the factors for withdrawal of renowned
hospitals from CGHS empanelment across the country. The casual and desultory
approach of the Department towards prompt bill settlement reflects poorly on the
functioning of the Department. The Committee feels that in this age of digitization,
such delay is unacceptable. The Committee, therefore, deprecates the Department for its
inept handling of the matter and recommends that the Department should address the
issue seriously and devise a fool-proof mechanism to overcome the deficiencies in the
existing system of bill settlement within a specified time-frame. (Para 3.49)
The Committee notes that many State Governments have digitized system in
operation for on-line submission of hospital bills. The Department informed the
Committee that introduction of e-processing of hospital bills in Delhi/NCR had been
proposed. The Committee appreciates the Department’s proposal and feels that in the
present times of digitization, the e-processing of bills would be a progressive move which
would result in saving upon time and resources. The Committee would also like to
suggest to the Department to peruse the Tamil Nadu Scheme and Arogyashree in Andhra
Pradesh as suggested during the course of its meeting held on 19th November, 2014 for
on-line system of bill submissions. The Committee would like the Department to
expedite introduction of e-processing of hospital bills. (Para 3.50)

47
The Committee observes that seamless settlement of hospital bills is critical to
the efficient delivery of health care services by the empanelled hospitals. The
Committee notes that a new set of guidelines have been formulated and implemented
to streamline the process of bill settlement. The Committee sincerely hopes that the
new arrangement would help iron out the hindrances coming in the way of hassle-free
process of bill settlement. The Committee’s only advice to the Department in this
regard would be to ensure that the checks and balances are maintained between the
impaneled hospitals and the CGHS beneficiaries and the beneficiaries are not forced to
make any inappropriate payment to the impaneled hospitals. (para 3.52)
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may sit with the
representatives of the Association of Health Care Providers, India, a nodal body of
Private empanelled hospitals for arriving at an amicable solution for all the above said
issues. As regards fixing the rates for various treatment/ procedures, the Ministry
should review the rates of the National Accreditation Board for Hospitals & Health Care
Providers. The Committee is of the opinion that there should be some rationale while
fixing rate of various packages keeping in view various components involved therein as
also the rate of doctor’s consultation charges. Besides, all efforts should be made for
clearing outstanding dues of the empanelled hospitals well in time so that unnecessary
hardships are not caused to the honest private empanelled hospitals and CGHS
beneficiaries are not deprived of quality health care facilities being provided by the
private empanelled hospitals. (para 3.53)
The Committee is dismayed to note that many hospitals/diagnostic centres are
opting out of the CGHS. A serious introspection is required for finding out the cause
for such a phenomenon. The Committee apprehends that if all the issues of dispute
with the hospitals/diagnostic centres are not resolved in a time-bound manner then
there is every possibility that many more hospitals/diagnostic centres may opt out of
CGHS. (Para 3.54)
The Committee would rather like the Department to dwell on the issue of refusal
of admission/ treatment to CGHS beneficiaries by private empanelled hospitals more
seriously. The Department should find out the reasons for which empanelled hospitals
are refusing/ avoiding treatment to CGHS beneficiaries and come out with remedial
measures to check instances of such discrimination. The Committee feels that some of
the rates offered to the empanelled hospitals for various procedures and treatment are
unrealistic and hence result in denial of treatment to CGHS beneficiaries. The whole
procedure of empanelment, as being pursued by the Department for empanelment of
hospitals/diagnostic centres, also needs to be relooked into as mere adoption of L1 rates
without going into the quality of services offered results in pushing for non-realistic
rates for other hospitals and diagnostic centres who otherwise are willing to offer
services to CGHS beneficiaries. The Department should also spell out the mechanism
available with the beneficiary to report such instances of refusal by the empanelled

48
Hospitals. The Committee would like the Department to put in place a strong
monitoring mechanism to ensure that the empanelled hospitals/diagnostic centres
violating the terms of memorandum of agreement should be penalized in a deterrent
manner. (Para 3.59)
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department towards expansion
of CGHS by opening at least one dispensary in the capital city of those States where
CGHS is not in operation till now. The Committee recommends that all out measures
be adopted to ensure that all necessary approvals are obtained in time so that there is
no time overrun and the resultant cost escalation. The Committee would like to suggest
that the Department should ensure that CGHS Wellness Centres, which are to be
established at these places, should have state-of-art equipments and facilities with
adequate staff to cater to the health needs of the patients serviced by these Wellness
Centres. The Committee would like to be apprised of the broad roadmap drawn for the
purpose. (Para 3.69)
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should give shape to its
proposed uniform policy for including autonomous organisation within the CGHS
ambit expeditiously to address the grievances of those who are not covered so far
under it. (Para 3.70)
The Committee feels that there should not be any biased approach in the
treatment of same organisation such as KVS in the matter of extending CGHS facilities
and the Department should frame a well reasoned policy regarding the provision of
CGHS facilities to the employees of Kendriya Vidyalaya. The Committee is of the view
that such an unfair arrangement breeds corruption. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Department to take a balanced and humanitarian view towards addressing the
demand of KVS employees for inclusion under CGHS so that CGHS facilities are
provided to all KVS employees across the country. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the decision taken by the Department in this regard. (para 3.71)
The Committee feels that dental care plays a significant role in overall health
care and there is need to expand dental care facilities to all CGHS Wellness Centres.
The Committee notes from the information furnished to it that 300 square feet area had
been provided for the dental unit within the CGHS Wellness Centres. The Dental Clinics
run by M/s Forsan Dental Life had been allowed to entertain private patients between
13.30 hrs to 19.30 hrs. If, -despite extending these facilities, 42 complaints of unethical
practice have been received, it is a disquieting matter. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the complaints received may be looked into expeditiously and resolved
in a transparent manner. The Committee would once again emphasize that probability of
providing dental services in other CGHS Wellness Centres should be looked into by
resolving all the issues with the current service provider. Alternatively, the Department
may have a fresh bidding done for the provision of the facility. The Committee also

49
recommends that the Department should be cautious that these private operators do not
use the facilities provided by the CGHS for commercial purpose, ignoring the CGHS
beneficiaries. (Para 3.76)
The Committee notes from the submission that there is still no mechanism to
ensure that the existing empanelled hospitals and diagnostic labs are subjected to
institutionalized checks/ scrutiny from time to time so that non-compliance of quality
parameters and misinformation about capacity by empanelled hospitals/ diagnostic labs
are detected and corrective follow-up action taken expeditiously. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that concrete measures should be initiated to ensure that the
disclosures made by the already empanelled hospitals and diagnostic centres are checked
and validated through physical inspection. (Para 3.81)
The Committee welcomes the new proposal of the Department for inspection of
facilities before empanelment in future. The Committee observes that the prior
physical inspection would help filter dubious hospitals and diagnostic centres. The
Committee sincerely hopes that the operationlisation of the new proposal will be
pursued vigorously. (Para 3.82)
The Committee takes notes of the reply furnished by the Department that the
“suggestion of Hon’ble Committee would be examined”. However, it fails to indicate the
time period by which the suggestion will be examined. The Committee is not in position
to accept such a routine and cursory reply. The Committee does not find any merit in
the contention that “CGHS finds it difficult to appoint ALC in many cities due to poor
response from chemists.” The Committee feels that if procedural hurdles are removed
and the appointment of ALC is anchored on the principle of mutual commitment to
agreed objectives, there is no reason why sufficient number of chemists would not be
willing to be appointed as ALC. The Committee, therefore, again recommends that the
Department should explore the possibility of including three ALCs within the specified
radius of CGHS Wellness Centre. (Para 3.85)
The Committee observes that the availability of quality and essential drugs to
patients is sine-qua-non  for their recuperation and well being. It is in this context that
the expeditious finalization of revision of the formulary by the expert Committee set up
in September, 2014 assumes added significance. The Committee, therefore, urges upon
the Department to play a proactive role and help expedite revision of the formulary in
such a way that the health needs of CGHS beneficiaries are not adversely affected and
a coherent and effective drug dispensing policy offering the desired flexibility is
formulated forthwith. (para 3.94)
The Committee notes that the Ministry has agreed to the suggestions/
recommendations pertaining to improving functioning of the Medical Centre, PHA and
assured to take appropriate action for implementation of the suggestions/recommendations

50
in this regard. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to take necessary action at the
earliest for smooth functioning of the Medical/Centre. (Para 3.99)
The existing computer equipments are old and outdated. These should be replaced
by the new efficient machines. Besides, the Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendation that computerization of the Medical Centre should be taken up on
priority basis. (para 3.100)
The Committee is constrained to observe that two regular posts at the
physiotherapy centre at PHA have not been filled for the last two years despite the fact
that the Centre caters to the physiotherapy treatment of the Members of Parliament.
If this is the state of affairs at such a high profile Centre, the plight of other centres
can be well imagined. The Committee, therefore, recommends that immediate steps may
be taken to fill up the two regular vacancies at the physiotherapy centre at PHA. As it
is evident from the reply of the Ministry, the physiotherapists are being posted at the
centre on rotation basis without provision of any incentives. The Committee feels that
this stop-gap arrangement is counter-productive to professional motivation of the
physiotherapists. The Committee, therefore, recommends that till the time the vacancies
are filled up on a regular basis, the physiotherapists working at the PHA physiotherapy
centre on loan basis should be given some incentives. The Committee has also been
given to understand that the physiotherapy Centre at PHA is not equipped with state-
of-art equipments which hinders the delivery of high quality physiotherapy facilities to
the Members of Parliament. The Committee, therefore, recommends that urgent steps
may be taken to upgrade the Centre to the higher level and equip it with latest
equipments. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made on the
above issues. (para 3.101)
The Committee would like to be apprised of the current status in this regard.
(para 4.20)
The Committee would like to be apprised of the final outcome of the study.
(para 4.75)
The Committee is of the view that the referral system in CGHS is a time
consuming process and the Department, therefore, needs to simplify the procedure so
that precious time is not lost in getting all the permissions and approvals repeatedly.
The Committee suggests that the beneficiary should be given the option to choose from
getting treatment done from government hospital empanelled hospitals after consulting
the doctor at CGHS wellness centres. (Para 4.28)
The Committee came to know from a recent Media report that the Ministry has
now decided to stop CGHS cashless scheme presently available to the pensioners and
their dependents from March 7, 2014. Due to this the pensioners and their dependants

51
are going to suffer the most, keeping in view the higher cost of different packages, as
most of the pensioners cannot afford such a huge amount for their treatment. The
Committee taking a serious view of the above developments observes that the Ministry
cannot escape from its social responsibility of providing free health care facilities to the
CGHS beneficiaries, particularly the pensioners and their dependents. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to withdraw the decision of stopping
cashless facilities to the pensioners immediately. (para 4.29)

MINUTES

IV
FOURTH MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 16th October, 2014 in Room
No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Shri Vijay Goel
5. Shrimati B. Jayashree
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
7. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
8. Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem
9. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
10. Dr. Subhash Bhamre
11. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
12. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
13. Dr. K. Kamaraj .
14. Shri Arjunlal Meena
15. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
16. Shri Chirag Paswan
17. Shri M.K. Raghavan
18. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
19. Shri Alok Sanjar
20. Dr. Mahesh Sharma
21. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
22. Shri Raj Kumar Singh
23. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
24. Shrimati Rita Tarai
55

56
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Department of Health and Family Welfare
l. Shri Lov V erma, Secretary
2. Shri R. K. Jain, Additional Secretary & DG (CGHS)
3. Dr. Sharda Verma, Director, CGHS
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the members of the Committee and apprised
them of the agenda of the meeting, i.e. , to hear the Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare along with Additional Secretary & Director General(CGHS) on the ‘Action
Taken Note, (ATN) on the recommendations/ observations made by the Committee in its 71st
Report on ‘Functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)’.
II. Oral evidence on Action Taken Note (ATN) on the recommendations/observations
made by the Committee in its 71st Report on ‘Functioning of Central Government
Health Scheme’
3. The Committee heard views of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
on the Action Taken Note (A TN) on the recommendations/observations made by the
Committee in its 71st Report on ‘Functioning of Central Government Health Scheme(CGHS)’.
He enumerated the following points  viz.  overview of CGBS; resource and manpower
constraints coming in the way of expansion of CGHS; waiving of requirement for referral/
permission for diagnostic tests at empanelled hospitals and diagnostic labs; starting of ‘SMS
Alert’ system to check misuse of CGHS cards; revision in working hours of CGHS Wellness
Centres from 7.30 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. to 8.00 a.m. to 3.00 p.m. free consultation to Senior
Citizens from general public in 26 selected CGHS Wellness Centres (between 1.30 to 3.00 p.m;
issue of medicines as per ECHS/ESIC formulary also in addition to CGHS formulary; addition
of Insulin and anti diabetic and other essential medicines in the formulary; setting up of Expert
Committee for revision of CGHS formulary; formulation of a mechanism to update list of
medicines / treatment procedures; putting in place transparency measures like putting up status
of medical reimbursement claims, claims of pensioners pending for more than 30 days; details
of payments in preceding month to empanelled hospitals/laboratories on CGHS website.
4. The Additional Secretary then made a power-point presentation on the subject. Some of
the important points highlighted by him were delegation of powers to Additional Directors of
CGHS cities to appoint retired Government doctors on contract basis and empanel hospitals and

57
diagnostic centres; reimbursement of 70% of bill amount of empanelled hospitals/diagnostic
centres within five working days on submission of bills without scrutiny and rest after
scrutiny; proposal for introduction of Health Insurance Scheme for Central Government
employees and pensioners with special focus on pensioners living in non CGHS covered areas;
introduction of Medical Audit & Presentation; new empanelment procedure involving e-tenders
for empanelment of private entities; staff position in CGHS; budgetary constraints, etc.
5. Members then raised queries which included - reasons for non fulfillment of vacancies
for the posts of specialists (82), GDMOs (282),Group B & C (634); need for revision of rates
of consultation fee for doctors; steps taken to improve infrastructure at CGHS wellness centres
and mechanism to monitor the same; need to open CGHS Wellness centres in other places also;
need to take strict action against empanelled hospitals who refuse to treat CGHS beneficiaries;
need to put in place a more robust monitoring system to ensure checking of quality of
medicines given to CGHS beneficiaries; installation of MRI machine, upgradation of dental unit
with Ortho Pantomo Gram (OPG) facility and latest equipments as well as posting of two
physiotherapists on permanent basis in Physiotherapy unit of Medical Centre, PHA for
convenience of Members of Parliament; reasons for reluctance on the part of UPSC recruited
doctors to join CGHS and, need to find out an effective mechanism on how to attract doctors
to CGHS to fill up the massive demand-supply mismatch in terms of availability of doctors;
need to have a correction system in place so that the shortcomings noticed are addressed
immediately; need to ensure quick renewal of plastic cards to CGHS beneficiaries in view of
complaints of undue delay in this regard; need to ensure coverage of CGHS for all Central
Government employees in Delhi, etc.
6. The Chairman after hearing the views of the Department on the subject suggested that
members may make on the spot visit to CGHS Wellness Centres located around the place of
their residence and report to the Committee of the short-comings and requirements of the
Centre. He directed the Health Secretary to furnish a checklist/proforma on the facilities
provided in CGHS Wellness Centres.
7. The Chairman then raised certain other questions regarding the functioning of CGHS
and sought detailed note thereon for consideration of the Committee within fifteen days on the
issues raised by him and other Members of the Committee.
8 . *                      *                      *
9. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 4.10 P.M. to meet again on the 12th November, 2014.
*** Relate to other matters

VI
SIXTH MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 19th November, 2014 in
Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
5. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
7. Dr. K. Kamaraj
8. Shri Chirag Paswan
9. Shri Alok Sanjar
10. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
11. Shri Manohar Untwal
12. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Indian Medical Association
Dr. Narender Saini, Hony. Secretary General
58

59
Delhi Medical Association
Dr. Anil Goyal, President
Association of Healthcare Providers India
1. Dr. Girdhar Gyani, Director General
2. Dr. Vijay Aggarwal, President (Delhi Chapter)
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed members of the Committee and apprised
them of the agenda of the meeting, i.e. , to hear the views of Dr. Narendra Saini, Hony.
Secretary General, Indian Medical Association and others on functioning of Central Government
Health Scheme (CGHS). * * *
II. Oral evidence on functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)
3. The Committee then heard views of the above mentioned witnesses on the
functioning of CGHS. After a brief introduction on the functioning Indian Medical Association
by Dr. Saini, Dr. Vijay Aggarwal delineated the following points viz. problems being faced’ by
the empanelled hospitals; low and unviable rates for many procedures; package rates not taking
care of co-morbidities and complications; there is no provision for revision of rates annually
or even price index linked increase; in-ordinate delay in settlement of bibs spanning months;
unjustified deductions ranging from 25-30% without assigning any reasons; withdrawal of
super specialty OPD consultation rates in the current MoU; cumbersome procedure of approval
for getting treatment from empanelled hospitals, which needs to be simplified; need to dispense
with multiple referral procedures; rates should be based on cost analysis and not Ll rates as
quality should be a major criterion for fixation of rates; confirmation that the rates quoting
Health Care Organisation (HCO) for a procedure is actually doing it or is competent to do the
same; package rate did not include consumables, cost of treatment of co-morbidities and
complications; there should be gradation of procedures and service providers; rates revision
should be linked to price index; tendering process should be made transparent; need to have
double envelop bidding system for tendering; anomalies in the present list of rates should be
corrected after consultation with stakeholders; all stakeholders including doctors/organisations
(DMA/IMA), HCO’s representatives and Ministry officials should be part of decision making
committee; CGHS system should be digitised, where hospitals can submit bills online and
payment can be made online; need to put in place a system wherein hospitals should be
compensated by paying interest in case of delay by CGHS in making payment to the empanelled
hospital, etc.
4. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries/suggestions namely, whether medical
audit of procedures is carried out; need to study similar schemes like Chief Minister Health
Scheme in Tamil Nadu and Arogyashree Scheme in Andhra Pradesh where all approvals are
done online and probability of adopting the same in CGHS as far as feasible; rates charged by
AIIMS on different surgical procedures and diagnostic investigations; reasons for fixation of
*** Relate to other matters.

60
different rates for various surgical procedures and diagnostic investigations in different cities;
need for NABH accreditation of empanelled hospitals, etc. The witnesses replied to some of
the queries raised by Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the Chairman directed that replies
to queries which remained unanswered may be furnished within a week.
5. The Chairman then raised certain other questions regarding the functioning of CGHS
and sought detailed note thereon for consideration of the Committee within a week on the
issues raised by him and other Members of the Committee which remained unanswered during
the course of the meeting.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 P.M.

IX
NINTH MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Friday, the 16 th January, 2015 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde
3. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
4. Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem
5. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
7. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Dr. K. Kamaraj
10. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
11. Shri Chirag Paswan
12. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
13. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
14. Shri Raj Kumar Singh
15. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
16. Shri Manohar Untwal
17. Shri Akshay Yadav
18. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
61

62
WITNESSES
Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. * * *
2. Shri N.S. Kang, Additional Secretary and DG , CGHS
3. * * *
4* * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7.   Dr. Sharda V erma, Director, CGHS
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised
them of the agenda of the meeting,  i.e ., to hear the concerned Additional Secretaries,
Department of Health and Family Welfare on (i) * * * and (ii) the functioning of Central
Government Health Scheme (CGHS). * * *. Similarly, subsequent to listening to representatives
of IMA on functioning of CGHS in the meeting of Committee held on 19th November, 2014,
it was decided to hear the Ministry on the issues raised by the IMA representatives.
Accordingly, the Health Secretary had been invited to depose before the Committee on both the
subjects. However, the Secretary had expressed his inability to appear before the Committee
and sought exemption from personal appearance as he has been scheduled to visit Barabanki
District, Uttar Pradesh, during 14-16 January, 2015 as per the direction of Hon’ble Prime
Minister and requested to allow * * * and Shri Navreet Singh Kang, Additional Secretary and
DG (CGHS) along with Director (CGHS), for presentation on CGHS, on his behalf which had
been acceded to. * * *
II. Oral evidence on the functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)
3. The Committee thereafter took oral evidence of Shri N.S. Kang, Additional
Secretary and DG, CGHS on functioning of CGHS. On the issue of unviable rates for various
procedures, he admitted that anomalies had crept in while fixing rates and a Technical
Committee had been appointed to review the rates fixed and the said Committee would be
meeting on 21st January, 2015 to decide on the issue. Shri Kang informed that the outcome
of the said Committee would be submitted to the Parliamentary Standing Committee. Procedure
for fixing rates; new process of empanelment of hospitals and diagnostic centres; broad
parameters for fixing rates; delay in reviewing the fixed rates and removing the anomalies
therein; continuous Empanelment Scheme etc. also figured during the discussion. He also
submitted before the Committee that the empanelment is done on the basis of documents
submitted by the hospitals seeking empanelment but empanelled hospitals need to be accredited
by Quality Council of India within a year of empanelment.
*** Relate to other matters.

63
4. Thereafter, Members raised certain queries regarding issues of technical and financial
bidding; the reasons for not conducting physical checks of hospital before granting
empanelment; need to ascertain the capability of a hospital for empanelment; future plans for
verification of those hospitals already under empanelment, say, by roping in the District
Magistrate; inspection of empanelled hospitals; criteria for empanelled hospitals; delay in issue
of CGHS plastic cards to beneficiaries; requirement of certification by Quality Council of India
for empanelment; keeping the standard of CGHS high; upgradation of dental unit and
installation of Magnetic Imaging Resonance (MRI) machine at Parliament House Annexe for
facilitation of Members of Parliament, etc. Shri Kang, Additional Secretary, Department of
Health and Family Welfare and Director, CGHS replied to some of the queries raised by
Members of the Committee and assured to furnish written replies of those queries which
remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
5. The Chairman then raised certain questions regarding the functioning of CGHS and
sought detailed note thereon for consideration of the Committee by the first week of February,
2015.
III. ** *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

XXV
TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING
(2014-15)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday the 12th August, 2015 in Room No.
‘139’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh
5. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Thangso Baite
7. Dr. Subhash Bhamre
8. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
9. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
10. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
11. Shri Chirag Paswan
12. Shrimati Rita Tarai
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P .K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
** *
** *
64
*** Relate to other matters

65
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and briefed them
about the agenda of the meeting i.e. (i) to consider and adopt the draft 88th Report on the
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in 71 st
Report of the Committee on Health and Family Welfare on the Functioning of Central
Government Health Scheme (CGHS);      *             *             *
II. Consideration and adoption of draft 88th Report of the Committee
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the draft 88th Report on the Action
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in its 71
st Report
on the Functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS). After some discussions, the
Committee adopted the said Report. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Report may be
presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday the 13 th
August, 2015. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Shri Jairam Ramesh
and Dr. T.N. Seema to present the Report in Rajya Sabha, and Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt and
in her absence, Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
III. * * *
4. * * *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.46 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE  - I
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shrimati B. Jayashree
4. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
&7. Shri Rasheed Masood
8. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
9. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
10. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
14. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
15. Shrimati Priya Dutt
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
18. Dr. Monazir Hassan
19. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
20. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
31. Vacant
& V acant vide  disqualification as a member of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) w.e.f .19 th September, 2013.
69

70
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

71
ANNEXURE  - II
LIST OF EXPERTS/STAKEHOLDERS HEARD BY THE COMMITTEE
19th November, 2015
WITNESSES
Indian Medical Association
Dr. Narender Saini, Hony. Secretary General
Delhi Medical Association
Dr. Anil Goyal, President
Association of Healthcare Providers India
Dr. Girdhar Gyani, Director General
Dr. Vijay Aggarwal, President (Delhi Chapter)

ANNEXURE  - III
DETAILS OF NEW LOCATIONS FOR CGHS  OWN BUILDINGS
Improvement of the infrastructure in the CGHS Wellness Centres is a ongoing concern.
The CGHS is constructing its own buildings at various places with a view to provide better
facilities to its beneficiaries. Details of such new places is as below:-
Construction of the
following CGHS Wellness
Centre is under way
after obtaining approvals
from local/civic bodies
1. Dwarka Sec-9
2. Dwarka Sec-23
3. Mayur Vihar Phase-I
4. Patparganj
5 Sheikh Sarai/Malviya
Nagar (almost
completed)
6. Alaknanda
7. Vasant Vihar
8. Vasaant Kunj
9. Shakurbasti
10. Vikaspuri
11. Ptampura
12.Rohini See-16
13.Nauroji Nagar
14.CGHS (HQ), Delhi-
Admn Building
Sec.-13  R.K. Puram
Following new
Wellness Centres
were opened in
rented accommodation
1. Greater Noida
2. Sarita Vihar
3. V asant Kunj
4. Gurgaon Sec-55,56
5. Rohini Sec-16
6. Noida Sec-82
7. Shahibabad
8. Vasant Vihar
9. Vaishali/Indirap-
uram (to be opened
soon)
Building Plan
submitted to
authorities for
approval
1. Sarita Vihar
2. Mayur Vihar
Phase-II
3. M.B. Road
Sec-VII
4. Paschim Vihar
Construction of
CGHS W ellness
Centre on its own
plot was completed
1. Ashok Vihar
2. Yojana Vihar
3. Yamuna Vihar
4. Gurgaon Sect.-V
12 3 4
72

73
The Following Wellness Centres where CGHS has plots have been approved by Dept.
of Expenditure:
1. Patparganj
2. M. B. Road Sec. - VII
3. Vasant Vihar
Apart from new buildings, computerisation has been completed at most of the
Allopathic Wellness Centres in 2010; where the 19 P&T dispensaries taken over by CGHS are
in various stages of computerization. 200 new Computers have been provided under CGHS,
Delhi in 2014 to replace and strengthen the computerization system. The existing 2 mbps
leased line connection in CGHS Wellness Centres in Delhi is being replaced by 4 Mbps optic
fiber line and the work is in final stages. To take care of emergent local needs, imprest money,
available with the CMO Incharge (CMO I/c) of Dispensary, has been increased to `20,000/-
per year. Further, the work regarding sanitation and cleanliness of Wellness Centres has been
outsourced in phases in all zones from 2010.

(1) Unviable rates Example:
(a) Package rate for
Kidney Transplantation
`4025.
(b) Ventral lncisional
Hernia the Rate is
`1,242/-
(c) Diagnostic endoscopy
`288/-
(d) ICU charges `750/-
(2) Illogical rates Example:
(a) Anomalous rate for
Double valve
Replacement at
`60,950/- and
`1,19,0001- for
single valve
replacement.
(1) There are many rates under Kidney transplantation for
different types of Kidney Transplantation. The rates in
respect of only one surgery are anomalous.
Non-NABH NABH
Kidney Transplantation (related) 3500 4025
Kidney Transplantation (Spousal/ 143000 164450
unrelated)
ABO incompatible Transplantation 490000 563500
Swap Transplantation 388000 446200
The anomaly shall be reviewed.
The rate for Ventral lncisional Hernia under revised 2014 rates is
Non-NABH NABH
Ventral /incisional Hernia Repair 10293 11837
Laproscopic ventral Hernia Repair 17500 20125
Rate for Diagnostic endoscopy is included at two places and
one of the rates is anomalous.
Regarding ICU charges, it was clarified that `750/- is for
monitoring. In addition the accommodation charges as per
entitled category are admissible. Two consultations per day at
CGHS rates, cost of medicines and consumables, Oxygen
charges and investigations charges are also admissible in
addition to ICU charges.
2) There has been an anomaly in respect of Double valve
replacement.
It is lower than the rate for single valve replacement surgery.
Under, the tender process the L1 for Single Valve Replacement
was  ` 53,000/-  This was corrected as per the rate for other
open heart surgeries.
These anomalies shall be reviewed on priority basis.
NNEXURE  - IV
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION VIEW POINT ON C.G.H.S. AND REPLIES
FURNISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
View Points of I.M.A. CGHS Reply
12
74

75
(3) Consultation
(a) Super-Speciality
consultation has
been reduced from
`240/- to `150/-
(b) Consultation charges
are `150/- whether it
is by family
physician, specialist
or Super specialist.
(4) Issues regarding
package rates:  The CGHS
package rates do not take
into account that the patient
may have comorbidity ;
somebody may have
uncontrolled diabetes or
somebody may have poor
heart condition for which he
requires requisite treatment.
but CGHS says that you
treat this condition in that
much package only.
(5) Consumables items are
also not accounted for in
the CGHS scheme
(6) There is no provision
for revision of. CGHS
rates  annually or even it
cannot be linked to the price
index. No redressal is
provided when the
beneficiaries demand
extended stay in hospitals
beyond the medical needs.
(3) OPD consultation:
The Ll in the tender was `58/-  This was reviewed and
enhanced to `150/-
Inpatient consultation:
The Ll in the tender was `58/-  It was again enhanced to
`300/ -
4) The charges for additional stay are considered based on
justification of the additional stay.
(5) Consumables where ever justified are reimbursable in
CGHS. However, these may form part of package rates fixed
up for surgical procedures. Only in respect of Implants,
Government has fixed ceiling rates reimbursable and therefore,
if any CGHS beneficiary opts for in writing for specific brand
of implant and give a written undertaking to bear the difference
in cost; the hospitals are permitted to charge the difference in
price of implants like stents.
(6) As per the tender conditions and empanelment, the CGHS
rates were not fixed with linking to price index. They are
revised through tender process and the rates are applicable for
a period of two years (with option to extend for another year.
12

76
(7) Super specialty
hospital charges have been
withdrawn from the current
list
(8) Most of the CGHS rates
from the list of 2010 to 2014
have dropped. Example:
(a) The cost of double
valve replacement of
heart was `130000/-
in 2010 and it has
been brought down
to `60,050/- in 2014.
(b) A ureteric cathete-
rization was given
`8500/- in 2010 has
been brought down
to ` 794/-
(c) Pe1vic lymphadenec-
tomy: its rate was
`23000/- in 2010 has
been brought down
to `1380/- in 2014.
(d) The rate of an
endoscopic incision
of the neck in a
Diverticulectomy
which was `27180/-
has been brought
down to `1984 now.
(9) Different rates in
different cities.
(7) Under the present empanelment there is no separate
category as Super-Speciality. All the hospitals are
categorized as either NABH accredited or Non-NABH.
(8) The list of procedures and investigations are updated from
time to time in consultation with Specialists.
The number of treatment procedures and investigations under
2010 list were about 1700 and the number under 2014 list is
1782.
It is also submitted that any L1 rates Less than 20% of the
CGHS 2010 rate submitted by the bidders was taken as un-
viable rate and ignored and in some cases L2 and even L3
rates were taken into account. The HCOs quoting such
unviable rates for more than 20 times were not considered for
empanelment. Such procedure was adopted in respect of 399
treatment procedures/investigations.
The rate for ureteric catheterization and endoscopic incision of
the neck in Diverticulectomy are also anomalous.
The anomaly shall be reviewed.
For pelvic lymphadenectomy and other cancer surgeries the
rates of Tata Memorial Hospital are applicable and a
clarification Office Memorandum was already issued by this
Ministry on 26/11/2014.
(9) The representatives of the Hospitals referred to difference in
rates in different cities. The anomalies in 2010 rates were largely
taken care of and under the new 2014 rates for different cities
they lie between 90-100% of CGHS, Delhi rates.
CGHS rates are finalized for private hospitals empanelled under
CGHS. In many Government hospitals the rates are very low and
they cannot be compared to the rates of empanelled hospitals.
The rates were sought from the bidding hospitals and the
package charges were quoted by the hospitals in their wisdom
and the rates are not unilaterally fixed by the Government.
There is no fool proof system for fixation of the rates and
tender process is the most transparent option.
12

77
(10) Unjustified deductions
ranging from 25% - 30%
without assigning any
reason and long pendency
of bills.
(11) There may be
simplification of approval
system for the beneficiaries.
(12) Rates being offered for
health insurance scheme
may be compared with
CGHS rates, and it would
be suitable to have Third
Party Assessment (TPA) for
CGHS beneficiaries.
The clause that CGHS empanelled hospitals shall not charge
more than CGHS rates and provide credit facility to pensioners
and others was incorporated under 2001 tender as per the
undertaking given to the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi.
Therefore, there is no provision to permit the hospitals to
charge over and above the CGHS rates.
(10) There is no large pendency of payment of hospital bills.
In the last quarter of the Financial year 2013-14 there was a
pendency of  about 75 crores. Special measures were taken for
clearance of these bills and the pendency was largely cleared
by 31 st March 2014.
There are some issues regarding early paymentundet new
tender. A committee under Director, CGHS with Controller of
Accounts, Min. of H&FW, DDO, CGHS. and representatives of
UTI-ITSL is examining the issues related to payment through
UTI-ITSL and suitable action will be initiated on the basis of
the report of the committee.
(11) & (12) Regarding simplification of approval system for
the beneficiaries, it is submitted that there is a difference
between CGHS and Medical Insurance Schemes. No Medical
Insurance Scheme covers OPD consultation, OPD medicines
and Investigations as CGHS does. Therefore, TPAs are part of
Medical Insurance Schemes. Moreover, unlike the medical
insurance schemes, CGHS is an open ended scheme with few
parallels. Therefore, it is not possible to do away with prior
approval for the treatment in elective surgeries.
However, no prior permission is required for .undergoing
treatment under emergency. Government has enclosed a list of
medical emergency conditions as illustration and it is by no
means exhaustive. CGHS reimburses at approved rates in all
medical emergencies justified by the clinical conditions. There
is no proposal to appoint another third party administrator for
approvals.
Private hospitals under CGHS are empanelled to provide
alternate. option to avail inpatient facilities for approved CGHS
procedures at CGHS rates with prior approval of competent
authorities. Empanelled hospitals are an adjuvant, but not a
substitute to CGHS and Government hospitals.
12

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.