10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
 
TENTH REPORT
 
ON
 
THE HOMOEOPATHY CENTRAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL-2005
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON    29TH   JULY, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON   29TH   JULY, 2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
     July, 2005/ Sravana, 1927 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
   
 
1. Composition of the Committee
2. Preface
3. Report
4. Observations/Recommendations at a glance 
5. Annexure
6. Minutes                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
 
 
1. 
Shri Amar Singh                        ¾        Chairman
 MEMBERS
             RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur
3. Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
4. Dr. A.K. Patel
5. Shrimati Maya Singh
 *6.    Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri R. Sarath Kumar
8. Shri Lalming Liana
 **9.     Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
 $10.     Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
11.    Vacant
LOK SABHA

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
12.   Shri D.K. Adikesavulu
13.   Shri M.H. Ambareesh
14.   Smt. B. Sushila Devi Laxman
15.   Dr. M. Baburao
16.   Dr. R.C. Dome
17.   Smt. Maneka Gandhi
18.   Smt. Bhavana Pundlikrao Gawali
19.   Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
20.   Dr. Chinta Mohan
21.   Shri Rasheed Masood
22.   Ms. Archana Nayak
23.   Shri D.B. Patil
24.   Shri Nakul Das Rai
25.   Shri Rajendra Kumar
26.   Smt. K. Rani
27.   Md. Shahabuddin
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29.   Shri Uday Singh
30.   Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
31.   Shri Kailash Nath Yadav
32.   Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
            
            Shri N.C. Joshi,         Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg,  Joint Secretary
Shri P.R. Guharoy ,   Director
Shri  Momraj Singh,   Under Secretary
Shri S.C. Dixit,          Committee Officer
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 31st August, 2004
** Nominated w.e.f. 31st August, 2004      
$ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 14th December, 2004
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health &Family Welfare, having been authorized
by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Tenth Report of the Committee. The Report is on the Homoeopathy
Central Council (Amendment) Bill-2005. *
2.         In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha,
referred** the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill 2005 (Annexure-I) as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 23 rd March
2005 and pending therein, to the Committee on the 19th  April 2005 for examination and report, within a period of three months.
3.         The Committee considered the Bill in four meetings held on the 12th May, 26th May, 1st July and 14th July, 2005. 
4.         At its meeting held on the 12 th May, 2005, the Committee heard the Secretary of the Department of AYUSH. Thereafter, on the 
26th May, 2005, the Committee held extensive discussions with the office-bearers of the Central Council of Homeopathy and some
experts. (Annexure-II)   In its meeting held on the 1 st July, 2005, the Committee took up “clause-by-clause” consideration of the Bill.  The
Committee, in its meeting held on the 14th July, 2005, considered the draft Report and adopted the same .
5.         The Committee has relied on the following in finalizing the Report:
(i)                  Background Note and Clause-by-Clause Note on the Bill received from the Department of AYUSH;
(ii)                Presentation and clarification by Secretary of the Department;
(iii)               Memoranda received on the Bill from the President, Central Council of Homoeopathy and individuals/experts;
(iv)              Replies to the Questionnaire on the Bill; and

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
(v)                Oral evidence on the Bill.
6.       On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions made by those who deposed before the
Committee and submitted their valuable suggestions on the subject matter of the Bill.
7.         For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.  
NEW DELHI;
14th July , 2005
23 Asadha , 1927 (Saka)
AMAR SINGH
 Chairman
 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
                                                                                                                                                                            
___________________________________________________________________________
*          Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2, dated 23rd March, 2005.
**         Rajya Sabha Parliamentary bulletin Part II, No 42127, dated 19th April 2005
REPORT
            The Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill 2005 aims to amend the Homoeopathy Central Council Act,
1973,which provides for constitution of the Central Council of Homoeopathy for regulation of the educational standards of
Homoeopathic Medical Colleges, maintenance of the Central Register of practitioners of Homoeopathy and for matters connected
therewith.
2.         The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill is as under: -
“ The Central Council of Homoeopathy was initially constituted through nomination of members in the year 1973.
Subsequently, elections to the said Central Council were conducted.  Though the tenure of all the members of the said Central
Council had expired in 2002, but it could not be reconstituted even after a lapse of more than two years.  This is due to not
updating the State Register of Homoeopathy, at the instance of sitting members, a pre-requisite for conducting elections in time. 
Sometimes, elections are delayed due to litigation and stay orders from court.
 
The election for the Central Council of Homoeopathy from Bihar and Maharashtra States could not be conducted till date
and the members elected in 1989-90 are still continuing in the Central Council of Homoeopathy.  It has been observed that such
problem persists due to the existing provisions in section 7(1) of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973, which provide for
term of five years from date of election or nomination, as the case may be, or until the election or nomination of the successor,
whichever is longer. 
Further, in the HCC Act, 1973, there is no provision for removal of the President, Vice-President of the Council and also
withdrawal of the member nominated to the Council in case they commit some irregularity or unwanted activities.  The
Department is of the opinion that the tenure of the members should not exceed  five years and also there should be a provision for
the removal of the President, Vice-President or the members.
 
Sometimes, the Central Council abuses and exceeds its powers and in such conditions, there is a need to issue proper
direction to the Central Council.  Since there is no provision in HCC Act, 1973 to give directions to the Central Council in case of
any irregularity, the Central Government is not in a position to check such activities.
The Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 was amended with effect from 28.1.2003 to check the mushroom growth of
sub-standard Homoeopathic Medical Colleges, increase in admission capacity and starting of new courses in such colleges.  The
permission of the Central Government is mandatory for establishing new colleges or starting new courses of study.  The
amendment shall require permission of the Central Government for existing Homoeopathic Medical Colleges within a grace
period of three years.  This will improve the standard of Homoeopathic Medical Colleges in the country imparting training of
Homoeopathic education.  There is need to improve the standard of existing colleges, to bring uniformity of standard in existing
Homoeopathic Colleges.
In order to meet the requirements, it is proposed to amend the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 so as to make
provisions-
(a)
    to define Homoeopathic Medical College;
(b)   to nominate ex-officio members;
(c)    for seeking permission for certain existing Homoeopathic Medical Colleges;
(d)   to have fix tenure of elected or nominated members;
(e)    to remove the President, Vice-President and members on the grounds of misconduct or incapacity;
(f)     to dissolve the Executive Committee of the Central Council if it persistently defaults or abuses its powers; and
(g)    to give directions to the Central Council in public interest.
The proposed amendments will ensure timely election to the Central Council of Homoeopathy and streamline its
functioning”.
3.         The Secretary, Department of AYUSH deposing before the Committee on the 12 th May 2005, put forward the
Department’s views for bringing the Bill. Outlining  the history of  theCentral Council of Homoeopathy since its constitution in

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
1973, the Secretary drew the attention of the Committee to inherent flaws in some provisions of the Central Homeopathy Council
Act, 1973. The Secretary  emphasized that this has resulted in undue delay in the elections to the Central Council and arbitrary 
decisions being taken by it. In order to bring about overall quality improvement in the educational standards of Homeopathy, the
Homoeopathy   Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005 has been brought before Parliament, it was clarified
4.         The Committee in its meeting held on the 1 st July, 2005, took up ‘clause-by- clause’ consideration of the Bill. The clauses
where amendments have been suggested by the Committee are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
Clause 2
5.1       Section 2 of the Homeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 deals with ‘definitions’ Clause 2 (i) of the Bill proposes to include
the definition of “Homoeopathic Medical College” as given below:-
                        
“Homeopathic Medical College” means a college of Homoeopathy, whether known as such or by any
other name, in which a person may undergo a course of study or training including any postgraduate
course of study or training which will qualify him for the award of a recognized medical qualification.”
5.2The Committee feels that in order to ensure quality and standard of education, affiliation to a University is a
mandatory condition for every college. Specific mention in this regard needs to be incorporated in the
definition of ‘Homeopathic Medical College’. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the
following definition of ‘Homeopathic Medical College’ may be inserted after clause (d) in section 2 (1)
of the Principal Act  --
 
‘(da) “Homeopathic Medical College” means a college of Homoeopathy, whether known as such or by any other
name affiliated to a University, in which a person may undergo a course of study or training including any
postgraduate course of study or training which will qualify him for the award of a recognized medical
qualification.’
 
         Clause  2 (ii) defines the term “ Member” as follows:-
       ‘   “member” means a member of the Central Council and includes the President and   Vice-President’
5.4The Committee feels that the definition should also specify the category of member - elected or nominated. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that the following definition of ‘member’ may be inserted after clause (e) in section 2(1) of the
Principal Act:-
‘(ea) “Member” means any member of the Central Council, elected or nominated and
includes President or Vice-President.’
Clause- 3
6.1        This clause seeks to insert the provision regarding nomination of two ex-officio members,  namely Adviser or Deputy
Adviser (Homeopathy),Department of AYUSH, and Director, National Institute of Homoeopathy to the Central Council by the
Central Government in section 3 of the Principal Act.
6.2       The Committee was given to understand that nomination of two ex-officio members will enable the Council to make use
of their expertise in policy matters/academic areas which will improve its functioning. The Committee, however, observes that
Section 3 (1) (c) of the Principal Act already empowers the Government to nominate 40% of the total number of members elected
under clauses (a) and (b) from amongst persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of Homeopathy or
other related disciplines The Committee feels that this provision is adequate and experts are getting due representation under this
clause. The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause-3 of the Bill proposing to insert clause (d) in section 3(1) of the
Principal Act may be deleted.
Clause 4
7.1       Clause 4 of the Bill seeks the insertion of a new Section 3A  ‘Reconstitution of Central Council’ after Section 3 of the
Principal Act. As per this clause, the existing Central Council shall stand dissolved with all the members vacating their office
from the date of commencement of the Homeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2005. A new Council will be re-
constituted as soon as possible by the Central Government. The new clause also proposes appointment of a Board of
Administrators.
 7.2
        The Committee takes note of very serious reservations expressed by not only the office-bearers of theCentral Council, but
also by some experts who appeared before it. The Committee is inclined to agree with their views that dissolution of a primarily
elected body of professionals and experts cannot be considered democratic. The Committee has been given to understand that
besides some members of the existing Council having completed their term, it also consists of some members yet to complete
their term.
            7.3       The Committee was informed that election was to be conducted in 23 States/UTs for 34 seats including those in the
defaulting states of Bihar and Maharashtra where elections were last conducted in 1989-90. Despite funds being provided for
conducting elections and Returning officers being appointed, elections remain to be held. The Committee finds that election
process for the Central Council has been initiated since 2002 with Gazette Notifications dated 13.7.02, 3.3.03, 13.11.03, 26.3.04,
6.5.04, 22.11.04 and 1.4.05 being issued. The Committee is of the firm opinion that appointment of Board of Administrators will
not serve any purpose for the very reason that existing election process is a prolonged affair. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that proposed clause 3 A may be deleted.

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
    Clause-5
8.1       Clause 5 seeks to substitute Section 7 (1) of the Principal Act which pertains to the term of President, Vice- President and
Members of Central Council. As per the substituted provision, the President, Vice-President and members of the Central Council
shall hold office for a fixed term of five years from the date of election/ nomination. This specific provision is further sought to be
strengthened by making it binding for the Central Govt to take necessary steps for the reconstitution of a new Central Council at
least three months before the expiry of the term of the Council. 
8.2       Explaining the logic behind the amendment clause, the Department has submitted that the Homoeopathy Central Council
was last constituted in 1998. Although term of all the members expired in 2003, members are still continuing beyond their term of
five years because of non-holding of election due to non-updation of State Registers in many states. The existing legal provisions
which allow continuance of members beyond their term of five years have compounded the problem. The Committee was given to
understand that the restriction of five years on the term of members and office bearers would ensure timely election of Council.
8.3       The Committee also feels that fixed term of five years for the members and office- bearers of the Council and withdrawing
the option of continuing beyond their term by virtue of their successor not being elected or nominated would be the ideal position.
The Committee is, however, not inclined to agree with the contention of the Department that fixed term of five years would ensure
timely election of the Council. The Committee fails to understand as to how the members would be in a better position to
influence the State Councils/ Boards for updating of State Registers - a pre-requisite for conducting timely elections. The
Committee would like to emphasize that as per Section 4 of the Principal Act elections to the Council are to be conducted by the
Central Govt. However, the history of the Council, since its constitution through nomination in 1974, clearly indicates that the
Central Govt. has failed in its statutory duty. First elections to the Council could be conducted only in 1989-90, followed by next
elections during 1996-98. The Committee finds that although steps were initiated for conducting elections in 2001, elections are
yet to be conducted in 23 States/ UTs for 34 seats.
The Committee does not foresee any significant improvement in spite of Central Govt. being bound to take necessary steps for the
reconstitution of a new Council at least threes months before the expiry of term of the Council as indicated in the proviso to
substituted section 7 (1). The Committee feels that the period of three months is not enough for the Central Govt. to complete the
procedural formalities for reconstitution of the Central Council. The Committee also feels that the involvement of the Council in
the election process would expedite the same. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Govt., in consultation with
the Central Council, should initiate the process of reconstitution of Central Council at least six months before the expiry of the
term of the Council.
8.5       Committee’s attention has been drawn by sub-section (6) of section 7 of the Principal Act reproduced below:-
“Where the said term of five years is about to expire in respect of any member, a successor may be elected
or nominated at any time within three months before the said term expires but he shall not assume office
until the said term has expired”
The Committee feels that in view of the proposed substitution of section 7(1) of the Act, the above provision has
become redundant. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the same may be deleted.  
8.6        Sub-section 7 (1) states that the term of office of President, Vice-President or member shall start from their date of
election or nomination. Committee’s attention was drawn towards another disturbing aspect of election process of the Council.
Not only election/ nomination gets delayed due to compelling reasons, there are instances of undue delay on the issue of Gazette
notifications about election/nomination. Therefore, with a view to protect the rights of newly elected/nominated members, the
Committee feels that election/nomination should be notified without any delay. It would be appropriate if the term of the member
starts from the date of notification of his election/nomination. The provision may be amended accordingly.
8.7       Proposed sub-section (1A) to section 7 empowers the Central Government to appoint a Board of Administrators in case the
Central Govt. is unable to reconstitute the Central Council within the specified time.
8.8       The Committee feels that the Central Council which is a democratically elected body, having eminent experts in their
respective fields as its members cannot be substituted by the nominees of the Central Govt. even for a temporary period of six
months. The Committee would like to emphasize that with the proposed substitution of section 7(1) providing a fixed term for
members and Committee’s recommendation for starting the election process six months in advance, any eventuality of a Board of
Administrators running the Council should not arise. The Committee would also add that Govt. should instead take all necessary
measures for expediting the election process so as to ensure its completion within six months.
8.9       Section 7(3) of the Principal Act stipulates that members of Central Council shall be eligible for re-election or re-
nomination. Sub-clause (b) of clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert a proviso thereby restraining the members from serving more
than two terms.
8.10     The Department justified this restriction in view of the needs of the changing time and wider choice of persons. In
contrast, the representatives of the Central Council of Homoeopathy were of the view that the restriction on contesting elections
for third time is undemocratic and violates the fundamental rights of Homoeopaths. Similar opinion was voiced by some of the
experts who appeared before the Committee.
8.11     While upholding the democratic rights of members of the Council the Committee feels that functioning of the Council
should not be allowed to remain under the control of a selected few. The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of two
terms, a member should be allowed to hold office for three terms. The proviso may be amended accordingly.
   
Clause- 6
9.1       Clause (6) of the Bill seeks to insert the following section relating to ‘Time for seeking permission for certain existing
Homeopathic Medical Colleges’ after Section 12 B of the Principal Act: -

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
“12 C (1)If any person has established a Homoeopathic Medical College or any Homoeopathic Medical College has opened a
new or higher course of study or training (including the postgraduate course of study or training) or increased the admission
capacity in any course of study or training (including the postgraduate course of study or training) on or before the date of
commencement of the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2005, such person or Homoeopathic Medical college, as
the case may be, shall seek, within a period of three  years from the said commencement, permission of the Central Govt. in
accordance with the provisions of Section 12 A. 
  If any person or Homoeopathic Medical College, as the case may be, fails to seek permission under sub-section (1), the
provisions of section 12B shall apply, so far as may be, as if, permission of the Central Govt. under Section 12 A has been
refused”.
9.2       Explaining the rationale behind this clause, the Department had submitted that the provision has been introduced for the
purpose of bringing the existing colleges at par with new Homoeopathic colleges within a grace period of three years.
   9.3      The Committee feels that required infrastructure and faculty members are the most rudimentary requirements of all
Homoeopathy Medical Colleges, be it new or old. Therefore, it should be ensured that the standard of education in the
Homoeopathy Medical Colleges is maintained. The Committee, however, feels that the grace period of three years sought to be
given to the existing colleges to improve themselves and come at par with new colleges is too long, which may lead to adversely
affecting the career of students. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that grace period of only one year should be given.
Proposed section 12 C may be accordingly modified.
Clause 7
10.1     Clause 7 of the Bill provides the mechanism of removal of President, Vice-President or member of the Council by
inserting Section 30A after Section 30 of the Principal Act. Sub-clauses (1) and (2) give the power to the Central Council to
recommend to the Central Government for removal of the President, the Vice-President or any member on the grounds of
misconduct or incapacity. Such a recommendation is to be based on a resolution passed by a majority of the total membership of
the Central Council excluding the vacancies and a two thirds majority of the members present and voting after having given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard. In the event of a President being removed , his powers and duties are to be performed by
the Vice- President .
10.2     The Committee observes that this provision is required to be invoked in case of some irregularity or unwanted activity on
the part of the President or the Vice-President or any member. The Committee, therefore, agrees to the proposed addition. The
Committee, however, has reservations about the provisions of sub-clauses (3) and (4) whereunder powers and duties of Vice-
President since removed are to be exercised and performed by a person to be appointed by the Central Govt. Period of three
months is provided for election of the new President or Vice-President or any member. The Committee is of the opinion that the
provision regarding Central Govt. having the powers to impose any outsider although eligible to be a member of the Council as
the Vice-President will go against the Central Council, an elected body. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Vice-
President should be elected by the members from amongst themselves. The Committee also recommends that instead of three
months, a period of one month would be adequate for election of new President or Vice-President or any member. Proposed sub-
sections  (3) and ( 4) of new sub-section 30A may, accordingly, be modified.
10.3     Clause 7 of the Bill proposes to insert Section 30 (B) in the Principal Act  which provides for withdrawal and removal of
nominated members of Central Council by the Central Government in public interest.
10.4     The Committee does not agree with the submission of the Department that there is a need for having a provision for
withdrawal and removal of nominated members in case they commit some misconduct or unwanted activity. The Committee is of
the opinion that such a provision will prove to be discriminatory for nominated members. The Committee also apprehends that
members nominated by the Central Council may become pawns in the hands of the Central Government. Therefore, for the
purpose of maintaining the independent status of the Council, the Committee recommends for the deletion of the above provision
from the Bill.
10.5    Clause 7 of the Bill provides for insertion of section 30 C in the Principal Act which provides that
             in the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Central Council shall be guided by such directions as may be
given to it in the public interest by the  Central Govt.  In the event of any dispute arising between the Central Govt.
and the Central Council as to whether a question relates to public interest or not, the decision of the Central Govt.
thereon shall be final.
10.6     The Committee was given to understand that there have been instances of the Council exhibiting tendency to violate the
legal/regulatory provisions and exceeding its powers. Proper direction needs to be given to the Council by the Central Govt. for
initiating any corrective course of action.
 10.7    The Committee is of the opinion that making it obligatory for the Central Council to be guided by directions given in ‘
public interest ‘ by the Central Govt. may lead to undue interference in the working of the Council which is a duly elected body
whose decisions are collective, based on majority of votes. The Committee observes that section 30 of Principal Act already
provides for a Commission of Inquiry to be setup by the Central Govt. to probe any action of the Council contrary to the
provisions of the Act. The Committee, therefore, recommends deletion of proposed section 30 C.   
10.8     Clause 7 of the Bill provides for insertion of Section 30 D whereunder the Central Govt. will have the power to dissolve
the Executive Committee or any other committee of the Central Council in the event of its failure in performing its duties/
persistent default/ abuse of its powers etc. The Committee will be dissolved only after being given reasonable time for
explanation. The Clause further stipulates that during the period of dissolution, all the powers and duties of the Executive
Committee/committee shall be exercised and performed by such persons appointed by the Central Govt. for a maximum period of

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
six months. 
10.9     The Committee has been given to understand that the Principal Act is not having any provisions to check irregularities on
the part of the Executive Committee/committees. The amendment provides for action in an objective and transparent manner so
that no bias can be attributed to passing of such orders. The alternative arrangements after dissolution will be for a maximum
period of six months only. The Committee is, however, not inclined to agree with the argument put forth by the Department.
10.10   The Committee would also like to point out that as per section 30 D (1) (b) any non-compliance of the directions sought to
be given by the Central Govt. under Section 30 C either willfully or without sufficient cause by the Executive Committee/ any
other committee would justify its dissolution by the Central Govt. The Committee strongly feels that an elected body cannot be
dissolved by an Executive order. Further, imposition of persons in spite of them being from amongst the members of the Council
as proposed under section 30 D (2) (b) will be clearly at the discretion of Central Govt. Thus, for a period of six months, Central
Govt will be virtually running the Council. The Committee apprehends that instances may be there when Central Govt. may
assume such powers more than once during the term of a Council. Thus, an atmosphere of confrontation may prevail which will
be against the larger interests of all concerned. The Committee would also like to point out that Govt. nominees are already
represented in the Council and various Committees under Section 3 (C) of the Principal Act. Not only this, there also exists a
provision for setting up a Commission of Inquiry under Section 30 where by the Central Govt. has the powers to refer any case of
non-compliance by the Council to a Commission of inquiry for investigation and follow up action.  
10.11    The Committee feels that the provision of Commission of Enquiry as mentioned in Section 30 is sufficient to check the
misuse of power/ successive default by any Committee of the Council and there is no further need to give the Government powers
which are susceptible to be misused. The Committee, therefore, recommends fordeletion of this provision from the Bill.
  10.12 Clause 7 of the Bill provides for insertion of Section 30 (E) in the Principal Act. Section 30E seeks to empower the Central
Govt. to remove President, Vice-President or any member of the Executive Committee or any other Committee on the same
grounds as envisaged in section 30D where under Central Govt. can dissolve Executive Committee or any other Committee.
      10.13         Explaining the reason for introduction of the provision, the Department submitted that the provision for removal of
President, Vice-President or member of Executive Committee or any other Committee has been made as a measure of caution
and to dissuade the office bearers of the Council/ members of Committee from indulging in unethical and illegal acts. Adequate
provisions have been proposed not to give scope for any arbitrary action by the Government, as evident from the amendment.  
      10.14         The Committee is of the view that the above provision gives unfettered powers to the Government, which can be
used to interfere with the autonomous functioning of the Council. The Committee also notes that there already exists section 30
in the Principal Act which provides for the constitution of a Commission of Inquiry by the Central Govt. to enquire into the
cases of alleged misconduct by the office bearers of   the Council/ member of Committee. Besides that, with the proposed
section 30A with amendments as suggested by the Committee, action can be taken by the Central Council based on a resolution
passed by majority of membership of the Central Council.
     10.15          The Committee therefore feels that there is no need to insert Section 30 E in the Principal Act, as proposed by the
Bill and the same may be deleted.
Clause-10
11.1     This Clause empowers the Central Govt. to issue directions to the Council for making or amending or revoking any
regulation within a specified period, by inserting Section 34 after Section 33 in the Principal Act.  Central Govt. may itself
make/amend/revoke regulations in the event of non-compliance by the Central Council.
 
11.2     The Committee has been given to understand that such a provision was necessary to take care of an eventuality where
Central Council was not agreeing to the suggestions made by the Central Govt. with regard to regulations. The Committee is,
however, not convinced by the contention of the Department. The Committee would like to point out that under section 32 of the
Principal Act, the Central Govt is already empowered to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. Section 33 provides that
the Central Council, with the previous sanction of the Central Govt. may make regulations necessary for its functioning. The
Committee fails to understand the justification for assumption of over-riding powers by the Central Govt. as against the powers
given to the Central Council, an elected body which will be making /amending/revoking regulations with the previous sanction of
the Central Govt. The Committee therefore, recommends the deletion of section 34 sought to be incorporated in the Principal Act. 
12.   The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill, including the enacting      formula and the title without any
amendment.
General Observations
13.1.Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Homeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005gives the impression that
besides some inherent shortcomings in some provisions of the Principal Act, functioning of the Central Council also needs to be
streamlined. Based on the feedback received by the Committee and also its interactions with a number of witnesses, the
Committee has to make the following observations.
13.2.On a specific query about the efforts made by the Department to obtain the views of all Stake-holders on various provisions
of the proposed legislation, the Committee has been informed that only an internal exercise had been taken by the Department.  
The Committee expresses its serious concern on non-adherence to a well-established convention of consultation with all the

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
Stake-holders for bringing out any legislation or proposed amendments thereto.   Clarification made by the Department that
unwarranted action of the Council has resulted in the proposed legislation for amendment of the Act clearly indicates that this
non-initiative was deliberate on the part of the Department.
 
13.3.The Committee notes that the election to the Homoeopathy Central Council is conducted by the Central Govt.  as per the
provision of the relevant Rules.   The Returning Officer is appointed by the Central Govt. on the recommendation of State Govt.
The Voters List is to be provided by the Registrar, State Board/Council.  Non-appointment of Returning Officer, frequent change
of Returning Officers by State Govts. due to retirement/transfer/death of incumbents, non-provision of updated State Registers by
State Registrars, Court cases, difficulty in determination of seats etc. are some of the constraints being faced by the Central Govt.
in the conduct of elections to both the Councils.
 
13.4.The Committee observes that the election process for the Central Council is a  prolonged affair, depending upon timely
appointment of Returning Officers and availability of Updated Registers.   The Committee fails to understand in what manner,
Central Govt. would manage and expedite the election process of the Central Council under the existing provisions.   The
Committee is of the view that there is an urgent need for review of the existing system, specially in view of the present
circumstances.  Proposed amendments to the Act governing the functioning of the Central   Council will neither result in timely
appointment of Returning Officers nor in timely updating of State Registers.   The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for
review of the existing procedure for election to the Central Council and taking required steps for streamlining the same. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Central Govt. in consultation with the Central Council and experts may initiate
action.
13.5.The Committee observes that under the present setup, State Boards/Councils are not controlled by the Central Council.  
They are also not accountable to Central Govt.    As a result, by and large, State Councils are not adhering to the prescribed norms
for updating of State Registers, essential for holding elections to the Councils. Non-submission of consolidated list of
practitioners, non-removal of names of expired practitioners, submission of incomplete lists with regard to State Registers are
some of the shortcomings brought to the notice of the Committee.    State Councils are also defaulting in the proper and timely
appointment of Returning Officers.   The Committee apprehends that after enacting the present legislation, there would not be any
significant improvement.   The Committee is of the firm opinion that a mechanism has to be evolved where under Central Council
and State councils work in coordination, complementing the functioning of each other and the State Councils should function
under the former. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should work out a legally and practically viable set
up for the purpose.
13.6.The Committee was informed by the Department that on a complaint made by MPs, a Commission of Inquiry was set up to
look into the allegations against the office-bearers of CCH on the 12
th January, 2004. The Commission was to give its Report
within four months.   The Commission has completed its hearings and examination of witnesses and is expected to give its Report
shortly.
13.7.During the course of interaction with the office-bearers of CCH on the 26
th May, 2005, the President of CCH categorically
mentioned that the Commission of Inquiry was wound up on the 28 th February, 2005 itself. The Committee observes that the
Report of the Commission of Inquiry was already one year overdue. The Committee is disturbed to note the discrepancy between
the information given by the office-bearers of CCH and the Department.   The Committee would like to have the factual position
about the status of the Commission of Inquiry.
13.8     Statement of Objects and Reasons for the Bill mentions that sometimes elections are delayed due to litigation and stay
orders from the court.   The Committee, however, observes that, in respect of CCH, out of 76 pending cases, only two cases relate
to election matters.  Generally cases pertain to matters regarding opening of new colleges, increase in seat intake capacity, service
matters etc.  Thus, the Committee is not inclined to accept the contention of the Department that due to litigation and stay orders
by Court, elections to the Council get delayed.  
OBSERVARION/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
            The Committee feels that in order to ensure quality and standard of education, affiliation to a University is a mandatory
condition for every college. Specific mention in this regard needs to be incorporated in the definition of ‘Homeopathic Medical
College’. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the following definition of ‘Homeopathic Medical College’ may be
inserted after clause (d) in section 2 (1) of the Principal Act  --
 
‘(da) “Homeopathic Medical College” means a college of Homoeopathy, whether known as such or by any other
name affiliated to a University, in which a person may undergo a course of study or training including any
postgraduate course of study or training which will qualify him for the award of a recognized medical
qualification.’ 
   
            The Committee feels that the definition should also specify the category of member - elected or nominated. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the following definition of ‘member’ may be inserted after clause (e) in section 2(1) of
the Principal Act:-
‘(ea) “Member” means any member of the Central Council, elected or nominated and
includes President or Vice-President.’

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
The Committee feels that this provision is adequate and experts are getting due representation under this clause. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that clause-3 of the Bill proposing to insert clause (d) in section 3(1) of the Principal Act may
be deleted.
The Committee takes note of very serious reservations expressed by not only the office-bearers of theCentral Council,
but also by some experts who appeared before it. The Committee is inclined to agree with their views that dissolution of a
primarily elected body of professionals and experts cannot be considered democratic. The Committee has been given to
understand that besides some members of the existing Council having completed their term, it also consists of some members yet
to complete their term.
                        The Committee was informed that election was to be conducted in 23 States/UTs for 34 seats including those in the
defaulting states of Bihar and Maharashtra where elections were last conducted in 1989-90. Despite funds being provided for
conducting elections and Returning officers being appointed, elections remain to be held. The Committee finds that election
process for the Central Council has been initiated since 2002 with Gazette Notifications dated 13.7.02, 3.3.03, 13.11.03, 26.3.04,
6.5.04, 22.11.04 and 1.4.05 being issued. The Committee is of the firm opinion that appointment of Board of Administrators will
not serve any purpose for the very reason that existing election process is a prolonged affair. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that proposed clause 3 A may be deleted.
                 The Committee also feels that fixed term of five years for the members and office- bearers of the Council and
withdrawing the option of continuing beyond their term by virtue of their successor not being elected or nominated would be the
ideal position. The Committee is, however, not inclined to agree with the contention of the Department that fixed term of five
years would ensure timely election of the Council. The Committee fails to understand as to how the members would be in a better
position to influence the State Councils/ Boards for updating of State Registers - a pre-requisite for conducting timely elections.
The Committee would like to emphasize that as per Section 4 of the Principal Act elections to the Council are to be conducted by
the Central Govt. However, the history of the Council, since its constitution through nomination in 1974, clearly indicates that the
Central Govt. has failed in its statutory duty. First elections to the Council could be conducted only in 1989-90, followed by next
elections during 1996-98. The Committee finds that although steps were initiated for conducting elections in 2001, elections are
yet to be conducted in 23 States/ UTs for 34 seats.
The Committee does not foresee any significant improvement in spite of Central Govt. being bound to take necessary
steps for the reconstitution of a new Council at least threes months before the expiry of term of the Council as indicated in the
proviso to substituted section 7 (1). The Committee feels that the period of three months is not enough for the Central Govt. to
complete the procedural formalities for reconstitution of the Central Council. The Committee also feels that the involvement of
the Council in the election process would expedite the same. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Govt., in
consultation with the Central Council, should initiate the process of reconstitution of Central Council at least six months before
the expiry of the term of the Council.
 “Where the said term of five years is about to expire in respect of any member, a successor may be elected
or nominated at any time within three months before the said term expires but he shall not assume office
until the said term has expired”
The Committee feels that in view of the proposed substitution of section 7(1) of the Act, the above provision has
become redundant. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the same may be deleted.  
The Committee feels that election/nomination should be notified without any delay. It would be appropriate if the term of
the member starts from the date of notification of his election/nomination. The provision may be amended accordingly.
The Committee feels that the Central Council which is a democratically elected body, having eminent experts in their
respective fields as its members cannot be substituted by the nominees of the Central Govt. even for a temporary period of six
months. The Committee would like to emphasize that with the proposed substitution of section 7(1) providing a fixed term for
members and Committee’s recommendation for starting the election process six months in advance, any eventuality of a Board of
Administrators running the Council should not arise. The Committee would also add that Govt. should instead take all necessary
measures for expediting the election process so as to ensure its completion within six months.
 
While upholding the democratic rights of members of the Council the Committee feels that functioning of the Council
should not be allowed to remain under the control of a selected few. The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of two
terms, a member should be allowed to hold office for three terms. The proviso may be amended accordingly.
             The Committee feels that required infrastructure and faculty members are the most rudimentary requirements of all
Homoeopathy Medical Colleges, be it new or old. Therefore, it should be ensured that the standard of education in the
Homoeopathy Medical Colleges is maintained. The Committee, however, feels that the grace period of three years sought to be
given to the existing colleges to improve themselves and come at par with new colleges is too long, which may lead to adversely
affecting the career of students. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that grace period of only one year should be given.
Proposed section 12 C may be accordingly modified.
The Committee observes that this provision is required to be invoked in case of some irregularity or unwanted activity on
the part of the President or the Vice-President or any member. The Committee, therefore, agrees to the proposed addition. The
Committee, however, has reservations about the provisions of sub-clauses (3) and (4) whereunder powers and duties of Vice-
President since removed are to be exercised and performed by a person to be appointed by the Central Govt. Period of three
months is provided for election of the new President or Vice-President or any member. The Committee is of the opinion that the
provision regarding Central Govt. having the powers to impose any outsider although eligible to be a member of the Council as
the Vice-President will go against the Central Council, an elected body. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Vice-

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
President should be elected by the members from amongst themselves. The Committee also recommends that instead of three
months, a period of one month would be adequate for election of new President or Vice-President or any member. Proposed sub-
sections  (3) and ( 4) of new sub-section 30A may, accordingly, be modified.
The Committee does not agree with the submission of the Department that there is a need for having a provision for
withdrawal and removal of nominated members in case they commit some misconduct or unwanted activity. The Committee is of
the opinion that such a provision will prove to be discriminatory for nominated members. The Committee also apprehends that
members nominated by the Central Council may become pawns in the hands of the Central Government. Therefore, for the
purpose of maintaining the independent status of the Council, the Committee recommends for the deletion of the above provision
from the Bill.
The Committee is of the opinion that making it obligatory for the Central Council to be guided by directions given in ‘
public interest ‘ by the Central Govt. may lead to undue interference in the working of the Council which is a duly elected body
whose decisions are collective, based on majority of votes. The Committee observes that section 30 of Principal Act already
provides for a Commission of Inquiry to be setup by the Central Govt. to probe any action of the Council contrary to the
provisions of the Act. The Committee, therefore, recommends deletion of proposed section 30 C.  
The Committee strongly feels that an elected body cannot be dissolved by an Executive order. Further, imposition of
persons in spite of them being from amongst the members of the Council as proposed under section 30 D (2) (b) will be clearly at
the discretion of Central Govt. Thus, for a period of six months, Central Govt will be virtually running the Council. The
Committee apprehends that instances may be there when Central Govt. may assume such powers more than once during the term
of a Council. Thus, an atmosphere of confrontation may prevail which will be against the larger interests of all concerned. The
Committee would also like to point out that Govt. nominees are already represented in the Council and various Committees under
Section 3 (C) of the Principal Act. Not only this, there also exists a provision for setting up a Commission of Inquiry under
Section 30 where by the Central Govt. has the powers to refer any case of non-compliance by the Council to a Commission of
inquiry for investigation and follow up action.
         The Committee feels that the provision of Commission of Enquiry as mentioned in Section 30 is sufficient to check the
misuse of power/ successive default by any Committee of the Council and there is no further need to give the Government powers
which are susceptible to be misused. The Committee, therefore, recommends for deletion of this provision from the Bill.
                        The Committee is of the view that the above provision gives unfettered powers to the Government, which can be
used to interfere with the autonomous functioning of the Council. The Committee also notes that there already exists section 30
in the Principal Act which provides for the constitution of a Commission of Inquiry by the Central Govt. to enquire into the
cases of alleged misconduct by the office bearers of   the Council/ member of Committee. Besides that, with the proposed
section 30A with amendments as suggested by the Committee, action can be taken by the Central Council based on a resolution
passed by majority of membership of the Central Council.
                        The Committee therefore feels that there is no need to insert Section 30 E in  the Principal Act, as proposed by the
Bill and the same may be deleted.
The Committee is, however, not convinced by the contention of the Department. The Committee would like to point out
that under section 32 of the Principal Act, the Central Govt is already empowered to make rules to carry out the purposes of the
Act. Section 33 provides that the Central Council, with the previous sanction of the Central Govt. may make regulations necessary
for its functioning. The Committee fails to understand the justification for assumption of over-riding powers by the Central Govt.
as against the powers given to the Central Council, an elected body which will be making /amending/revoking regulations with
the previous sanction of the Central Govt. The Committee therefore, recommends the deletion of section 34 sought to be
incorporated in the Principal Act.
The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill, including the enacting      formula and the title without any
amendment.
General Observations
The Committee expresses its serious concern on non-adherence to a well-established convention of consultation with all
the Stake-holders for bringing out any legislation or proposed amendments thereto.   Clarification made by the Department that
unwarranted action of the Council has resulted in the proposed legislation for amendment of the Act clearly indicates that this
non-initiative was deliberate on the part of the Department.
 The Committee notes that the election to the Homoeopathy Central Council is conducted by the Central Govt.  as per the
provision of the relevant Rules.   The Returning Officer is appointed by the Central Govt. on the recommendation of State Govt.
The Voters List is to be provided by the Registrar, State Board/Council.  Non-appointment of Returning Officer, frequent change
of Returning Officers by State Govts. due to retirement/transfer/death of incumbents, non-provision of updated State Registers by
State Registrars, Court cases, difficulty in determination of seats etc. are some of the constraints being faced by the Central Govt.
in the conduct of elections to both the Councils.
         The Committee observes that the election process for the Central Council is a  prolonged affair, depending upon timely
appointment of Returning Officers and availability of Updated Registers.   The Committee fails to understand in what manner,
Central Govt. would manage and expedite the election process of the Central Council under the existing provisions.   The
Committee is of the view that there is an urgent need for review of the existing system, specially in view of the present
circumstances.  Proposed amendments to the Act governing the functioning of the Central   Council will neither result in timely
appointment of Returning Officers nor in timely updating of State Registers.   The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for
review of the existing procedure for election to the Central Council and taking required steps for streamlining the same. The

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Central Govt. in consultation with the Central Council and experts may initiate
action.
         The Committee observes that under the present setup, State Boards/Councils are not controlled by the Central Council.  
They are also not accountable to Central Govt.    As a result, by and large, State Councils are not adhering to the prescribed norms
for updating of State Registers, essential for holding elections to the Councils. Non-submission of consolidated list of
practitioners, non-removal of names of expired practitioners, submission of incomplete lists with regard to State Registers are
some of the shortcomings brought to the notice of the Committee.    State Councils are also defaulting in the proper and timely
appointment of Returning Officers.   The Committee apprehends that after enacting the present legislation, there would not be any
significant improvement.   The Committee is of the firm opinion that a mechanism has to be evolved where under Central Council
and State councils work in coordination, complementing the functioning of each other and the State Councils should function
under the former. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should work out a legally and practically viable set
up for the purpose.
The Committee is disturbed to note the discrepancy between the information given by the office-bearers of CCH and the
Department.   The Committee would like to have the factual position about the status of the Commission of Inquiry.
 
The Committee, however, observes that, in respect of CCH, out of 76 pending cases, only two cases relate to election matters. 
Generally cases pertain to matters regarding opening of new colleges, increase in seat intake capacity, service matters etc.  Thus,
the Committee is not inclined to accept the contention of the Department that due to litigation and stay orders by Court, elections
to the Council get delayed.
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
 
SL NO.                                    NAME OF WITNESS (ES)
                                                Date of Hearing- 12th May, 2005
 
Secretary, Department of AYUSH
 
Date of Hearing- 26th May, 2005
     2. Dr. S.P.S. Bakshi, President, Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH).
     3. Dr. Ramjee Singh, Vice-President, (CCH).
     4. Dr. M.R. Srivatsan, Executive Member, (CCH).
     5. Dr. J.S. Khanna, Ex-President,The Homoeopathy Medical Association of India.
     6. Dr.Veerabramhachary, President, Karnataka Homoeopathic Board, (Govt. of   Karnataka).
     7. Dr. Arun Bhasme, Secretary General, National Federation of Homoeopathic  Colleges in India.
     8. Dr. Diwan Harish Chand, Chairman (Ex-President, CCH)
Scientific Advisory Committee, Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy, New Delhi.
    9.  Dr. V.K. Khanna, MD (Homoeo), Principal, Nehru Homoeopathic Medical  College & Hospital, New Delhi.
  10.  Dr. S.K. Bhattacharaya, Director, National Institute of Homoeopathy, Kolkatta.
  11.  Dr. Mahendra Singh, Secretary-General, Indian Homoeopathic Teachers      Association, Kolkata.
MINUTES
RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
            The Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 12 th May, 2005 in Committee Room ‘A’ Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Amar Singh                 ¾        Chairman
 
LOK SABHA
Shri D.K. Adikesavulu
Dr. M. Baburao
Dr. R.C. Dome
Smt. K. Rani
Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
Shri P.R. Guha Roy, Director
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri S.C. Dixit,        Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH
 
1.         Smt. Uma Pillai                          Secretary
 2.        Shri Tara Dutt                           Joint Secretary      
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Secretary, Department of AYUSH then gave a
presentation on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill-2005 and the Homoeopathy Central Council
(Amendment) Bill-2005. The members raised certain issues in respect of both the Bills.
2A.      Verbatim record of proceeding of the meeting is kept.
3.         The Committee then decided to hear the views of “experts” on both the Bills at its next meeting scheduled on 24
th May, 2005.
4.         The meeting then adjourned at 5.30 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on the 24th May, 2005.
NEW DELHI
12
th   May, 2005
(MOMRAJ SINGH)
 UNDER SECRETARY
                      
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 26th May, 2005 in Room 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
             MEMBERS PRESENT
          RAJYA SABHA
Shri Amar Singh                 ¾        Chairman
Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur
Dr. A.K. Patel
Smt.  Maya Singh
Shri Lalming Liana
 
LOK SABHA
 
6.   Shri D.K. Adikesavulu
7.   Smt. B. Sushila Devi Laxman
8.   Dr. M. Baburao
9.   Dr. R.C. Dome
10. Smt. Maneka Gandhi
11. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
12. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
13. Shri Uday Singh
14. Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
15. Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav
16. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg,  Joint Secretary
Shri P.R. Guha Roy, Director
Shri Mom Raj Singh,  Under Secretary
Shri S.C. Dixit,         Committee Officer
 
         WITNESSES
A.  Representatives of The Central Council of Homoeopathy 

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
 
1.   Dr. S.P.S. Bakshi                President, Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH).
2.   Dr. Ramjee Singh                Vice-President, (CCH).
3.   Dr. M.R. Srivatsan              Executive Members, (CCH).
4.   Dr. J.S. Khanna                  Ex-President, the Homoeopathy Medical Association of India.
5.   Dr.Veerabramhachary         President, Karnataka Homoeopathy Board, (Govt. of Karnataka).
6.  Dr. Arun Bhasme               Secretary General, National Federation of Homoeopathy Colleges in India.
 
          B. Expert on Indian System of Medicine                  
 
Dr. B.L. Gaur                          Director, National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur.
 
C. Experts on Homoeopathy
 
1.  Dr. Diwan Harish Chand      Chairman (Ex-President, CCH)
Scientific Advisory Committee, Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy, New Delhi.
2.  Dr. V.K. Khanna                 MD (Homoeopathy), Principal, Nehru Homoeopathy Medical College & Hospital, New
Delhi.
3.  Dr. S.K. Bhattacharya,       Director, National Institute of Homoeopathy,
Kolkata.
4.   Dr. Mahendra Singh,          Secretary-General, Indian Homoeopathic Teachers Association, Kolkata.
 
2.         The Committee heard the views of the President/Vice-President of Central Council of Homoeopathy and “experts” on the
Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill 2005. The Committee also heard the views of Director, National Institute of
Ayurveda, Jaipur on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005   The Members raised certain queries which
the witnesses replied.
2A.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 
3.
                    The Committee decided to hold its next meeting on 28 th June, 2005. The Committee then adjourned at 1:00 p.m. to
meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, 28th June, 2005.
NEW DELHI             
26th May, 2005
           MOM RAJ SINGH
 UNDER SECRETARY
                                                                                                       
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Friday, the 1 st July, 2005 in Committee Room “A” Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
             MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Amar Singh                 ¾        Chairman
Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur    
Dr. A.K. Patel
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri D.K. Audikesavulu
Smt. B. Sushila Devi Laxman
Dr. M. Baburao
Smt. Maneka Gandhi
Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
Dr. Chinta Mohan
Shri Rajendra Kumar
Shri Uday Singh
Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri P.R. Guha Roy, Director
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri S.C. Dixit, Committee Officer
 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee and took-up for consideration both the 
Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill-2005, and the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005 clause-
by-clause.  The observations of the Committee with regard to the changes proposed in the Homoeopathy Central Council
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 are as  follows:
                
 
Clause -1
2.1       The Committee considered the provisions of the clause (1) and adopted the same as it is.
            Clause 1 was adopted without any change.
Clause -2
2.2    (i) The Committee considered insertion of Sub-clause (i), after clause (d) in Sub-Section-I of Section 2 of Principal Act
regarding the definition of Homoeopathy Medical College but after discussion decided the definition of Homoeopathy Medical
College may be substituted with the following definition.
‘(da) “Homeopathic Medical College” means a college of Homoeopathy, whether known as such or by any
other name affiliated to a University, in which a person may undergo a course of study or training
including any postgraduate course of study or training which will qualify him for the award of a recognized
medical qualification.’
 
The Committee adopted the Sub Clause (i) as amended.
(ii) Sub-clause (ii) after clause (e) in Sub Section-I,  the Committee considered the definition of the term “Member” and after
discussion decided to insert the words ‘elected and nominated’ after the word “Central Council” (in line 2) in the definition of the
“member”
                        The Committee adopted the Sub Clause (ii) as amended.
(iii) The Committee agreed to the definition of the term “President” as given in the sub-clause (iii) of the Bill.
                       
The Committee adopted the Sub Clause (iii) without any change.
(iv) The Committee agreed to the definition of the term “Vice-President” as given in sub-clause  (iv) of the Bill.
 
The Committee adopted the Sub Clause (iv) without any change.
Clause-3
2.3       The Committee considered the provisions of clause 3 of the Bill and after extensive discussion decided that Clause –3 of
the Bill proposing to insert Clause (d) after Clause (C) in Section 3 (I) of the Principal Act may be deleted.  The Committee did
not agree to insert Clause 3 of the Bill.
               Clause 3 was not adopted.
Clause-4
2.4       The Committee considered the insertion of new Section 3 A ‘Reconstitution of Central Council’ after Section 3 of the
Principal Act.  The new clause also propose the appointment of Board of Administrator.  The Committee after extensive
discussion decided not to insert the new Section 3 A of the Bill and it may be deleted.
            Clause 4 was not adopted.
Clause-5
2.5     (i) The Committee considered the substitution for Sub-Section 1 of Section 7 of the Principal Act and decided that the
Central Government in consultation with the Central Council should initiate the process of reconstitution of the Central Council at
least 6 months before the expiry of the term of the Council.  The Committee’s attention was also drawn regarding Sub Section 6
of Section 7 (i) of the Act would become redundant hence it should be deleted.  It was also felt that election/nomination should be
notified without any delay.  It would be appropriate, if the term of the member starts from the date of notification of his
election/nomination.  So this provision may be amended accordingly. 
 
(ii) The Committee also considered the proviso contained in Sub Section (1A) in Section 7 of the Principal Act and did not agree
with the provision and decided that it may be deleted.

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
 
(iii) The Committee considered the part b of clause of the Bill and decided that instead of two terms a Member should be allowed
to hold office for three terms.
            Clause 5 as amended was adopted.
Clause-6
2.6       The Committee considered the insertion of new Section 12C after Section 12 B of the Principal Act under Clause (6) of the
Bill and decided to insert as a whole except one substitution, i.e., the word “three was substituted with the word “one”   
Clause 6 as amended was adopted.
Clause-7
2.7      (a) The Committee then considered the insertion of new section 30 A in the Principal Act. The Committee after extensive
discussion, decided to insert the sub-clause (1) and (2) in toto.  The Sub Clause (3) and (4) was amended slightly by the
Committee.
 
(a)(i)  The Committee decided for substitution of the words “who is otherwise eligible to become the member of the Central
Council  as the Central Government may appoint in that behalf” with the words “who is elected by the member from amongst
themselves”
 (ii) The Committee decided to substitute the word “three” with the word “one”.
(b) The Committee did not agree with the provisions to be insertion under Sections -30 B,30 C, 30D& 30E of the Principal Act as
proposed in the Bill and decided to delete the same.
            Sub-clause was deleted.
Clause-8 & 9
            The Committee discussed the position contained in Clause 8 & 9 of Bill regarding Sub Section 1 the “brackets and
figures” “(1)” and Sub Section 2 in Section 32 and 33 of the Principal Act and decided that the same should be adopted.
           
The Clause 8 and 9 were adopted without any change.
Clause-10
2.8       (i) The Committee considered the insertion of new Section 34 and 35 after section 33 of the Principal Act regarding power
of Central Government to issue directions for making or amending regulations and laying of rules and regulations respectively. 
The Committee decided to delete the provisions contained in Section 34 as the Central Government is already empowered to make
rules to carry out the purposes of the Act.  The Committee decided to delete the same. 
            Section 34 was not adopted.
General Observations
2.9       Statement of objects and Reasons to the Homeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005 gives the impression that
besides some inherent shortcomings in some provisions of the Principal Act, functioning of the Central Council also needs to be
streamlined.  Based on the feedback received by the committee and also its interactions with a number of witnesses, the
Committee has to make the following observations.
 
(i)         On a specific query about the efforts made by the Department to obtain the views of all Stake-holders on various
provisions of the proposed legislation, the Committee has been informed that only an internal exercise had been taken by the
Department.   The Committee expresses its serious concern on non-adherence to a well-established convention of consultation
with all the Stake-holders for bringing out any legislation or proposed amendments thereto.   Clarification made by the
Department that unwarranted action of the Council has resulted in the proposed legislation for amendment of the Act clearly
indicates that this non-initiative was deliberate on the part of the Department.
(ii) The Committee noted that the election to the Homoeopathy Central Council is conducted by the Central Govt.  as per the provision of
the relevant Rules.   The Returning Officer is appointed by the Central Govt. on the recommendation of State Govt. The Voters List is to
be provided by the Registrar, State Board/Council.  Non-appointment of Returning Officer, frequent change of Returning Officers by State
Govts. due to retirement/transfer/death of incumbents, non-provision of updated State Registers by State Registrars, Court cases, difficulty
in determination of seats etc. are some of the constraints being faced by the Central Govt. in the conduct of elections to both the Councils.
The Committee observed that the election process for the Central Council is a prolonged affair, depending upon timely
appointment of Returning Officers and availability of Updated Registers.   The Committee fails to understand in what manner, Central
Govt. would manage and expedite the election process of the Central Council under the existing provisions.   The Committee was of the
view that there is an urgent need for review of the existing system, specially in view of the present circumstances.  Proposed amendments
to the Act governing the functioning of the Central   Council will neither result in timely appointment of Returning Officers nor in timely
updating of State Registers.   The Committee felt that there is an urgent need for review of the existing procedure for election to the
Central Council and taking required steps for streamlining the same. The Committee, accordingly, recommended that the Central Govt. in
consultation with the Central Council and experts may initiate action.
(iii) The Committee observed that under the present setup, State Boards/Councils are not controlled by the Central Council.   They
are also not accountable to Central Govt.    As a result, by and large, State Councils are not adhering to the prescribed norms for
updating of State Registers, essential for holding elections to the Councils. Non-submission of consolidated list of practitioners,
non-removal of names of expired practitioners, submission of incomplete lists with regard to State Registers are some of the
shortcomings brought to the notice of the Committee.    State Councils are also defaulting in the proper and timely appointment of
Returning Officers.   The Committee apprehended that after enacting the present legislation, there would not be any significant

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
improvement.   The Committee is of the firm opinion that a mechanism has to be evolved where under Central Council and State
councils work in coordination, complementing the functioning of each other and the State Councils should function under the
former. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Department should work out a legally and practically viable set up for
the purpose.
(iv)
 The Committee was informed by the Department that on a complaint made by MPs, a Commission of Inquiry was set up to
look into the allegations against the office-bearers of CCH on the 12 th January, 2004. The Commission was to give its Report
within four months.   The Commission has completed its hearings and examination of witnesses and is expected to give its Report
shortly.
During the course of interaction with the office-bearers of CCH on the 26
th May, 2005, the President of CCH categorically
mentioned that the Commission of Inquiry was wound up on the 28 th February, 2005 itself. The Committee observes that the
Report of the Commission of Inquiry was already one year overdue. The Committee is disturbed to note the discrepancy between
the information given by the office-bearers of CCH and the Department.   The Committee would like to have the factual position
about the status of the Commission of Inquiry.
 
(v)        Statement of Objects and Reasons for the Bill mentions that sometimes elections are delayed due to litigation and stay
orders from the court.   The Committee, however, observed that, in respect of CCH, out of 76 pending cases, only two cases relate
to election matters.  Generally cases pertain to matters regarding opening of new colleges, increase in seat intake capacity, service
matters etc.  Thus, the Committee was not inclined to accept the contention of the Department that due to litigation and stay orders
by Court, elections to the Council get delayed.
 
3.         The Committee took-up for consideration the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill 2005 clause-by-clause.
Provisions of both the Bills being similar, therefore decided that amendments as suggested in the case of Homoeopathy Central
Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005 may be made applicable with respect to Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill,
2005 also.
   4.      The Committee then adjourned at 4:30 p.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on the        14
th July, 2005.
NEW DELHI
1
st July, 2005
MOM RAJ SINGH
 UNDERSECRETARY
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 14 th July, 2005 in Room No. 63 First Floor, Parliament House, New
Delhi.
             MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Amar Singh                 ¾        Chairman
Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur    
Dr. A.K. Patel
Shrimati Maya Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri D.K. Adikesavulu
Smt. B. Sushila Devi Laxman
Dr. M. Baburao
Dr. R.C. Dome
Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
Md. Shahabuddin
Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
Shri Uday Singh
Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav
Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT

10th Report of Committee on Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/10threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:59]
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri P.R. Guha Roy, Director
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri S.C. Dixit, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
 
1.         Shri S.Y. Quraishi                                 Special Secretary & D.G. (NACO)
2.         Dr. S.P. Agarwal                                  Director General (Health Service)
3.         Dr. Ashwani Kumar                              Drug Controller General of India
             4.         Smt. Rita Teaotia                                      Joint Secretary
             5.         Shri  Rajesh Bhushan                               Director
6.         Dr. N.S. Dharamshakhu                                   Addl. Project Director (NACO)
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Special Secretary, Department of Health then
gave a brief presentation on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill-2005.  The members raised certain issues in respect of
the Bill to which the Spl. Secretary assured to submit  written reply later.
3.      The Committee then took up for consideration the Tenth and Eleventh Draft Reports of the Committee on the Homoeopathy
Central Council (Amendment) Bill-2005 and the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill-2005 respectively. The
Committee adopted both the Draft Reports without any change.
4.         The Committee decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha in
the ensuing Monsoon Session of the Parliament.  The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence Smt. Maya Singh to
present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Uday Singh and in his absence Shri R.C. Dome for laying the Reports on the
Table of Lok Sabha.
4A.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4.
                    The Committee then adjourned at 4:00 p.m.
NEW DELHI             
14th July, 2005            
            MOM RAJ SINGH UNDERSECRETARY  
 
           
                                                                     