PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 13 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING   
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
EIGHTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2005-2006 (DEMAND NO. 49) OF   
THE DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY WELFARE 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21ST DECEMBER, 2005) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21ST DECEMBER, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2005/AGRAHAYANA, 1927 (SAKA) 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http//rajyasabha.nic.in 
E.mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING   
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
EIGHTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2005-2006 (DEMAND NO. 49) OF   
THE DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY WELFARE 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
LITERACY 
(MINISTRY OF HAN RESOURCE D 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 21ST DECEMBER, 2005) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 21ST DECEMBER, 2005) 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2005/AGRAHAYANA, 1927 (SAKA)) 


 
CONTENTS 
 PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................................... (i) 
2. P REFACE ......................................................................................................................... (iii ) 
3. R EPORT ........................................................................................................................... 1 
 CHAPTER I Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government .............................................................. 
 
2—9 
 CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply ............................ 
 
10—12 
 CHAPTER 
III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ..................... 
 
13—25 
 CHAPTER 
IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited ................................................... 
 
26 
4. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE ............................................... 27—30  
5. A NNEXURE ...................................................................................................................... 31—49 
6. M INUTES .......................................................................................................................... 51—5 3 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 1. Shri Amar Singh —    Chairman 
  MEMBERS 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur 
 3. Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar 
 4. Prof. P.J. Kurian 
 5. Dr. A.K. Patel 
 6. Shrimati Maya Singh 
 7. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy 
 8. Shri R. Sarath Kumar 
 9. Shri Lalhming Liana 
 *10. Shri Digvijay Singh 
  LOK SABHA  
 11. Shri M. Ambareesh  
 12. Shri D.K. Adikesavulu 
 13. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
 14. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi 
 15. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawali 
 16. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
 17. Shrimati Sushila Bangaru Laxman 
 18. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah 
 19. Shri Rasheed Masood 
 20. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam 
 21. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 22. Ms. Archana Nayak 
 23. Shri D.B. Patil 
 24. Shri Nakul Das Rai 
 25. Shrimati K. Rani 
 26. Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin   
 27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 28. Shri Uday Singh 
 29. Shrimati V. Radhika Selvi 
 30. Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav 
 31. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
  Shrimati Vandana Ga rg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.R. Guharoy, Director 
  Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary 
  Shri S.C. Dixit, Committee Officer 
 
   
* 
Nominated w.e.f. 13th December, 2005. 

 
 
PREFACE 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to  present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present 
this Thirteenth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations 
deservations contained in the Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 49) of the Department of 
Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2005-2006. 
2.   The Eighth Report of the Department-relat ed Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and 
Family Welfare was presen ted to Rajya Sabha on 28 th April, 2005 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
27th April, 2005. Replies of the Go vernment on the recommendations co ntained in the Report, received 
from the Department of Family Welfare were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on  
15th December, 2005. 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report an d adopted the same in its meeting held on  
15th December, 2005. 
  AMAR SINGH 
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
15th December, 2005 Department-related Parliamentary 
24 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
  Health and Family Welfare. 

REPORT 
 The Report of the Committee deals with th e Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/Observations contained in its Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 49) of 
the Department of Family Welfare for the year 2005-06. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendation 
contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows: 
 (i) Recommendations/Observations which have  been accepted by the Government: 4.3, 6.5, 
7.3, 7.5, 7.7, 7.8, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 9.4, 9.6, 9.8, 10.3, 11.5, 13.1, 13.3, 14.3  
  Total-17 (Chapter-I) 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Co mmittee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies: 1.3, 7.14, 11.1, 12.2, 13.2   
  Total-5 (Chapter-II) 
 (iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee. 1.5, 2.5, 3.2, 3. 3, 4.4, 5.6, 5.8, 5.9, 5.11, 5.12, 7.6, 7.11, 
7.12, 15.2   
  Total-14 (Chapter-III) 
 (iv) Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited 
  -Nil- (Chapter-IV) 

CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
IV. NATIONAL RURAL HEALTH MISSION  
Recommendations/Observations 
4.3 The Committee notes that NRHM is the most am bitious Project proposed to be launched in the 
Health and Family Welfare Sector. Mission has received the Cabinet approval very recently, i.e. 4th January 
2005. States are being now advised to undertake prep aratory activities. The Committee has been given to 
understand that in view of the recent Cabinet approv al, requirement for activities under NRHM could not 
be included in the proposal sent to the Planning Commission. A minimum of Rs. 600 crores will be 
required as additional budgetary support during 2005-06. 
Action Taken 
 Planning Commission has accorded in principle approval of Rs. 900 crores as additionality for 2005-
06 for National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) at RE stag e subject to availability of funds. The details of 
the scheme-wise allocation of funds of Rs. 900 crores are as under: 
(Rs. in crores) 
Sl. No. Activity Allocation 
1. Upgrading Public Health Infrastructure 400 
2. Mobile Medical Unit 200 
3. Drug Supply 200 
4. Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY)/Na tional Maternity Benefit Scheme 60 
5. National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme 40 
 TOTAL : 900 
VI. URBAN FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES  
Recommendations/Observations 
6.5 The Committee has taken seriously the underut ilization of funds under Urban Family Welfare 
Services for a number of years in succession and the reason being the same. The Department perhaps did 
not take any remedial steps to improve the si tuation. The Committee feels that based on the 
recommendations of the evaluation study, steps should be taken for strengthening/expansion of the scheme. 
Action Taken 
 During the years 2002-03 and 2003-04, the shortfall was due to 10% statutory provision of total 
budget made for North-Eastern States, whereas their re quirements were very less. As there are no Health 
Posts in NE region, the 10 per cent of the total budget of Urban Health Posts could not be utilized.  
 During 2004-05, the budget allocation for thes e two schemes was Rs. 121.00 crores, which was 
entirely utilized. There is no under utilization of fu nds under these schemes. Wh en the final evaluation 
report is received, requisite action will be taken for strengthening/expanding of the scheme, subject to 
availability of funds. 
VII. REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROGRAMME (RCH)  
Recommendations/Observations 
7.3 The Committee would however like to emphasize that besides organizing workshops/meetings with 
State/district level officials, inspections both regular/ surprise by designated Central officials should also be 

initiated. The Committee welcomes all these very significant initiatives being taken by the Department and 
hopes that they would be implemented as envisaged to get the desired results. 
Action Taken 
 With a view to getting the desired results, th e second phase of the RCH programme encourages 
decentralized need based planning by the States. Furthe r, specific attention is being paid by the programme 
to develop the programme management capabilities at th e District and the State levels through induction of 
skilled professionals. A carefully thought out monito ring and evaluation system is expected to provide 
regular feedback on the implementation of the progra mme, using both Departmental as well as community 
based feedback mechanisms. Consiste nt with the directions of the Committee, Nodal Officers have been 
designated to maintain oversight over the implementation of the programme in the States. 
Recommendations/Observations 
7.5  The Committee observes that more or less the sa me factors were responsible for underutilisation in 
the first two years of the Tenth Plan. The Committee notes that an enhanced allocation of Rs. 1380.68 
crores has been made for 2005-06, based upon an assessment of demands of the States/UTs, and the 
committed liabilities of the States. The Committee view s with serious concern the availability of unspent 
funds with different States under this programme. 
Action Taken 
 The Ministry expects improved off take under the programme as a result of decentralized planning, 
programme management capacity building at the State and District levels and introduction of new 
monitoring and evaluation mechanisms. In so far as availability of unspent funds with different States under 
the programme is concerned, the States have been se nsitized on the need to settle releases made upto 
31.3.2005 under the first phase of the programme. A DO letter to all the States/UTs has already been 
written on 24.5.2005. As a result, 5 States have resp onded and reminders to the other States are being 
issued so that the unspent balances lying with them may be refunded/adjusted as early as possible. It is also 
proposed to organize workshops with the States/UTs to settle issues relating to unspent funds. 
Recommendations/Observations 
7.7 The Committee notes that the Department has in itiated some remedial measures, creating State and 
District Management Units, engaging qualified Mana gers, Accounts persons and a qualified Financial 
Expert which are the required initiatives. The propos al of the Govt. to continue with the process of 
organizing workshops and meetings with State and di strict level officers is welcome. The Committee, 
would, however, like to emphasize that besides organizing workshops/meetings with State/district level 
officers, inspections both regular and surprise by designated Central Govt. officials should also be initiated. 
Action Taken 
 As mentioned in response to Para No.7.3, with a view to getting the desired results, the second phase 
of the RCH programme encourages decentralized need  based planning by the States. Further, specific 
attention is being paid by the programme to develop the programme management capabilities at the District 
and the State levels through induction of skilled prof essionals. A carefully th ought out monitoring and 
evaluation system is expected to provide regular fe edback on the implementation of the programme using 
both Departmental as well as community based feedback  mechanisms. Consistent with the directions of the 
Committee, Nodal Officers have been designated to  provide oversight to the implementation of the 
programme in the States/UTs. 
Recommendations/Observations 
7.8 The Committee has some apprehensions about the fe asibility of the new methodology proposed to be 
adopted for release of Central financial assistance und er RCH-II. In view of very poor performance of the 
various State Govts. in majority of the components of  RCH programme so far, the flexibility now proposed 
to be given to them may prove to be counter-producti ve. The Committee is of the view that the Department 
in the initial years will have to play a pro-active role in the formulation and implementation of State 
Specific Plans with an inbuilt effective monitoring m echanism. With the option now being made available 

to the State Govt. to prioritize their schemes as per the local requirements, involvement of public 
representatives, reputed NGOs and Panchayat Raj In stitutions will prove to be very beneficial. The 
Committee, therefore, is of the view that the Department should evolve a system where under besides State 
Govts. other Stakeholders also have a decisive role to play. 
Action Taken 
 In keeping with the suggestions of the Committee, from the very outset the Government of India is 
closely involved with the planning and programme im plementation process under RCH-II. To this end, a 
model National Programme Implementation Plan was deve loped and shared with the States/UTs to enable 
them to formulate their respective pl ans. Thereafter consultations involving all the States/UTs were held to 
assist them in formulating their specific proposals. The States/UTs experiencing difficulties in formulating 
their respective proposals were provided with expert technical assistance for developing their plans. 
Further, clear guidelines on appraisal of State PIPs we re formulated and circulated to the States/UTs in 
advance so as to enable them to fo rmulate appropriate proposals. Finally, a participative process has been 
adopted for evaluation of the State Programme Implementation Plans wherein detailed discussions have 
been held with representatives of each and every State before approving the individual plan. The RCH-II 
also, as suggested by the Committee,  envisages involvement of public representatives, reputed NGOs and 
Panchayati Raj Institutions so as to ensure that the stakeholders have a role to play. 
VIII.  JANANI SURAKSHA YOJANA (NATIONAL MATERNITY BENEFIT  SCHEME) 
Recommendations/Observations 
8.2 The Committee observes that exerci se of revision of this scheme has been going on for the last two 
years. As a result, funds allocated have remained underutilized. Against the allocation of Rs.500 crores in 
the Tenth Plan, the expenditure for first two years is only Rs. 87.57 crores and the balance available for the 
remaining period is Rs.300.43 crores. The Committee feels that there should be no further delay and 
finalization of the schemes should be expedited. The Committee would also like to emphasize that the 
Department should not be complacent by just revi sing the scheme, rather an effective monitoring 
mechanism should be evolved for its proper implementation. 
Recommendations/Observations 
8.3 The Committee has observed that under the existin g scheme, there is no mechanism to ascertain the 
exact number of actual beneficiaries of the scheme . The Department has been estimating the number of 
beneficiaries on the basis of amount of grants released  to the District authorities. The Committee feels that 
under the proposed revised scheme, there should be an i nbuilt mechanism so that there is periodic survey to 
verify the exact number of beneficiaries. The Committee also observes that State-wise details of estimated 
number of beneficiaries indicate that those States wh ere need for population stab ilization measures is the 
most do not seem to be taking benefit of this sche me. The Committee is of the opinion that the revised 
scheme should be given due publicity, specially in backward/tribal areas. 
Recommendations/Observations 
8.4  The Committee has also noticed that under th e existing Scheme due to unspent balances, non 
receipt/late receipt of UCs/Audited accounts/receipt of incomplete/incorrect documents, there was improper 
and underutilization of allocated funds. This was evid ent in respect of all the States in the country. The 
Committee, would therefore, like to em phasize that all preventive measures need to be taken to avoid such 
problems/shortcomings under the revised scheme. 
Action Taken 
 The scheme of Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY ) has been approved by Cabinet Committee of 
Economic Affairs on 29.3.05 and the scheme has come into force w.e.f. 12.4.05. Under the scheme, 
assistance to expectant mother in rural areas is of Rs . 700/-per delivery. In urban areas of low performing 
States, the expectant mother will receive an amount of Rs.600/- per delivery. Moreover, in the Scheme, 

Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs) would be  working as link between the poor expectant mothers 
and the health institutions. 
 In the Janani Suraksha Yojana, monitoring and evaluation aspects have been given due thrust. A time 
bound reporting mechanism has been drawn in th e guidelines of the sc heme. The State Health 
Mission/State Implementation Committe es has been given flexibility to institute adequate and appropriate 
arrangements for monitoring and evaluation of the scheme. The Central Government also proposes to 
establish an independent monitoring and evaluation mechanism. 
 Under the guidelines of the scheme, a clear cut reporting mechanism has been drawn up under which 
the State Implementation Committee is mandatorily required to send six-monthly district-wise reports along 
with SOE/UC/ARs in the prescribed format including number of beneficiaries. 
IX.  STRENGTHENING OF IMMUNISATION PROGRAMME AND ERADICATION OF 
POLIO 
Recommendations/Observations 
9.4  The main reason for underutilisation of funds is non-receipt of UCs and unspent balances available 
with the States. On a specific query about the co nstraints being faced by the State Govts. in the 
implementation of this programme, it was clarified that  details of expenditure figures and unspent balances 
from the remote districts were not being received by the State Govts. This resulted in delay in preparation 
of UCs for submission of the Central Govt. The Committee is not inclined to agree with the justification for 
underutilization of funds given by the Department. The Committee feels that the Department will have to 
focus on State-specific strategies for optimum and judicious utilisation of allocated funds. The Committee 
observes that as per RHS-2002, immunization level of ch ildren is 49 per cent. The Department will have to 
make concerted efforts to reach the ta rget of 100 per cent coverage of children under immunization against 
six preventable diseases by the end of Tenth Plan, 2007. 
Action Taken 
 The suggestion of the Committee for focusing on Stat e-specific strategies for optimum and judicious 
utilization of funds is taken note of. It may be mentioned that State specific strategies have been included in 
the recently launched National Rural Health Mission (NRHM). Under NRHM, funds will be released to the 
States on the basis of their own Project Implementati on Plans (PIPs). Since fund s will be based on the 
States’ requirements, as reflected in their PIPs, the St ates will be accountable for the physical and financial 
progress in the implementation of the various programmes, including immunization. The Government has 
embarked upon a number of additional supports to the States for facilitating 100% immunization coverage 
of children against six preventable diseases. The add itional supports will be in respect of (i) alternative 
vaccine delivery at immunization sites, (ii) holding  of sessions in slums and under-served areas, (iii) 
mobilization of children by ASHA, etc. to immunizatio n session sites, (iv) mobility support to District 
Immunization Officers, (v) provision of Computer Assistant to the districts, (vi) six-monthly review 
meetings with the districts at Stat e level, and (vii) implementation of State-specific strategies. These 
additional supports are intended to (i) facilitate better and timely service delivery by the ground level staff, 
and (ii) improve the quality of monitoring and superv ision. The performance of the States, especially the 
poor performing States, in the area of pulse polio programme and Routine Immunization programme is 
closely being monitored. 
 The Government of India has also decided to introduce Auto Disable (AD) syringes for 
administering all vaccines (except oral polio vaccine) under Universal Immunization Programme. Besides 
ensuring injection safety, it will also improve the implementation of the programme. Supplies of AD 
syringes are expected to start from August-September, 2005. 
Recommendations/Observations 
9.6 The Committee is a bit apprehensive of the commitm ent of the Government to eradicate all strains of 
the poliovirus in near future. The Department has now confirmed that as on 14
th March 2005, 136 cases of 
Polio were reported in the country in 2004, out of which 82 were from U.P. and that too, 21 from 
Moradabad and 12 from Badaun district. Analysis of  cases in Moradabad and Badaun has shown that poor 

micro-planning, training and social m obilization are the main factors responsible for high rate of Polio in 
these districts. 
Action Taken 
 The Polio eradication programme in India made greater progress in the last three years than ever 
before, with cases dropping from 1600 in 2002 to 134 in 2004, and affected districts falling from 157 in 
2002 to 44 last year. The virus is now confined to its last strongholds in UP and Bihar. However, 
eradication of poliovirus in UP and Bihar requires immunization of all children less than 5 years with 
multiple doses of oral polio vaccine (OPV). 
 The Govt. of India and the State Governments are taking all possible measures to ensure 100 per cent 
coverage of children below 5 years of age. Micro-plans of the high-risk districts of Uttar Pradesh have been 
strengthened so as to ensure that no house/child is missed during polio rounds. 
 Special training module of vacci nators and supervisors engaged in  the conduct of the rounds has 
been developed and these staff has been trained as  per these improved modules. This has resulted in 
improved quality of training and consequent improved activities. 
 Additional personnel have been deployed by the State and district administrations, UNICEF & 
Rotary International for better involvement of the community in the programme. 
Recommendations/Observations 
9.8 Committee’s attention has been drawn by Media reports that Bihar has recorded 41 cases of Polio in 
2004, more than double the number of cases reported in 2003 which stood at 18. The Committee 
understands that these cases are scattered all over  in Bihar with Patna, Khagaria, Madhepura and 
Muzaffarpur being the worse affected. Already two cases have been reported from the State in 2005. On a 
specific query in this regard, the Department conf irmed the media reports about Bihar. The Committee 
finds that the justification given by the Department th at due to poor quality of rounds undertaken between 
July to Sept. 2004 because of floods cannot be cons idered very convincing. Th e Committee feels that the 
Department has to anticipate this kind of situations and take remedial action well in time. The Committee 
hopes that with the high quality of supplementary immunization activity planned for 2005, things would 
improve in the State. The Committee would also like to emphasize that the remedial measures as initiated in 
affected districts of U.P. in the wake of increase in th e number of Polio cases may also be undertaken in all 
the affected districts of Bihar. 
Action Taken 
 The concerns of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 For ensuring quality implementation of the rounds during floods, Flood Plans have been prepared for 
all the districts of Bihar. These Plans envisage that people would move in boats to specific places during 
floods where vaccines, vaccinators and other logistics would be reached as per plan. 
 The Government, in collaboration with partners, has taken a number of initiatives in the recent 8 
months to stop poliovirus transmission in high-risk di stricts of UP and Bihar. These include (1) introducing 
vaccine targeting the one type of wild polio virus which is now most common in India (monovalent OPV); 
(2) increasing vaccination teams at high volume transit sites like train and bus stations; (3) coordinating an 
approach to immunizing children on trains with the Railway Ministry; (4) redeployment and concentration 
of WHO, UNICEF and Government personnel with extensive expertise in the highest risk districts; (5) 
revision of micro plans; and (6) intensive investigation of cases to identify how the virus is spreading in the 
last phase of eradication. 
X. JANSANKHYA STHIRTA KOSH  
Recommendations/Observations 
10.3 The Committee expresses its serious concern about the fate of a project initiated with laudable 
objective. It took three years to implement the de cision of setting up the Kosh. Almost two years have 
passed since then and the seed mone y of Rs.100 crores available under  the Kosh is lying unutilized. The 
Committee can understand the total lack of contri butions/donations from an y sector. The Committee, 

however, fails to understand the rationale for non-utilisation of funds available under the Kosh. The 
Committee finds that the approval of th e Cabinet has been obtained for reco nstitution of the Kosh so as to 
increase its membership and establish it as an autonom ous society, free to operate in a non-bureaucratic 
mode. The Committee would like to emphasize that adequate publicity about the availability of funds under 
the Kosh for providing financial as sistance for Projects on Population Stabilisation and also for inviting 
contribution to the same needs to be given. 
Action Taken 
 The Janasankhya Sthirata Kosh (JSK) was established as an autonomous body, registered under the 
Societies Registration Act on 12th June, 2003 with a view to provide a window for canalising resources 
through voluntary contributions from individuals, in dustry, trade organisations and others, and support 
projects, schemes, initiatives and innovative ideas designed to achieve population stabilisation at a level 
consistent with the socio-economic development of the country. Government has contributed a sum of 
Rs.100 crores towards the corpus of the Fund. 
 It has to be appreciated that the Department of  Health & Family Welfare is managing a budgetary 
allocation in the range of Rs.5000 crores every year, of which the Budget for NGO Division and private 
sector by way of Social Franchise, Mother NGO Scheme etc. is already in the range of more than Rs.100 
crores per annum. Thus the utili zation of the income of the Kosh did not present any administrative 
challenge to the Department, rather the Department  insisted on adopting the unorthodox approach of 
ensuring a non-bureaucratic mode for operationalization of the Kosh and utilization of its income. Due to 
less than encouraging response of NGOs and corporate sector, and the need for a renewed Cabinet 
revalidation, this has taken some time. However,  the Department is committed to reconstitution, 
energization and full operationalizati on of the Kosh in the current year. As per the Cabinet approval, the 
corpus of Rs.100 crores shall be deposited in a Ba nk Account or Government Securities. The earnings of 
the Kosh by way of interest earned on the corpus, do nations from individuals, industry, trade organisations 
and subscription fee for membership etc., were to be  utilized for management of the Kosh, and financing 
projects, schemes or activities. 
 The Government has since reconstituted the Kosh on 14
th June 2005. Now the scope for membership 
to the Kosh has been widened. All the State Governments, demographers, specialists in the field of 
population stabilisation and its allied  sectors, representatives from organisations of trade and industry, 
NGOs active in the fields of popul ation stabilisation or associated with the Health & Family Welfare 
sectors, Medical and Para-medical associations are now free to beco me its Member. While the General 
Body of the Kosh is presided by the Union Minister  for Health & Family Welf are, the Union Health & 
Family Welfare Secretary chairs its Governing Board. The Executive Director of the Kosh, who will be the 
Chief Executive Officer and Member Secretary of the Ko sh, is to be selected fr om the civil society to 
operate in a non-bureaucratic mode. Most of the members of the Governin g Board are to be elected by the 
Members of the General Body of the Kosh. During the fi rst three years, Government will help the Kosh in 
its efforts to expand its membership. It is expected that the reconstituted Kosh will be in a position to attract 
contributions from various sources and the Kosh will start functioning in desired manner. Appropriate 
publicity will be given to disseminate information about the Kosh and enhance the level of contributions. 
 The recommendations/observations of the Committe e have been noted and steps would be taken to 
increase the membership of the Kosh, mobilize contribut ions and utilize the same to achieve the objectives 
of the Kosh. 
XI. FREE DISTRIBUTION OF CONVENTIONAL CONTRACEPTIVE AND ITS SOCIAL 
 MARKETING  
Recommendations/Observations 
11.5 The Committee observes that the initiative take n by the Hindustan Latex Family Planning Promotion 
Trust in selected districts of MP, Orissa, Jharkhand and Bihar is a positive development. The Committee 
finds that another area project on social marketing is being implemented by the Society for Women and 
Child Health in four districts of Haryana from Apr il, 2000. The Committee feels that the results of these 
two initiatives should be shared with other reputed NGOs so as to motivate them to implement similar 

projects in other weak performing districts. The Committee is of the view that the Department may make an 
assessment in this regard and coordinate with the concerned State Govts. and implementing agencies. 
Action Taken 
 Five NGOs are considered for inclusion in the social marketing programme of the GoI during current 
year for implementing area specific social marketing projects. These are Population Foundation of India; 
Press Institute of India; Indian Association of Pa rliamentarian on Population & Development; Sanskar 
Siksha Samiti, Bhopal; and Prayas, Chittorgarh. Besides, proposals of at least 2 NGOs are under scrutiny of 
the department for approval. A concept paper on social marketing has also been shared with NGOs. Thus, 
the initiative of social marketing of contraceptives is being expanded in asso ciation with capable and 
willing NGOs. 
XIII. ACTIVITIES IN NORTH-EAST REGION  
Recommendations/Observations 
13.1 The Committee is not in agre ement to the suggestion of the De partment for being exempted from 
earmarking the mandatory allocation of 10% for the NE  region. The Committee feels that the appropriate 
action would be to initiate new schemes including th ose aimed at establishing new Primary Health Care 
Institutions and also adequately augmenting staff strength in NE Region. 
Action Taken 
 The Ministry welcomes the suggestion of Par liament Standing Committee and may like to inform 
that the Ministry has already initiated action on the following: 
 1. Carry out necessary architectural correction in the basic h ealthcare delivery system for the 
NE States under the NRHM. 
 2. Setting up of a Regional Resource Centre to assist in the capacity building of NE States. 
 3. Comprehensive strengthening of the Primary/ Secondary healthcare system by looking at the 
infrastructural requirements as well as the ma npower and other components of the health 
system. 
 Under NRHM, it is proposed to provide (i) Add itional ANMs wherever needed; (ii) upgrading 
existing Sub-Centres; (iii) strengthening PHCs by u pgradation of 100 per cent PHCs for 24 hours referral 
service; and (iv) operationalising CHCs (30-50 beds) as 24 hours First Referral Units. 
Recommendations/Observations 
13.3 The Committee has, however, a word of caution for the Department. Committee’s attention has been 
drawn by media reports about diversion of Central Funds meant for NE States due to pressure of 
underground outfits. The Committee understands that this  issue was discussed in a recent meeting chaired 
by the Cabinet Secretary. The Committee would like to  emphasize that in Stat es like Manipur, Nagaland 
and some parts of Assam, due to underground activ ities, impact of various Central Family Welfare 
Programmes is not visible. Infrastructure is simply no t there. There is acute shortage of doctors and other 
allied staff. The Committee is of the view that a proper monitoring mechanism is evolved so that the 
enhanced funds meant for Family Welfare services in N.E. region are appropriately utilized and relevant 
infrastructure is established. Inspection by Central teams, both regular and surprise, may also be conducted, 
specially in view of reported diversion of Central funds. 
Action Taken 
 Recently, a team of Officers head ed by the Joint Secretary visite d the NE States to review the 
specific requirements of the NE Region in terms of healthcare delivery system. Through regular monitoring 
and visits of the officials of the Ministry, it is propose d to ensure that the funds are being utilized for the 
purpose they have been assigned. 
XIV. MISCELLANEOUS  
Recommendations/Observations 

14.3 The Committee feels that the list of MNGOs should have been readily available with the 
Department. The Committee also fails to understand the constraints being faced by the Department in 
furnishing the list of MNGOs to the Members in w hose constituencies, the districts allotted to these 
MNGOs are located. The Committee would like to point out that the addresses of Members of Parliament 
can easily be obtained from the Website of Parl iament Secretariat. The Committee would therefore 
emphasize that the Department should make arrangemen ts for submitting the list of MNGOs to the local 
Members of Parliament without any further delay. 
Action Taken 
 The Mother NGO Scheme was introduced in the Ninth Five Year Plan under the RCH Programme. 
Presently, 151 Mother NGOs (MNGOs) have been functioning in 252 districts in the country. The process 
of selection is continuing to cover all the distri cts in the country. The MNGO Programme has been 
decentralized in RCH-II and the ownership of the programme is with the State Government. 
 The MNGO with the help of District NGO Comm ittee headed by the District Collector selects 3-4 
Field NGOs per district and implement the Programm e through them. The NGO guidebook is enclosed for 
ready reference with details of the Programme. 
 The State-wise list of MNGOs is enclosed at Annexure-V. The list is also being sent to all the 
Members of Parliament. The list will be updated with the selection of MNGOs from time to time. 

CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES  
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.3 Committee observes that there have been significant changes in the demographic and health profile 
of the country. The Committee would,  however, like to point out that average rate of various health 
indicators does not indicate the ground realities in  the big and populous States of the country. The 
Committee notes that performance level in such Stat es continues to remain much below the average 
national rate. A few examples as indicated below are self-revealing: 
Neo-Natal Mortality Rate 2002 (Source: Sample Registration System, Registrar General of India) 
State Year (2002) 
Assam 45 
Orissa 53 
Rajasthan 48 
Uttar Pradesh 47 
India 41 
Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) - 2002 (Source: Sample Registration System, RGI) 
State Year (2002) 
Assam 70 
Chhattisgarh 73 
Orissa 87 
Rajasthan 78 
Uttar Pradesh 80 
India 63 
Action Taken 
 IMR is one of the best indicators that captures th e effectiveness of the deliv ery of health & family 
welfare services to pregnant women and infants. It reflects the impact of (i) immunization & ante-natal care 
of pregnant women, (ii) utilization of healthcare faci lities during delivery, and (iii) immunization & care of 
children during neo-natal period and infancy. Thus, IMR broadly indicates the ground realities of healthcare 
status of women & children in different States. The Department has launched NRHM in the country with 
special emphasis on 18 States to im prove the delivery of health & family welfare services so that poorly 
performing States can be brought at par with the good performing States. 
VII. REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROGRAMME (RCH)  
Recommendations/Observations 
7.14 RCH camps were initially permitted for 117 dist ricts of 21 States and 7 UTs and then to all the 
districts of EAG States, i.e. Bihar, Orissa, M.P., Rajasthan, Uttara nchal, U.P., Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh. 
Rs. 19.70 crores have been released so far and nu mber of camps organized is 7283. The Committee has 
been given to understand that funds are released to the States as per their proposal and also subject to the 
submission of UCs and Audit Report for the earlier y ears. The Committee notes that a variety of services 
are being provided in the RCH camps by the States. As per the information made available to the 
Committee, States like Assam, Gujarat, Himachal  Pradesh, J&K, M.P., Maharashtra, Rajasthan, 
Uttaranchal, and U.P. have been very active in  holding RCH camps. However, the Committee is 
constrained to observe that in the case of EAG Stat es like Bihar, Chhattisgarh , Jharkhand and Orissa no 
information is available in spite of  there being provision to hold RCH camps in all the districts of EAG 

States. The Committee strongly feels that these States sh ould be persuaded to take maximum benefit of this 
facility. 
Action Taken 
 The scheme of RCH camp was initiated in the year 2001 under RCH-I and feedback from most of 
the States have indicated a good re sponse from the public residing in th e remote and rural areas. However, 
it is true that in many States, camps could not be held  as per established guidelin es. This is mainly due to 
lack of managerial capacity of the State Government and lack of availability of the specialists from the 
Government or from the private sector even on paym ent of honorarium. Despite these facts, under RCH-II, 
most of the States/UTs have proposed to continue the schemes in those PHCs that are underutilized. Recent 
report received in the Department has indicated that the State of Bihar has held 134 RCH camps, 
Chhattisgarh 280 Camps, Orissa 122 camps. Jharkhand has yet to report holding of any camps. 
 To boost the managerial capability and capacity of the 8 EAG States i.e. Bihar, Jharkhand, UP, 
Uttaranchal, MP, Chhattisgarh, Orissa and Rajasthan,  Programme Management Unit at District and State 
level have been given under GOI support. For lack of sp ecialists, most of the States have indicated in their 
PIPs for taking up the training of MBBS doctors to overcome this situation. 
XI. FREE DISTRIBUTION OF CONVENTIONAL CONTRACEPTIVE AND ITS SOCIAL 
 MARKETING  
Recommendations/Observations 
11.1 Provision for Free Distribution of Conventional Contraceptives cover four items viz. Condoms, Oral 
Contraceptive Pills (OCPs), IUDs and Laparoscopes/Tubal Rings. The allocation of Rs. 95 crores under BE 
2004-05 was reduced to Rs. 91.81 crores at RE stage due to non-procurement of Laparoscopes during 2004-
05. The BE for 2005-06 has been substantially hiked to Rs. 169.97 crores due to the proposal to procure 
Laparoscopes to meet the requirements of the States. The Committee is apprehensive of the justification as 
the reduction in allocation during 2004-05 is very marginal for non-procurement of Laparoscopes whereas 
increase in the year 2005-06 is abnormally high fo r purchase of the same item. The Committee therefore 
recommends that the allocation availa ble for a specific purpose should be utilized in proper, just and 
equitable manner. 
Action Taken 
 Under Free Supply, there was a marg inal decrease of Rs. 3.19 crores in RE as compared to BE 2004-
05. The increase of Rs.78.16 crores in BE 2005-06 over RE 2004-05 has been made for meeting increased 
demand of contraceptives especially for condoms from Stat es as well as from States Aids Control Societies 
(SACS). This increase also includes Rs. 20 crores for the procurement of laparoscopes for supply to States 
as no procurement could be made during last three years and a large number of Laparoscopes in State’s 
Hospitals are reported defunct due to wear & tear. It may also be mentioned that the procurement of 
laparoscopes will be under the technical assistance of World Bank for ensuring efficiency and transparency. 
XII. ACCEPTANCE OF FAMILY PLANNING METHODS  
Recommendations/Observations 
12.2 The Committee notes that a number of remedial measures like media and vi sual publicity, Training 
of doctors and NSV and involvement of IMA in increa sing awareness among private doctors in this regard, 
have been initiated by the Departme nt during 2004-05. The Committee also observes that on the basis of 
inputs received from EAG States, the compensation  package for undergoing Tubectomy, Vasectomy and 
IUD insertion has been revised from 2003-04. The Comm ittee hopes that with these measures there would 
be an increase in the acceptance level of male acceptance of family planning methods. 
Action Taken 
 As per the information received, after adoption of revised norms for EAG States, the acceptors of 
sterilization in the EAG States are given in the Table below. The acceptors of vasectomy in these States are 
also given in the Table. All the States except Jharkhand and Uttaranchal have shown increase in the 
acceptance of vasectomy. 
     

State Sterilization # Vasectomy # 
 2004-05 2003-04 2004-05 2003-04 
Bihar 86,948 120,899 911 478 
Chhattisgarh 124,478 115,848 3,788 3,242 
Jharkhand 30,326* 48,960 140* 326 
Madhya Pradesh 368,639 353,646 14,850 7,052 
Orissa 99,672 90,723 1,355 1,232 
Rajasthan 333,660 300,138 8,659 1,769 
Uttar Pradesh 503,596 483,141 10,000 5,276 
Uttaranchal 34,799 31,200 1,718 1,900 
# Provisional.               * Up to February 2005. 
XIII. ACTIVITIES IN NORTH-EAST REGION  
Recommendations/Observations 
13.2 The Committee has been given to understand that  with the launching of National Rural Health 
Mission, a Steering Committee has been set up in th e Department which will also be responsible for 
implementation of family welfare Programmes in the NE Region. An officer in the Department has been 
specifically deputed for this purpose. The Committee was also informed that budget provision for NE States 
for 2005-06 has been enhanced by 30 %. The Secretary assured the Committ ee that with these initiatives, 
there would be proper focus on this remote and inaccessible area. 
Action Taken 
 As part of NRHM, a Steering Committee has been set up to review the progress of work. A Joint 
Secretary level officer has been made in-charge of North East Region and support at Deputy Secretary level 
has also been provided. 

CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.5 Committee is not fully convinced by the contention of the Department that SRS, RGI have estimated 
the MMR for the country as 407 per 100,000 live births in 1998 which is the same period when NFHS-II 
have estimated the MMR as 540 per 100,000 live births. The fact remains that there are some problem areas 
in data collection. No availability of reliable estimates of maternal mortality has been admitted by the 
Department also in its Annual Report (2004-05). The Committee notes that an expert group has been 
constituted in the Department which is looking into the modalities of carrying out a survey for collection of 
data on maternal mortality. A pilot survey for this ha s already been completed. Similar problems may be 
there in respect of other health indicators also. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the Department 
should carry out a comparative analysis of findings of NFHS-I and NFHS-II in order to understand the 
factors responsible for discrepancies in the two Survey Reports. The Committee would also like to 
emphasize that the entire Family Welfare planning is based on the National Surveys being conducted at 
regular intervals. Therefore, it should be ensured that accurate data is ma de the basis of all health surveys. 
This can be achieved to a large extent by monitoring of data being obtained specially from the States not 
performing well by involving Central teams also in the collection of data, to the extent possible. 
Action Taken 
 NFHS-I & II estimates are widely accepted at al l levels both in the country and internationally 
among policy makers. Reason for wide variation in MMR estimated from SRS and NFHS is large sampling 
variations due to inadequate sample size. With regard to  role of Centre in collection of data, it is clarified 
that despite routine performance reports sent by State/UT Governments, the Ministry also undertake 
evaluation surveys through independent professional agencies in the field of health and family welfare 
sector. Besides, there are regional evaluation teams located in the offi ces of Regional Directors, who 
undertake regular sample ve rification of health care delivery system and various records maintained by 
ANMs. At present there are seven Regional Evaluation  Teams (RETs) located at Delhi, Lucknow, Patna, 
Bangalore, Chennai, Bhopal and Kolkata functioning for sample verification of fa mily welfare acceptors, 
both qualitative and quantitative, in the various districts of States/UTs. Findings of these teams are 
regularly communicated to the State Governments and district authorities for taking necessary action. The 
comparative findings of NFHS-I & II in respect of key indicators is given below: 
Key Indicators- All India 
Indicators  NFHS-I NFHS-II 
1 2 3 
Neo-Natal Mortality 48.6 43.4 
Infant Mortality Rate 78.5 67.6 
Child Mortality Rate 33.4 29.3 
Contribution of Higher Order Birth (3 & above) 48.6 45.2 
% of mothers received ANC 62.3 65.4 
% currently using any method: 40.6 48.2 
 (a) Sterilization 30.8 36.1 
 (b) Spacing method 5.5 6.8 
 (c) Traditional methods 4.3 5.3 

% of children fully vaccinated : 35.4 42.0 
 (a) B.C.G. 62.2 71.6 
 (b) D.P.T. 3 51.7 55.0 
 (c) Polio 3 53.4 63.0 
 (d) Measles 42.2 51.0 
Institutional Delivery (%) 25.5 33.6 
Safe Delivery (%) 34.2 42.3 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is not inclined to fully accept the clarification given by the Department. The 
Committee’s attention has been drawn by a World Bank study ‘Country Strategy for India- 
September, 2004’ which has raised doubts about the reliability of Maternal Mortality Rates (MMR). 
Annual Report of the Department for 2004-05 also accepts this fact. The Committee had noted that 
an expert group constituted in the Department is looking into the modalities for carrying out a survey 
for collection of data on maternal mortality. The Committee hopes that the expert group may have 
given its report. The Committee would like to be apprised about the factual position in the matter. 
II. TENTH FIVE-YEAR PLAN - MID TERM APPRAISAL  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.5 The Committee is constrained to observe that the expected levels of some of the indicators by the 
terminal year of the Tenth Plan are very high when compared with the actual achievement level reached by 
the end of Ninth Plan, i.e. 2002. The Committee feels that the percentage of performance reached at the end 
of the Ninth Plan was virtually the same in respect of  these indicators. The Comm ittee is, therefore, of the 
view that the immediate goal of the Department/State  Government/implementing agencies should be put to 
a sustained exercise in motion where under the weakest performing districts (State-wise) are identified and 
targeted interventions are initiated, accompanied by regular monitoring. 
Action Taken 
 The National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) has been  launched for the whole country with a special 
focus on 18 socio-demographically weaker States and having weak primary health infrastructure with the 
objectives to provide comprehensive integrated hea lthcare services upto grassroot level specially for the 
rural poor. These include 8 EAG States (Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal), 8 North-East States (Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura), and the States of Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal 
Pradesh. Under the NRHM, District Action Plans are also being prepared. The goals in terms of health care 
indicators have been fixed for the period 2005-2012 on yearly basis with the ultimate objective of achieving 
population stabilization that are given below:— 
Year TFR IMR MMR Raising 2000+  
CHCs to IPHS 
Engaging 
2.5 lakhs 
ASHAs 
2005 2.6 58 300 15% 15% 
2006 2.5 50 250 15% 30% 
2007 2.4 45 200 20% 40% 
2008 2.3 36 150 20% 15% 

2009 2.2 33 112 10%  
2010 2.1 30 100 10%  
2011 2.1 30 100 10%  
2012 2.1 30 100   
ASHAs - Accredited Social Health Activists 
 The funds are being released for the following activities to achieve the pre-targeted goals: 
 1. Untied funds @ Rs. 10,000 per Sub-Centre per annum. 
 2. Upgradation of 2000+ CHCs to Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) @ Rs.40 lakhs per 
district. 
 3. Availability of trained community level worker at village level with a drug kit for generic 
ailments. 
 4. Providing mobile medical units at district level to make available healthcare facilities to 
population, specially the women and children, in inaccessible areas. 
 5. Main streaming the practitioners of Indian System of Medicine (AYUSH). 
 The Ministry is in the process of developing a systematic integrated monitoring system in order to 
achieve the targets as per the time limits indicated un der the NRHM. It is expected that with the increased 
year-wise allocations for the Mission period for the health  sector, the Government will be in a position to 
achieve the targets in terms of health indicators. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee notes that the National Rural Health Mission has been launched in the country 
with a special focus on 18 socio-demographically weaker States. The goals in terms of health care 
indicators have been fixed for the period 2005-2012 on yearly basis. While appreciating that district 
specific action is envisaged under NRHM, the Commit tee feels that target achievement would not be 
a simple task in view of very low status of child health in some States. This area of concern also finds 
a place in the Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Plan as indicated below:— 
Infant and New Natal Mortality Rates (Per 1000 live birth) 
Year Bihar M.P. U.P. Orissa 
2000 (IMR) 62 87 83 95 
2002 (IMR) 61 85 80 87 
2002 (NMR) 37 57 47 53 
 The Committee is of the view that success of Na tional Rural Health Mission lies in significant 
improvement in health status of both mother and child in bad performing States. The Committee, 
however, is constrained to observe that the Depa rtment is still in the process of developing a 
systematic integrated monitoring  system for NHRM. The Committee would like to point out that 
constant monitoring at all levels  by a dedicated team alone can bring about a change in the present 
discouraging scenario. This can only be achieved if an element of accountability is also included in 
the programme. 
III. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
Recommendations/Observations 
3.2 The Committee notes that the a pproved outlay for the Tenth Plan stands as Rs. 26,126 crores which 
is almost double the Ninth Plan allocation. The Comm ittee is, however, constrained to note that position 
has remained virtually the same in the first three year s of the Tenth Plan as evident during the Ninth Plan. 

Allocated funds continued to be reduced at the RE stage and even those reduced funds remained under-
utilized:— 
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 
BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE- 
provisional 
4930.00 4150.00 3916.00 4930.00 4700.00 4409.27 5780.00 5500.00 5300.00 
Action Taken 
 The reduction at the RE stage is due to the fact that the expenditur e upto September of that year is 
always significantly less than the required 50% of budget allocation. Factors attributable to this less 
expenditure are (i) non-availability of the utilization certificates of the releases made in the previous year in 
the first half of the year that results in less releases , and (ii) booking of the expenditure on procurement of 
vaccines, contraceptives, equipments, etc. is made only  after receiving the confir mation that supplies have 
reached the consignees. Though substantial expenditure on procurement is incurred during first two 
quarters but its booking is possible only during the third/fourth quarters. This pulls down the expenditure 
during the first two quarters and hence the reduction at RE stage. 
 The reason for underutilization of funds provided at RE stage is less expenditure in NE Region than 
the mandatory requirement of spending 10% of the allocation. The norm based funding of different 
Schemes of the Department restricts the expenditure of the Department in NE Region to significantly less 
than the target. If the expenditur e in the NE Region is excluded fro m the total expenditure, then the 
expenditure of the Department with respect to RE is  97.50%, 99.26% and 98.17% (provisional) during the 
years 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively as per the following table: 
(Rs. in crores)
 
For NE Region For Other than NE Region Total Year 
BE RE Expdt. BE RE Expdt. % of 
Expdt. 
to RE 
BE RE Expdt. 
2002-03 493.00 415.00 275.07 4437.00 3735.00 3641.56 97.50 4930.00 4150.00 3916.63 
2003-04 493.00 470.00 210.58 4437.00 4230.00 4198.69 99.26 4930.00 4700.00 4409.27 
2004-05 578.00 530.00 201.01 5202.00 4770.00 4682.90 98.17 5780.00 5300.00 4883.91* 
* The figures are provisional. 
 During the current year  2005-06, special focus has been made for improving the primary healthcare 
infrastructure in NE Region under NRHM and it is ex pected that the whole allocation for the NE Region 
will be utilized. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee expresses its serious concern over  the justification given by the Department for 
reduction of allocated funds at the Revised Estimates stage and those reduced funds remaining under 
utilized. The Committee observes that non-availability of utilization certificates due from user states 
and bookings of various items only after confirma tion of their reaching th e consignees have been 
cited as the two main factors. The Committee strongly feels that these procedural problems can easily 
be resolved if a sincere effort is made. Regular monitoring at all levels and streamlining of accounting 
procedure can be the simple remedies. 
 The Committee is more concerned with the reason  given for under-utilization of funds already 
reduced at the RE stage. NE Region has been held re sponsible for such a situation. The Committee would, 
however, like to point out that NE Region comprises of States which are located in the remotest corner of 
the country and are having very unsatisfactory health indictors when compared wi th the national average. 

The Committee feels that urgent action needs to be taken for improving the less than 50 per cent utilization 
position of allocated funds, already reduced at the RE  stage. The Department has admitted that the norm 
based funding of different schemes re stricts the expenditure in NE Region to significantly less than the 
target. The Committee is of the view that norms need to be made State specific keeping in view their 
special requirements specially for backward population and inaccessible areas. 
Recommendations/Observations 
3.3 The Committee is not hopeful about full utili zation of allocated funds in 2004-05. The Committee 
expresses its serious concern over the element of unspe nt balances available under majority of the schemes 
during the first three years of the Tenth Plan. The very fact that unspent balances continue to be available 
from year to year under any scheme can lead to only two conclusions. Either the projected allocation has 
not been based on a scientific assessment or failure of  the implementing agencies  in reaching the targeted 
beneficiaries. Both the situations  need serious review/rethinking of implementation process of such 
schemes. The Committee would, accordingly, impress up on the Department to take remedial measures in 
the matter. 
Action Taken 
 The unspent balance available with the State Governments underline the need for better ownership of 
programmes for which funds are released by the Government of India and for professional management and 
accounting of funds. Under the paradigm adopted under NRHM/RCH-II, financial envelopes have been 
conveyed to State Governments within which they can plan the activities for attainment of goals. It is hoped 
that such decentralization of pla nning and management of funds woul d result in increased ownership of 
programmes at State level. 
 The expected outlay of the State for Health and Family Welfare has been conveyed in April 2005 to 
ensure predictability of funds and enable better plan ning for the same. Up to 6 per cent funds under RCH 
State Programme Implementation Plans are being provided towards management cost. In EAG States, the 
Government of India has assisted in creation of State and District Programme Management Unit through 
contractual engagement of skilled professionals like MBA, CA, MIS Specialist etc. The States have also 
been assisted in the process of recruiting manpower for such posts. Additionally, the system of e-banking is 
proposed to be piloted in six States for improved tracking and accountability of funds. Nodal Officers in the 
rank of Joint Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India have been 
identified for the States to oversee and guide in better implementation of programmes. It is hoped that these 
remedial measures will lead to better utilization of funds. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee notes that a number of measures have been initiated by the Department under 
NRHM for elimination of unspent balances lying with different states. Th e Committee appreciates 
the streamlining of existing accounting  procedure. The Committee hopes that with the nodal officers 
in place things would improve and result in both better utilization of funds and implementation of 
schemes. 
Recommendations/Observations 
4.4 Objectives of the Mission are laudable and are very much required in th e present scenario. The 
Committee observes that divergent activities not only of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, but 
also number of other Ministries are proposed to be implemented in an integrated manner. Two Departments 
of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have been integrated for optimum utilisation of financial 
resources and manpower. The Committee, however, has a word of caution in this regard. Both the 
Departments as separate entities were already impl ementing large number of schemes and supervising 
institutions falling under their respective jurisdiction. Not only this, quite a few programmes under both the 
Departments were not being administered effectively due to a very weak monitoring mechanism relying 
only on state figures. The Committee feels that with th e convergence of a number of Health and Family 
Welfare schemes under NRHM, effective monitoring may not be feasible. The Committee, would, 

therefore, emphasize that dilution of services at present available separately under the two Departments 
must be avoided at all costs. 
Action Taken 
 The National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) has been constituted with the objective of providing 
comprehensive healthcare facilities for the entire co untry with special focus on 18 States with weak 
demographic indicators and infrastructure, through Public Health Infrastructure by upgrading the same to 
the Indian Public Health Standard (IPHS) and also to provide Health Management Samiti in CHCs/District 
Hospitals to ensure quality services and transparency. 
 The aim of the Mission is to undertake architectural  correction of the Health  System, to enable it to 
effectively handle increased allocations as promis ed under the NCMP. The decentralization of the 
programme to district levels woul d provide greater opportunities for in tersectorality, enabling effective 
utilization of resources through integration and convergence. The District level planning would help 
mobilize large number of stakeholders for improving Public Health facilities at the grass root level. Further, 
the Mission aims at bridging gaps in rural healthcare provisioning by creating a provider in each village and 
providing improved hospital care. Overall, the Mission aims at providing accessible,  affordable, effective, 
accountable and reliable health care to all citizens and in  particular, to the poorer and vulnerable sections of 
the population. 
 To achieve these objectives, it was decided to  merge some of the ongoing programmes of the 
Department of Health & Family Welfare in the States  to have better monitoring, utilization of funds and 
better service providing. The c onvergence of Health and Family Welfare Programmes under NRHM will 
bring consolidated efforts in the Health care servi ce facilities with larger coordination. New posts of 
Additional Secretary, Joint Secretary and Director have been created for the Mission. An officer of the rank 
of Additional Secretary has been appointed as the Mission Director. This would enable proper coordination 
among the programmes subsumed under NRHM within the Department of Health & Family Welfare. Such 
convergence of the two departments was much needed  to rationalize and optimize funds, manpower, MIS, 
training and BCC strategies under the different programmes of HFW. However, the observations of the 
Committee have been noted for compliance. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee finds that to achieve better results under NRHM, some of the ongoing 
programmes of the Department of Health & Family  Welfare in the States have been merged. The 
main idea behind such a move is to have better monitoring, utilization of funds and better service 
providing. New posts have been created. The Committee, however, reiterates its earlier observation 
made in this regard. An effectiv e monitoring mechanism with an in built system of having required 
follow up action should be the most crucial comp onent under NRHM. This is all the more required 
due to convergence of the two Departments. 
V. RURAL FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES 
Recommendations/Observations 
5.6 The Committee would like to be apprised of ex act number of Sub-Centres established (State-wise) 
during the, first three years of Tenth Plan. 
Action Taken 
 As per 1991 population, the shortfall in the number of Sub-Centres was to the tune of 8669. Out of 
these 8669, targets were given to 15 States/UTs. Ag ainst these targets, as per the latest information 
available, a total of 2909 Sub-Centres have been established in eight States namely, Haryana, Maharashtra, 
Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttaranchal, West Bengal and Dadra & Nagar Haveli. The State-wise 
position of these Sub-Centres is at Annexure-I. 
Comments of the Committee 

 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the dismal achievement made by majority of 
States in establishing new Sub-centres during the Tenth Plan. Against a target of 8669 Sub-centres, 
only 2909 Sub-centres could be set up so far. Raja sthan, Nagaland, Punjab and West Bengal are the 
only States which have succeeded in achieving their targets. In contrast, in respect of States like 
Bihar and Chhattisgarh, details of Sub-centres set up are not available with the Government 
although fourth year of the Tenth Plan is nearing its end. Similarly, Meghalaya, Orissa, Tripura, U.P. 
and Delhi have failed to set up even a single Sub- centre. Same is the status  of Maharastra which has 
taken almost four years to set up only two Su b-centres against a target of 808 Sub-centres. The 
Committee fails to comprehend the constraints faced by these States in spite of Central assistance 
available for setting up of Sub-centres, at a hi gher level for EAG and NE  States. The Committee 
hopes that under the National Rural Health Mission, all such crucial aspects will be fully taken care 
of. 
Recommendations/Observations 
5.8 The Committee is surprised to note that some St ates have already established PHCs in excess of the 
prescribed norms. There are also States where shortf all in the number of PHCs is evident. Against a 
population norm of 30,000 per PHC, average rural population (2001) per PHC is 45,095 in Bihar, 37,169 in 
Madhya Pradesh, 36,348 in Tripura, 36,169 in U.P., 49,231 in West Bengal and 1,18,090 in Delhi. The 
Committee is not convin ced by the clarifications of the Departme nt that the target for establishment of 
PHCs is given by the Planning Commission to the respec tive States/UTs and it is the responsibility of the 
States/UTs to establish them. The Committee strongly feels that with funds provided under PMGY scheme, 
it is the responsibility of the Department to monitor the establishment of PHCs. 
Action Taken 
 The Planning Commission fixes the targets for the establishment of new Sub-centres/ PHCs/CHCs 
and provides funds for this purpose in the States’ A nnual Health Sector Plans under Primary health care. 
The achievement of these targets is monitored in the Working Group on Health under the Chairmanship of 
Principal Adviser (Health), Planning Commission while discussing the States’ annual health sector plan 
proposals. The Commission, while discussing the Health Plans of the States, also earmarks the funds under 
PMGY. As per the guidelines issued by the Planning Commission, the funds under PMGY are to be utilized 
for procurement of consumables such as reagents, X-ray films, repair of equipments, etc. and for repair, 
maintenance of infrastructure at PHCs/CHCs (water su pply, adequate toilet faci lities, hospital infection 
control and waste management). PMGY funds are not to be utilized for establishment of new infrastructure. 
The Commission also monitors the utilization of funds under PMGY. The Department of FW provides 
funds for strengthening the infrastructural facilities at PHCs/CHCs under the Schemes RCH Flexible Pool, 
and Procurement of Drugs and Equipments. 
 As per the 2001 population norm, 4436 PHCs are ne eded to be established in the country as on 
September, 2004. The State-wise position in respect of PHCs is at Annexure-II. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee observes that as on Septemb er, 2004 (as per 2001 population), there is a 
shortfall of 4436 PHCs spread over in different St ates in the country. The Committee would like to 
point out that the overall figures reveal very dist urbing trends. States like Arunachal Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Karnataka, Kerala, Mani pur, Mizoram, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil 
Nadu, A&N Islands and Pondicherry have excess number of PHCs. In contrast, States like Bihar, UP 
and West Bengal are yet to establish a large numbe r of PHCs. Such a situation clearly indicates that 
norms for setting up of PHCs are not being strictly  adhered to by the States. In spite of Central 
assistance being provided both fo r establishment of PHCs and provisions of required infrastructure 
and maintenance some States seem to  have failed to take benefit of such assistance. The Department 
should make concerted efforts in getting the required PHCs established in States. 
 The Committee also strongly f eels that there is a need for review of the scheme of health 
centres in rural areas, by having a more flexible approach. 

Recommendations/Observations 
5.9 The Committee finds that the same problem is th ere with regard to CHCs also. Arunachal Pradesh, 
U.P., Mizoram, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep and Pondicherry have excess infrastructure in 
terms of CHCs. Capital cost of one CHC is Rs. 80.50 lakhs with a recurr ing liability of Rs. 27.00 lakhs is 
met by the State Governments. under the PMGY progr amme. The Committee is of the opinion that in view 
of the non-adherence to the prescribed population norms , whether short or excess by majority of the States, 
it is time that a review of the existing population norms are looked into by the Department. 
Action Taken 
 As per 2001 population norm, 3332 more CHCs are needed to be established in the Country as on 
September 2004. The State-wise position in respect of CHCs is at Annexure-III. 
 Regarding review of existing population norms,  the issue will be taken up with the Planning 
Commission which had fixed these norms during the Sixth Plan. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee views with seriou s concern the low achievement level of setting up of CHCs in 
different States in the country. The Committee has been  informed that the issue of review of existing 
population norms will be taken up with the Plan ning Commission. The Co mmittee would emphasize 
that the Department should pursue this matter with the Planning Commission so that population 
norms for setting up of CHCs are revised without any further delay. The Committee is disturbed by 
the fact that even those States whose track record about setting up of Sub-centres and PHCs has been 
very good, even having excess number of Centres, ha ve shown a dismal performance level of setting 
up CHCs. The very purpose of having the required /excess number of Sub-centres and PHCs gets 
defeated if the required number of CHCs are not th ere to take care of referral cases from smaller 
centres. 
Recommendations/Observations 
5.11 The Committee understands that the Report of the NCAER study is at present under the 
consideration of the Department. The Committee woul d like to emphasize that the Department should 
initiate action at the earliest for strengthening the f unctioning of Sub-centres, PHCs and CHCs, the only 
service providers to the targeted beneficiaries in th e remote and inaccessible areas in the country. A 
beginning can be made with the fourteen states where the sample study was conducted by NCAER. The 
Committee would also like to emphasize that a similar st udy is also required to be undertaken with regard 
to the functionaries of both PHCs and CHCs which are also the main service providers like Sub-Centres. 
Action Taken 
 The State-wise Reports presented by NCAER on “Evaluation of functioning of Sub-centres” are 
being forwarded to concerned States for taking appropriate action on the same. 
 Under National Rural Health Missi on, the Sub-centres are proposed to be strengthened by providing 
untied funds for local action @ Rs. 10,000 per annum, supply of essential drugs, both Allopathic and 
AYUSH, to the Sub-centres. Mission is to strengthen  PHCs for quality preventive, promotive, curative, 
supervisory and outreach services th rough adequate and regular supply  of essential quality drugs and 
equipments to PHCs, provision of 24 hours service in at least 50 per cent PHCs by addressing shortage of 
doctors, especially in high focus States, through mainstreaming AYUSH manpower, observance of 
Standard treatment guidelines and protocols. A key strategy of the Mission is operationalising 3222 existing 
CHCs (30-50 beds) as 24 hours First Referral Units, in cluding posting of anesthetists. It also proposes to 
codify new Indian Public Health Standards, promotion of Stakeholder Committees for hospital 
management, developing standards of services and co sts in hospital care and developing, displaying and 
ensuring compliance to Citizens Charter at CHC/PHC leve l. Similar studies, like the study undertaken for 
Sub-Centres, are also being planned for PHCs and CHCs. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee had drawn the attention of th e Department towards the findings of an 
evaluation study of 1040 Sub-Centres covering 300 districts of 14 major states conducted by NCAER 

submitted on the 22nd November, 2004. The Committee is surprised to note that even after one year of 
submission of evaluation study recommendations, the same are still in the process of being forwarded 
to the concerned states. The Committee emphasizes that the Department should pursue with the 
State Govts. the required follow-up action in the light of NCAER evaluation study without any 
further delay. There is an urgent need for conducting similar evaluation studies of PHCs and CHCs 
at the earliest, specially in view of the fact th at National Rural Health Mission has already been 
launched. 
Recommendations/Observations 
5.12 The Committee would like to point out that demo graphically weak states have higher birth rate and 
Infant Mortality Rate. The workload of ANMs in thes e states is thus higher. The Committee, therefore, 
feels that in such states, sanction ing of ANMs should be based on existing norms as per 2001 population. 
At the same time, the Department should also closely monitor the filling up of all the sanctioned posts of 
ANMs. 
Action Taken 
 As on September 2004, the number of ANMs in position in the Country is 138,906 against the 
sanctioned posts of 146,852. The statement indicating State-wise position of ANMs, both sanctioned and in 
position, is at Annexure-IV. 
 RCH Programme, additional ANMs on contractua l basis are provided to the States, wherever 
needed. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee views with serious concern th e shortfall of 11,191 posts of ANMs in the 
country. ANM is an important functionary in Health Care delivery system at local level and therefore 
such a high shortfall of ANMs will adversely affect the system of health care in rural and inaccessible 
areas. The Committee fails to comprehend the reasons for non-availability of records regarding 
ANMs in the case of Bihar and Jharkhand. The Committee would like to know about the criteria for 
release of Central Funds for salary of ANMs to states. 
 The Committee recommends that the matter of sh ortfall in the posts of ANMs both which have 
not yet been sanctioned and also sanctioned posts yet to be filled up should be taken up with the 
concerned State Govts. so that work in demographica lly weaker states as well as in the other states 
progresses at a faster pace. 
VII. REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROGRAMME (RCH)  
Recommendations/Observations 
7.6 In its Second Report presented to the Parliament on 26
th August, 2004, the Committee had expressed 
its serious concern over the availabi lity of unspent balances amounting to Rs. 912.80 crores with different 
states against the total allocation of Rs.2217.00 cror es under RCH Programme since its inception in 1997-
98. In response thereto, the Department in its Action Taken Note have informed that unspent balances stand 
reduced to Rs. 809.26 crores from Rs.912.80 crores wh ereas the actual unspent balances were even less. 
The Committee is not inclined to accept this feedba ck for the simple reason that as per the latest 
information given by the Department itself, against a total allocation of Rs. 2461.57 crores, utilization 
figures are Rs. 1638.49 crores and unspent balances ar e Rs. 823.07 crores. This clearly indicates that the 
funds are being released under the RCH Programme on re gular basis, availability of unspent balances with 
States making no difference. Position with regard  to a few States found alarming last year by the 
Committee, continues to be the same as indicated below:- 
(Rs. in crores) 
State Grants released Amount utilized Balance 
Bihar 174.38 93.64 80.74 
Jharkhand 32.68 7.12 25.56 
Gujarat 185.87 85.37 100.44 

Madhya Pradesh 153.40 110.31 43.09 
Chhattisgarh 33.63 26.62 7.00 
Maharashtra 140.97 97.27 43.69 
Orissa 87.49 46.04 41.44 
Rajasthan 172.51 97.73 74.78 
Uttar Pradesh 495.68 350.76 145.41 
West Bengal 135.64 95.78 40.38 
 The Committee is also perturbed to note that in respect of some states, qu antum of unspent balance 
being more than the funds utilized by them clearly in dicates their failure to take benefit of such a vital 
scheme of family welfare. What is more worrisome is that all these States/UTs with the exception of one or 
two are very small having a tribal population, where the need of this programme is the most: 
(Rs. in crores) 
State Grants released Amount utilized Balance 
Jharkhand 32.68 7.12 25.56 
Gujarat 185.81 85.37 100.44 
A & N Islands 3.57 1.70 1.86 
Chandigarh 3.60 1.56 2.03 
Daman & Diu 2.54 0.77 1.76 
Lakshadweep 2.38 0.69 1.68 
Action Taken 
 The Ministry is making determined efforts to obta in Utilization Certificates from the States/UTs in 
respect of funds released during the preceding years.  To this end, besides re minders through letters, 
regional workshops have also been organized and detailed discussions have been held with representatives 
of the States/UTs on the subject at the time of a ppraisal of their respective Programme Implementation 
Plans for the second phase of the prog ramme. It is also expected that in the future, the offtake under the 
programme will improve due to introduction of decentralized need base d planning, programme 
management capacity building at the State and Dist rict levels and introduction of new monitoring and 
evaluation mechanisms. It is further proposed to obta in refund or adjust unspent balances lying with the 
States/UTs while making releases under the second phase of the RCH programme. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee takes note of number of initiatives being taken by the Department for elimination of 
unspent balances with the states and procurement of u tilization certificates from the concerned State Govts. 
The Committee is, however, not convinced by the pr oposed method of the Department of obtaining 
refund/adjusting unspent balances agai nst the subsequent withdrawal. Such  a move will be directly against 
the set goals, thus defeating the very  objectives of the programme. Desired action would be to motivate the 
states to utilize the allocated funds as per the Action Plan. 
Recommendations/Observations 
7.11 A comparative analysis of funds released a nd achievement level of physical targets of these 
interventions present a very discouraging position. Ag ainst an allocation of Rs. 109.88 crores under ANM 
scheme, only 6335 ANMs were given contractual appointm ent. Similarly, for PHN/Staff Nurse, against an 
allocation of Rs. 31.04 crores, only 1467 PHNs could be given contractual appointment. Allocation for Lab 
Technicians stands at Rs. 8.37 crores, number of cont ractual Lab Technician is only 381. Similarly, for 

hiring of SM consultant, against an allocation of Rs . 3.61 crores, only 1054 Consultants were appointed. 
For hiring of private Anaesthetists, Rs.83.73 lakhs have been provided and number of Anaesthetists hired is 
only 1059. In a number of interventions, although  funds have been duly re leased not even a single 
contractual appointment seems to have been made in th e States of Bihar, Jharkhand, Tripura, Uttaranchal, 
Karnataka. In the case of other States also, level of physical achievement is very poor when compared with 
the quantum of funds released. 
Recommendations/Observations 
7.12 Non-availability of sufficiently qualified manpower in the states is the main reason cited for non-
achievement of contractual appointments of ANMs/PHNs/SNs/Lab Technicians. Sufficient number of 
Anaesthetists in the private sector is  not available at sub-district level. Honorarium of Rs. 800/- per visit 
was not found adequate enough to motivate Safe Motherhood Consultants being mainly lady doctors to 
travel to remote areas. The Committee feels that all th ese interventions that would continue to be available 
under the flexible RCH pool will have  to be revamped in view of th e ground realities. Not only this, 
practice of funds being released without showing any achievement needs a review in view of non-
utilization of such Govt. funds for considerable period. 
Action Taken 
 Under RCH-I, for contractual ap pointments of Addl. ANMs, PHNs/SNs and Lab Technicians, grants 
have been released to the States/UTs on a yearly basis for a specified number of staff worked out as per the 
RCH guideline. As such, the States can make appointmen t every year only within the limit prescribed by 
the Govt. of India and this is the reason for showing fixed number of appointments although the fund 
released has been indicated on the cumulative basis since the inception of Programme. 
 The non-availability of sufficie nt numbers of Anaesthetists and Gynaecologists in most of the 
States/UTs is major hindrance in the smooth implementation of the two schemes. Under RCH-II, most of 
the States, in their Project Implementation Plans (PIPs) , have proposed to implement the schemes either by 
conducting a short training programme for the MBBS doctors or by paying fixed honorarium on a monthly 
basis. 
Comments of the Committee 
 Committee’s attention has been drawn by a number of interventions like cont ractual appointment of 
ANMs, Public Health/Staff Nurse/Lab Technicians an d hiring of Private Anesthetists/ Gynaecologists 
under RCH phase-I. The Committee had commented abou t low level of such appointments by different 
states in spite of considerable central funds being released therefor. The Committee has now been given to 
understand that whereas details of appo intments have been on yearly basi s, details of funds released were 
on cumulative basis. The Committee is not happ y with the kind of information submitted by the 
Department which has resulted in confusion. The Comm ittee would like to be apprised about the details of 
funds released and appointments made under the interv entions of RCH phase-I for the first three years of 
Tenth Plan (year wise). The Committee would also like to point out that amount of honorarium/contractual 
salary for different categories also needs to be reviewed so as to attract the required medical personnel. 
XV. ANNUAL REVIEW REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT FOR 2003-04  
Recommendations/Observations 
15.2  The Committee views with serious concern the irregularities in Annual Review Report 2003-04 of 
the Department. The Committee strongly feels that irre gular charging of States’ General side Expenditure 
to the Family Welfare Budget is a very disturbing trend as it has been happening for years. As per the 
information made available to the Committee, amount transferred to Personal Deposit Account is Rs. 1.25 
crores and amount involved due to irregular charging  of States’ General side Expenditure is Rs. 24.50 
crores and the States involved are U.P., Punjab, Haryana, Uttaranchal and UT of Chandigarh. The 
Committee is of the view that the Department shoul d pursue with the concer ned States for corrective 
measures so as to avoid occurrence of such irregularities in future. 

Action Taken 
 The Central Internal Audit Party (CIAP), after doin g the inspection, sends its report to the concerned 
States/UTs with the details of irregularities observed and requests the States/UTs for its compliance so as to 
avoid its recurrence in future. Howe ver, the States/UTs do not respond in the matter and no compliance 
report is received. The Department  has viewed it seriously and the matter is being taken up with the 
concerned States/UTs for its compliance. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee takes serious note about lack of re sponse from States/UTs regarding the inspection 
report of the Central Internal Audit Party (CIAP) mentioning irregularities observed by it. The Committee 
believes such a practice continues because of impr oper accountability measures currently in vogue. The 
Committee is of the view that in such cases, the Department should pursue at the highest level. The 
Committee feels that the Department should devise ad equate measures to increase the accountability of 
states in the wake of which defaulting States/UTs could be asked for compliance. 

CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-NIL- 

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee is not inclined to fully accept the clarification given by the Department. The 
Committee’s attention has been drawn by a World Bank study ’Country Strategy for India- 
September, 2004' which has raised doubts about th e reliability of Maternal Mortality Rates (MMR)). 
Annual Report of the Department for 2004-05 also accepts this fact. The Committee had noted that 
an expert group constituted in the Department is looking into the modalities for carrying out a survey 
for collection of data on maternal mortality. The Committee hopes that the expert group may have 
given its report. The Committee would like to be apprised about the factual position in the matter. 
  (Para 1.5) 
II. TENTH FIVE-YEAR PLAN - MID TERM APPRAISAL 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee notes that the National Rural Health Mission has been launched in the country 
with a special focus on 18 socio-demographically we aker states. The goals in terms of health care 
indicators have been fixed for the period 2005-2012 on yearly basis. While appreciating that district 
specific action is envisaged under NRHM, the Commit tee feels that target achievement would not be 
a simple task in view of very low status of child he alth in some states. This area of concern also finds 
a place in the Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Plan as indicated below: - 
Infant and New Natal Mortality Rates (Per 1000 live birth) 
Year Bihar M.P. U.P. Orissa 
2000 (IMR) 62 87 83 95 
2002 (IMR) 61 85 80 87 
2002 (NMR) 37 57 47 53  
 The Committee is of the view that success of National Rural Health Mission lies in significant 
improvement in health status of both mother a nd child in bad performing states. The Committee, 
however, is constrained to observe that the Depa rtment is still in the process of developing a 
systematic integrated monitoring  system for NHRM. The Committee would like to point out that 
constant monitoring at all levels  by a dedicated team alone can bring about a change in the present 
discouraging scenario. This can only be achieved if an element of accountability is also included in 
the programme. (Para 2.5) 
III.  BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee expresses its serious concern over  the justification given by the Department for 
reduction of allocated funds at the Revised Estimates stage and those reduced funds remaining under 
utilized. The Committee observes that non-availability of utilization certificates due from user states 
and bookings of various items only after confirma tion of their reaching th e consignees have been 
cited as the two main factors. The Committee strongly feels that these procedural problems can easily 
be resolved if a sincere effort is made. Regular monitoring at all levels and streamlining of accounting 
procedure can be the simple remedies. 
 The Committee is more concerned with the reason  given for under-utilization of funds already 
reduced at the RE stage. NE Region has been held responsible for such a situation. The Committee 
would, however, like to point out that NE Region comprises of states which are located in the 
remotest corner of the country and are having very  unsatisfactory health indictors when compared 
with the national average. The Co mmittee feels that urgent action needs to be taken for improving 
the less than 50% utilization position of allocated funds, already reduced at the RE stage. The 

Department has admitted that the norm based fund ing of different schemes restricts the expenditure 
in NE Region to significantly less than the target. The Committee is of the view that norms need to be 
made State specific keeping in view their special requirements specially for backward population and 
inaccessible areas. (Para 3.2) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee notes that a number of measures have been initiated by the Department under 
NRHM for elimination of unspent balances lying with different states. Th e Committee appreciates 
the streamlining of existing accounting procedure. The Committee hopes that with the nodal officers 
in place things would improve and result in both better utilization of funds and implementation of 
schemes. (Para 3.3) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee finds that to achieve better results under NRHM, some of the ongoing 
programmes of the Department of Health & Family Welfare in the states have been merged. The 
main idea behind such a move is to have better monitoring, utilization of funds and better service 
providing. New posts have been created. The Committee, however, reiterates its earlier observation 
made in this regard. An effect ive monitoring mechan ism with an inbuilt system of having 
required follow up action should be the most cruc ial component under NRHM. This is all the more 
required due to convergence of the two Departments. (Para 4.4) 
V. RURAL FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the dismal achievement made by majority of 
states in establishing new Sub-centres during the Te nth Plan. Against a target of 8669 Sub-centres, 
only 2909 Sub-centres could be set up so far. Raja sthan, Nagaland, Punjab and West Bengal are the 
only States which have succeeded in achieving thei r targets. In contrast, in  respect of States like 
Bihar and Chhattisgarh, details of Sub-centres set up are not available with the Government 
although fourth year of the Tenth Plan is nearing its end. Similarly, Meghalaya, Orissa, Tripura, U.P. 
and Delhi have failed to set up even a single Sub-c entre. Same is the states of Maharashtra which has 
taken almost four years to set up only two Su b-centres against a target of 808 Sub-centres. The 
Committee fails to comprehend the constraints faced by these States in spite of Central assistance 
available for setting up of Sub-centres, at a higher level for EAG and NE States. The Committee 
hopes that under the National Rural Health Mission, all such crucial aspects will be fully taken care 
of.  (Para 5.6) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee observes that as on Septemb er, 2004 (as per 2001 population), there is a 
shortfall of 4436 PHCs spread ov er in different states in the count ry. The Committee would like to 
point out that the overall figures reveal very dist urbing trends. States like Arunachal Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Kernataka, Kerala, Mani pur, Mizoram, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil 
Nadu, A&N Islands and Pondicherry have exce ss number of PHCs. In contrast, States like 
Bihar, U.P. and West Bengal are yet to establis h a large number of PHCs. Such a situation clearly 
indicates that norms for setting up of PHCs are not be ing strictly adhered to by the States. In spite of 
Central assistance being provided both for establishment of PHCs and provisions of required 
infrastructure and maintenance some  States seem to have failed to take benefit of such assistance. 
The Department should make concerted efforts in getting the required PHCs established in States. 
The Committee also strongly feels that there is a ne ed for review of the scheme of health centers in 
rural areas, by having a more flexible approach. (Para 5.8) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee views with seriou s concern the low achievement level of setting up of CHCs in 
different States in the country. The Committee has been  informed that the issue of review of existing 
population norms will be taken up with the Plan ning Commission. The Co mmittee would emphasize 
that the Department should pursue this matter with the Planning Commission so that population 
norms for setting up of CHCs are revised without any further delay. The Committee is disturbed by 

the fact that even those states whose track record about setting up of Sub-Centres and PHCs has 
been very good, even having excess number of Centres, have shown a dismal performance level of 
setting up CHCs. The very purpose of having the required/excess number of Sub-Centres and PHCs 
gets defeated if the required number of CHCs ar e not there to take care of referral cases from 
smaller centres. (Para 5.9) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee had drawn the attention of th e Department towards the findings of an 
evaluation study of 1040 Sub-centres covering 300 di stricts of 14 major States conducted by NCAER 
submitted on the 22nd November, 2004. The Committee is surprised to note that even after one year of 
submission of evaluation study recommendations, the same are still in the process of being forwarded 
to the concerned states. The Committee emphasizes that the Department should pursue with the 
State Govts. the required follow-up action in the light of NCAER evaluation study without any 
further delay. There is an urgent need for conducting similar evaluation studies of PHCs and CHCs 
at the earliest, specially in view of the fact th at National Rural Health Mission has already been 
launched. (Para 5.11) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee views with serious concern th e shortfall of 11,191 posts of ANMs in the 
country. ANM is an important functionary in Health Care delivery system at local level and therefore 
such a high shortfall of ANMs will adversely affect the system of health care in rural and inaccessible 
areas. The Committee fails to comprehend the reasons for non-availability of records regarding 
ANMs in the case of Bihar and Jharkhand. The Committee would like to know about the criteria for 
release of Central Funds for salary of ANMs to states. 
 The Committee recommends that the matter of sh ortfall in the posts of ANMs both which have 
not yet been sanctioned and also sanctioned posts yet to be filled up should be taken up with the 
concerned State Govts. so that work in demographica lly weaker states as well as in the other states 
progresses at a faster pace. (Para 5.12) 
VII. REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROGRAMME (RCH)  
COMMENT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee takes note of number of in itiatives being taken by the Department for 
elimination of unspent balances with the States an d procurement of utilization certificates from the 
concerned State Govts. The Committee is, however,  not convinced by the proposed method of the 
Department of obtaining refund/adjusting unspent balances against the subsequent withdrawal. Such 
a move will be directly against the set goals, thus defeating the very objectives of the programme. 
Desired action would be to motivate the states to utilize the allocated funds as per the Action Plan. 
  (Para 7.6) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 Committee’s attention has been drawn by a number of interventions like contractual 
appointment of ANMs, Public Health/Staff Nurse/Lab Technicians and hiring of Private Anesthetists 
Gynaecologists under RCH phase-I. The Committ ee had commented about low level of such 
appointments by different states in spite of cons iderable central funds being released therefor. The 
Committee has now been given to understand that whereas details of appointments have been on 
yearly basis, details of funds released were on cumulative basis. The Committee is not happy with the 
kind of information submitted by the Department which has resulted in confusion. The Committee 
would like to be apprised about the details of funds released and appointments made under the 
interventions of RCH phase-I for the first three years of Tenth Plan (year wise). The Committee 
would also like to point out that amount of hono rarium/contractual salary for different categories 
also needs to be reviewed so as to attract the required medical personnel. (Para 7.11 & 7.12) 
XV. ANNUAL REVIEW REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT FOR 2003-04  

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee takes serious note about lack of response from States/UTs regarding the 
inspection report of the Central Internal Audit Pa rty (CIAP) mentioning irre gularities observed by 
it. The Committee believes such a practice contin ues because of improper accountability measures 
currently in vogue. The Committee is of the view that in such cases, the Department should pursue at 
the highest level. The Committee feels that the Department should devise adequate measures to 
increase the accountability of states in the wake of which defaulting States/UTs could be asked for 
compliance. (Para 15.2) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 

 
ANNEXURE-I 
TARGETS AND ACHIEVEMENTS IN ESTABLISHMENT OF SUB-CENTRES 
 
Tenth Plan Sl.
No.
State/UT Sub-Centres 
Functioning 
(31.03.2002) 
Targets Achievement
s 
(31.07.2005) 
Sub-Centres 
functioning 
as reported 
by the States 
Excess Sub- 
Centres 
Established 
by the 
States* 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1. Andhra Pradesh 10568   12522 1954 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 273   376 103 
3. Assam 5109   5109  
4. Bihar 30337 1210 NA 10337  
5. Chhattisgarh 3818 874 NA 3818  
6. Goa 172   172  
7. Gujarat 7274   7274  
8. Haryana 2299 183 134 2433  
9. Himachal Pradesh 2069   2067  
10. Jammu & Kashmir 1700   1879 179 
11. Jharkhand 4462   4462  
12. Karnataka 8143   8143  
13. Kerala 5094   5049  
14. Madhya Pradesh 8129   8835 706 
15. Maharashtra 9725 808 2 9727  
16. Manipur 420   420  
17. Meghalaya 413 51  401  
18. Mizoram 346   351 5 
19. Nagaland 302 23 23 394 69 
20. Orissa 5927 447  5927  
21. Punjab 2852 6 6 2858  
22. Rajasthan 9926 461 461 10387  
23. Sikkim 147   147  
24. Tamil Nadu 8682   8682  
25. Tripura 539 40  539  
26. Uttaranchal 1524 240 51 1575  
27. Uttar Pradesh  18629 1944  18577 
28. West Bengal 8126 2230 2230 10356  
29. A & N Islands 100   107 7 

30. Chandigarh 13   13  
32. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 36 4 2 38  
32. Daman & Diu 21   21  
33. Delhi 42 148  42  
34. Lakshadweep 14   14  
35. Pondicherry 80   75  
A
LL INDIA 137311 8669 2909 143172 3023 
* Established by the States on their own without being given any targets for their establishment. 
 
 

ANNEXURE-II 
SHORTFALL IN HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE AS PER 2001  
POPULATION IN INDIA (As on Sept. 2004) 
 
PHCs Sl.
No.
State/UT 
RP S
1 2 3 4 5 
1. Andhra Pradesh 1924 1490 434 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 39 78 * 
3. Assam 826 610 216 
4. Bihar 2489 1648 841 
5. Chhattisgarh 659 516 143 
6. Goa 22 19 3 
7. Gujarat 1172 1070 102 
8. Haryana 500 408 92 
9. Himachal Pradesh 186 438 * 
10. Jammu & Kashmir 271 334 * 
11. Jharkhand 806 561 245 
12. Karnataka 1211 1679 * 
13. Kerala 791 933 * 
14. Madhya Pradesh 1670 1194 476 
15. Maharashtra 1984 1780 204 
16. Manipur 64 72 * 
17. Meghalaya 90 95 * 
18. Mizoram 22 57 * 
19. Nagaland 80 87 * 
20. Orissa 1171 1282 * 
21. Punjab 536 484 52 
22. Rajasthan 1555 1675 * 
23. Sikkim 17 24 * 
24. Tamil Nadu 1173 1380 * 
25. Tripura 104 73 31 
26. Uttaranchal 214 229 * 
27. Uttar Pradesh 4390 3640 750 
28. West Bengal 1993 1173 820 
29. A & N Islands 8 20 * 
30. Chandigarh 3 0 3 
31. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 7 6 1 

32. Daman & Diu 3 3 0 
33. Delhi 31 8 23 
34. Lakshadweep 1 4 * 
35. Pondicherry 10 39 * 
 A
LL INDIA 26022 23109 4436 
Notes: The requirement is calculated on the basis of final total and tribal population of Census, 2001 in rural 
areas using the prescribed norms. All India shortfall is derived by adding State-wise figures of 
shortfall ignoring the existing surplus in some of the States. 
In-position figures are provisional. 
R: Required; P: In Po sition; S: Shortfall; *:  Surplus. 
 
 

ANNEXURE-III 
SHORTFALL IN HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE AS PER 2001  
POPULATION IN INDIA (As on Sept. 2004) 
    
CHCs Sl. 
No. 
State/ UT 
RP S
1 2 3 4 5 
1. Andhra Pradesh 481 161 320 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 9 31 * 
3. Assam 206 100 106 
4. Bihar 622 101 521 
5. Chhattisgarh 164 116 48 
6. Goa 5 5 0 
7.      Gujarat 293 271 22 
8. Haryana 125 72 53 
9. Himachal Pradesh 46 66 * 
10. Jammu & Kashmir 67 70 * 
11. Jharkhand 201 47 154 
12. Karnataka 302 253 49 
13. Kerala 197 115 82 
14. Madhya Pradesh 417 227 190 
15. Maharashtra 496 382 114 
16.  Manipur 16 16 0 
17. Meghalaya 22 23 * 
18. Mizoram 5 12 * 
19. Nagaland 20 21 * 
20. Orissa 292 231 61 
21. Punjab 134 117 17 
22. Rajasthan 388 298 90 
23. Sikkim 4 4 0 
24. Tamil Nadu 293 35 258 
25. Tripura 26 9 17 
26. Uttaranchal 53 36 17 
27. Uttar Pradesh 1097 294 803 
28. West Bengal 498 95 403 
29. A & N Islands 2 4 * 
30. Chandigarh 0 1 * 
31. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 1 1 0 

32. Daman & Diu 0 1 * 
33. Delhi 7 0 7 
34. Lakshadweep 0 3 * 
35. Pondicherry 2 4 * 
ALL INDIA 6491 3222 3332 
Notes:  The requirement is calculated on the basis of  final total and tribal population of Census, 2001 in 
rural areas using the prescribed norms. All India shortfall is derived by adding State-wise figures of 
shortfall ignoring the existing surplus in some of the States. 
In-position figures are provisional. 
R: Required; P: In Position; S: Shortfall; *: Surplus. 

ANNEXURE-IV 
MULTI-PURPOSE WORKER [Female]/ANM (As on Sept. 2004) 
  
Sl. No. State/ UT Required 1 
[R] 
Sanctioned 
[S] 
In Position 
[P] 
Vacant 
[S-P] 
Shortfall 
[R-P] 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1. Andhra Pradesh 14012 14077 13740 337 272 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 454 454 454 0 0 
3. Assam 5719 5719 5719 0 0 
4. Bihar 11985 NA NA NA NA 
5. Chhattisgarh 4334 4130 3667 463 667 
6. Goa 191 196 179 17 12 
7.      Gujarat 8344 7274 6650 624 1694 
8. Haryana 2841 2841 2818 23 23 
9. Himachal Pradesh 2505 2210 1790 420 715 
10. Jammu & Kashmir 2213 1964 1588 376 625 
11. Jharkhand 5023 NA NA NA NA 
12. Karnataka 9822 9986 8635 1351 1187 
13. Kerala 6027 6331 6331 0 * 
14. Madhya Pradesh 10029 10029 9560 469 469 
15. Maharashtra 11507 11032 10699 333 808 
16.  Manipur 492 463 463 0 29 
17. Meghalaya 496 496 496 0 0 
18. Mizoram 408 388 385 3 23 
19. Nagaland 481 342 342 0 139 
20. Orissa 7209 7121 6768 353 441 
21. Punjab 3336 3982 3667 315 * 
22. Rajasthan 11601 12271 12013 258 * 
23. Sikkim 171 267 266 1 * 
24. Tamil Nadu 10062 10343 10070 273 * 
25. Tripura 612 525 561 * 51 
26. Uttaranchal 1754 1933 1902 31 * 
27. Uttar Pradesh 22217 21682 20646 1036 1571 
28. West Bengal 11529 10356 9070 1286 2459 
29. A & N Islands 127 127 127 0 0 
30. Chandigarh 13 13 13 0 0 
31. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 44 38 38 0 6 

32. Daman & Diu 24 24 24 0 0 
33. Delhi 50 102 89 13 * 
34. Lakshadweep 18 22 22 0 * 
35. Pondicherry 114 114 114 0 0 
 A LL INDIA 165764 146852 138906 7982 11191  
Notes:  
 Figures are provisional.  
 NA: Not Available.  
   *: Surplus.  
          1 One per each Sub Centre and Primary Health Centre. 
 

ANNEXURE-V  
LIST OF MOTHER NGOs WITH THEIR ADDRESSES AND DISTRICTS ALLOTTED 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of MNGO with address 
  
Districts Allotted 
 
   1                        2 3 
Andhra Pradesh 
1. Rahul’s Medical & Health Services  Society, Nalgonda and Hyderabad 
 Kothakota, Mahabubnagar, A.P. - 509381  
2. Society for National Integration through Rural Developments  Prakasam and Nellore 
 (SNIRD), Railpet, Ongole, Distt. Prakasham, A.P.  
3. St. Peter’s Multipurpose Health Workers (Female]  Guntur 
 Development Society, Tenali P.O. Distt. Guntur, A.P.  
4. Health Education Agricultural Developmen t Society, Muttala  Anantapur and Chittoor 
 Post, Atmakur Via, Distt. Anantapur, A.P. - 515751  
5. Social Action For Social Development, Mahboobnagar and 
 131 -B, Surya Nilaya Apartments, Flat No.3, 11 Floor,  Rangareddy 
 Sanjeeva Reddy Nagar, Hyderabad - 50038, A.P.   
6. Ekalavya Memorial League, West Godavari and 
 Ramakrishna Puram, Chirala, Dist t. Prakasam, A.P. Visakhapatnam  
  
Arunachal Pradesh 
7. Voluntary Health Association of Arunachal Pradesh, East Kameng and  
 P.O.Box No. 185, Bank Tinali, Itanagar, Arunachal Pradesh West Kameng 
  
Assam 
8. Rural Women Upliftment Associati on of Assam,  Nalbari and Barpeta 
 Japorigog High School Lane, Sundarpur, RG Baruch Road,   
 Guwahati-781 005  
9. Voluntary Health Association of Assam,  Lakhimpur and Sonitpur 
 “Ashirwad”, Zoo-Narengi Road, Geeta Nagar Area, Near ABITA 
Office, Guwahati 
 
10. Deshbandhu Club, Beharabazar, Cachar-788 817 Assam Cachar and Hailakandi 
Bihar 
11. Daudnagar Organisation for Rural Development, Kamur (Bhabua) and 
 2nd Floor, Chitkohra House, Dr. Ashraf Lane, S.P. VermaRoad,  Aurangabad 
 Patna-800001   
12. Scientific Educational Promotion & Medical Aid Foundation, Siwan and Saran 
 1-Niti Bagh, B.V. College P.O., Patna-800 014.  
13. Millat Educational Society, Samastipur and  
 Station Road, P.O. & Distt.  Samastipur, Bihar Sitamarhi 

14. Mahila Bal Utthan Kendra, Muzffarpur and  
 Sahu Road, Muzaffarpur -842 001, Bihar Darbhanga 
15. Adithi, Patna Jehanabad Gaya 
 2/30, SB1 Colony II, Baily Road, Patna-800014, Bihar  
16. Adarsh Mahila Kala Kendra, Manorma Bh awan, Manorma Lane,  Saharsa and Khargaria 
 Amirganj, Dharampur, Tajpur Road, Samastipur, Bihar  
17. Bhagwan Buddha Vikas Samiti, North Mandir, South of Kali 
Mandir,  
Buxar 
 Bansghath, Patna-800001  
18. Shantidoot, Udantpuri, Bihar Sharif, Distt. Nalanda, 803101 Shekpur 
19. Gram Nirman Mandal, Sarvodaya Ashram,  Jumui  
 P.O. Sakhodeora, Distt. Nawada-805106 Nawada 
20. Arthic Atma Nirbharta Samajik Vikas Pradhikaran Purnia  
 Swami Sahjanand Smarak Bhavan, Vidyapati Marg, Patna Bhagalpur 
21. Rajinder Institue of Education & Social Welfare,  East Champaram 
 Sitamarhi, Bihar West Champaran 
22. Bihar Voluntary Health As sociation, Patna, Nalanda 
 West of Ganga Apartment, Mainpura, Patna-800 001  
Chandigarh 
23. Society for Service to Vo luntary Agencies, Chandigarh 
 Kothi No.81, Sector-10, Chandigarh  
Chhattisgarh 
24. Centre for Labour Education and Social Research, Raipur  
 C-14, Indira Vihar, Bilaspur-495006 (MP off)  Rajnandgaon 
 J-2/63A,DDA Flats, Kalkaji, N. Delhi-(Delhi Off)  
25. Utthan - Centre for Sustainable Development and Poverty  Bilaspur and Sarguja 
 Alleviation  (Chhattisgarh Chapter),  
 Village & Post Sakri, Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh  
26. Sankalp Sanskiriti Samiti Kawardha  
 Chikhli, Ward No.3, Ranjandgaon, Chhattisgarh Dhamtari 
27. Berojgar Mahila Sewa Samiti, Q.No.9 /H, Street No.l, Zone 3, Dantewada  
 Khursipar, Bhilai, Durg-490011 Chhattisgarh Durg 
28. Chhatisgarh Janjati Vikas Parishad, Jail Road Babupura  Jashpur  
 Ambikaur, Dist. Surguja-497001 Chhattisgarh Koria 
29. Mahila Manch Raipur, B-2/7, Lokm anya Samity Rohinipuram, Mahasamand 
 Raipur - 492010 Chhattisgarh  
30. Champa Chritistian Hosp ital Society Jangirchampa 
 PO Champa - 495671 Chhattisgarh  
31. Shri Shanti Vijaya Sewa Samiti, Gandhi Chowk, College Road,  Kanker,  
 Mahasamund - 493445,  Chhattisgarh Bastar 
 
Delhi 
32. INDCARE Charitable Trust, West and North-West 
 1030, Vikas Kunj, Vikas Puri, New Delhi  

33. Society for Service to Voluntary Agencies, Delhi Chapter,  South and East 
 First Floor, Community Centre, Near Fire Station,   
 Hari Nagar Ashram, N.Delhi.  
34. DISHA Society For Rural & Urban Development,  New Delhi 
 13/88 Block, CA/B, Pocket 13, Flat No.88, Janak Puri, New Delhi  
  
Gujarat 
35. Gujarat Voluntary Health Association,  Ahmedabad and Anand 
 E-5, Sterline Row House, Drive-in Road, Memnagar P.O. 
Ahmedabad 
 
36. FPAI, Family Planning Association of India, Nashabandhi Gandhinagar and Dahod 
 Compound, Opp.Multi-Storeyed Building, Bhadra, Ahmedabad  
37. CHETNA, Lilavatiben Lalbhai’s Bungalow, Civil Camp Road, Sabarkatha and Mehsana 
 Shahibaug, Ahmedabad-380 00  
38. Samagra Vikas Trust Amreli  
 Ashish, Ramnagar- 9, Am reli, Gujarat Bhavnagar 
39. Kutch Mahila Vikas Sangathan, 11, Nutan Colony, Ashpura Kutch 
 Mata Temple, Bhuj, Kutch-370 001, Gujarat  
40. DHRUVA (BAIF), Valsad and Dangs 
 Vill-Lachakhadi, Ta. Vansda, Gujarat  
41. Shri Sarvodaya Mahila Udhyog Mandal, Modi Noval Opp. Jamnagar 
 G.E.B. Office Okha Port, Distt. Jamnagar, Gujarat  
42. International Rural Educational and Cultural Association Narmada 
 (INRECA), INRECA Complex, Rajpipla Road, Dediapada,   
 Distt. Narmada -393040, Gujarat  
43. Jagrut Mahila Sangh, Opp.Grid, Lambhavel Road,  Kheda 
 Anand-388001, Gujarat  
44. Society for Women’s Action and Training Initiatives (SWATI) Surendranagar 
 14, Somnath Society, B/h Bhar gvi Society, Haivad Road,   
 Dhangadhra, Distt.Surendranagar-363310, Gujarat  
45. Gram Vikas Trust, A-18, Pushpadhan Bungalow, Link Road,  Bharuch 
 Near HDFC Bank, Bharuch-392001, Gujarat  
46. Navjeevan Trust, Bishop’s House, P.B.No. l, Kalawad Road,  Rajkot 
 Rajkot-360005, Gujarat  
47. Shroff Foundation, Vadodara 
 At & P.O.-Kalali, Ta. & Distt. Vadodara, Gujarat  
48. Rural Development Society, At-Panelav , Post-Tajpura, Ta.Halol,  Panchmahal 
 Distt. Panchmahal, Gujarat  
    
Haryana 
49. Society for Service to Vo luntary Agencies, (Haryana Chapter) Gurgaon and Sonipat 
 Mathura Road, Gurgaon  
50. Survival for Women and Children Foundations (SWACH),  Panchkula and  
 Sector-16, Panchkula, Haryana. Yamunanagar 

51. Haryana Nava Yuvak Kala Sangam, 443/30, Development 
Colony,  
Bhiwani 
 Delhi Road, Rohtak-124001, Haryana  
    
Himachal Pradesh 
52. Society for Social Uplift Through Rural Action,  Kangra and Una 
 P.OJagjit Nagar, via ‘ubbar, Solan District-173225, Himachal 
Pradesh 
 
53. Nishcal Foundation (Anand Welfare Centre),  Solan and Shimla 
 Gabriel Road, Sector II, Parwanoo - 173220., Himachal Pradesh  
54. Himachal Pradesh V H A, Mandi and Bilaspur 
 B-37, Phase-I, Sector-2, New Shimla-171009.  
   
Jammu and Kashmir 
55. Kalamkari Centre (Society) Vocational Oriented Women’s 
Polytechnic,  
Jammu and Kathua 
 Upper PlouTa, P.O. Ploura, Jammu  
56. J&K Ex-Services League, Amphalla, Jammu - 180 005 Udhampur and Rajouri 
57. Valley Women’s Welfare Soci ety, Anantnag and Srinagar 
 Post Box No. 542, G.P.O., Srinagar-190 001  
   
Jharkhand 
58. Women in Social Action, Raghunathpur, East Singhbhum and 
 Jhagram -721507 Midnapore, West Bengal. West Singhbhum 
59. Krishi Gram Vikas,  Hazaribagh and Gumla 
 D.O.Neori Vikas Block, Ormanjhu Ranchi, Jharkhand.  
60. Phooleen Mahila Chetna Kendra, Hathima Pather Farm Village,       Deogarh 
 Bhogachorant, P.O. Ramachandrapur, Via. Madhupur, Deoghar  
   
Karnataka 
61. Society for Service to Voluntary Agencies Karnataka Chapter,     Chitradurg, Belgaum 
 Shaakari, No. 338, A II Floor, III Block, Rajaji Nagar, Bangalore.  
62. St. John Medical College, Udupi and Uttar Kannada     
 Bangalore-569 934.  
63. Karnataka Volunt ary Health Association, 60, Rajini Nilaya,  Mysore and  
 2nd Cross, Gurumurthy Street, Ramakrishna Mutt Road, Ulsoor. Chamraj Nagar 
  
Kerala 
64. Kerala Voluntary Health Services, Kottayam and Idukky 
 Mullankuzhi, Collectorate PO, Kottayam - 686 002  
65. Family Planning Association of India, Kallattumukku, Trivandrum and Kollam 
 Manacaud P.O., Thiruvananthapuram  
   
Madhya Pradesh 
66. Family Planning Association of India Indore and Hoshangabad 

 Bajaj Bhawan, Nariman Point, Mumbai -400 021.  
67. Sarvajanik Pariwar Kalyan an d Sewa Samiti, Health Research 
Project  
Gwalior and Bhind 
 Building, Darji Oli, Jamdar Khana, Gwalior- 474001, MP. . 
68. Sanskar Shiksha Samiti, Bhopal and Seohar 
 E-7/327, MIG Area Colony, Bhopal - 16, MP . 
69. Sambhav Social Service Organisation, Shivpur and Tikamgarh 
 13, Balwant Nagar, Gwalior-474002, MP  
70. Madhya Pradesh Voluntary Health Association,  Jhabua and Dhar 
 Near Villabai Lake, P.O. Kasturbagram, lndore-452020, MP.  
71. Medical Counselling Centre, Betul and Chhindwara 
 13-14, Panchsheel Nagar, Bhopal-462003  
72. Utthan-Centre for Sustainable Development and Poverty 
Alleviation,  
Satna and Rewa 
 (MP Chapter), 359,Galla Mandhi Chalk Ghat, Distt. Rewa, MP  
73. Tarun Sanskar, 2036 Ranjhi, Azad Nagar,  Dindori and Mandla 
 Sub-Division, Jabalpur-482005, MP  
74. Parsvanath Bal Mandir Samiti, Indore, MP Ratlam and Mandsaur 
75. Mahila Utkarsh Sansthan, Harda and Badwani 
 3/4 Vrindavan Society, Banganga, Indore - 452006  
76. Sewa Bharti, Matri Chhaya Si su Kalyan Kendra,  Balaghat 
 Swami Ramtirath Nagar, Hoshangabad Road, Bhopal  
77. Star School Samiti, Shajpur 
 88, Bank Colony, Annapurna Temple Road, Indore  
78. Shri Ram Shiksha Samiti, Rajgarh 
 Opp. Dr. Diwan Oli Lashkar, Gwalior  
79. Seth Mannulal Jagannathdas Hospit al & Research Centre, Katne Umaria 
 2022, Upparganj, Ward Dixit Pura, Jabalpur  
80. Bairagarh Sharda Shiksha Samiti, Dewas 
 35, First Floor, Zone-II, M.P. Nagar, Bhopal, MP  
81. Chaitanya Mahila Kalyan Samiti, West Nimar (Khargaon) 
 Ramanand Nagar, Post Sirpur, Indore, MP-452002  
   
Maharashtra 
82. Pravara Medical Trust, Aurangabad and  
 Loni (BK), 413 736,TaIuka Sri Rampur, Ahmadnagar. Ahmadnagar 
83. Sevadham Trust, 1148, Sadashiv Peth, Pune. Sholapur and Kolhapur 
84. Society for Service to Voluntary Agen cies, Shardham Park,  Pune and Raigarh 
 A-Wing, 3rd Floor, Near Jahangir Nursing Home, Pune-411 001.  
85. Godavari Foundation, Godavari Hospital Building,  Jalgaon and Nasik 
 MG College Road, Near Bhas kar Market, Jalgaon-425 001.  
   
Manipur 
86. Lamding Cherapur Homoeopathic And Unani Association, Thoubal and  

 Lamding Cherapur, Wangjing- 795 148 Imphal (East) 
87. Family Planning Association of India, Churachanpur and  
 Keishamthong Bazar, Imphal - 795 001 Chandel 
Mizoram 
88. The Presbyterian Hospital, Durtlang, Aizwal - 796 025 Mizoram Aizwal 
89. The Christian Hospital,  
 Serkawn, P.O. Zotlang, Lunglei District, Mizoram Lunglei 
Nagaland 
90. Nagaland Voluntary Health Association, Kohima and Phek 
 Opposite War Cemetery, Kohima  
91. Woodland Multipurpose Cooperative Society Ltd., Mokokchung 
 Sungrastu, Distt. Molcokchung, Nagaland-798 601  
92. Konyak Ngupoh Shekokhong, Mon 
 PO & PS Mon, Distt. Mon, Nagaland-798 621  
  
Orissa 
93. Association for Social Reconstructive Ac tivities (ASRA),  Jajpur and Jagatsinghpur 
 Satyaprada Press Premis es, Pithapur, Cuttack.  
94. Institute for Social Work & Ac tion Research (ISWAR),  Dhenkanal 
 Chirulei, Mahimagadi, Dhenkanal, Orissa-759 014  
95. Orissa Voluntary Health Associati on, 317, Parkview,  Angul and Nayagarh 
 Mausima Chauk, Bhubaneswar-751 014, Orissa  
96. Anchalika Kunjeshwar; Sankrut Sansad, Puri and Khurda 
 Sevanchala P.O. Kanas, Distt. Puri -752 017.  
97. MY HEART (March of youth for Health, Education and  Baragarh and Sambalpur 
 Action for Rural Trust), 21, Brameshwar Bagh, Trankapani Road,   
 Bhubaneswar-751002.  
98. Organisation for Social Change and Rural Development (OSCARD), Kalahandi and Bolangir 
 A/85 SahidNagar, Bhubaneswar.  
99. PRAKALPA, P.O. Jyotipur, District Keonjhar, Orissa-758 046 Keonjhar 
100. Nilanchal Sewa Pratishtan, Dayavihar (Kanas), Mayurbhanj 
 District Puri-752 017, Orissa.  
101. NIHARD, Kalyani Nagar, Cuttack, Orissa-753 013 Baleshwar and Cuttack 
102. Animal Welfare Society, Bhadrak and Nabrangpur 
 Qr.No.4R72, Unit-8, Gopalbandhu Square, Bhubaneshwar-751 012.  
103. Vishwa Jeevan Seva Sangh (VJSS),  Boudh 
 At. Saradhapur, PO-Garsanput, Di stt.-Khurda 752 060, Orissa  
104. SRUSTI, Khariar, Dist-Nuapada, 766 107 Orissa Nuapada 
105. South Orissa Voluntary Action (SOVA), Koraput 
 Janiguda, Koraput - 764 020, Orissa  
106. JAGRUTI, PO Box 13, Amlapada, Phulbani, District, Orissa. Phulbani (Kondhamal) 
107. Tagore Society for Rural Development,  Malkangiri 
 A-47, Rameswar, Patna, Mausima Square, Bhubaneswar, Orissa  

108. Family Planning Association of India (FPAI), Bhubaneswar Branch,  Jharsaguda 
 300, Kharvela, Unit-3, Bhubaneswar, Orissa  
109. Society for Welfare of Weaker Sections (SWWS), Gajapati 
 Parlakhemundi - 761 200, Gajapati District, Orissa.  
110. Jyotirmayee Mahila Samiti (JMS),  Kendrapada 
 At-Ghol Singh, P.O. Thakarpatna, District-Kendrapada, Orissa-754 
250. 
 
111. Universal Service Organization (USO),  Rayagada 
 At-B. Devadala, P.O. Komatalpeta, Distt. Rayagada, Orissa-765 
001. 
 
112. Family Planning Association of India, Bhubaneswar Branch Deogarh  
 (FPAI),B-25-BJB Nagar, District- Deogarh, Bhubaneswar  
113. Citizens Association for Rural Development (CARD), Ganjam 
 Corporation Road, Berthampur, District-Ganjam, Orissa  
114. SEWAK, Ranjiamunda, Sundergarh, Orissa Sundergarh 
 
Pondicherry 
115. Society for Social Justice and Human Resources Development, Pondicherry 
 565, M.G. Road, Pondicherry-01  
Punjab 
116. Society for Service to Voluntary Agen cies (Punjab Chapter), Ropar and Patiala 
 Kothi No.8l, Sector-10, Chandigarh  
117. Family Planning Association of India, Mohali Branch, Muktsar and Ferozpur 
 S.C.O.26, Super Market, S.A.S. Nagar, Mohali - 160 071, Punjab  
118. Voluntary Health Association of Punjab, Fategarh Saheb and  
 SCF 18/1. Sector 10-D,Chandigarh-160 011. Nawanshahr 
Rajasthan 
119. Bhoruka Charitable Trust, Churu and Jhunjunu 
 1, Prabhu Dayal Marg, Sanganer Airport, Jaipur  
120. Rajasthan Voluntary Health Association,  Dungerpur, Banswara 
 11/1040, Shipra Path, Aganval Farm , Mansarovar, Jaipur - 302 020  
121. URMUL, Rural Health Research,  Bikaner and Jaisalmer 
 Urmul Campus, Sri Ganganagar Road, Bikaner - 334 603  
122. Centre for Health Education Training & Nuti tion Awareness, Rajasthan,  Bharatpur and Alwar 
 C/o CUTS, D-222 A, Basement of Vijaylaxmi Apartt.   
 Bhaskar Marg, Bani Parkjaipur - 302 016 (Rajasthan)  
123. Bodhgram Society for Education Conscien tisation Awareness Karauli and Dholpur  
 & Training (ECAT), Kukanwali, Distt. Nagaur, Rajasthan  
  
Sikkim 
124. Voluntary Health Association of Sikkim, Sonarn Gyatso Marg East and West Sikkim 
 (Tibet Road), Post Box-144, Gangtok  
  
Tamil Nadu 

125. FPAI, Madurai Madurai and Tuticorin 
 FPAI Bhawan, FPAI Road, Ellis Nagar, Madurai  
126. Tamil Nadu Voluntary Health Association Theni and Tirunelveli 
 18, Appadurai Main Road, Ayanavaram, Chennai - 23  
127. Rural Education & Development Society,  Sivagangai and Ramnad 
 REDS Farm, Kootururavupatty, Idayamelur Post, Sivgangai-623 563  
128. Deepam Educational Society fo r Health (DESH), Chennai and  
 42, Srinivaspuram, East Coast Road , Tiruvanmiyur, Chennai Kanchipuram 
129. Gandhigram Instt. of Rural Health & Family Welfare Trust Dindigul and Trichy 
 P.O. Ambathurai R.S., Dindigul, Anna District, Tamil Nadu  
130. Socio-Educational Trust, 279/4, Anai Therasa Nagar,  Tiruvalur 
 Thimmavaram, Chengalpattu, Tamil Nadu  
Tripura 
131. Voluntary Health Association of Tripura,  West Tripura and  
 Circuit House Area, Opp. Bangladesh Visa Officer, PO Kunjaban, Agartala South Tripura 
  
Uttar Pradesh 
132. Utthan - Centre for Sustainable Development and Poverty Alleviation,  Allahabad and  
 ( UP Chapter), 102, G/3, Be ni Ganj, Allahabad Pratapgarh 
133. World Welfare and Research Institute,  Gonda and Basti. 
 1, Zila Parishad Boarding House, 45/4, Malviya Nagar, Gonda  
134. Family Planning Association of India , Lucknow and Unnao 
 27, Dr. B. N. Verma Road, Lucknow  
135. New Public School Samiti,  Kanpur Nagar and  
 504/21-D, Krishna Bhavan, Tagore Marg , Daliganj, Lucknow Kanpur (Dehat) 
136. Naujhil Integrated Rural Project for Health and Development  Mathura and Agra 
 (NERPHAD), 14, Boul evard Road, Delhi  
137. Indian Institute for Developmen t Studies,  Jaunpur and Sultanpur 
 18/25, Stanley Road , Judges Colony, Allahabad-211 002  
138. Centre for Agrarian Research Trg. & Education, (CARTE), Ghaziabad and  
 Block-C, Sector-16, Shastri Nagar, Ghaziabad-201 002. Bulandshahar 
139. Uttar Pradesh Voluntary Health Association (UPVHA), Gorakhpur and  
 5/439,Vikram Khand, Gomati Nagar, Lucknow-226 010 Siddharth Nagar 
  
Uttaranchal 
140. Himalayan Institute Hospital Trust, Dehradun and Pouri 
 Jolly Grant Doiwala, Dehradun,  
141. Gramin Uthhan Samiti, Bageshwar 
 Village and Post Kapkot, Bageshwar  
142. Himalaya Study Circle for Environment, Child Education, Health and  Pithorgarh &  
 Research, Himalaya Bhavan, GI C Road, Pithoragarh Champawat 
143. Himalayi Manav Evam Prakriti Sansthan (HIMANI),  Nainital 
 Bhimtal Road, Nainital  
144. Shri Bhuvneshwari Mahila Ashram (BMA)  Chamoli & Uttarkashi 

 Anjanisen, Tehri Garhwal, Uttaranchal  
145. Instt. of Himalayan Environmental Research and Education, Almora 
 Masi Almora  
146. Gomti Prayag Jan Kalyan Parishad,  Rudraprayag 
 Bhakunda, District Chamoli  
West Bengal 
147. West Bengal Voluntary Health Association,  Jalpaiguri and  
 19A, Dr. Sundari Mohan Avenue, Calcutta. Darjeeling. 
148. Child in Need Institute, South 24-Parganas and 
 Post Box No. 16742, Calcutta-700 027. Howrah 
149. Gana Unnayan Parishad, North 24 Parganas and 
 P.O. Bankura, 10, Ganesh Lane, Calcutta. Murshidabad 
150.    St. John’s Ambulance Association Uttar Dinajpur 
 Uttar Dinajpur District Centre, Raiganj-733 134  
151.    Society for Participatory Action and Reflection (SPAR) Coochbihar 
 49/53 Prince Gulam Muhammad Shah Road, Kolkata-700 033  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 

V 
FIFTH MEETING 
 The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 15 th December, 2005, in Committee Room  
No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1. Shri Amar Singh   —   Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Prof. P. J. Kurian 
  LOK SABHA 
 3. Shri D.K. Adikesavulu 
 4. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
 5. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi 
 6. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah 
 7. Dr. Baburao Mediyam 
 8. Shri Nakul Das Rai 
 9. Shri Uday Singh 
 10. Shrimati V. Radhika Selvi 
 11. Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav 
 12. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Ga rg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P. R. Guha Roy, Director 
  Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary 
  Shri S.C. Dixit, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. The Committee then 
considered and adopted the following Reports:— 
 (i) * * * 
 (ii) 13th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 8th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) relating to the 
Department of Family Welfare. 
 (iii) * * * 
 (iv) * * * 
2A. The Committee also decided that the 12th, 13th, 14th and 15th Reports may be presented in Rajya 
Sabha by the Chairman and in his absence, by Prof. P. J. Kurian and in his absence by Shrimati Maya Singh 
and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha by Dr. Karan Singh Yadav and in his absence by Shri Uday Singh on 
the 21st December, 2005.  
3. The Committee adjourned at 3.00 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
*** 
Relates to some other matters. 
 