21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
TWENTY FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS /
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2006-2007 (DEMAND NO. 47) OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF AYUSH
 (MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8th March, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8th March, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2007/ Phalguna, 1928 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                 
2.         PREFACE                                                                                                      
3.                  REPORT                                                                                                                                                                    
                 
CHAPTER  I   Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
 Government’s
replies
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the                  Committee
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final replies of the Government are still awaited
*4.       Observations/Recommendations at a glance
*5.       Minutes                                               
 
 6.        Annexure 
*          To be appended at printing stage
 
                COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-2007)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh                       ¾        Chairman
    #2.   Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur          
@3.  Shri A.K. Antony
4.   Prof. P. J. Kurian

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
5.   Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
6. Shrimati Maya Singh
7. Shri Digvijay Singh
8. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
9.   Shri Lalh Mingliana
    *10. Shri Manohar Joshi
$$11. Smt. Viplov Thakur
       
LOK SABHA
 
 @12.  Shri M. Ambareesh
  ^13.   Smt. Bhavana P. Gawli
     14.  Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
     15.  Smt. Maneka Gandhi
     16.  Shri B. Vinod Kumar
     17.  Shri Rajendra Kumar
     18.  Smt. Susheela Bangaru Laxman
     19.  Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
     20.  Shri Rasheed Masood
     21.  Dr. Chinta Mohan
     22.  Shri Nihal Chand
     23.  Shri D.B. Patil
     24.  Smt. K. Rani
     25.  Shri Pannian Ravindran
    (i)
     26.  Dr. R. Senthil
     27.  Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin
     28.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
     29.  Shri Ajit Kumar Singh
     30.  Shri Uday Singh
     31.  Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 **32.  Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya
^^33.   Shri Vinod Khanna
  $34.   Shri R.L. Jalappa
 
SECRETARIAT
            
            Shri N.C. Joshi,                  Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg,           Joint Secretary
Shri H.C. Sethi,                  Deputy Secretary
Shri  Pradeep Chaturvedi,  Under Secretary
            Shri Dinesh Singh,          Committee Officer
___________________________________________________________
th

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
*          Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 4  September, 2006
**        Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 31st August, 2006
^          Nominated w.e.f. 31st August, 2006
^^        Nominated w.e.f 3rd September, 2006
@        Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 24th October, 2006
$          Nominated w.e.f.28th November, 2006
$$        Nominated w.e.f.30th November, 2006
#          Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 15th December, 2006 on demise
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare,
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Twenty First Report
of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in its Seventeenth Report on
Demands for Grants (Demand No.47) of the Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the
year 2006-2007.
2.         The Seventeenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family
Welfare was presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 22 nd May, 2006 and laid in the Lok Sabha on the 22 nd May, 2006. 
Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of AYUSH
were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the                                28
th February, 2007.    
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on the 28 th February,
2007. 
  NEW DELHI;
February 28, 2007
Phalguna 9, 1928 (Saka)
AMAR SINGH
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare
 
REPORT
 
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Govt. on the recommendations / observations
contained in its Seventeenth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No.47) of the Department of AYUSH for the year
2006-07.
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations / observations
contained in the Report.   They have been categorized as follows: -
(i) Recommendations/ Observations which have been accepted by the Government      5.3, 5.5, 5.6, 8.8, 8.10, 8.11, 8.12,
13.4, 16 (Chapter I) Total - 9         
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies: 2.3, 3.2, 3.3, 6.2.2, 8.4, 9.3, 9.4, 12.2, 14.3        (Chapter II) Total – 9
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:  2.1, 2.4, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 4.2, 6.1.3, 6.2.3, 6.2.4, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 8.5, 9.2, 10.2, 11.2, 14.4, 15.2 (Chapter III)
Total –18
 

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
(iv) Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:   (Chapter-IV) Nil
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
V.  DRUGS QUALITY CONTROL
Recommendations/Observations
5.3       The Committee has been given to understand that fund constraint if any in the provision of Rs.11 crores in  
2006-07 will be overcome by re-appropriation of savings from other schemes at the RE stage, provided suitable
proposals are received from states.   The Committee strongly feels that quality control of AYUSH drugs   is required to
be maintained in view of the increasing demand for such drugs and also for checking circulation of spurious drugs in the
market. 
 
Action Taken
Department of AYUSH is taking necessary measures for the enforcement of Quality Control of AYUSH drugs
throughout the country.  The State Enforcement Mechanism are being supported and directed to implement the
provisions under Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules strictly. 
 
Recommendations/Observations
5.5       Assistance amounting to Rs.2.52 crores was provided to units obtaining GMP certificates.        The Committee
has been given to understand that a subsidy amount of 25% subject to a maximum of RS. 5 lakh being provided to
AYUSH units for becoming GMP compliant was not proving to be sufficient enough.    Keeping in view increasing
number of cases of spurious and fake drugs available in the market, the Committee feels that there is a need for  
increasing the quantum of financial assistance under this component.    This would enable individual units or a group of
units to set up a joint quality control lab and acquire requisite equipment for testing of heavy metals and raw materials
etc.  The Committee strongly recommends that a decision for  enhancing the funding for units obtaining GMP
certificates should be taken well before the beginning of XIth Plan.
 
Action Taken
            It is proposed to increase the assistance from Rs. 5 lacs to Rs. 50 lacs in the XI Plan.
 
Recommendations/Observations
5.6       The Committee has been given to understand that the implementation of the provisions of the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act and Rules made thereunder is the responsibility of the State Govt. licensing authority.    The Committee
would, however, like to emphasize that there is an urgent need for the Department for taking a pro-active role by
making persistent efforts for strengthening of drug testing labs and the other allied controlling authorities.     
 
 
Action Taken
Department has taken urgent action to strengthen State Drug Testing Laboratories by enhancing the grant-in-aid
upto Rs. 150.00 lakh to State Drug Testing Laboratories.   Apart from this Private Drug Testing Laboratories are also
being recognized for the testing of ASU drugs.
 
 
VIII      NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANT BOARD
Recommendations/Observations
8.8   The Committee observes that the existing monitoring mechanism has perhaps not proved to be effective enough.
Basis for this assessment made by the Committee is the alarming increase in the number of pending Utilization
Certificates under both the schemes.
 
Action Taken
            The National Medicinal Plants Board is taking all measures for liquidation of pending Utilization Certificates
and also monitoring the progress of projects sanctioned. In this connection it is proposed to engage some specialized
organization in Govt./Non-Government sector from amongst Research Institutions/Agriculture Universities etc

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
specifically for monitoring purpose.
 
Recommendations/Observations
8.10 The Committee apprehends that the pendency is likely to arise further in view of sanctioning of as many as 1233
projects worth Rs. 32.10 crore and 233 projects worth Rs. 25.65 crore under the Contractual Farming Scheme and
Promotional Scheme respectively during 2005-06 alone.
 
Action Taken
            The Department would like to allay the apprehension of Committee regarding the pendency of UCs.   Inspite of
shortage of manpower the Board is making all efforts for adequate utilization of sanctioned funds and procurement of
required UCs. Sanction of new projects every year is routine activity of Board. Steps are being taken to procure
Utilization Certificates (UCs) simultaneously as soon as they become due. As stated above it is proposed to engage an
independent agency for monitoring and evaluation purpose. This would expedite the work of procurement of Utilization
Certificate also.
 
Recommendations/Observations
8.11     The Committee observes that both pendency rate of UCs involved therein is very high. During the course of
discussion with the representatives of the Department as well as the National Medicinal Plant Board, it was
categorically stated that amount involved in pending UCs would be negligible. However, the following information
forwarded by the Department proves the contention to be wrong and misleading. The Committee takes strong exception
to this.
Contractual Farming Scheme
(Rs. In lakhs)
Year Projects sanctioned Amount released Pending UCs Amount
2002-03 63 193 35 114
2003-04 688 837 306 368
2004-05 1557 1808 986 1046
 
Promotional Scheme
(Rs. In lakhs)
Year Projects sanctioned Amount released Pending UCs Amount
2001-02 143 2098 68 656
2002-03 101 735 59 343
2003-04 64 459 40 273
2004-05 178 999 97 501
The Secretary informed the Committee that due to constant monitoring with State Govt./implementing agencies,
the Department has brought down pending UCs from 850 involving an amount of Rs.340.37 crore as on 1.6.05 to 343
UCs involving Rs. 78.28 crore as on 31.03.2006. The Department will similarly pursue liquidation of 212 UCs of the
year 2004-05 amounting to Rs. 182.60 crore which have become due as on 1.04.2006. The Committee is not convinced
by the justification given by the Department that pending UCs was a common problem with all Ministries administering
Centrally Sponsored Schemes on account of delay in release of CHS grants by the states to implementing agencies and
consequent delay in submission of UCs. The plea of the Department that the requirement of vetting by Chartered
Accountants under the Contractual Farming Scheme was difficult to be complied with by farmers is also not acceptable
to the Committee. The Committee would like to emphasize that the pendency is bound to increase keeping in view the
level of central assistance released under both the schemes during 2004-05 and 2005-06.
 
Action Taken
            There was no intention to mislead the Committee. Factual information has been provided. Revised status is
given at Annexure-III. Adequate measures are being taken for liquidation of pending Utilization Certificates as stated
above. State Medicinal Plants Board (SMPBs) located in States / UTs have been suitably involved for this purpose. As a

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
step in this direction the Board has started releasing the grants sanctioned in respect of projects for a particular
State/UTs in the form of consolidated demand draft in favour of all concerned State Medicinal Plants Board in case of
Contractual Farming Scheme. The State Medicinal Plants Board would be responsible for furnishing of required
Utilization Certificate in a consolidated manner in future.
 
 
Recommendations/Observations
8.12     The Committee has been informed that independent third party evaluation of both the schemes has been assigned
to the Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education, Dehradun and Indian Institute of Forest Management,
Bhopal. The Committee hopes that reports of these studies would provide critical input to the Board to modify and
recast the scheme accordingly. The Committee has a suggestion to make in this regard. Involvement of Forest
Department will not be helpful simply because they do not have any expertise in growing trees. The Committee is of the
firm opinion that agriculture universities like Pant Nagar need to be involved in the implementation of schemes like
Promotional and Contractual Farming. The Committee fails to understand the reason for not initiating the provision of
recovery of funds provided in the terms and conditions of both the schemes. The Committee strongly feels that a review
of the functioning of state Boards also needs to be done. They need to be strengthened and made accountable for the
drawbacks being noticed in the two schemes.   
 
Action Taken
Reports of Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education, Dehradun and Indian Institute of Forest
Management, Bhopal have been received. Salient findings of Reports are below:
(i) The National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB) promoted projects had a positive impact in terms of production of
medicinal plants, which has increased quantitatively. Performance of the projects implemented by some of the NGOs
was noteworthy.
(ii)
                            Under the Commercial Projects the emphasis has been on a few species like Safed Musli, Amla, Isabgol,
Senna and Ashwangandha. The other prioritized species have been cultivated over less than 30% of the total area
covered.
(iii)
                           Most of the farmers wanted the Contract Farming supported by National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB)
to continue by better networking between corporate, retailers, manufacturers and the farmers.
(iv)
                          The average success rate of commercial projects is more than 77%. The average per acre production was
recorded as the highest in Chhatisgarh  and lowest in Rajasthan. The production in Rajasthan is lowest due to the harsh
soil and climate conditions.
(v)
                            The Commercial projects resulted in 36% of the cost being incurred on employment. More than 50% of the
cultivators were those with area more than 6 acres. In other words the beneficiaries were mostly medium and large
farmers. The average representation of women was 17%.
 
(vi)
                          MoU between the Buyer and Seller was a  weak link. More than 50% of the cultivators claimed to have
sold 100% of their production. Only less than 7% were not able to sell their products. 30% of the growers sold their
products after some processing. Marketing, therefore, remained a constraint. However, there were Farmers Federation in
some states which had taken the responsibility of marketing and such innovations were found useful and therefore,
needed to be replicated.
(vii)
                         Though the Quality Planting Material was raised under the Promotional projects, there was no proper
networking for its supply to the cultivators.
(viii)
                       Monitoring by the SMPBs was found to be either absent or weak except in some of the states like
Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh.
(ix)
                          Requirement of certification of UCs by a Chartered Accountant has been a cause of delay in submission of
UCs by farmers, affecting delay in release of next installment. This in turn delayed the project implementation.
(x)
                            There were isolated cases of SHGs providing linkage for implementation of Promotional projects. This had
a positive impact on the project implementation.
(xi)
                          The organizational structure of SMPBs is generally weak. Mostly the SMPBs are located in the ISM&H
Departments headed by ISM&H officials. There are also states where SMPBs are located in the Forest/Horticulture
Departments. In states where either the SMPBs are in the Forest Departments or where IFS officers are on deputation
with ISM&H Department, the functioning of SMPB is much more effective.
(xii)                         On the whole, the implementation and achievement of objectives present a mixed picture. There is,

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
therefore, need to critically look at the shortcomings so that the programme achieves the objectives of increasing
availability of quality raw material for industry, improved economy for the farmers, employment generation and better
health security.
 
            The Operational Guidelines of schemes are being revised considering the inputs received. The Board proposes to
initiate modification in the schemes during the 11
th Plan. Regarding suggestion of the Committee for involvement of
Agriculture Universities like Pant Nagar, it is submitted that Agriculture Universities / Institutions have been already
involved in implementation of various programmes on National Medicinal Plants Board. However, it is felt that Forest
Department has been largely involved in the matters related to Medicinal Plants Sector since long back. The Medicinal
Plants including the trees of medicinal value have been growing in forest and major quantity of the medicinal plants
material is still sourced from the forest. It is also submitted that the subject matter is more relevant to Forest Department
than the Department of Agriculture which are basically concerned with cereal and horticultural crops. Steps have
already been initiated for recovery of grants where projects were not properly implemented. Guidelines have also been
issued for strengthening of State Medicinal Plants Boards (SMPBs), who are always accountable, for proper
implementation of programmes.
 
XIII. STANDARDIZATION OF NATUROPATHY COURSES
Recommendations/Observations
13.4     The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for regulation of education of naturopathy. There are
ten-degree colleges of naturopathy in the country. But in the absence of any council having the power to regulate the
education of naturopathy, such colleges are running courses in a haphazard way, without any Central Standardization or
and any accountability whatsoever. The Committee is of the firm view that the Department should initiate immediate
action so that people are not put to any trouble. The Committee is happy to note that Department is reviewing the status
of both education and treatment aspects of naturopathy and would be coming out with a proper regulatory system in this
regard within a period of three months. The Committee would like to be apprised of the same.
 
Action Taken
               After consulting eminent practitioners and academics, the guidelines on the accreditation of Naturopathy
practitioners and institutions have been circulated to all the States and Union Territories. State Governments have also
been requested to enact comprehensive legislation at the State level covering the registration of practitioners, the
regulation of medical education and all related matters in due course and that till then a system for registration and
accreditation as suggested above should be put up in place immediately. A copy of the Department’s letter written to all
the Health Secretaries of the States and Union Territories dated 14.09.2006 is at Annexure-IV.
 
XVI.    MISCELLANEOUS
Recommendations/Observations
Tibetan Medicine has become quite popular amongst the people although it is not a recognized system in India. 
In states like Himachal Pradesh, Amchis are the medical practitioners in the Tibetan system of medicine.   There have
also been reports about violations concerning wildlife and usage of huge amount of bone material in this system of
medicine. The Committee has been given to understand that the Tibetan Medicine does not find any mention in our
existing legislation.  The Drugs and Cosmetic Act 1940 has a chapter on Indian Medicine but it does not mention
anything about the Tibetan medicine.  The Committee is of the opinion that the Tibetan system of medicine should be
brought within the ambit of law.  The Committee urges the Department to consider the inclusion of Tibetan system of
medicine in the legislation so as to regulate and recognize it for the benefit of the people.
 
Action Taken
            Department is undertaking research on Amchi (Tibbetian) system through RRI Leh a unit of CCRAS.
Department is developing the institute.   It also appears that Amchi system of medicine has originated from Ayurveda. 
Department is analyzing whether it should be developed as a separate system or as another specialty of Ayurveda. For
recognition of new medicinal systems, a bill is likely to the introduced by Department of Health and Family Welfare.
CHAPTER- II
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONBUDGETARY ALLOCATION II.BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.3       The Committee is not fully convinced by the justification given by the Department.   The Committee would like
to point out that during 2005-06, expenditure reported upto 15.1.2006 was Rs.223.27 crores which went upto Rs.292.35
crores by the end of the financial year.  This clearly shows that the last quarter of the year reported higher rate of
expenditure as compared to the remaining three quarters of the year. 
 
Action Taken
The expenditure of Rs.223.27 in the first three quarters reported upto 15.1.2006 constitutes 76% of the total
Expenditure during the year 2005-06 and therefore, the remaining expenditure in last quarter may not be considered as
higher rate of expenditure during last quarter as compared to that during remaining three quarters.
 
 
III CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES
Recommendations/Observations
3.2       The Committee notes that    against an allocation of Rs. 37.56 crores in 2005-06, expenditure reported upto 7th
March, 2006 is Rs.27.82 crores.  Receipt of less proposals due to pending UCs of previous years has been cited as the
main factor responsible for underutilization of allocated funds.  The Committee notes that level of overall expenditure
under the scheme has been more or less satisfactory during 2003-04 and 2004-05.   However, the Committee would like
to point that status of some components indicate a different position.   Funds meant for development/assistance of
UG/PG AYUSH colleges remained under utilised during 2003-04 and 2004-05 due to revision of the component and
receipt of less number of feasible proposals.  The Committee observes that during 2005-06, the physical targets set
under these components could not be achieved fully.   Under ROTP/CME for AYUSH personnel, the Committee notes
that against a target of 105-110 colleges to be benefited, achievement level is restricted to 64 colleges only.   The
Committee understands that the component in its revised form is being closely monitored.     The Committee would like
to know about the number of beneficiaries (institution and statewise) during 2005-06.  
 
Action Taken
During 2005-06, thirty four college/institutions were assisted under R.O.T.P. component and the number of
colleges/institutions benefited under Continuing Medical Education (CME) was 28.  The required details of assistance
given under different components of the scheme is given in the statement at Annexure II.
 
Recommendations/Observations
3.3       The physical targets set for establishment of computer labs for selected colleges could not be met during 2005-
06 as central assistance of Rs.20 lakhs could be provided to only two colleges against a target of 7-8 colleges.   The
Committee finds that the scheme, very much required under the present scenario has not been getting due impetus.   
While there was nil achievement during 2003-04, performance level during 2004-05 showed noticeable improvement.    
Status of this component during 2005-06 is again discouraging.   The Committee strongly feels that this component
needs to be focussed more.
 
Action Taken
Efforts have been made to obtain adequate number of proposals under the component of Establishment of
Computer Laboratories and the component is receiving necessary focus. During the year 2005-06, central assistance was
provided for Eight Computer Labs. Under this scheme grants can be given to only government AYUSH PG College.
The scheme on “Development of Institution is being reviewed and would be modified in the Eleventh Plan to make it
more successful.
 
VI CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES
      STATUTORY INSTUTIONS
Recommendations/Observations
6.2.2   The Committee notes that   allocation of Rs. 15 lakhs in 2005-06 was brought down to Rs. 10 lakhs and the actual

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
expenditure reported is only Rs. 1.08 lakhs.   The reason given is delay in the formulation of a new proposal and
availability of Rs. 3.32 lakhs as unspent balances. The Committee finds the position was the same during 2004-05.  The
Committee apprehends that availability of unspent balances might have been the factor responsible for under utilisation
of allocated funds.
 
Action Taken
            Central Council of Indian Medicine has been utilizing the fund of non plan in time.    Non-receipt of proper
proposals for organizing workshops has been the reason for underutilization of allocated funds. This year out of 15.00
lakhs Rs. 13.30 lakh has been sanctioned to them.
 
VIII      NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANT BOARD  
Recommendations/Observations
8.4       The Committee is surprised to note that the proposal and projected requirements did not find favour with the
Department of Expenditure and the Planning Commission. Instead it was suggested that 5 posts including 2 posts on
outsourcing basis suggested by the Department of Expenditure would serve the purpose and accordingly there was no
justification for creation of 30 additional posts.
Action Taken
Matter of record.
 
 
IX   STRENGTHENING OF PHARMACOPOEIAL LABORATORIES
Recommendations/Observations
9.3       The Committee observes that the performance level of the other lab, HPL, Ghaziabad has been satisfactory with
regard to achievement of financial targets.   The physical targets and the achievement level during 2005-06 with regard
to various activities undertaken by the lab also indicate a good track record. 
 
Action Taken
Matter of record
 
Recommendations/Observations
9.4       The Committee has been observing the progress being made in the construction of buildings for the HPL and
PLIM for the last few years.  The Committee was given to understand that the both the buildings were to be completed
in all respects with the mandatory certificates and handed over by October, 2005 by the CPWD.   However, the latest
feedback given by the Department indicates that there has been some fresh delay in these projects.     The Committee
finds that the building of PLIM although completed structurally is yet to be handed over by the CPWD.   At present, the
matter is being pursued vigorously with the CPWD engineers.     Statement of the Department that the building for HPL
is reportedly complete indicates that there may be some formalities to be completed in respect of this project also.   The
Committee is not aware whether the buildings for both the labs were handed over on 10
th April, 2006 after fulfilling all
mandatory requirements as assured by the CPWD.   The Committee would like to be apprised about the final position. 
The Committee would also like to know about the original estimate and the actual expenditure of both the projects. 
 
Action Taken
Buildings of both PLIM and HPL have been completed and both the institutes have shifted to the new campus. 
The possessions of the buildings were taken on 26-6-2006.  The total expenditure up to 2005-06 was 12.99 crore against
the approved estimated amount of Rs. 13.17 crore for the project.
 
XII.     USE OF ANIMAL AND MARINE PRODUCTS IN AYURVEDA, SIDHA AND UNANI DRUGS.
Recommendations/Observations
12.2     The Committee strongly feels that the Department has to play a more pro-active rote in this sensitive area by
banning all animal products and wild honey in all preparation. Pig and cow products are likely to take on communal
colour. Other items like Ambrgris and elephant parts are internationally banned. Earthworm, animal teeth, peacock
feathers have no medicinal value and reduce the medicine to a placebo.
 

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
Action Taken
Ministry of Environment and Forests has constituted two Expert Committees viz. Animal Committee and Plant
Committee for reviewing the names of animals in the different schedules of Wild Life Protection Act.  Department had
requested both the Committees to give time for making presentation before them.   The Plant Committee has given time
and Animal Committee is also likely to give time shortly.  Department has always taken a stand for compliance of all
Acts and Rules.  As some of the animal products are used in Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani formulations.   Department
would like to convince the Animals Committee and the Committee constituted under Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
Act to formalize collection of animal products for Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani formulations without affecting the
conservation status and harm to  these animals.
 
XIV.    INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
14.3     Under the second component of Assistance for Exchange Programme/Seminar/ Conference /Workshop on
AYUSH in the country the Committee finds that an amount of Rs. 51 Lakh was approved for 2005-06 which was
sanctioned for 38 Colleges/Institutions/Universities /Organisations etc.   The Committee would like to have an idea
about the contributions of AYUSH made by such Exchange Programme / Conferences.
 
Action Taken
An amount of Rs.51.00 lakh was released  during 2005-06 under the Central Sector component for assistance for
exchange programme for Seminar/conference/workshop.
The scheme has promoted better awareness on AYUSH system of medicine in various countries.   Details of
visits/exchange of experts under this scheme are given at                      Annexure - V.
CHAPTER – III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.1       The Committee observes that there has been massive enhancement in the allocation of plan funds for the
Department.   As compared to Ninth Plan allocation of Rs. 364.43 crores, funds provided to the Department in the Tenth
Plan were Rs. 1194.60 crores.   Department has   managed optimum utilisation of funds during both the plan periods,
massive enhancement of funds notwithstanding.    The Committee notes that the trend of allocation and utilisation of
funds during the last two years of both Ninth and Tenth Plan indicates interesting similarity.   The Department could not
match the substantive increase in allocation of plan funds in 2000-01 and 2001-02, the last two years of Ninth Plan. 
Committee notices the same position in 2005-06 where funds had to be reduced at the RE stage.  The Committee
apprehends the same position during      2006-07 also.
 
Action Taken
The administrative set up for AYUSH is very weak in most of the States.  Funds under Centrally Sponsored
Schemes are released through the State budget and in many cases there is inordinate delay in release of funds to the
implementing agencies by the States.   Most of the construction work at the State level is centralized at the level of State
P.W.D who take inordinate long time to complete the construction component of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme.   
Due to these reasons the absorption capacity of the State is low and they are not able to furnish Utilization Certificates
in time, which leads to reduction at RE stage.  Further, some projects relating to All India Institute of Ayurveda, New
Delhi and National Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy, Arunachal Pradesh could not get administrative and
financial approval in time on account of various reasons.  This also resulted in reduction in R.E. 2005 – 2006.
 
Comments of the Committee
            Admission by the Department that the administrative set-up for AYUSH being very weak in most of the states
reveals the ground realities.   The Department has cited the inordinate delay in release of funds to the implementing
agencies by the State Govts as the main factor behind Central funds remaining under-utilised.   While appreciating the
constraints of the Central Govt., the Committee would like to point out that holding the State Govts. responsible would

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
not serve the purpose.    The Committee is of the firm view that role of the Department should not continue to be
confined as a fund-distributing agency.    The Department has to play a more pro-active role by identifying the
procedural bottlenecks at both State and Central level and take effective measures for removal of the same.
Recommendations/Observations
2.4       Committee’s attention has been drawn by another disturbing trend in the utilisation of allocated funds.   As
reported in the Performance Budget  (2005-06) , as on 31
st March, 2004 there were as many as 373 pending Utilisation
Certificates amounting to Rs.107.02 crores.   As per the latest information made available to the Committee, number of
UCs has reached the figure of 850 involving an amount of Rs.340.37 crores as on 1
st June,2005.   This clearly shows
that alongwith the increase in allocation, utilisation level is going down.  The Committee has been given to understand
that the major constraint being faced in optimum utilisation is the delay in the release of centrally sponsored grant by the
State Govts. to the implementing agencies and consequent delay in the submission of  UCs.   The Committee observes
that the Department has initiated some damage control measures, as a result of which number of UCs has been brought
down to 343 amounting to Rs.78.28 crores as on 31 st March, 2006.   While appreciating the efforts made by the
Department, the Committee is constrained to observe that these UCs date back to 1976.   It seems that the Department
has initiated corrective measures only during the last year or so.   The Committee would like to have an idea about the
pending UCs (State and Scheme wise).
 
Action Taken
The Department is continuing its efforts vigorously at highest administrative levels for obtaining the pending
UCs. A statement showing state-wise number of UCs pending and amount involved therein in respect of Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of the Department is at Annexure-I.
 
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee observes that the vigorous efforts made by the Department at highest administrative levels for
obtaining the pending Utilization Certificates have not led to any significant improvement.   Apprehensions of the
Committee remain unchanged as number of 343 UCs amounting to Rs. 78.28 crores as on 31.3.2006 have reached to
663 UCs amounting to Rs. 263.25 crores.  Details made available by the Department indicate that maximum pendency
of Rs. 149.11 crores is under the scheme of hospitals and dispensaries.  The Committee strongly feels that alongwith
pursuing at the highest levels for clearance of pending UCs with the major defaulter States, the Department should also
make an assessment of its schemes so as to identify their inherent drawbacks / constraints and removal thereof.  The
Committee has been compelled to make such an observation as pendency of UCs has been noticed in respect of majority
of States.
 
III.  CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES
Recommendations/Observations
3.4       The Committee takes a serious view of the pendency level of Utilisation Certificates    pertaining to all the
components of the scheme with 21 beneficiary states.   Maximum number of UCs are awaited from the following states
–
                                                                                                (Rs.in lakhs)
State No. of institutions Amount of UCs
Andhra Pradesh 23 360.40
Karnataka 18 331.89
MP 13 283.37
Maharashtra 22 362.31
Orissa 23 387.50
 
The Committee also notes that the above mentioned pending UCs are for the years 2002-03 and 2003-04.  All
the above-mentioned States are the recipients of   maximum funding   during 2004-05 and 2005-06 also.   
 
Recommendations/Observations

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
3.5       On a specific query in this regard, the Department cited the following factors responsible for pendency of UCs  -
-           Delay by State   Govts. in releasing funds to the implementing agencies for a variety of administrative
and budgetary reasons.
-                     UCs received not being in order.
 
Recommendations/Observations
3.6 The Committee was informed that the matter of pending UCs was being vigorously followed up with the concerned
States.  It was proposed to impress upon the States that release of further funds would be dependent on the clearance of
pending UCs.   The Committee   feels that this is the right decision taken which was long overdue and hopes that    there
would be judicious utilisation of funds by the State Govts. in future.
 
Action Taken
The Department is continuing its efforts vigorously for obtaining the pending UCs and insisting on releasing of
further funds on the basis of clearance of pending UCs.
 
 
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee has been expressing its serious concern over the ever-increasing number of Utilization
Certificates under different Centrally sponsored schemes of the Department.   In its Seventeenth Report, the Committee
had dwelt at length on this aspect of the scheme of ‘Development and Upgradation of AYUSH Institutions / Colleges.   
The Committee views with serious concern the response received from the Department.   The Committee is not inclined
to believe the contention of the Ministry that further funds are being released on the basis of clearance of pending UCs. 
Last year the Committee had pointed out the example of a few states which continued to receive funds inspite of
pending UCs.  The Committee is disturbed to note that the position remains unchanged.   From the details made
available to the Committee, as on 30.9.2006 i.e. during 2006-07, these very States were released further funds.  The
Committee strongly feels that by the end of the financial year of 2006-07,  the position would have aggravated further. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should initiate concerted efforts without any further delay
so as to ensure maximum and judicious utilization of allocated funds.
 
IV     HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES
Recommendations/Observations
4.2       The Committee observes that there are about 21000 AYUSH dispensaries in the country and the scheme calls for
financial assistance @Rs.25000 per dispensary per annum.  The Committee notes that during 2003-04 and 2004-05, 
utilisation was optimum and the funds were not found sufficient for the projected requirements of the existing
dispensaries.    The Committee is not aware about the reason for the reduction in the allocated funds for AYUSH
dispensaries during 2005-06.   The Committee would however like to point out that the core strategy of mainstreaming
of AYUSH under NRHM is to make available AYUSH services at the PHC/CHC level, either by reallocation of
AYUSH doctors from existing dispensaries or by hiring of additional doctors on contract basis for which funds will be
provided under NRHM.  The Committee apprehends that  on the plea of providing  AYUSH doctors at PHC/CHC with 
the funds being provided therefor under NRHM, AYUSH dispensaries  spread across the country may perhaps  not
continue to provide the services as being done uptil now.  Out of the 10000 AYUSH dispensaries and units located in
rural and backward areas, only 7936 dispensaries could be covered for improving the supply position of essential
AYUSH drugs during the year 2005-06.  The Committee would, therefore, like to emphasize that every effort should be
made for effective functioning of the existing AYUSH dispensaries.   
 
Action Taken
            As per schematic provision it is only the dispensaries which are located in ‘Rural and backward/remote areas’
which can be given funds and therefore 100% coverage is not possible.  The scheme is being revised in the 11
th Plan. 
Suggestions of the Committee regarding making the AYUSH dispensaries function effectively would be discussed with
State Health Secretaries on  14th – 15th December, 2006.
 
Comments of the Committee
           

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
The Committee was informed that out of 10,000 AYUSH dispensaries / units located in rural and backward
areas, only 7936 dispensary could be provided funds during 2005-06.  The Committee hopes that things must have
improved during 2006-07, and the changes proposed in the Scheme during the Eleventh Plan would also make the
Scheme more effective and useful for the targeted beneficiaries.
 
VI     CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES
STATUTORY INSTITUTIONS
Recommendations/Observations
6.1.3    Maintenance of Central Register of Homoeopathy is the responsibility of CCH.  However, the Committee notes
that there has been undue delay in the publication of such registers.  As per the information made available to the
Committee during 2005-06 central registers of homoeopathy for 1993, 1996 and 2003 could be published.  The
Committee is surprised to note that one register is under the process of printing since 21
st June 2004.   The Committee
notes that work relating to   renewal of central registers published in 1993 and 1996 which started on 20.1.2001 and
10.1.2004 is under process.   The Committee understands that it is a long drawn process.  Another problem being
noticed in the renewal of registers is receiving back of notices as undelivered due to expiry or address of the practitioner
not being known.  Delay in making inquiries from the state councils is the other problem responsible for non-updating
of registers.   The Committee is surprised to note that the last central register of homoeopathy sent to Controller of
Publication, Delhi on 21.6.2004 still awaits publication in the gazette notification.    This further delays the next issue of
central register.   The Committee is not happy with the way the matter of publication and updation of Central Register of
Homoeopathy has been handled so far.   It seems that      nobody concerned is prepared to take the responsibility.     The
Committee is of the view that the Department and the Council both have to take the responsibility for getting expedited
the publication of Central Register of Homoeopathy.
 
Action Taken
Central Council of Homoeopathy has published the Central Register(s) in 1993, 1996, 2003 and 2004 (the
Register published in 2004 was received in Oct; 2006) respectively.   Another Central Register containing the names of
practitioners borne on State Registers of Gujarat, U.P. & Karnataka (Part-I) has been sent to Govt. Press for publication
( on 25.10.2006).  The Council has also sent the renewed Central Register ( in respect of the Central Register of
Homoeopathy published in Gazette in 1993) to Govt. Press for publication.   The Council will be informing the
concerned practitioners about removal of their names from Central Register as per provisions of Registration
Regulations and names removed will also be published in the Gazette.  The work to renew Central Register published in
1996 has been initiated too.
 The delay in publication of Central Register occurs because Central Council of Homoeopathy faces the
problems of either non-submission of the State Registers at all or delay in submission thereof.  The State Registers are
maintained by the respective State Councils/Boards as per provisions of respective State/U.T. Acts. The State Registers
of some states do not furnish complete information as required to maintain the Central Register of Homoeopathy in the
prescribed manner.
 
In order to resolve the said difficulties regarding maintenance of Central Register of Homoeopathy, the Council
arranged a workshop in October 2006 wherein Registrars of various States Boards/Councils participated and difficulties
being faced were discussed.
 
Comments of the Committee
In its Seventeenth Report, the Committee had noted that the Central Register of Homoeopathy was sent to the
Controller of Publication, Delhi on the 21
st June, 2004.  As per the latest feedback received from the Department, the
Register published in 2004 was received in October, 2006.  The Committee does not appreciate this misleading
information.  The Committee can only conclude that although the Registers are being received at a later date from the
Press, they are being shown as published w.e.f. the date of their being sent to the Press.   This must be true in respect of
earlier Registers also.   The Committee would like to point out that this inordinate delay in printing indirectly gives
undue benefit to those practitioners whose names had to be removed for justified reasons.  The Committee, therefore,
emphasizes that the Department should pursue with all concerned authorities, be it State Councils/ Boards, State Govts

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
or the Govt. Press for timely publication of the Central Register.   Suggestions made at the workshop held in October,
2006 with State agencies could be used in expediting the process.
Recommendations/Observations
6.2.3    The Committee observes that the status of Central Register of Indian Medicine as on 28.02.2006 clearly reveals
that almost all the concerned states are lagging behind in sending the requisite information of updation of Central
Register.  States like J&K have sent the details which date back to March 1993.  The Committee understands that at
present information relating to the period April 1983-October 2005 is under process by the Council.   In respect of other
States also the Committee observes that although information have been received from the State Councils for 10-15
years on an average in each case, the same is yet to be incorporated in the Central Register.   It is not known that since
when this information is under compilation by the Central Council.   Even if it has been received in the recent past, the
Committee would like to emphasize that the process needs to be expedited.   The plea of the Central Council due to non
receipt of inputs from some states, there is delay in updating the Central Register can not be considered to be very
convincing.  The Committee is of the view that in the event of non-submission of required information by any state
council, a mechanism needs to be evolved so as to ensure that the updation of Central Register does not get unduly
delayed.  In the event of the AYUSH practitioners of a particular state being deprived of the opportunity of getting
registered in the state council, the fault should lie with that council. 
 
Action Taken
The Central Council of Indian Medicine maintains the Central Register of Indian Medicine in three parts as per
provisions of I.M.C.C. Act, 1970. This Register is based on the State Register of Indian Medicine maintained by various
State Boards / Councils.  Continuous efforts are being made to update the Central Register.  However, sometimes list of
practitioners has not been received from State Boards/Council in time and it could not be updated in a particular year in
such cases. For examples, the State Register for the period upto December, 1987 of Uttar Pradesh State has been
received only in 2006 inspite of making repeated request.  After going through the State Register of above period it has
been  observed that against the names of most of the practitioners, the names of qualification   and  awarding body were
not mentioned. Without having these information Central Register of Uttar Pradesh for the period upto December, 1987
can not be prepared.
 
As per information available, the record of Maharashtra Council is sealed by CBI and State Register of
Maharashtra State from 1992 onwards has not been received so far.
 
Further, Jharkhand, Uttaranchal and Chhatisgarh are newly constituted states and State Register of these States
have not been received so far.
 
            A workshop is being organized and Registrar/Presidents of State Board/Council and other State authorities will
be invited to deliberate the matter and evolve proper system and mechanism.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply given by the Department.   The Seventeenth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department was presented to the Parliament on the 22
nd May,
2006.  Action Taken Note sent by the Department on the 30 th November, 2006; i.e. after six months, simply informs
that a workshop with the state authorities is being organized.   The Committee is not aware whether such a conference
could be finally held.  Fact remains that pendency level of Central Register of Indian Medicine remains unchanged.  The
Committee, accordingly, reiterates its earlier observation for evolving an effective mechanism for updation of the
Central Register of Indian Medicine. 
 
Recommendations/Observations
6.2.4    The Committee has observed that the funds duly allocated for conduct of Election for the Council during the last
three years remained underutilized, making the Council not fully constituted. On a specific query in this regard the
Committee has been informed that the Council is fully constituted inspite of delay in election of Members from some

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
States due to the very fact that the members elected previously are still holding office.   From the Statewise information
furnished by the Department, the Committee finds that elections have been delayed in Bihar, MP, Rajasthan,
Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and W. Bengal either due to delay in updating of State Register or pending court
cases or frequent change of Returning Officers.  The Committee is not fully satisfied with the justification given by the
Department.  The Committee hopes that the Govt. would be bringing forward the amended Bill relating to the CCIM
before Parliament which would take care of these anomalies.
 
Action Taken
The Department is also of the opinion that there is a need to amend the IMCC Act so as to have elections in
time.  Accordingly, it has been proposed that a member of the Central Council shall hold office for a term of  five years
from the date of election or, as the case may be,  nomination and no longer: Provided that the Central Government shall
take or cause to be taken necessary steps for the reconstitution of new Central Council at least three months before the
expiry of the term of the Central Council. 
 
The Parliamentary Committee has accepted for a fixed term of five years to the members.  Even after this
amendment, if the elections from the States are not held in time, it is being considered to have a provision in the Act as
stated below:
 
“The Central Government shall nominate Members from the State in consultation with the State Government. Such
nominated members shall hold office till the elections are conducted and replaced by the elected Members.”
 
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee in its 11
th Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005, presented to
the Rajya Sabha on the 29th July, 2005 had made recommendations on the timely elections in the CCIM.  On the lines of
its recommendations made therein, the Committee feels that since the Central Council of Indian Medicine is a
democratically elected body having eminent experts in their respective fields, its members cannot be substituted by the
nominees of the Central Government for a temporary period of three months.  The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Central Government should start the election process six months prior to the expiry of the term of an elected
Member of the CCIM, thereby obviating any possibility of nominated members being appointed as members of the
CCIM.
 
VII    HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES
Recommendations/Observations
7.1   All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi
            The Committee has been observing the progress being made in the construction of the building for the past few
years.  The Committee is surprised to note that till 2004-05 the issue of allotment of land for the institute was the reason
for the undue delay.  Although the additional land is yet to be acquired, another development has taken place during
2005-06.   As informed to the Committee, the EFC in its meeting held on 3.10.2005 has directed that the proposal be
reformulated with focus on R&D, safety evaluation and quality standard in AYUSH. Accordingly a Committee has been
constituted to look into the suggestion made by the EFC and prepare a concept paper accordingly.   The Committee
apprehends that not much progress would be made during 2006 also as the planning for the project of building continues
to be under consideration.   The Committee is not aware of the original estimate approved for the construction of the
building for the hospital.  However, as things stand, it would be definitely on a enhanced level when completed.
 
Action Taken
Establishment of All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi requires approval of the Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) and C.C.E.A. before implementing the project.   Though EFC considered the proposal in its meeting
held on 3.10.2005 and recommended in-principle approval thereof but did make certain observations with regard to its
activities and scaling down of the estimated cost of Rs.315.00 crore. The revised proposal is again required to be
brought before the EFC.
 

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
            In pursuance of observations made by EFC in its meeting held on 3.10.2005 another detailed project report has
been prepared.  EFC proposal has also been prepared and Department is seeking the date for convening the meeting of
the EFC.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is distressed to note that no progress has been made in the project of construction of buildings
for the All India Institute of Ayurveda in the year 2006.  The Committee observes that   observations with regard to the
activities of the Institute and scaling down of the estimated cost were made by the EFC at its meeting held on the 3 rd
October, 2005.  More than a year has elapsed since then but the Ministry has not been able to seek a date for convening
the meeting of the EFC. The Committee apprehends that if things move in such a languid fashion, this Institute would
not see the light of the day in near future.  The Committee would like the Department to deal with the matter with a
sense of urgency so as to hasten the process, remove procedural bottlenecks and complete this project within the
approved cost and within the reasonable time period.
Recommendations / Observations
 
7.2       Ayurveda Hospital, New Delhi
            The hospital set up in 1978 is meant for extending Ayurvedic treatment facilities to CGHS beneficiaries and
general public. The Committee observes that in spite of funds being made available for expansion of the hospital, so far
no progress worth mentioning is visible. The Committee finds that the expenditure of the hospital is being managed
from the non-plan side. Not only this there is delay in the matter of creation of posts for the hospital. Year 2005-06 was
also no exception. Provision of Rs. 1.00 crore was brought down to Rs. 32.00 lakhs and expenditure reported upto 7
th
March 2006 was only Rs. 7.43 lakhs. The Committee notes that the proposal of upgradation of 25-bedded hospital to
50-bedded hospital has been finally approved. However, against the proposed 82 posts, the Ministry of Finance has
agreed to only 13 regular posts and 39 posts on outsourcing basis. The Committee strongly feels that in order to expand
the services of the hospital, required number of permanent posts need to be created. The Department should once again
approach the Ministry of Finance in this regard.
 
Action Taken
Main reason for underutilization of plan funds for this Hospital continues to be the non-filling up of posts. 
Efforts are being made to recruit persons on the 13 regular posts but with regard to the 39 posts approved for filling up
on outsourcing basis the Department is experiencing difficulty in getting the medical, paramedical and other
housekeeping staff from one single contractor.
 
            Department has taken note of the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to approach the Ministry of
Finance for creation of further regular posts in place of the posts on outsourcing basis.
 
Comments of the Committee
            Tardy progress in making the Ayurveda Hospital, New Delhi fully functional has been drawing the attention of
the Committee for considerable time.    The Committee is unhappy to note that no progress whatsoever has been made
during 2006-07 also.  The Department succeeded neither in filling up 13 regular posts nor in outsourcing 39 Sanctioned
Posts.  The Committee strongly feels that the Department should take up this issue with the Ministry of Finance so as to
resolve all the problems being faced by it in filling up the sanctioned posts.
 
Recommendations/Observations
7.3 Expansion of AYUSH Dispensaries in CGHS
            The Committee has been observing the non-performance of this scheme during the Tenth Plan. It has not been
possible so far to either strengthen the existing AYUSH dispensaries or to set up additional dispensaries. Every year,
targets are set and funds allocated therefor. But the Department has not succeeded in fulfilling them. The Committee has
been given to understand that out of seven AYUSH dispensaries sanctioned in 2003-2004,five have become functional. 
The Committee would, however, like to point out that ground realities are entirely different. These seven dispensaries
have been made functional by deployment of medical officers from the existing strength of CGHS dispensaries. The
Committee has been informed that a norm study of ISMH Dispensaries conducted by SIU is at present under

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
examination. Additional posts of medical/para-medical staff will be created only after implementation of SIU Report.
The Committee finds that in the meantime nine more AYUSH dispensaries have been sanctioned in 2004-05. The
Committee does not appreciate this kind of approach. Implementation of SIU Report needs to be given priority so that
dispensaries already set up can become fully functional. The Committee would, accordingly, recommend the creation of
additional posts for AYUSH dispensaries without any further delay.
 
Action Taken
The SIU report   on the staffing pattern of AYUSH CGHS dispensaries has been accepted and   action to create
necessary posts, for the AYUSH dispensaries already established with Medical officers, transferred along with the post
from the existing dispensaries and   for those dispensaries yet to be established, has been initiated. As soon as the staffs
are   available the dispensaries which are yet to be established shall be opened
 
Comments of the Committee
           
The Committee observes that finally the SIU Report on the staffing pattern of AYUSH CGHS Dispensaries has
been accepted and action for creation of necessary posts has been initiated.    The Committee would, however, like to
point out that efforts need to be made in a time-bound manner for creation and subsequent filling up of the required
posts for AYUSH CGHS dispensaries.
 
VIII. NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANT BOARD
Recommendations/Observations
8.5       The Committee finds that the final outcome of this whole exercise has been the proposed study for restructuring
of the Board for which preparatory exercise has already begun. The Committee is not happy with the turn of events. Six
years have gone since the setting up of the Board and the basic decision about its objective and infrastructure required
therefor remains undecided. One plan period would be over soon and perhaps the next plan would also be nearing its
end before a final view on the setting up of the Board is taken. The Committee expresses its deep sense of
dissatisfaction on this turn of events. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates once again to expedite the decision about
the mandate and structure of the Board acceptable to all concerned. The Committee is afraid that continuance of an air
of indecisiveness about this vital Body would lead to our endangered medicinal plants reaching the brink of extinction.
 
Action Taken
The decision to conduct Study for suggestion on status and organizational structure for National Medicinal
Plants Board was taken since the Planning Commission and Department of Expenditure did not agree to the proposal
contained in Cabinet Note and subsequent EFC memo pertaining to proposal for grant of status of registered society to
National Medicinal Plants Board and creation of 30 posts for it. The intention behind commissioning of Study is to have
an independent assessment of the role and functions of the Board and the appropriate organizational structure skills and
manpower required.
          Report from Consultancy organizations in respect of the study is expected shortly and the matter shall be pursued
thereafter with the competent authority for creation of posts.
           However, it is also submitted that the Medicinal Plants Board has been implementing programmes for
conservation, protection, cultivation and development of the Medicinal Plants including those considered endangered.
There is no indecisiveness in respect of status of the Board. The Board is functioning as part of the Department of
AYUSH. The Board is presently managing its work through officers/staff drawn from Department of AYUSH and
Research Councils etc working under it and the matter regarding its strengthening will be pursued with the competent
authority after receipt of the report of consultants.
 
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is happy to note that there is no indecisiveness in respect of status of the Board.  The Committee
would, however, like to point out that it is more than five years since the Board was set up, yet the phase of conducting
study on its status and organized structure has not ended.  Stopgap arrangement for carrying out the functions of the
Board through officers / staff drawn from the Department / Research Councils cannot be considered an ideal state of
affairs.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that every possible effort needs to be made at the earliest to make the
Board fully functional.
 

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
IX. STRENGTHENING OF PHARMACOPOEIAL LABORATORIES
Recommendation/Observation
9.2       The Committee observes that Plan allocation of Rs. 27 lakhs for PLIM, Ghaziabad during 2005-06 was reduced
to Rs. 15 lakh at the RE stage, out of which only Rs. 11.53 lakh could be utilized.   Reason given is less requirement of
funds due to non-filling up of posts.  The Committee has been observing the same trend of allocation and utilisation of
funds during the Tenth Plan.    Provision of funds is made at the beginning of the year but they remain unutilized due to
expansion of the lab not taking place.   The Committee is constrained to observe that the post of Director, PLIM, still
remains to be filled up.   The Committee has been given to understand that the post had to be readvertised under the
directions of UPSC. The Committee does not have much hope of further progress in the matter during the last year of
the Tenth Plan.  
 
Action Taken
Department of AYUSH is striving hard to get post of Director; PLIM upgraded from Rs. 12000 – 16500/- to Rs.
18400 – 22500/-.  The upgradation of the pay scale is very important to get a well-qualified and experienced person for
the post to lead the institute for developing it as an institute of international standards.  The post was re-advertised in the
lower scale.  Due to importance of the Laboratory, it was decided to upgrade the post and fill it up.  Director, HPL has
been given the charge of the posts of Director, PLIM.  Department is making sincere efforts to develop the institute.
Comments of the Committee
            Apprehensions of the Committee have proved to be true.  Tenth Plan would be over shortly and there would be
no regular Director for PLIM, Ghaziabad.  This is a classic example of making plans without having any prior
assessment.  The post of Director, PLIM, Ghaziabad was advertised.  Thereafter it was re-advertised in the lower scale. 
Then it was realized that for getting a well-qualified and experienced person, the upgradation of the post needed to be
done.  Present position is that the Department is striving hard to achieve the same.  The Committee expresses its deep
sense of unhappiness on this state of affairs.  The Committee once again emphasises that the Post of Director, PLIM,
Ghaziabad may be filled up without any delay.  
 
X.  DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH-EAST UNDER PLAN SCHEMES OF THE DEPARTMENT
Recommendations / Observations
10.2     The North East Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy is to be set up in Arunachal Pradesh.  The Committee
has been observing the progress of this project for quite some time.   In the beginning of every year, nominal provision
for this project is being religiously made.   The proposed allocation for the entire Tenth plan was Rs. 5 lakhs and the
beginning of last year has started without any progress whatsoever being made.   As per the latest information furnished
by the Department, the matter has been reviewed by the Minister on 4
th October 2005 in the light of observations made
by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure about the viability of   the project.   The Committee is surprised
to note that a decision has now been made to locate the Institute of Health and Medical Sciences at Shillong and
allotment of land  for the Institute has also been made.    At present, approval of CCEA is awaited.   The Committee is
not very happy with the way the project of Institute   to be set up for the benefit of NE region has been handled.   It has
taken about four- five years to do the planning which has since been reviewed.   The Committee apprehends that another
plan period would perhaps be over in taking a final decision and starting the preparatory exercise for this much needed
institute.  The Committee can only emphasize that the Department should vigorously pursue this matter with all
concerned authorities. 
 
Action Taken
 
 It has now been decided in consultation with NE states in the meeting taken by  Hon’ble Minister for Health and
Family Welfare on 7-11-2006 that the North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine (NEIFM) will be established at
Passighat, Arunachal Pradesh and North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy (NEIAH) at Shillong.  A
Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the NEIAH at Shillong has been prepared with the estimated cost of Rs. 81 crore. 
Another DPR for NEIFM, Passighat is being prepared separately.   The Department of AYUSH would do its best to get
both these projects sanctioned and started as early as possible.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that another Institute i.e. North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine (NEIFM) will be

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
For timely utilization of funds, Department of AYUSH has taken number of initiatives.    The regular
meetings are being held with the State Health Secretaries/Directors of ISM of states at the level of Joint Secretary
and Secretary (AYUSH) for monitoring to release the funds to the implementing agencies in time. Further, the
department has ensured that no subsequent grant is released to the concerned state unless the UC for the earlier grant
is received.  Recently, the concerned Programme Officers were also deputed to various states to take stock of the
position and to stress upon the State Governments. to release funds to the implementing agencies and to obtain UCs
and also to monitor the implementation of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes of this Department. 
established at Passighat, Arunachal Pradesh.  The Committee would like to know the objectives of setting up of this
Institute for Folk Medicine.   Inordinate delay has already taken place in respect of the North Eastern Institute of
Ayurveda and Homoeopathy.  The Committee apprehends that the Institute of Folk Medicine might also meet the same
fate.   In order to obviate the possibility of further delay, the Committee reiterates its already expressed concern that
after the approval of CCEA is sought for both the Institutes, preparatory exercises should be started based on the
detailed project reports as early as possible and a deadline set for the completion of the projects so that these Institutes
benefiting the North Eastern region see the light of the day.
 
XI.     PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF DEPTT. OF AYUSH FOR THE PERIOD OF 2000-01 TO 2004 – 05 BY
CAG
Recommendations/Observations
11.2       The Committee notes that a number of areas which deserve to be seriously viewed have been raised in the CAG
Report.  The Secretary of the Department admitted before the Committee that most of the observations made by the
CAG were valid and exercise has been started at the Department level to take the corrective measures.  The Committee
would like to be apprised about the full details of follow up action to be taken by the Department.
 
Action Taken
Para 5.1 to 5.1.8 of the CAG Report regarding efficacy of Planning, Allocation and utilization of funds.
The matter of delay in release of funds by the States has been taken up with State Health Secretaries/Chief
Secretaries on a regular basis.  Most of the states have set up an umbrella State Health Society under NRHM and others
are in the process of setting up such societies.  The Department has also taken concurrence of Planning Commission and
Ministry of Finance for release of Department of AYUSH’s Centrally Sponsored Schemes funds to states through the
State Health Societies for onward release of funds to implementing agencies.   State Health Societies will be held
responsible for monitoring of implementation of schemes.  These arrangements, to be operationalized in 2007-08, are
expected to reduce delay in release of funds to the grantees and also result in improved monitoring.
 
Para 5.2.1 to 5.2.10 of the CAG Report regarding
Unrecognized Courses: There is no college which is authorized to award any qualification by themselves.   Colleges of
Ayurved, Unani and Siddha are affiliated to various recognized Universities and only those Universities are awarding
the degree to the students who undergo training in the colleges of Ayurved, Unani and Siddha.  Therefore there is no
question of any student passing out from any college obtaining the degree from a college and continuing without
recognition.  Sometimes it happens that new Universities do not apply or some restructuring of university and change of
name are not brought to the notice of  Govt. of India with request  with necessary supporting documents to include their
qualification in IInd Schedules to IMCC Act, 1970 as required under section 14(2) of IMCC Act, 1970.
 
Permission to Homoeopathy colleges in Chhattisgarh and Orissa: Since many representations had been received for
allowing the Raipur Homoeopathic College, Raipur which was established in the year 1982 for running diploma courses
and which was upgraded to BHMS course in 1998, for taking admissions from 2003-04, a central team of experts,
consisting of Adviser (Homoeopathy), Dept. of AYUSH and Principal, Nehru Homoeopathic Medical College, New
Delhi were deputed to inspect and assess the infrastructure of the college. They were also advised to inspect the other
college situated in Raipur which was granted permission by CCH for the year 2003-04.
After making an objective assessment of the infrastructure, the team of experts had recommended to allow
admission of 50 students in the Raipur Homoeopathic Medical College, Raipur and the permission was granted with the
approval of the competent authority i.e. Minister of Health and Family Welfare.
The Orissa Medical College of Homoeopathy and Research, Sambalpur (A State Govt. Institution) had not been

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
given extension of recognition by CCH for the year 2000-01 and 2000-02. However the college took the admission of
the students as the decision of CCH was communicated to the college only after the admission was over. The
recognition was not granted for the year under reference on the ground that the college did not fulfill the minimum
prescribed norms.  Further the CCH did not furnish any inspection report.  As such, a Central Team of Officers
consisting of Adviser (Homoeopathy) and Assistant Director, CCRH was deputed for inspection. The team
recommended the grant of ex-post-facto permission for the year 2000-01 and 2001-02 and for making fresh admission
in 2004-05 and onwards considering the assurance given by the State Government for fulfilling the deficiencies. The
Department of AYUSH had also provided funds under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Development of Institutions
to the institution for development of the infrastructure. Considering the recommendations of the team of experts
permission was granted with the approval of Hon’ble Minister of Health and Family Welfare to the college subject to
fulfilling the deficiencies pointed out in the CCH reports.
 
Non-fulfilling of minimum requirement : There are 458 Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha & Homoeopathy, Yoga &
Naturopathy (AYUSH) Colleges/ teaching institutions in the country.  It has been observed that several teaching
institutions do not meet the requirements of prescribed standards.  The onus for creating the required infrastructure and
making provision for teaching faculty etc. in accordance with the prescribed standards lies with the concerned college
management.  However, in order to assist the colleges to fill the critical gaps, this Department has been implementing
Schemes for assisting the Government/Government aided teaching institutions.  The following components of Centrally
Sponsored Scheme “Development of AYUSH Institutions” are being implemented during 10
th Five Year Plan by this
Department for upgradation of the standard of AYUSH education: -
(a)                Development of AYUSH UG Colleges
(b)               Assistance to PG Medical Education
(c)                Re-orientation Training Programme for AYUSH personnel
(d)               Renovation and Strengthening of hospital wards of Govt./Govt. –aided teaching hospitals of AYUSH.
(e)                Establishment of Computer Laboratory in AYUSH colleges.
(f)                 Upgradation of academic institutes to the status of State Model Institute of Ayurved/ Siddha/ Unani/
Homeopathy.
 
It is also proposed to include private but not for profit colleges under the above scheme in XI Plan.
 
Permission on the basis of previous year’s inspection:       The Central Council of Indian Medicine normally visits
any college which has not completed 5 years standing every year.  It is to confirm progress on various points of
infrastructure being made in that college every year as per requirement of professional courses.  After completion of 5
years, it is understood that the college may be maintaining requirement for teaching and training, thereafter one year gap
is given for visitation to those colleges which have not completed 10 years stand.
 
            The remaining colleges being standing for more than 10 years some time visitations are not conducted in these
colleges even for 2 to 3 years with the understanding that they must be maintaining Minimum Standards required for
teaching.
           
            However, since permission for admission is given to the college on year to year basis so those colleges not
visited in that particular year and if there is no complaint, then they are permitted to admit student as per previous year.
 
i)
                    The Central Council has decided to visit those colleges every year which are established within five years.
ii)                   Those colleges established within 5 to 10 years be visited every alternate year.
iii)                 10 to 15 years be visited twice within five year.
iv)                 The college established before 15 year be visited once in five years.
 
Rationalizing the inspection of various colleges:            The CCIM has laid down the minimum standards and
requirements for education in Ayurveda/Unani/Siddha systems of medicine for under-graduate and post-graduate
courses.  Besides, the Central Council had also laid down the proforma to be filled by the visitors at the time of
visitation on each and every point to enable the visitor to do the physical verification at the time of visitation.  
Normally, new colleges are visited every year for five years and thereafter on every alternate year.  Very old and

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
well-established colleges are visited after a gap of every two years or so.
 
      The CCH in routine inspects Homeopathic Medical Colleges once in three years but in respect of new college
granted permission by the Central Government, inspection is carried out every year.  Also the Council undertakes
inspection of the college as and when a request is received as per provisions of Section 12 A of Homeopathy Central
Council Act for increase of seats, starting of new or higher course or for considering a proposal for new college.  
Inspection of colleges/examinations are undertaken as per provisions of Section 17 and 18 of HCC Act and also as
per Inspectors and Visitors Regulations.
 
Inquiry against functioning of CCH:       In respect of teams of experts constituted for visitation of colleges, it is
true that members of Executive Committee are also visiting some of the colleges from time to time.    The visitation
reports are not only considered by the members of Executive Committee but prior to that it is considered by
Education Committees of concerned systems thereafter Executive Committee and ultimately by the Council.   So far
there students of understanding that excluding members of Executive Committee from visit of any particular
institution may not have in specific purpose.  It is also to be mentioned that in any visit of any particular college
there may be maximum one or two members of Executive Committee and decision taken by the Central Council is
of the entire which includes President and Vice-President also.  However, future policy of visitation is under
consideration of the Council and the final decision on this issue will be taken in near future.
     
      In exercise of the power conferred on the Central Government under Section 30 (1) of the Homoeopathy Central
Council Act, 1973, a Commission of Inquiry was appointed as under:
 
(1)
   Ms. Justice Usha Mehra, Retired Justice of Delhi High Court – Chairperson
(2)   Dr. Ramjee Singh, Vice-President, Central Council of Homoeopathy- Member
(3)   Dr. S.P. Singh, Adviser (Homoeopathy), Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,
Government of India – Member Secretary
 
As per Section 30 (1) the provision is “Whenever it is made to appear the Central Government that the Central
Council is not complying with any of the provisions of this Act (HCC Act, 1973), the Central Government may refer the
particulars of the complaint to a Commission of Inquiry consisting of three persons, two of whom shall be appointed by
the Central Government, one being the Judge of a High Court, and one by the Central Council of Homoeopathy and
such Commission shall proceed to inquire in a summary manner and to report to the Central Government as to the truth
of the matters charged in the complaint and in case of any charge of default or of improper action being found by the
Commission to have been established, the Commission shall recommend the remedies if any, which are in its opinion
necessary”.
           
                        Hence, it is very clear that two members one being the Judge of the High Court has to be appointed by
the Central Government and one will be the nominee of the Central Council of Homoeopathy.   The Central
Council of Homoeopathy had recommended the name of its Vice President, Dr. Ramjee singh for nomination in
the Commission on behalf of the Central Council of Homoeopathy.  That is why Dr. Ramjee Singh was
nominated as the representative of the Central Council of Homoeopathy.   The Order for appointment of the
Commission was made vide this Ministry’s letter No. R-14030/06/2002-HD dated 14
th January, 2004 and next
letter regarding terms and conditions of the services of Ms. Justice Usha Mehra, Retired Judge of Delhi High
Court was issued vide this Ministry’s letter of even number dated 31st March, 2004.   The Commission started its
functioning from the next day i.e 1 st April, 2004 in the premises of the Central Council for Research in
Homoeopathy, Janak Puri, New Delhi.  Commission submitted its report in June, 2005.
 
                        The Report of the Inquiry Commission was submitted to Government in the middle of June, 2005.  After
examination of the findings of the Report of Commission of Inquiry, the same was referred to Central
Investigating Agency (CBI) on 11.7.2005.  The CBI has registered cases on 28.9.2005 against the President/Vice
President/Secretary, CCH on the basis of the Enquiry Commission report for irregularities and corrupt practices.
 
      The CCIM maintains the Central Register of Indian Medicine in 3 parts as per the provisions of IMCC Act, 1970. 

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
This Register is based on the State Register of Indian Medicine maintained by various State Boards/Councils.   Efforts
have been made by the Council to update the Central Register.  However, updated list of practitioners is not been
received from some of the State Boards/Councils in time from some States; Central Government has also been
requesting the State Governments to update the registers in time and to hold elections on time.  Hon’ble HFM has also
written to the concerned Chief Ministers in this regard.
 
            The CCH has published the Central Register (database) in 1993, 1996 and in 2003 and another register is with
the Government Press, Nasik for publication in the Gazette.   Maintenance of Central Register is done on the basis of
updated State Registers of Homoeopathy, which are not furnished in time by the respective State Councils. A workshop
of Registrars of all states Councils / Boards of Homoeopathy keeping in view the various difficulties in maintenance of
Register of Homoeopathy faced by CCIM and CCH, as well as representatives of State Governments/UT
Administration would be organized by CCIM/CCH in October, 2006 so that some solution comes out for removal of
bottlenecks.  Hon’ble Health & Family Welfare Minister has sent a D.O. letter to the concerned Chief Ministers to
ensure timely updation of register of Practitioners by the State Boards and holding of timely elections.
 
National/Apex level Institutes
(a) National Institute of Homoeopathy, Kolkata:  Due to the CBI case against the Ex-Director and his subsequent
suspension & non-availability of a regular Director, there have been some administrative problems.  All efforts are
being made to find a suitable person for the post of Director and filling up of vacancies of teachers.   19 part-time
teachers have been engaged to ensure that teaching work does not suffer.   Adequate Plan/Non-Plan funds are being
provided to the institute.
(b) NIA, Jaipur:  The Institute advertised these 9 posts (2 Professors and 7 Associate Professors) and also 5 posts of
Lecturer in 1999. 
The posts remained vacant because the Method of Recruitment for the posts of Professor and Associate
Professor was 100% by Direct Recruitment when these posts were notified in 1999.  On a demand from the teachers to
revert back to the Method of Recruitment of 50% by Promotion and 50% by Direct Recruitment existed till 1996, a
proposal was moved to the Ministry to amend the Method of Recruitment.   This was approved and amended as 50% by
Promotion and 50% by Direct Recruitment in 2002.  Till then these posts remained vacant.  After the amendment, 1 post
of Professor and 4 posts of Associate Professor were filled by Promotion so also 4 posts of Lecturers by DR in the year
2002.  Though interviews for the remaining 1 post of Professor and 3 post of Associate Professor were also held on the
same dates, the Selection Committee did not find any one suitable for these posts. Thus, the remaining posts of 1
Professor and 3 Associate Professor and also 1 post of Lecturer only remained vacant.  Later on few more posts fell
vacant and all these have been advertised and  applications received are being processed for selection.
As the matter of filling up posts of Assistant Professor is at present sub-judice, an application has been filed in Hon’able
High Court to withhold only one post and allow all other posts. 
 
             As regards para-medical staff, it is submitted that it was not felt to fill up these posts looking to the starting of
the Diploma Course in Ayurvedic Nurse/Compounder as these trainees can be engaged in the hospital duties.  As these
posts remained unfilled for more than one year, they stand lapsed as per Govt. of India orders.  The work was managed
by the then existing para-medical and similar staff and no difficulty was experienced without filling up those posts and
therefore, it was not felt necessary to revive these posts. At present there are only 5 para-medical posts vacant and action
has been taken to fill up these posts.
 
Decline in Bed Occupancy:  The hospital buildings were under renovation, repair, white-washing, painting etc..  
Further the Institute also increased the user charges for various tests, etc.    All these resulted in the decline in bed
occupancy.  However, in the subsequent years, the bed occupancy was 61% in 2004-2005, 60% in 2005-2006 and 76%
during April-October 2006.  Efforts are being made to increase the bed strength to the maximum.  
 
(c)        National Institute of Unani Medicine  - All the 4 posts of Reader and 11 posts of Lecturers out of 12 have now
been filled up at NIUM. Despite posts having been advertised thrice, the 4 posts of Professors are not being filled up due
to non-availability of suitable candidates. We have also written to the Heads of various P.G. institutions and Universities
having P.G. faculty in Unani for suggesting names of suitable candidates. However, no response has been received. On

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
Remarks on Irregularities/ Deficiencies noticed: -
i. Efforts are being made to get the feed back of the training programme from the organization.
 
ii. Efforts are being made to get the Utilization Certificate of the training programme from the organization.
Reminders are being issued to the defaulter organizations.
 
2 posts of Professors retired professors have been engaged on contract basis. The Department of AYUSH has approved
the proposal of the Institute for inviting Guest Faculty from various institutions to take P.G. classes and guide the
students.
 
(d)        Rastriya Ayurved Vidyapeeth, New Delhi: 30 students have been fixed for admission to CRAV course and
regarding recognition of the course, it is submitted that the mandate of the RAV is not to confer degrees but to carry
forward the informal system of learning through the Guru Shishya Parmapara and the objects laid in MOA are being
achieved through imparting training to graduates and post-graduates, and publications.  RAV is a unique effort to revive
and sustain Ayurvedic traditional knowledge through informal mode of education.
 
Clarification on Para 5.2.20 of the CAG Report regarding Educational Institutions
5.2.20 The Department has been organising regular meetings with the State Health Secretaries/ Director of ISM of
States for monitoring of these schemes and to release the funds to the implementing agencies in time.   Further, the
Department has ensured that no subsequent grant is released to the concerned state unless the Utilisation Certificate for
the earlier grant is received.  Moreover the Programme Officers of this Department are being deputed to the States/ UTs
to monitor these schemes and to obtain Utilisation Certificates/documents pending with the State Governments.
Letters/reminder are also issued to State Govts. / Institutions to get the UCs and other documents.  The component wise
information is as follows:
 
Name of the programme: - Development of undergraduate colleges
 
Remarks on Irregularities/ Deficiencies noticed:- The issue of pending UCs is being monitored regularly and it is
being ensured that no grant is issued if there are pending UCs.  Two private colleges were given grant of Rs. 10.00 lakh
each for construction for building in Maharashtra for fulfilling prior commitment, which was made before amendment
of the scheme in 2003.  For construction of building grant is given in advance to state Government so that building is
constructed in time.   Since 1.4.2005 to 22.11.2006, 156 Utilisation Certificates have been issued in respect of UG
colleges.
 
Name of the programme:- Development of Post-graduate medical education
 
Remarks on Irregularities/ Deficiencies noticed:- Under this scheme, grant is given only to Government Institution.  
Care is being taken to ensure fulfillment of all conditions before grant is given.  From 1.4.2005 to 22.11.2006, 45
Utilisation Certificates have been issued in respect of PG colleges.
 
Name of the programme:- Re-orientation Training Programme for AYUSH personnel
 
 
iii . During 10
th Five Year Plan this scheme has been changed from Central Sector Scheme to Centrally Sponsored Plan
Scheme.  Accordingly grants are being released to the concerned organization through the State Government.  State
Governments have been asked to expedite utilization of grant and submit UCs in time.  From 1.4.2005 to 22.11.2006, 38
Utilization Certificates have been issued in respect of Re-orientation Training Programme.
 
Name of the programme: - Renovation and Strengthening of teaching hospitals
 
Remarks on Irregularities/ Deficiencies noticed: - Attempts have been made to ensure full compliance of conditions
before grant is released.  In the cited cases in Andhra Pradesh, the State Government has been asked to refund the grant.
Upto 22.11.2006 only 16 Utilization Certificates were pending.
 

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
 
Name of the programme: - Establishment of Computer Laboratory
 
Remarks on Irregularities/ Deficiencies noticed: - Department has nominated a nodal officer for each State to
monitor all schemes.  Moreover, meetings with ISM&H Secretary / Director in the State Governments are organized to
monitor the progress.  Upto 22.11.2006, only 19 Utilization Certificates were pending.
 
Name of the programme: - State Model Institute of Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani/ Homoeopathy
 
Remarks on Irregularities/ Deficiencies noticed: -
 
This scheme is a Centrally Sponsored Plan Scheme.   Accordingly grants are being released to the concerned
organization through the State Government.  State Governments are repeatedly asked to release money in time to
implementing agencies.
 
Clarification on Para 5.5 of CAG Report regarding
Production of raw material for AYUSH
Present status of the projects under implementation is as under: -
 
Year Promotional Scheme Contractual Farming Scheme
 Projects
Sanctioned
Cancelled Balance Completed Projects
sanctioned
Cancelled Balance Completed
2000-01 5 -- 5 -- -- -- -- --
2001-02 144 1 143 90 -- -- -- --
2002-03 101 -- 101 48 63 16 47 18
2003-04 66 1 65 31 688 24 664 139
2004-05 156 3 153 27 1557 492 1065 103
Total 472 5 467 196 2308 532 1776 260
 
Under Contractual Farming Scheme a total of 2308 projects have been sanctioned from 2002-03 to 2004-05. Out
of this 532 projects have been cancelled due to various reasons. In all 260 projects are deemed to have been completed
for which final installment has been released by National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB).
 
NMPB has prioritized 32 medicinal plants based on their market demand and their conservation status. However
cultivation is largely demand driven and project proposal received from farmers are largely governed by consideration
like easy availability of planting material, marketability and quick maturity. As a result only a few species were
preferred during the initial years under cultivation. However during the subsequent years the choice of species has
become much more broad based and representative.
 
As regards production, the assessment has been made by Indian Institute of Forest Management (IIFM), Bhopal
& Indian Council of Forest Research & Education (ICFRE), Dehradun evaluation study. Also, there are some crops
which have a long gestation and in case of such crops it will take some more time to assess the production.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee has taken note of the corrective measures taken by the Department on the observations made in
the CAG Report.
Efficacy of Planning, Allocation and Utilization of funds (Para 5.1 to 5.1.8 of the CAG Report)
 
            The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has initiated measures for timely utilization of funds and
obtaining of UCs.  The Committee hopes that monitoring by the Secretary (AYUSH), in active co-ordination with State
Health Secretaries, Chief Secretaries, Programme Officers and State Health Societies will lead to maximum and
judicious utilization of allocated funds in future.   The decision to release the Department’s Centrally Sponsored
Schemes funds to states through the State Health Societies (SHSs) for onward release of funds to the implementing

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
agencies is a welcome step.  The Committee hopes that these steps will help break the vicious circle of ill planning,
misallocation and underutilization of funds.  The Committee would, however, like to emphasize that concerted efforts
also need to be made for recovery / adjustment of unspent balances without any further delay.   
 
Medical Education (Para 5.2.1 to 5.2.10)
            The Committee is dismayed to note the response of the Department to very specific and serious discrepancies
pointed out by the CAG.  Department’s contention that there being no question of any student passing out from any
college obtaining the degree from a college continuing without recognition does not nullify the fact that as on March,
2005, medical qualifications awarded by 69 out of 444 colleges were yet to be recognized.
            The Committee understands that it is a difficult job to monitor the functioning of 458 AYUSH Colleges spread
over in different parts of the Country.  All the 142 Colleges inspected during 2000-05 failing to fulfill the minimum
requirement of prescribed infrastructural and teaching standards is indeed a serious matter.    However, Ministry’s
attempt to wash its hands off by stating that the onus of creating the required infrastructure and making provision for
teaching faculty lies with the college   is more disturbing.  The Committee would like to point out that this was only a
test check by CAG.  Position would not be different in respect of the remaining colleges also.  Being the administrative
Department, the Department of AYUSH cannot escape its responsibility of ensuring compliance of prescribed
standards.  It would have been better if the defaulting institutions were approached for taking corrective measures.
The Committee fails to comprehend the justification given by the Department for giving permission for
admission in the next session on the basis of previous year’s inspection.   Absence of complaint does not confirm that
minimum standards of infrastructure and teaching are being maintained by a particular college.  Annual inspection is all
the more required in the cases of colleges getting permission for admission on year-to-year basis.   The Committee is of
the firm view that this practice should be discontinued forthwith.  
 
Updation of Central Registers (Para 5.2.11 to 13 of the CAG Report)
The Committee has been reiterating on timely updation of Registers so that elections are held in time in CCIM
and CCH. Organizing a workshop of Registrars of all State Councils is a step in the right direction.  Concerted effort
should be made by the CCIM/CCH so as to evolve a mechanism to hold the State Councils / Boards responsible.  The
Committee recommends that feedback from the State Boards/Councils should be taken so as to help them in removing
procedural difficulties, if faced any.
 
National /Apex Level Institutes (Para 5.2.16 of the CAG Report)
 
            Audit Remarks on the functioning of two well-established institutions, i.e. National Institute of Homoeopathy,
Kolkata and the National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur and response of the Department thereto clearly establishes that
all is not well with these two premier institutions.   Continuance of vacancies for such a long period for want of suitable
candidates and court cases compels the Committee to conclude that these institutions will continue to function with
these drawbacks.  The Committee is not inclined to agree with the contention of the Department that trainees of diploma
courses in Ayurvedic Course / Compounder in NIA, Jaipur can be easily engaged in hospital duties, thereby doing away
with the sanctioned para-medical posts.  Practical training can be one component of a technical course but the entire
course cannot be confined to practical training.   The Committee takes a serious view of the existing status of both NIH,
Kolkata and NIA, Jaipur and impresses upon the Department to make all conceivable efforts to bring back their earlier
reputation.
 
Educational Institutions (Para 5.2.20 of the CAG Report)
The Committee notes that the Department’s reply is defeaningly silent about non-furnishing of NOCs from local
bodies by 25 colleges in support of construction plan and the inspection reports of 41 colleges not being verifiable as
regards status of fulfillment of prescribed conditions.   The Committee would like the Department to give its
clarifications on the above observations made in the CAG Report.
 
            The Committee also observes underutilization of funds allocated for development of Under Graduate and Post-

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
Graduate colleges in various states.  Pending utilization certificates and non-completion of projects on time are the other
areas of concern.  The Committee is of the opinion that effective monitoring at all levels needs to be undertaken so as to
develop the educational institutions and benefit the student enrolled therein.
Production of raw material for AYUSH Drugs (Para 5.5 of the CAG Report)
           
The Committee is dismayed to find the dismal state of affairs as far as the completion of projects under the
Contractual Farming Scheme is concerned.  Out of the total 1776 projects for the years 2000-01 to 2004-05, only 260
projects have been completed.  The state of affairs for projects under the Promotional Scheme is slightly better but far
from satisfactory.   Out of the total 467 projects for the years 2000-01 to 2004-05, only 196 have been completed. 
            The Committee would like the Department to constitute a Committee of experts to underline the stumbling
blocks in timely completion of projects and take suitable remedial measures to address the problem, based on the
findings.
            The Committee has also noted a glaring mismatch in figures given in the ATN and that given in the CAG
Report.  As per CAG report, only six projects could be completed under the Promotional Scheme during the period
2002-05 while the corresponding figure in the ATN is 196. Likewise the ATN shows 260 projects as completed under
the Contractual Farming Scheme, but the corresponding figure in the CAG report is 36.  The Committee would like the
Ministry to clarify mismatch in the figures.
 
XIV. INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
14.4     The Committee also observes that during 2005-06, six private AYUSH drug industries were sanctioned an
amount of Rs. 3,16,456 for participation in international fairs held in Dubai and USA. The Committee is surprised to
note that except Rs. 70,454 sanctioned for fair held in USA, the remaining sanction was meant for one fair, Middle East
Natural Products Expo 2005 held at Dubai. What is more surprising is that for Dubai fair, out of the 5 participating
industries, three were based in Bhopal. The Committee would like to have full details in this regard, amount of sanction,
expenditure (industry-wise) users. The Committee would also like to understand the criteria fixed for participation of
drug industries in international fairs.
 
Action Taken
M.P. Trade and Investment facilitation Cooperation Ltd., (Govt. of M.P Bhopal undertaking) informed that 7
drug industries had participated in the Middle East Expo. held on 6-8 Dec., 2005 at Dubai. Based on the
recommendation made by the screening committee of Department after examination the eligibility criteria,  the
Deptt. of AYUSH had granted the incentives to three drug industries holding GMP certificate.
 
Only one drug industry applied for grant of incentive for the participation in the Venetian and Expo Las Vagus
Naveda at USA.
 
The Department of AYUSH had sanctioned an amount of Rs. 4,13,25/- to 10  Drug Industries.  The details
indicating the amount of expenditure and sanctioned amount are given at Annexure-VI.
 
As per the Central Sector Scheme ‘Incentive to Drug Industries for participation in the fairs the Deptt. of
AYUSH  is providing the grant as incentives @ of 25% of total expenditure involved in the participation of the GMP
holding industries at National and International fairs of AYUSH Drug industries.  It is on reimbursement basis subject to
submission  of the statement of expenditure verified by a C.A.
 
Comment of the Committee
The Committee has been given to understand that the Screening Committee of the Department recommends the
names of industries for incentives for participation in international fairs after examination of their eligibility criteria.  
The Committee is yet not clear of the criteria set for eligibility for participation of drug industries in international fairs.  
The Committee finds only one such criterion i.e of holding a GMP certificate for participation in the International fairs. 
The Committee would like the Department to furnish categorical and detailed information on the eligibility criteria for
participation in international fairs and also the composition of the Screening Committee of the Department.
 

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
XV. ACQUISITION AND PUBLICATION OF TEXT BOOKS AND MANUCRIPTS.
Recommendations/Observations
15.2     The Committee has been given to understand that for acquisition and publication of text books and manuscripts,
Rs. 25 lakhs has been spent. The Committee would like to know the details about the books bought in the last 25 years
and the source of the acquisition of manuscripts. The Committee notes that the grant released for this scheme is used
only for continuation of old schemes and compilation of chapters as per the information given for the year 2003-04. The
Committee would like the Department to furnish information regarding the nodal agency involved in this process.
Details like the date of release of grant and the time given to complete the project and the selection of textbooks and
manuscript which are to be acquired should also be given. 
 
Action Taken
           For publishing the translation of manuscript Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha and Central 
Council for Research in Unani Medicine have been identified as a nodal coordinating agency by Department of AYUSH 
to identify the valuable manuscripts and out of print books of Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha throughout India.  The 
Councils evaluate the valuability of the manuscripts and out of print books through a Steering Committee comprising of 
Manuscript experts. No acquisition of any manuscripts has been done so far by the Department because 
               Department of AYUSH has no facility for the proper preservation and security of manuscript.
 
               The scheme was implement from 2003 onwards.  The detailed expenditure during the financial year 2003-
2004, 2004-2005 and 2005-2006 indicating the institutions and the publication of manuscript/text book are given in the 
statement at Annexure-VII
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is surprised to note that no acquisition of manuscripts has been done so far by the Department
for want of facility for the proper preservation and security of manuscripts.   It is not known whether any attempt at any
level has been made so far to acquire the required set-up for keeping the rare manuscripts in safe custody.  The
Committee fails to understand the reasons for having such a scheme on paper.  With regard to the other component of
the scheme i.e. publication of Textbooks etc., the Committee is constrained to observe that the complete information as
asked for has not been shared by the Department.  From the details made available to the Committee, it seems that there
is no time limit prescribed for any project about publication of Text Books.  The Committee finds that during 2004-05
and 2005-06, both fund allocation is on the low side and satisfactory progress is also there, however, this cannot be said
about 2003-04.  During this year, maximum grant of Rs. 105.00 lakhs was made to different agencies, with Director,
CCRAS, New Delhi getting Rs. 54.00 lakhs.  The Committee is constrained to observe that not even one agency out of
the eight agencies to which funds were released, have succeeded in completing their projects.   The Committee is of the
firm view that all these projects should not be allowed to continue any longer.  It is for the Department to monitor the
work being done by agencies falling under its control.
 
CHAPTER – IV
OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL
AWAITED
-Nil-
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS – AT A GLANCE
 
 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Comments of the Committee
            Admission by the Department that the administrative set-up for AYUSH being very weak in most of the states
reveals the ground realities.   The Department has cited the inordinate delay in release of funds to the implementing
agencies by the State Govts as the main factor behind Central funds remaining under-utilised.   While appreciating the
constraints of the Central Govt., the Committee would like to point out that holding the State Govts. responsible would
not serve the purpose.    The Committee is of the firm view that role of the Department should not continue to be
confined as a fund-distributing agency.    The Department has to play a more pro-active role by identifying the
procedural bottlenecks at both State and Central level and take effective measures for removal of the same. (Para 2.1)

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
 
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee observes that the vigorous efforts made by the Department at highest administrative levels for
obtaining the pending Utilization Certificates have not led to any significant improvement.   Apprehensions of the
Committee remain unchanged as number of 343 UCs amounting to Rs. 78.28 crores as on 31.3.2006 have reached to
663 UCs amounting to Rs. 263.25 crores.  Details made available by the Department indicate that maximum pendency
of Rs. 149.11 crores is under the scheme of hospitals and dispensaries.  The Committee strongly feels that alongwith
pursuing at the highest levels for clearance of pending UCs with the major defaulter States, the Department should also
make an assessment of its schemes so as to identify their inherent drawbacks / constraints and removal thereof.   The
Committee has been compelled to make such an observation as pendency of UCs has been noticed in respect of majority
of States. (Para 2.4)
 
 
III.  CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES
 
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee has been expressing its serious concern over the ever-increasing number of Utilization
Certificates under different Centrally sponsored schemes of the Department.   In its Seventeenth Report, the Committee
had dwelt at length on this aspect of the scheme of ‘Development and Upgradation of AYUSH Institutions / Colleges.   
The Committee views with serious concern the response received from the Department.   The Committee is not inclined
to believe the contention of the Ministry that further funds are being released on the basis of clearance of pending UCs. 
Last year the Committee had pointed out the example of a few states which continued to receive funds inspite of
pending UCs.  The Committee is disturbed to note that the position remains unchanged.   From the details made
available to the Committee, as on 30.9.2006 i.e. during 2006-07, these very States were released further funds.  The
Committee strongly feels that by the end of the financial year of 2006-07,  the position would have aggravated further. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should initiate concerted efforts without any further delay
so as to ensure maximum and judicious utilization of allocated funds. (Para 3.4, 3.5 & 3.6)
 
IV     HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES
Comments of the Committee
           
The Committee was informed that out of 10,000 AYUSH dispensaries / units located in rural and backward
areas, only 7936 dispensary could be provided funds during 2005-06.  The Committee hopes that things must have
improved during 2006-07, and the changes proposed in the Scheme during the Eleventh Plan would also make the
Scheme more effective and useful for the targeted
beneficiaries.                                                                                                                 (Para 4.2)
 
VI     CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES
STATUTORY INSTITUTIONS
Comments of the Committee
In its Seventeenth Report, the Committee had noted that the Central Register of Homoeopathy was sent to the
Controller of Publication, Delhi on the 21
st June, 2004.  As per the latest feedback received from the Department, the
Register published in 2004 was received in October, 2006.  The Committee does not appreciate this misleading
information.  The Committee can only conclude that although the Registers are being received at a later date from the
Press, they are being shown as published w.e.f. the date of their being sent to the Press.   This must be true in respect of
earlier Registers also.   The Committee would like to point out that this inordinate delay in printing indirectly gives
undue benefit to those practitioners whose names had to be removed for justified reasons.  The Committee, therefore,
emphasizes that the Department should pursue with all concerned authorities, be it State Councils/ Boards, State
Governments or the Govt. Press for timely publication of the Central Register.   Suggestions made at the workshop held
in October, 2006 with State agencies could be used in expediting the
process.                                                                                                                                                       
                                                       

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
                                                                                               (Para 6.1.3)
Comments of the Committee
           
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply given by the Department.   The Seventeenth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department was presented to the Parliament on the 22 nd May,
2006.  Action Taken Note sent by the Department on the 30 th November, 2006; i.e. after six months, simply informs
that a workshop with the state authorities is being organized.   The Committee is not aware whether such a conference
could be finally held.  Fact remains that pendency level of Central Register of Indian Medicine remains unchanged.  The
Committee, accordingly, reiterates its earlier observation for evolving an effective mechanism for updation of the
Central Register of Indian Medicine.  (Para 6.2.3)
 
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee in its 11th Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005, presented to
the Rajya Sabha on the 29th July, 2005 had made recommendations on the timely elections in the CCIM.  On the lines of
its recommendations made therein, the Committee feels that since the Central Council of Indian Medicine is a
democratically elected body having eminent experts in their respective fields, its members cannot be substituted by the
nominees of the Central Government for a temporary period of three months.  The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Central Government should start the election process six months prior to the expiry of the term of an elected
Member of the CCIM, thereby obviating any possibility of nominated members being appointed as members of the
CCIM.  (Para 6.2.4)
 
VII    HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES
All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi
           
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is distressed to note that no progress has been made in the project of construction of buildings
for the All India Institute of Ayurveda in the year 2006.  The Committee observes that observations with regard to the
activities of the Institute and scaling down of the estimated cost were made by the EFC at its meeting held on the 3
rd
October, 2005.  More than a year has elapsed since then but the Ministry has not been able to seek a date for convening
the meeting of the EFC. The Committee apprehends that if things move in such a languid fashion, this Institute would
not see the light of the day in near future.  The Committee would like the Department to deal with the matter with a
sense of urgency so as to hasten the process, remove procedural bottlenecks and complete this project within the
approved cost and within the reasonable time period. (Para 7.1)
Ayurveda Hospital, New Delhi
Comments of the Committee
            Tardy progress in making the Ayurveda Hospital, New Delhi fully functional has been drawing the attention of
the Committee for considerable time.    The Committee is unhappy to note that no progress whatsoever has been made
during 2006-07 also.  The Department succeeded neither in filling up 13 regular posts nor in outsourcing 39 Sanctioned
Posts.  The Committee strongly feels that the Department should take up this issue with the Ministry of Finance so as to
resolve all the problems being faced by it in filling up the sanctioned posts. (Para 7.2)
 
Expansion of AYUSH Dispensaries in CGHS
           
Comments of the Committee
           
The Committee observes that finally the SIU Report on the staffing pattern of AYUSH CGHS Dispensaries has
been accepted and action for creation of necessary posts has been initiated.    The Committee would, however, like to
point out that efforts need to be made in a time-bound manner for creation and subsequent filling up of the required
posts for AYUSH CGHS dispensaries.                                                 
                                                                                                 (Para 7.3)

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
 
VIII. NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANT BOARD
 
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is happy to note that there is no indecisiveness in respect of status of the Board.  The Committee
would, however, like to point out that it is more than five years since the Board was set up, yet the phase of conducting
study on its status and organized structure has not ended.  Stopgap arrangement for carrying out the functions of the
Board through officers / staff drawn from the Department / Research Councils cannot be considered an ideal state of
affairs.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that every possible effort needs to be made at the earliest to make the
Board fully functional.  (Para 8.5)
 
 
IX. STRENGTHENING OF PHARMACOPOEIAL LABORATORIES
 
Comments of the Committee
            Apprehensions of the Committee have proved to be true.  Tenth Plan would be over shortly and there would be
no regular Director for PLIM, Ghaziabad.  This is a classic example of making plans without having any prior
assessment.  The post of Director, PLIM, Ghaziabad was advertised.  Thereafter it was re-advertised in the lower scale. 
Then it was realized that for getting a well-qualified and experienced person, the upgradation of the post needed to be
done.  Present position is that the Department is striving hard to achieve the same.  The Committee expresses its deep
sense of unhappiness on this state of affairs.  The Committee once again emphasizes that the Post of Director, PLIM,
Ghaziabad may be filled up without any delay.   (Para 9.2)
 
X.  DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH-EAST UNDER PLAN SCHEMES OF THE DEPARTMENT
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that another Institute i.e. North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine (NEIFM) will be
established at Passighat, Arunachal Pradesh.  The Committee would like to know the objectives of setting up of this
Institute for Folk Medicine.   Inordinate delay has already taken place in respect of the North Eastern Institute of
Ayurveda and Homoeopathy.  The Committee apprehends that the Institute of Folk Medicine might also meet the same
fate.   In order to obviate the possibility of further delay, the Committee reiterates its already expressed concern that
after the approval of CCEA is sought for both the Institutes, preparatory exercises should be started based on the
detailed project reports as early as possible and a deadline set for the completion of the projects so that these Institutes
benefiting the North Eastern region see the light of the day. (Para 10.2)
 
XI.     PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF DEPTT. OF AYUSH FOR THE PERIOD OF 2000-01 TO 2004 – 05 BY CAG
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee has taken note of the corrective measures taken by the Department on the observations made in
the CAG Report. Efficacy of Planning, Allocation and Utilization of funds (Para 5.1 to 5.1.8 of the CAG Report)
 
            The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has initiated measures for timely utilization of funds and
obtaining of UCs.  The Committee hopes that monitoring by the Secretary (AYUSH), in active co-ordination with State
Health Secretaries, Chief Secretaries, Programme Officers and State Health Societies will lead to maximum and
judicious utilization of allocated funds in future.   The decision to release the Department’s Centrally Sponsored
Schemes funds to states through the State Health Societies (SHSs) for onward release of funds to the implementing
agencies is a welcome step.  The Committee hopes that these steps will help break the vicious circle of ill planning,
misallocation and underutilization of funds.  The Committee would, however, like to emphasize that concerted efforts
also need to be made for recovery / adjustment of unspent balances without any further delay.    (para 11.3)
Medical Education
            The Committee is dismayed to note the response of the Department to very specific and serious discrepancies
pointed out by the CAG.  Department’s contention that there being no question of any student passing out from any
college obtaining the degree from a college continuing without recognition does not nullify the fact that as on March,

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
2005, medical qualifications awarded by 69 out of 444 colleges were yet to be recognized.
 
            The Committee understands that it is a difficult job to monitor the functioning of 458 AYUSH Colleges spread
over in different parts of the Country.  All the 142 Colleges inspected during 2000-05 failing to fulfill the minimum
requirement of prescribed infrastructural and teaching standards is indeed a serious matter.    However, Ministry’s
attempt to wash its hands off by stating that the onus of creating the required infrastructure and making provision for
teaching faculty lies with the college   is more disturbing.  The Committee would like to point out that this was only a
test check by CAG.  Position would not be different in respect of the remaining colleges also.  Being the administrative
Department, the Department of AYUSH cannot escape its responsibility of ensuring compliance of prescribed
standards.  It would have been better if the defaulting institutions were approached for taking corrective measures.
 
The Committee fails to comprehend the justification given by the Department for giving permission for
admission in the next session on the basis of previous year’s inspection.   Absence of complaint does not confirm that
minimum standards of infrastructure and teaching are being maintained by a particular college.  Annual inspection is all
the more required in the cases of colleges getting permission for admission on year-to-year basis.   The Committee is of
the firm view that this practice should be discontinued forthwith.   (Para 5.2.1 to 5.2.10)
 Updation of Central Registers
The Committee has been reiterating on timely updation of Registers so that elections are held in time in CCIM
and CCH. Organizing a workshop of Registrars of all State Councils is a step in the right direction.  Concerted effort
should be made by the CCIM/CCH so as to evolve a mechanism to hold the State Councils / Boards responsible.  The
Committee recommends that feedback from the State Boards/Councils should be taken so as to help them in removing
procedural difficulties, if faced any.  (Para 5.2.11 to 13 of the CAG Report)
National /Apex Level Institutes                                                                                                                                     
 
            Audit Remarks on the functioning of two well-established institutions, i.e. National Institute of Homoeopathy,
Kolkata and the National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur and response of the Department thereto clearly establishes that
all is not well with these two premier institutions.   Continuance of vacancies for such a long period for want of suitable
candidates and court cases compels the Committee to conclude that these institutions will continue to function with
these drawbacks.  The Committee is not inclined to agree with the contention of the Department that trainees of diploma
courses in Ayurvedic Course / Compounder in NIA, Jaipur can be easily engaged in hospital duties, thereby doing away
with the sanctioned para-medical posts.  Practical training can be one component of a technical course but the entire
course cannot be confined to practical training.   The Committee takes a serious view of the existing status of both NIH,
Kolkata and NIA, Jaipur and impresses upon the Department to make all conceivable efforts to bring back their earlier
reputation.  (Para 5.2.16 of the CAG Report)
Educational Institutions
The Committee notes that the Department’s reply is defeaningly silent about non-furnishing of NOCs from local
bodies by 25 colleges in support of construction plan and the inspection reports of 41 colleges not being verifiable as
regards status of fulfillment of prescribed conditions.   The Committee would like the Department to give its
clarifications on the above observations made in the CAG Report.
 
            The Committee also observes underutilization of funds allocated for development of Under Graduate and Post-
Graduate colleges in various states.  Pending utilization certificates and non-completion of projects on time are the other
areas of concern.  The Committee is of the opinion that effective monitoring at all levels needs to be undertaken so as to
develop the educational institutions and benefit the student enrolled therein.  (Para 5.2.20 of the CAG Report)
Production of raw material for AYUSH Drugs
The Committee is dismayed to find the dismal state of affairs as far as the completion of projects under the
Contractual Farming Scheme is concerned.  Out of the total 1776 projects for the years 2000-01 to 2004-05, only 260
projects have been completed.  The state of affairs for projects under the Promotional Scheme is slightly better but far
from satisfactory.   Out of the total 467 projects for the years 2000-01 to 2004-05, only 196 have been completed. 
 
            The Committee would like the Department to constitute a Committee of experts to underline the stumbling
blocks in timely completion of projects and take suitable remedial measures to address the problem, based on the

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
findings.
 
            The Committee has also noted a glaring mismatch in figures given in the ATN and that given in the CAG
Report.  As per CAG report, only six projects could be completed under the Promotional Scheme during the period
2002-05 while the corresponding figure in the ATN is 196. Likewise the ATN shows 260 projects as completed under
the Contractual Farming Scheme, but the corresponding figure in the CAG report is 36.  The Committee would like the
Ministry to clarify mismatch in the figures.  (Para 5.5 of the CAG Report)
XIV. INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE PROGRAMME
Comment of the Committee
The Committee has been given to understand that the Screening Committee of the Department recommends the
names of industries for incentives for participation in international fairs after examination of their eligibility criteria.  
The Committee is yet not clear of the criteria set for eligibility for participation of drug industries in international fairs.  
The Committee finds only one such criterion i.e of holding a GMP certificate for participation in the International fairs. 
The Committee would like the Department to furnish categorical and detailed information on the eligibility criteria for
participation in international fairs and also the composition of the Screening Committee of the Department. (Para 14.4)
 
XV. ACQUISITION AND PUBLICATION OF TEXT BOOKS AND MANUCRIPTS.
Action Taken
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is surprised to note that no acquisition of manuscripts has been done so far by the Department
for want of facility for the proper preservation and security of manuscripts.   It is not known whether any attempt at any
level has been made so far to acquire the required set-up for keeping the rare manuscripts in safe custody.  The
Committee fails to understand the reasons for having such a scheme on paper.  With regard to the other component of
the scheme i.e. publication of Textbooks etc., the Committee is constrained to observe that the complete information as
asked for has not been shared by the Department.  From the details made available to the Committee, it seems that there
is no time limit prescribed for any project about publication of Text Books.  The Committee finds that during 2004-05
and 2005-06, both fund allocation is on the low side and satisfactory progress is also there, however, this cannot be said
about 2003-04.  During this year, maximum grant of Rs. 105.00 lakhs was made to different agencies, with Director,
CCRAS, New Delhi getting Rs. 54.00 lakhs.  The Committee is constrained to observe that not even one agency out of
the eight agencies to which funds were released, have succeeded in completing their projects.   The Committee is of the
firm view that all these projects should not be allowed to continue any longer.  It is for the Department to monitor the
work being done by agencies falling under its control. (Para 15.2)
MINUTES
NUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON   HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
VI
SIXTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.30 p.m. on Wednesday the 28
th February, 2007 in Committee Room "A", Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
          MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
 
1. Shri Amar Singh                                   --                     Chairman
2. Shri Digvijay Singh
3. Shri Lalhming Liana
4. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
 
LOK SABHA
 
     5.    Smt. Maneka Gandhi
     6.    Shri S. Mallikarjuniah

21st Report of Committee On Health And Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/21streport.htm[29-06-2016 14:49:58]
     7.    Dr. Chinta Mohan
     8.    Shri Nihal Chand
     9.    Shri Pannian Ravindran
     10.  Shri Uday Singh
 
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Under Secretary
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Committee thereafter, took up for
consideration the draft 20th & 21st Reports on Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on 16 th & 17th Reports of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare and Department of AYUSH
respectively. While discussing the ATNs submitted by the Ministry, the Committee expressed its displeasure over the
non-implementation of most of the recommendations of the Committee and the perfunctory manner in which the
Ministry has been responding to some of the suggestions of the Committee. The Committee decided to convey its
displeasure to the Secretaries of the concerned Departments during the course of their deposition before the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2007-08). The Committee, thereafter, adopted its 20th and 21st Reports.
3.         The Committee decided to present/lay its 20 th & 21 st Reports on 8 th March, 2007 in both the Houses of
Parliament. The Committee authorised Shri Amar Singh and in his absence Shri Digvijay Singh to present the reports in
Rajya Sabha and Smt. Maneka Gandhi and in her absence Shri Uday Singh were authorised to lay the reports in Lok
Sabha.
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 p.m.
NEW DELHI
February 28, 2007
     PRADEEP CHATURVEDI
UNDER SECRETARY
ANNEXURES