NINETY FIRST REPORT
(
( aid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2015)
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  December, 2015)
L
22nd
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Eighty-Fourth Report
on Demands for Grants 2015-16 (Demand No. 6)
of the Ministry of Ayush
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2015/Pausha, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
 91
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE


PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
NINETY-FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations Contained in the Eighty Fourth Report on
Demands for Grants 2015-16 (Demand No. 6)
of the Ministry of AYUSH
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha 22nd December, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2015/ Pausha, 1937 (SAKA)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE  COMMITTEE ............................................................................   (i ) –(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..........................................................................................     (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ....................................................................................................  (iv)–(v)
4. R EPORT ........................................................................................................       26
Chapter–I –  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have been accepted by the Committee
Chapter–II– Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
Chapter–III– Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
Chapter–IV– Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited
5. O BSERV ATIONS/ R ECOMMENDATIONS  –A T A G LANCE  ......................................................  27 –28
6. M INUTES .................................................................................................. 29–32
7. A NNEXURES .............................................................................................. 33–40
 2–8
 9-17
18-25
26

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-16)
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav       –  Chairman
 
 RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde
5. Shrimati B. Jayashree
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
7. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
8. Shri Ambeth Rajan
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh
10. Dr. T.N. Seema
 LOK SABHA
11. Shri Thangso Baite
12. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre
13. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
14. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan
15. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
16. Shri Devendra alias Bhole Singh
17. Dr. (Smt.) Heena Vijay Gavit
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
19. Dr. K. Kamaraj
20. Shri Arjunlal Meena
21. Shri J. Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee
22. Shri Chirag Paswan
23. Shri C. R. Patil
24. Shri M.K. Raghavan
25. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
26. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
27. Shri R.K. Singh
28. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
29. Shrimati Rita Tarai
30. Shri Manohar Untwal
31. Shri Akshay Yadav

SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
hereby present this Ninety-first Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee’s Eighty-fourth Report on Demands for
Grants 2015-16 (Demand No. 6) of the Ministry of AYUSH for the year 2015-16.
2. The Eighty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
24th April, 2015. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report,
received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare were considered by the Committee at
its meeting held on the 18
th December, 2015.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
the 18th December, 2015.
NEW D ELHI;       PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV
18th December, 2015         Chairman,
Agrahayana, 27, 1937 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
  Committee on Health and Family Welfare
          Rajya Sabha
(iii)

ACRONYMS
ACDP : Acquisition, Cataloging, Digitization and Publication
AFCL : Agricultural Finance Corporation Ltd.
AIIA : All India Institute of Ayurveda
ASUDCC : A yurveda, Siddha, Unani Drugs Consultative Committee
ASU&H DRUGS : A yurvedic, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic Drugs
ASUDTAB : A yurveda, Siddha, Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board
ATNs : Action Taken Notes
BE : Budget Estimates
CCH : Central Council of Homoeopathy
CCIM : Central Council of Indian Medicine
C-DAC : Centre for Development of Advanced Computing
CCRAS : Central Council of Research in Ayurvedic Sciences
CCRYN : Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy
CRIM : Central Register of Indian Medicine
CTRI : Clinical Trials Registry – India
DA VP : Directorate of Audio Visual Publicity
DIPAS : Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences
DoPT : Department of Personnel and Training
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee
GCP : Good Clinical Practices
IMCC Act, 1970 : Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970
IEC : Information, Education and Communication
JIPMER : Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research
LHT : Local Health Traditions
MDNIY : Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding
NEIFM : North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine
NEHU : North Eastern Hill University

NEIAH : North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy
NIA : National Institute of Ayurveda
NGO : Non Government Organisation
NIH : National Institute of Homoeopathy
NIMHANS : National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences
NIIMH : National Institute of Indian Medical Heritage
NMPB : National Medicinal Plants Board
NPCCL : National Projects Construction Corporation Ltd.
OPD : Out Patient Department
PCIM : Pharmacopoeia Commission of Indian Medicine
PMU : Project Monitoring Unit
RE : Revised Estimates
SAC : Scientific Advisory Committee
SMPBs : State Medicinal Plants Boards
SFC : Standing Finance Committee
UCs : Utilization Certificates
. UG : Undergraduate
(v)

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Eighty-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(Demand No. 6) of the Ministry of AYUSH for the year 2015-16.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the 84
th Report.  They have been categorized as follows:
 (i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
been acepted by the Committee:  22, 23, 25, 26, 44, 55, 65, 122, 125
     T OTAL  – 9       (Chapter I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies: 24, 32, 35, 45, 60, 62, 76, 83, 100, 105, 119, 128
     T OTAL – 12        (Chapter II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not
been   accepted by the Committee:  46, 49, 52, 57, 69, 73, 88, 91, 108, 114, 115
    T OTAL – 11      (Chapter III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited:  Nil
     T OTAL - 0      (Chapter-IV)
3. The details of the A TNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 The Committee is concerned to find that there were savings of significant magnitude under
several important heads during 2013-14 and 2014-15 as is evident from Table Nos. 2 and 3 given
above. The fact that the savings were not just the result of implementation of economy measures
but occurred due to various reasons like non-filing of posts, non-approval of schemes, delay in
execution work, slow space of construction etc., clearly suggests that there were inadequacies in
the monitoring mechanism, as well as budgetary planning process and budget allocations were
proposed without obtaining all necessary clearances. The Committee is of the firm view that the
savings would have been minimized substantially if proper internal auditing and streamlined moni-
toring mechanisms had been in place and periodic review of the trends and progress of expenditure
had been adopted. The Committee notes that the Ministry of AYUSH has initiated, at the behest of
this Committee, a number of steps to ensure optimal and efficient utilization of allotted funds. The
Committee would like the Ministry to scrupulously implement the initiatives taken in this regard and
simultaneously evaluate the impact of new initiatives on utilization of budgeted funds. The Com-
mittee would like to be kept apprised of the impact of the new initiatives taken on utilization of
budgeted funds.   (Para 22)
Action Taken
1.2 The Department of AYUSH has become a full fledged Ministry w.e.f. 9.11.2014.  A number
of measures have been initiated, as suggested by the  Committee, to ensure efficient utilization of
allocated funds.  These initiatives have yielded significant improvement and accordingly, about 26%
of the allocated funds of R1,008/- crore (Plan) have been utilized as on 30.06.2015 which is a
substantial improvement in terms of percentage of expenditure as compared to previous years
(5%-6%) of this Ministry on corresponding date. Concerted efforts are being continued to improve
the expenditure further during the remaining period of the year 2015-16.
Recommendation/Observation
1.3 The Committee is constrained to note that there has been persistent and substantial
underutilization of Plan funds under the heads – “Hospitals and Dispensaries”, “Educational
Institutions”, “Research and Development including Medicinal Plants”, “Development of A YUSH
Industry”, and “National Mission on AYUSH”. The allocations made in BE 2013-14 and BE
2014-15 under the above heads, were subsequently revised downwards at the RE stage and the
sums which remained grossly underutilized, were surrendered by the end of the year. The
Committee observes that such huge variations in BE, RE and Actuals are indicative of the fact that
2

3
principles of fiscal prudence and discipline were neither observed nor proper assessment of the
projects was carried out. The Committee observes that in a resource-constrained country like India,
all care needs to be taken to ensure that the scarce resources do not remain locked up and
surrendered at the fiscal end. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry chalk out
its fiscal roadmap in such a way that the allocated funds are utilized optimally and more
productively under the above Heads and such a situation does not recur in future.    (Para 23)
Action Taken
1.4 The Ministry of AYUSH has initiated a number of steps to ensure optimal and efficient
utilization of allotted funds. The corrective measures taken  by this Ministry for better financial and
fiscal discipline have resulted in improvement in expenditure amounting to R258.96 crore which is
about 26% of BE of R1008 crore during the first quarter of the current Financial Year 2015-16
in comparison to R57.58 crore (5.39 per cent of BE of R1069 crore) in 2014-15 during the same
period.  Concerted efforts are being made to optimally utilize the funds under different heads.
Recommendation/Observation
1.5 The Committee observes that to obtain greater evenness in the budgeted expenditure
within a financial year and reduce rush of expenditure in the last quarter of the financial year,
Ministry of Finance has prescribed the expenditure ceiling of 33% for the last quarter of the
financial year. As is evident from Table No. 5, the Ministry of AYUSH has breached the ceiling
of 33%, though only marginally, by incurring expenditure of 36.61% of plan funds in the last
quarter. The Committee would like the Ministry to monitor expenditure of funds more closely
and avoid rush of expenditure in the last quarter.   (Para 25)
Action Taken
1.6 A proper monitoring mechanism has been put in place to review the expenditure
periodically to see the allocated funds are spent evenly in each quarter of the financial year
so that the rush of expenditure in the last quarter is avoided.  It may be mentioned that during
the current financial year, an amount of R258.96 has already been incurred against the budget
allocation of R1,008/- crore (Plan) upto 30.06.2015 which is about 26% which indicates the
proper pace of expenditure.
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 The Committee notes with concern that out of the plan allocation of R1069.00 crore
each in BE 2013-14, and BE 2014-15, as much as R507.99 crore and R573.21 crore were
surrendered in Financial Years 2013-14 and 2014-15 respectively. The Committee takes a
serious view of the fact that the Ministry kept unspent budgetary provisions of R507.99 crore
in 2013-14 and R573.24 crore in 2014-15 till the last day of the financial years despite
reduction in allocations at RE stage. The Committee observes that the unspent budgetary
provisions should have been surrendered as soon as these were foreseen without waiting till
the end of the Financial Year so that they could have been gainfully utilized under some other
heads. The Committee would like the Ministry to improve financial discipline.   (Para 26)

4
Action Taken
1.8 Noted for compliance.
CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES
Recommendation/Observation
1.9 The Committee observes that now that the National AYUSH Mission has been approved
and implemented, the Ministry should work out modalities in consultation with all the
stakeholders including the North Eastern States to ensure that utilization of the budgeted funds
for NE States does not suffer from any inadequacies and registers a marked improvement in
2015-16.   (Para 44)
Action Taken
1.10 Budget Estimate of R318.00 crore has been approved for the newly created scheme ‘NAM’
for stakeholders (State/UT) including the North Eastern States for 2015-16. Out of
R318.00 crore, there is a provision of R36.40 Crore for the North Eastern States, which is more
than normal rate of 10% of BE.
1.11 In this regard, Ministry of AYUSH already intimated the State/UT resource pool to the
States/UT Governments requesting them to send the State Annual Action Plan (SAAPs) by
7th  May, 2015.
Further, the States/UTs were also asked to constitute the State AYUSH Societies with
suitable programme support unit for the smooth implementation of the programmes. In this regard
most of the states/UTs have already constituted State AYUSH societies. The provision has also been
kept for periodic monitoring and evaluation of the programmes at different levels.
1.12 Further, from the Grant-in-Aid of the Central Government the State/UT Governments are
able to expand the AYUSH infrastructure in the concerned States/UTs through following compo-
nents:-
(i) Increase in the provision for medicines and regular supply as per the demand.
(ii) Most AYUSH health facilities including standalone facilities needed infrastructure
like buildings, furniture, and equipment which can be focused under NAM.
(iii)  Improvement in monitoring mechanism.
(iv) The AYUSH educational Institutes are required to expand and fill up their
infrastructure gaps like hostels, libraries, etc.
(v)  The focus will be on the states, where the scheme has not been rolled out
adequately so far, like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, etc.
(vi)  In the North Eastern States except Assam, no AYUSH Educational Institutions are
available. Therefore, the scheme provisions expanded the coverage to the North
Eastern States.
(vii) The scheme is being continued with enhanced financial assistance to include a

5
recurring assistance for contractual manpower for Drug Testing Laboratories
(DLTs) in the State which are responsible for drug licensing and enforcement but
are not having adequate manpower/facilities
(viii) The quantum of assistance to Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy (ASU&H)
Pharmacies increased.
(ix)   Increase in quality testing, certification and market support.
(x)    Capacity building at all levels.
(xi) Better support for Good Agricultural Practices (GAP), Good Storage Practices
(GSP), etc.
NATIONAL INSTITUTES UNDER MINISTRY OF AYUSH
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY (NIH), KOLKATA
Recommendation/Observation
1.13 The Committee is dismayed to note that construction of Hospital Building for the purpose
of expansion of the Hospital from 100 beds to 250 beds is yet to be completed, though the original
targeted year of completion of the project was 2010-11. During the course of examination of
Demands for Grants (2013-14) in April, 2013, the Ministry had informed the Committee that the
original cost of R11.59 crore had been revised upwards to R13.08 crore. The Committee sincerely
hopes that there would be no more delays and the expansion of the NIH would be executed within
the revised cost and time-frame. The Committee would like to be kept apprised of the completion
of work of expansion at NIH.   (Para 55)
Action Taken
1.14 In compliance with the recommendation, the matter had been pursued with the CPWD by
the Secretary (A YUSH). Accordingly construction cost has been revised to R13.08 crore (Civil)
plus cost of Electricals R1.84 crore as against R11.59 crore (plus R1.84 crore. for Electricals).
Funds have been released and the remaining work is in progress and expected to be completed as
per schedule in next few months. The Ministry has further informed that the building is ready and
likely to be handed over shortly.
MORARJI DESAI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOGA (MDNIY)
Recommendation/Observation
1.15 The Committee observes that Naturopathy and Yoga are gaining popularity not only amongst
the Indians but all over the world and feels that there is an urgent need to regulate the practice
of Naturopathy and Yoga. Some guidelines/norms should be prescribed in this regard and the people
should be made aware of the benefit of these practices but under the guidance of the trained
manpower.   (Para 65)
Action Taken
1.16 As a first step Common yoga protocol has been prepared and published for International
Day of Yoga. An instructional DVD for that occasion has also been prepared. These initiatives will
help the people awareness about the benefits of Yoga.  Consequent to the adoption of June 21 as
International Day of Yoga by the United Nations General Assembly, the Government decided to

6
celebrate June 21, 2015 in a befitting manner all across the world.  The Ministry of AYUSH, being
the nodal Ministry, organized the following two events in New Delhi –
(a)   Mass Yoga demonstration was organized at Raj Path, which was led by the Hon’ble
Prime Minister of India.  Two Guinness Book records were made.  One, by participation
of 35,865 people for performing Yoga at a one place and the second, that this huge
gathering of 35,865 people belonged to 84 nationalities.
(b)   A two day international Conference on Yoga for holistic Health was organized at Vigyan
Bhawan, New Delhi which was inaugurated by the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India.  The
Conference was attended by more than 1500 delegates including about 50 foreign
delegates from 26 countries.
1.17 The Ministry of External Affairs organized events, across the world, through the Indian
Missions.  It has been reported that the event was celebrated in 192 countries.
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
Recommendation/Observation
1.18 The Committee observes that though some headway has been made towards signing of
MOUs for cooperation in the traditional systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy with developed
countries having credible regulatory framework, a lot still remains to be done for tangible progress
in this matter. Needless to emphasize that the Ministry should continue to focus its energies on the
developed European countries and the USA for entering into MoUs so that the therapeutic
credentials of AYUSH systems of Medicine can be established globally.  (Para 122)
Action Taken
1.19 The Ministry is making all efforts to enter into bilateral dialogue and explore the feasibility
of cooperation in the field of traditional medicine and establish therapeutic credentials in USA and
Europe.
1.20 USA/ CANADA
(i)    The Ministry of AYUSH is actively involved in bilateral dialogue with USA. The joint
communiqué issued during India US Trade Policy Forum in November, 2014 and during
the visit of US President in January, 2015 gave further impetus to on-going discussions.
(ii)    Ministry also facilitated the visit of US Embassy Officials to Faculty of Ayurveda,
Banaras Hindu University (BHU), and Faculty of Unani Medicine, Jamia Hamdard for
exposure to the strength areas of these systems.
(iii)    In the endeavour to carry forward the bilateral dialogue, a 3 member delegation led by
Secretary, AYUSH visited USA from 13-17th April, 2015. The delegation attended 15th
International Conference of Botanicals at National Center for Natural Products Research
(NCNPR), University of Mississippi. Secretary, AYUSH delivered inaugural address
apart from other fruitful interactions with academia, scientists and policy makers. The
conference specifically focused on the progress in the botanical research and
development, as well as regulatory and clinical aspects.

7
(iv) During the recent visit of PM of India to Canada an India-Canada Joint Statement:
“New Vigour, New Steps” was issued on 15th April, 2015. Due to persistent efforts
from Ministry of AYUSH and MEA, the last Para of Joint Statement under the sub-
heading of Science, Technology, Innovation and Space refers that “In the interest of
public health and recognizing the need to strengthen bilateral engagement and exchange
information in the areas of safety, efficacy, and quality of therapeutic products,
including cellular therapy products, as well as on traditional medicines, the Prime
Ministers agreed to establish a dialogue between relevant federal departments of the two
countries in order to facilitate cooperation”.
1.21 EUROPE
(i)    A scientific seminar on Indian traditional systems of medicine was hosted by Yerevan
State Medical University with support Ministry of Health, Armenia during 24-26
November 2014. The Ministry had deputed a delegation to make presentations in the
seminar. The seminar was attended by Armenian experts including policy makers, to
study AYUSH and examine the traditional systems of medicines in a scientific way.
(ii)  An exposure visit to Chaudhary Brahm Prakash Ayurveda Charak Sansthan, New Delhi
was organized on 20
th January 2015 for  scholars from EHESP school of Public Health
in France, which conducts courses in hospital management.
(iii) During the visit of the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India to France in April 2015, a Letter
of Intent (LOI) was signed between the University of Strasbourg, France and CCRAS,
New Delhi for cooperation in the field of Ayurveda with the objective of strengthening
relationships in the area of Ayurveda education and research. The University of
Strasbourg, France had also hosted a conference on Ayurveda for medical professionals
on 14 April 2015 where experts were deputed by the Ministry to deliver lectures. The
experts also made presentations at Alsace on 15th April, 2015 and in Paris on 16th
April, 2015
(iv) The Ministry had provided financial support and deputed experts to participate in the
2nd Ayurveda Congress and Exhibition, held in Moscow during 6-10 April, 2015.
(v) A delegation from Ministry of AYUSH participated in International Ayurveda Conference
organized in  the Netherlands during  April 10-12, 2015
(vi) Adviser (Ayurveda), Ministry of AYUSH gave a presentation on the regulatory
provisions of the Indian systems of medicine in the 6th meeting of the EU-India Joint
Working Group on Pharmaceuticals and Bio technology held on 30th April-1st May
2015 at New Delhi.
1.22 In addition to the above International Day of Yoga was celebrated by all Indian Missions
on 21
st June, 2015.
INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION
Recommendation/Observation
1.23 The Committee welcomes the restructuring of the Scheme - Information, Education and

8
Communication and hopes that with the modifications incorporated, Ministry would utilize the funds
budgeted under this Head more efficiently.  (Para 125)
Action Taken
1.24 The Ministry is taking all steps to utilize the allocated funds under IEC more efficiently.
A sum of R15.12 crore has already been utilized against the total allocation of R20.00 crore for
the year 2015-16.

9
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 From a scrutiny of information furnished, it is revealed that the entire budgeted plan funds
had to be surrendered due to non-approval of certain Schemes. For example, a sum of R4.00 crore
and R25.00 crore had been proposed in BE 2013-14 and BE 2014-15 respectively under the head
“All India Institute of Unani Medicine.” The Ministry spent a meager R0.20 crore in 2013-14 while
the entire budgeted funds for 2014-15 had to be surrendered due to non-approval of the project.
What is alarming is that this is not the only example of surrender of the entire budgeted funds.
Similar is the case with quite a few other projects such as “All India Institute of Yoga”, “All India
Institute of Homoeopathy”, “Homoeopathic Medicines Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.”,
“Pharmacovigilance Initiative for ASU drugs”, “National Institute of Medicinal Plants”, etc. The
Committee deprecates the Ministry for making unrealistic projection of fund requirements without
obtaining necessary approvals for implementation of the above projects. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that the Ministry should ensure that all pre-approval formalities are completed
before budget allocations are proposed and realistic financial outlays are earmarked for the above
projects/schemes. There is no point in making ritualistic allocations which remain on paper only.
  (Para 24)
Action Taken
2.2 National Institute of Medicinal Plants : The location for establishment of “National Institute
of Medicinal Plants (NIMP)” is being finalized.
AIIUM
2.3 Though Project had to be completed during Twelfth Plan Period, it could not take shape
as per expectation for want of identification of land for establishing the Institute. Now, land for
its establishment has been identified and Project Consultant has been selected for preparation of
DPR and monitoring the Project progress. As such, a realistic budget provision is expected in
future.
AIIY
2.4 Land could not be identified for the project and this has been deferred now.
AIIH
2.5 The project could not be started for want of land. Now, land has been identified and it is
being processed for taking the possession of the land from DDA. As such, a realistic budget
provision is expected in future.
2.6 It is to be seen that in all the above cases the “Land Procurement” has been the cause of
uncertainity.

10
2.7 The Ministry is putting its best efforts to optimally utilize the funds under different heads
and wherever it is found that the allocated funds cannot be utilized during the financial year, the
funds would be re-appropriated to other heads where they are required.
PENDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES
Recommendation/Observation
2.8 The Committee is concerned to note that the number of pending UCs and the amount
involved therein is still substantial despite the efforts made by the Ministry. What is more alarming
is that pending UCs date as far back as 2001-02. All this leads the Committee to the conclusion
that the steps taken so far have not yielded the desired results. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should review the methodology of monitoring the progress of
utilization of funds by the implementing agencies and evolve a multipronged strategy for liquidation
of pending UCs so that the execution of projects is not hamstrung by lack of flow of funds.
  (Para 32)
Action Taken
2.9 The issue of pending UCs has been/is a top priority consideration of this Ministry.  For
liquidating the pending UCs the Programme Officers were recently directed on 01.06.2015 to
reconcile the pending UCs status with the Pay and Accounts Officer for its liquidation/settlement.
The State-wise Nodal Officers have been appointed for liquidation of pending UCs by NMPB.
However, the recommendation has been noted for compliance. The Ministry has further informed
that:-
(i) Regularly letters have been written to the State Government authorities to urgently
liquidate all pending UCs;
(ii) Senior Officers/Programme Officers of the Ministry also keep on pursuing with
State Authorities for liquidation of UCs pending from time to time.
(iii) Under the four Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Ministry of AYUSH, pending UCs
amounting to R42.25 crore have been liquidated during 01.04.2015 to 30.09.2015.
(iv) Ministry of AYUSH has been implementing National AYUSH Mission (NAM) under
which all four Centrally Sponsored Schemes have been merged.  An amount of R273.87
crore (April-Sept.2015) has been released to the States so far against R318.00 crore
allocated in BE 2015-16.
Recommendation/Observation
2.10 The Committee takes note of the Secretary’s submission that it had been decided to
transfer Central funds for Centrally Sponsored Schemes through Treasury Route instead of Society
Route and conditionality regarding submission of UCs is no longer an absolute bar for release of
funds. The Committee hopes that the new arrangement would lead to better absorption of Central
funds. The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry should be more vigilant and ensure
that the Treasury Route of funds does not lead to fiscal profligacy and the funds so released result
in corresponding benefits and asset creation on the ground.         (Para 35)

11
Action Taken
2.11 Under National AYUSH Mission (NAM), Grant-in-Aid is being transferred to State/UT
Governments through treasury route with effect from F.Y . 2014-15.  With regard to released
financial assistance under NAM, State/UT Governments have been requested to transfer the funds
from treasury to State/UT AYUSH Society/ implementing agency timely for better implementation
of the Scheme.
CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES
Recommendation/Observation
2.12 The Committee takes note of the generation of 4.8 lakhs of man-days and production of
1236 tones of Medicinal Plants in NE States under the Central Sector Schemes and welcomes the
same. The Committee would, however, expect the Ministry to monitor utilization of funds allocated
for North Eastern States in such a manner that it results in corresponding outcome. For this
purpose, the Committee would like the Ministry to put in place an on-line monitoring mechanism.
         (Para 45)
Action Taken
2.13 The National Medicinal Plants Board, Ministry of AYUSH was implementing a Centrally
Sponsored Scheme on National Mission on Medicinal Plants since 2008-09 up to 2014-15, in terms
of establishment of nurseries, cultivation of medicinal plants and post-harvest management. The
Scheme is now merged with National AYUSH Mission Programme implementing the same
component for medicinal plants. To get information from the States on livelihood generation and
availability of raw materials to the consumers, a State-wise study was conducted during 2014-15.
2.14 Accordingly, most of the State Missions including North-Eastern State undertook a
systematic study for assessment of (i) yield/ tonnage of various raw materials made available to
users/manufacturers of AYUSH and related industry (ii) livelihood generated out of support under
programmes and increase in income generation of farmers/growers involved etc.  NMPB received
information from 20 different States including 5 North-Eastern States.  There is a progress in
increase of area under medicinal plants and livelihood income of cultivators along with creation of
man-days.
NATIONAL INSTITUTES UNDER MINISTRY OF AYUSH
MORARJI DESAI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOGA (MDNIY)
Recommendation/Observation
2.15 The Committee observes that despite incurring very little expenditure against the budgeted
plan allocations of R9.00 crore in BE 2014-15, R5.00 crore has been allocated on the plan side
in BE 2015-16. Keeping in view the fact that the shortfall in utilization of budgeted plan allocation
to the extent of R10.42 crore was also witnessed in the fiscal year 2013-14, the Committee
recommends that Ministry should, henceforth, project requirement of funds under the above head
after properly assessing the fund requirements and its correlation with the fund deployment and
utilization.   (Para 60)

12
Action Taken
2.16 Apart from regular Yoga Therapy, Yoga training and research programmes of the institute,
a budget provision of R12.00 Crore has been kept for 2015-16 on account of recruitment of
faculties for B.Sc. Degree Course in Yoga Science, diploma in Yoga Science and other educational
courses, for creation of infrastructure for B.Sc. Degree Course, certain major works like covering
of Amphitheater area, setting up Laboratories etc. Proper care has been taken during projection for
requirement of funds in BE 2015-16.
Recommendation/Observation
2.17 The Committee gathers from the Annual Report 2014-15 that one of the four work-plans
to be taken up under WHOCC relates to meta-analysis of Yoga research studies for documentation
and promotion of evidence-based uses of yoga. The Committee is happy to note that Morarji Desai
National Institute of Yoga has been designated as WHO Collaborating Centre (WHOCC). The
Committee would like to be apprised of the headway made towards completing the above work-
plan and also of the outcome thereof.   (Para 62)
Action Taken
2.18 There are four work plans to be completed under WHO-CC (Y oga). (i) Preparation and
dissemination of consumer information on proper use of Yoga and (ii) Organization of capacity
building workshops and training programmes on the role, scope, practice and evidence-based use
of Yoga in non-communicable disease have been completed. The report is under submission.
2.19 The work plan 3 (Development and dissemination of standardized health promotion Yoga
modules for various target groups (Children, Adolescents and Women of Reproductive age,
Geriatric population and Mental health promotion) is in progress.
2.20 The Concept paper on work plan-4 (Meta-analysis of Yoga research studies for
documentation and promotion of evidence-based uses of Yoga) is being finalized which is planned
using following mode of work:
Collection of research data on basic and applied aspects of Yoga at least from 1980
and onwards
The data will be classified into basic and applied research data
Consultative meetings will be convened to discuss and finalize the material.
2.21 The outcome of the work plan 4 will be useful to standardize the Yoga protocols for
different disorders based on scientific and traditional findings. The Ministry has further informed
that the concept paper has been received and the work plan is being prepared in consultation with
experts in the field.
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA (AIIA), NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
2.22 The Committee expresses its unhappiness at the tardy progress of implementation of the
project resulting in cost escalation as well as in surrendering of the budgeted funds. Keeping in

13
view the inordinate delay in operationalisation of this project, the Committee feels that the existing
system of monitoring leaves much to be desired and warrants a comprehensive review. Setting up
of the AIIA is a very ambitious project and is mandated to focus on very critical areas like
fundamental research, drug development, quality control etc. in Ayurveda. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that periodic/quarterly meetings should be held to review and constantly
monitor the progress of operationalisation of the Institute and resolve forthwith whatever
procedural or administrative hurdles are encountered in executing the project. The Committee also
recommends the Ministry to ensure that there is no further escalation of the project cost and the
Institute should be fully operationlised within the extended time frame.   (Para 76)
ActionTaken
2.23 It is to mention that presently building of All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA) is at an
advanced stage of completion. The furniture procured fo r AIIA has almost been placed floor wise
and room wise by the concerned agency in the entire building. AIIA has started the recruitment
process and some faculty staff are to join AIIA shortly to enable the Institute to initiate the process
for starting Hospital services as well as Academic session in the FY 2015-16. Further, some
essential Medical Equipment and Machinery of AIIA have been received and being placed at
appropriate place. Moreover, other Medical Equipment and Machinery are being procured and shall
be placed shortly.
2.24 In the regard, as per the recommendation of the Committee, AIIA has already taken up the
matter with the concerned authority of M/s HSCC (India) Limited and other involved Agencies for
early completion of building. However, AIIA has assured that there is no further escalation of
project cost and Institute shall be operational in FY 2015-16. Progress of the establishment of the
Institute is monitored regularly by the Project Consultant appointed in the Ministry and report
submitted by him are discussed in the meeting of PMC constituted to monitor the progress of the
project under the Chairmanship of Secretary AYUSH. The Ministry has further informed that the
All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA) is holding consistently meetings with the representatives of
M/s HSCC (I) Ltd. and M/s Kothari Associates and the Institute shall be functional in the year
2015-16.   The Institute has started recruitment on regular basis and most of the regular staff may
join upto December, 2015.  Walk-in-interview conducted and some Hospital staff has joined.  The
basic OPD services in new building has started and clinics in OPD is under process.
CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEME FOR DEVELOPMENT AND UP-GRADATION OF AYUSH
INSTITUTIONS/COLLEGES
Recommendation/Observation
2.25 The Committee wonders why State Governments are not able to avail the funds under this
scheme. The Committee notes that the scheme Development and Upgradation of AYUSH Institutions
has been plagued with financial underperformance for the last many years, mainly due to pending
UCs and non-receipt of suitable proposals. In view of the fact that the Scheme has been
restructured and treasury route of funds has been adopted for transfer of funds, the Committee
hopes that it would lead to better financial performance. The Committee would, however,
recommend that the Ministry should ensure that the extent of grants made, actually results in
corresponding development and up-gradation of AYUSH Institutions/Colleges. The Committee would
like the Ministry to put in place an effective monitoring mechanism for the purpose.  (Para 83)

14
Action Taken
2.26 Under the scheme Development of AYUSH Institutions, no proposal was considered for
release of grant during the year 2012-13 and 2013-14 due to pending UCs in the States/UTs.  The
scheme was then merged with National AYUSH Mission (NAM) during the year 2014-15 and the
proposals were considered as a part of the State Annual Action Plan (SAAP) of NAM and timely
progress of the implementation has been ensured.
NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD (NMPB)
Recommendation/Observation
2.27 The Committee feels constrained to note that a substantial amount of funds are involved
in pending UCs under National Medicinal Plants Board (Central Sector Scheme) and National
Mission on Medicinal Plants (Centrally Sponsored Scheme). Of more serious concern is the fact
the UCs continue to be pending even under the Central Sector Scheme which is under the direct
administrative control of the Ministry. As regards the pendency of UCs under the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme, the Committee feels that with the availability of advanced information
technology, the Ministry should have been able to develop an effective system of coordination with
the State Governments for the purpose of timely liquidation of pending UCs. As has been
commented upon in the earlier part of this Report, with the changeover from society route of funds
to Treasury Route of funds liquidation of UCs should not impinge on the further release of funds.
This would also speed up execution of the project within the approved cost and timeframe. As
regards the UCs pending under the NMPB, the Committee wishes to be apprised of the reasons
for pendency thereof.  (Para 100)
Action Taken
2.28 Majority of the UCs pending under NMPB pertains to Contractual Farming projects which
were sanctioned to farmers of different States and the UCs of these Grant-in-aids pending against
farmers are not liquidated either because of non-submission/submission of wrong or incomplete
requisite document by farmer/SMPBs as per Scheme guidelines and GFR.
2.29 To expedite the matter of liquidation of these pending UCs, NMPB has been consistently
taking-up the matter with implementing agencies in the concerned State with the help of State-wise
Nodal Officers constituted.
2.30 NMPB will take-up a pilot scheme in organizing meetings with concerned project authorities
in States besides inviting stake-holders for a meeting under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary/
Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH, so as to appraise the consequences of the pendency of UCs.
QUALITY CONTROL OF ASU&H DRUGS
Recommendation/Observation
2.31 The Committee in its 55
th Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of erstwhile
Department of AYUSH had  inter alia  observed that “the quality and standardization of ASU&H
products and stringent implementation of the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 and

15
the rules framed there under are very vital for the credibility of ASU&H drugs. However, the drug
testing requirements of ASU&H drugs cannot be met without setting up adequate number of quality
control laboratories and strengthening of the enforcement mechanisms of the States.” From
information made available to the Committee, it is revealed that the Centrally Sponsored Scheme
for supporting quality control activities has been evaluated by an external agency and revised
suitably on the basis of suggestions from the States. The Committee sincerely hopes that the
revised scheme would maximize outcome oriented implementation and lead to better off-take under
this scheme during the remaining period of the 12
th Five Year Plan. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should closely monitor utilization of the funds under this head particularly, as it
relates to capacity building of the State Drug Testing Laboratories for better quality control of
ASU&H drugs.  (Para 105)
2.32 The Committee also notes that Indian Ayurvedic drugs were found containing excessive
mercury and other substance and therefore were banned by European Union and some other
Countries and these Countries had imposed ban on Ayurvedic drugs and cosmetics which apart
from bringing a bad name to the country also resulted in loss of precious foreign exchange. The
Committee recommends that Department need to look into such incidents and put necessary checks
and balances to stop these incidents.
Action Taken
2.33 In order to meet the  testing requirements of ASU&H drugs, the Ministry of A YUSH
provided financial support to 27  State Drug Testing Laboratories in the previous plans to improve
their infrastructural and functional capacities and a provision made in the Drugs and Cosmetic
Rules, 1945 to facilitate approval of private drug testing laboratories.  States have given licenses
to 39 such laboratories under Rule 160 A-J of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 for carrying
out testing of ASU drugs and raw materials used in these drugs.  The number of applications for
such license has increased over the years.
2.34 In the 12
th Five Year Plan, the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Quality Control of ASU&H
drugs has been merged into the National AYUSH Mission, which is notified and implemented from
October 2014 and inter alia  has a provision to provide grant-in-aid for strengthening as well as
establishment of drug testing laboratories in the public sector, engagement of technical manpower
in the State laboratories, testing of drugs and strengthening of drug control framework.  After
implementation of National AYUSH Mission in the year 2014-15, proposals of eleven States have
been approved under the State Annual Action Plans pertaining to the component of quality control
of ASU&H drugs.
2.35 The Ministry has regularly followed up with the States to submit the Utilization Certificates
(UCs) or refund the unspent amount of grants released to them under the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme for Drugs Quality Control in the previous years. As a result, UC position of 21 States is
clear and remaining States have been repeatedly asked to settle the grant accounts without further
delay by submission of proper UCs and associated documents or refund the unspent amounts.
2.36 Following are the activities of drug quality control, which can be supported through
National AYUSH Mission-

16
(i) Strengthening of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic drugs Pharmacies of
State Government/ Co-operatives/Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs.).
(ii) S trengthening/establishment of State Drug Testing Laboratories.
(iii) S trengthening of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic drugs control frame
work.
(iv) Engagement of technical manpower in State Drug Testing Laboratories.
(v) Documentation, publication and dissemination of quality control materials.
(vi) Quality testing of drugs.
2.37 Minerals/metals are ingredients of a specific category of Ayurvedic drugs called
‘Rasaushadhies’. Quality standards of 21minerals/metals are published in the Ayurvedic
Pharmacopeia Pt. I, V ol.VII. These minerals are subjected to certain processes called Shodhana,
Marana, Amritikaran etc. for rendering them therapeutically safe and effective and it is mandatory
for the manufacturers to follow the pharmacopoeial standards and the Good Manufacturing
Practices (GMP) provided in the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules. Permissible limits of heavy metals
(Mercury, Lead, Cadmium, Arsenic), aflatoxins, pesticide residue, and microbial load are prescribed
in the Pharmacopeia and mandatory to be complied with herbal Ayurvedic drugs. The Ministry of
AYUSH have also issued orders since 2008 that drugs without adhering to permissible limits of
heavy metals may not be allowed for export and set up a Committee of Experts headed by Director
General of Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences to examine the incidences of alert/
ban and defaming articles in newspapers/journals about Ayurveda and formulate suitable rebuttal
response to protect the credibility of Ayurvedic system.  Ministry has also brought out Essential
Drug Lists of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy to facilitate states for procurement of
medicines from these lists with the grants provided through National AYUSH Mission.  Instructions
have been issued to the Central and State procurement regarding analytical reports of each batch
of the medicines supplied by the manufacturers to the dispensaries and hospitals. Spurious,
Misbranded and Adulterated ASU drugs are defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and penalties
are prescribed for those, who act in contravention of the quality related provisions.  Individual
incidences of quality issues of ASU&H drugs brought to the notice of Ministry of AYUSH are taken
up with the state authorities for necessary action.
DEVELOPMENT OF COMMON FACILITIES FOR AYUSH INDUSTRY CLUSTERS
Recommendation/Observation
2.38 The Committee observes that in its 68th Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14, it had
recommended to redesign the Scheme so as to facilitate development of common facilities for AYUSH
industry cluster in each State of the country. The Committee is, however, concerned to note that no
new proposal has been received in the 12th Plan so far though three years of the 12th Plan Period
have already passed and only two years are left. This calls for serious introspection. The Committee
would emphasize that the contributory factors to non-submission of new proposals by the States
should be gone into in detail and necessary corrective action taken accordingly.       (Para 119)

17
Action Taken
2.39 The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION
Recommendation/Observation
2.40 The Committee observes that despite the above steps taken by the Ministry the overall
standard of education in AYUSH colleges continues to be poor. The Committee therefore
recommends the Ministry to reorient its focus on improving the quality and standards of A YUSH
education in the country and regulating the same effectively. The Committee would like the Ministry
to have the accreditation standards of AYUSH Colleges prescribed by the Quality Council of India.
 (Para 128)
Action Taken
2.41 A yurveda, Siddha and Unani (ASU) education and systems of medicine are regulated under
the provisions of the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 (IMCC Act) and the relevant
regulations made thereunder. The Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) is a statutory body
made under the IMCC Act to regulate the practice and education of these ASU systems of
medicine. There is no provision in the IMCC Act and its Regulations to follow any standard of any
other Act and Regulations prescribed by any other Council except CCIM. Therefore, it will be in
violation of IMCC Act and its Regulations to have the accreditation standards of AYUSH Colleges
prescribed by the Quality Council of India.
2.42 It is pertinent to mention here that the CCIM is the only regulatory authority to prescribe
the standards of education and infrastructure of ASU Colleges by the way of notifications with the
prior approval of the Central Government. All the Gazette notifications of subordinate legislations
published by the CCIM are laid down on both the tables of Parliament (Rajya Sabha and Lok
Sabha) as per the provisions of the Act.  Hence, the Quality Council of India cannot prescribe the
standards of education and infrastructure of ASU Colleges and a college cannot follow the two
different standards at the same time.
2.43 The CCIM has made a number of Regulations to regulate the quality education in ASU
systems at undergraduate and postgraduate levels. The Council is revising from time to time the
course and curriculum of study in ASU Colleges as per the recommendations of the various
committees of the expert set up for the purpose. The suggestions from different forums, experts
and stake holders are also invited and incorporated in preparation and amendment of the Regulations
and curriculum. Any new Regulation or amendment is also circulated by the Council to all State
Governments for their comments before notification.  A list of CCIM’s Regulations and
amendments made so far to regulate and improve the quality education of Ayurveda, Siddha and
Unani (ASU) systems of medicine can be seen at Annexure-B.
2.44 Presently, there are 334 ASU Colleges with annual intake capacity of 21004 students (17628
UG + 3376 PG) (281 Ayurveda Colleges with 15087 under-graduate seats and 3089
post-graduate seats, 9 Siddha Colleges with 410 under-graduate seats and 140 post-graduate seats
and 44 Unani Colleges with 2131 under-graduate seats and 147 post-graduate seats).

18
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 The Committee has learnt that there is a proposal to do away with the distinction between
Special Category and Non-special Category States and if this is implemented, the 11 Special
Category States, who depend heavily on the Central Sector funds for Plan Schemes, will be hit
hard as they will end up spending much more than 10 percent and face huge shortfall in their
expenditure for health. The Committee would like to be updated in this regard.      (Para 46)
Action Taken
3.2 Under Centrally sponsored scheme of National AYUSH Mission, there is a distinction
between States, as mentioned below:
3.3 In respect of components of AYUSH services, Educational Institutions and quality control
of ASU&H Drugs, for Special Category States (NE States and three hilly States of Himachal
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Jammu and Kashmir) Grant-in-aid component is 90% from the Government
of India and remaining 10% is proposed to be the State contribution towards all components under
the scheme.  For other States/UTs the sharing pattern is 75% : 25%.
3.4 For Medicinal Plants, the component   is 100% by Central Government in North Eastern
States and hilly States of Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Jammu and Kashmir whereas in other
States, it is shared in the ratio of 90 : 10 between Centre and States.
Further Recommendation
3.5 The Committee is constrained to State that the action taken reply does not allay the
concerns expressed by the Committee regarding a proposal of the Government to do away
with the distinction between Special category and Non-special Category  States as it has not
touched upon this issue.  The Ministry has simply chosen to state the existing distinction
between States for the purpose of disbursement of grant-in-aid which the Committee is well
aware of.  The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to state in unambiguous
terms whether there is any proposal to do away with the existing distinction between Special
category and Non-special Category States.
UPDATION OF CENTRAL REGISTERS OF  INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY
Recommendation/Observation
3.6 The Committee regrets to note that despite its earlier recommendation to timely update the
Central Registers of the Indian systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy, not much headway has
been made in the matter, mainly due to delay in submission of accurate information by the State
Boards and its incorporation in the Central Registers. This is contrary to a provision in the Indian
Medicine Central Council (IMCC) Act 1970 which mandates the State Boards to submit updated

19
registers of practitioners on the first of April every year. The Committee is also dismayed to note
from the information furnished that the data received from the States is often found to have several
inaccuracies which further delays the updation of the Registers. The Committee is also surprised
to note that the time-lag between the receipt of information from the State Governments and its
updation /incorporation is 6 to 9 months in respect of the Central Register of Indian Medicine and
3 to 24 months in respect of the Central Register of Homoeopathy. Given the IT resources
currently available, the Committee is unable to reconcile itself with this huge time-lag. The
Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should initiate action, both statutory and
administrative, to facilitate timely maintenance and submission of accurate information and its
incorporation in both the Central Registers of the Indian systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action initiated in this regard.   (Para 49)
Action Taken
3.7 CCIM
(i)    As per the provision of Section 23 of IMCC Act, 1970, the Central Register of
Indian Medicine has been prepared on the basis of entries in the State Register of
Indian Medicine.
(ii)    As per Section 24 of IMCC Act, 1970, every state provides / sends timely
information on updations /deletions in the State Register to the Central Council once
in a year after 1
stday of April.
(iii)    The Central Registers pertaining to few States have also been prepared and notified
upto March, 2014. The rest of the State Register upto the said period are under
preparation. 
(iv)    For obtaining the copies of State Register along with CD upto March, 2015, CCIM
has sent letters to the State Registration Boards/Councils.
(v)    The CCIM has informed that the digitization of Central Registration would be
started w.e.f. 10
th July, 2015.     
3.8 CCH
1.       CCH has not yet initiated the work related to digitization of Central Register. However, they
have sent the status of taking entries of State Registers into Central Register of Homoeopathy as
per Annexure-A.  Suggestions to CCH to proceed on similar lines as that of CCIM will be issued
by this Ministry.
Further Recommendation
3.9 The Committee desires the Ministry to fast-track the work of digitization and
complete all formalities in the matter in a time-bound matter.
NATIONAL INSTITUTES UNDER MINISTRY OF AYUSH
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA (NIA), JAIPUR
Recommendation/Observation  (Para 52)
3.10 The Committee notes with serious concern the high number of vacancies in Group ‘A’

20
posts.  Since the National Institute of Ayurveda is inter-alia mandated to develop high standards
of teaching, training and research in all aspects of Ayurvedic System of Medicine, such a large
number of vacancies in Group ‘A’ posts will certainly lead to compromise its mandated activities
and affect the quality of teaching and research in an adverse manner. The Committee in its 68
th
Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) had taken cognizance of the high number of vacancies
and recommended filling up of the vacancies in faculty posts with priority and urgency and also
suggested action towards appointing professionally qualified persons on short-term contract or
deputation till regular appointments are made. The Committee would further recommend that
keeping in view the perennial shortage of manpower in senior faculty positions, the Ministry may
explore the possibility of appropriately revising the methods and conditions of recruitment of senior
faculty without compromising the requisite standards. Better service conditions and emoluments
may also be considered for attracting the available talent towards teaching profession.
Action Taken
3.11 Recommendations of the committee for providing better service conditions and emoluments,
to explore the possibility of revising the methods and conditions of recruitment of senior faculty
without compromising the requisite standards, have been noted for compliance.  The Amendment
to Recruitment Rules at par with the similar posts in National Institutes under the Ministry of
AYUSH is under process in accordance with the guidelines of DOP&T.
Further Recommendation
3.12 The Committee expects that the assurance given by the Ministry would be translated
into action and not remain mere platitudes.  The Committee finds that the issue has been
hanging fire since 2013-14 and has not been resolved with alacrity it deserves.  The
Committee would therefore like the Ministry to expeditiously finalise amendments to
Recruitment Rules within a given time-frame to ensure that senior faculty positions are
filled in the current financial year.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY (NIH), KOLKATA
Recommendation/Observation
3.13 The Committee observes that a considerable number of vacancies in teaching cadre has
been persisting for quite some time. The Ministry does not seem to have taken any initiative
towards overcoming the problem. Given the fact that NIH imparts education in Homoeopathy, and
serves as a model for other institutes/colleges across the country, the Committee recommends that
there is an imperative need to amend the rules relating to recruitment of Group ‘A’ posts, service
conditions and the quantum of emoluments so that it would attract talent towards this profession
and facilitate filling up of vacancies.   (Para 57)
Action Taken
3.14 Recommendations of the committee for amending RRs for better service conditions and
raising quantum emoluments to attract talents have been noted for compliance. The Ministry has
further informed that the Amendment to Recruitment Rules at par with the similar posts in National
Institutes under the Ministry of AYUSH is under process in accordance with the guidelines of
DOP&T.
Further Recommendation
3.15 The Committee has already made an appropriate recommendation at para 3.12  The
same recommendation stands repeated here.

21
NORTH EASTERN INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA AND HOMOEOPATHY (NEIAH), SHILLONG
Recommendation/Observations
3.16 The Committee observes that it is a matter of serious concern that NEIAH is yet to be fully
operationlized despite passage of seven years since it was approved by the Union Cabinet. The
Committee is constrained to observe that inordinate delay in full operationlisation of the Institute and
surrendering of the budgeted funds year after year is not only indicative of serious shortcomings in the
planning and monitoring mechanism of the Ministry but also reflects absence of sound budgetary
mechanism for assessing the actual requirement of funds for the on-going civil works. The Committee
also expresses its serious concern at the tardy progress made towards enabling full opertionalisation of
the Institute. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should gear up its monitoring
mechanism so as to speed up the completion and full operationalization of the Institute and gainfully
utilize the allocated funds for the purpose.   (Para 69)
Action Taken
3.17 Progress of the project is constantly being reviewed and NEIAH has been asked to get the
work expedited through the contractor and also to complete all other requirements of specialized
services. In the Ministry, a Project Consultant has been appointed to visit the Institute for assessing
the progress and advising the Director as well as HSCC. He visits the Institute frequently and
submits his report before the PMC constituted in the Ministry to monitor the progress of
establishment of the Institute under the Chairmanship of Secretary (AYUSH). Director, NEIAH has
assured to make optimum utilization of the funds.
NORTH EASTERN INSTITUTE OF FOLK MEDICINE (NEIFM), PASSIGHA T, ARUNACHAL
PRADESH
Recommendation/Observation
3.18 It is extremely disquieting that despite the fact that the time-line for completion of this
important project had to be revised four times, NEIFM is still not fully operationalised. The
Committee deprecates the Ministry for the inordinate delay in full operationalization of the Institute
which aims to revitalize, promote and harness local health traditions of the North Eastern Region
of the country. While expressing serious concern over the snail’s pace of the progress made in the
matter, the Committee recommends that a dedicated mechanism be put in place to take care of
procedural or operational hurdles, if any, and resolve them expeditiously at the highest level of the
Ministry. The Committee wishes to be kept apprised of the progress of civil work on a quarterly
basis.   (Para 73)
Action Taken
3.19 As in case of NEIAH, Shillong, progress of the establishment work of NEIFM is also
monitored by the PMC constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary(A YUSH). The appointed
Project Consultant in the Ministry visits the institute regularly and submits the report to the PMC.
Committee’s recommendation for apprising the progress of Civil work on quarterly basis, has been
noted for compliance. The Project Management and Consultancy agency M/s HLL Lifecare Ltd.  is
constantly being reviewed and requested to speed up and complete the construction works.

22
Rectification work of the Building and Guest House is going on and it is expected that M/s HLL
Life Care Ltd. may be able to complete the same by November, 2015.
Further Recommendation
3.20 The Committee recommends that a deadline be fixed for full operationalisation of
NEIAH and NEIFM and non-compliance beyond the deadline should attract penalty on the
contractor/concerned persons.   (Paras 69 and 73)
SCHEME FOR GRANT-IN-AID TO NON PROFIT/NON-GOVERNMENTAL  AYUSH
ORGANIZATIONS/INSTITUTIONS FOR UP-GRADATION TO CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE
Recommendation/Observation
3.21 The Committee observes that this is yet another example of unrealistic projection of fund
requirements, which were left unutilized. The Committee notes with dismay that explaining the
reasons for variation between the budgetary provisions of R20.00 crore in BE and RE 2014-15
respectively and the savings to the extent of 15.83 crore the Ministry has stated that the “balance
upto RE level will be utilized in March 2015” and not enumerated the specific reasons for huge
mismatch in allocation and expenditure figures under the head. This, in the opinion of the
Committee, epitomizes the cavalier fashion with which the Ministry has furnished its reply. The
Committee wishes to be apprised of the reasons behind the huge under-utilization of the budgeted
funds under the above head. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should evolve a proper
monitoring mechanism for optimal utilization of the allocated plan outlay.   (Para 88)
Action Taken
3.22 The observations of the Committee are taken note of.
3.23 The budgetary allocation of R20 crore was made under BE keeping in view the expected
receipt of fully complete new proposals and also release of grant for ongoing projects.  The said
budget allocation was reduced to R5.70 crore at Revised Estimate stage and the same was fully
utilized, thereby the saving amounted to R14.30 crore.
3.24 The funds could not be utilized fully for the year 2014-15, resulting in savings because of
the following reasons:
(i) Sufficient numbers of new proposals as expected were not received.  Most
of the proposals received were incomplete and not as per Scheme guidelines.
(ii) In respect of on-going projects further grants could not be released for non-
liquidation of UCs for earlier grants under the scheme and also pending UCs in
other Schemes as per conditions laid down in Department of Expenditure O.M. No.
7(1)E.Coord/2012 dated 14.11.2012.
3.25 To ensure the timely and complete utilization of budgetary allocations, Ministry has initiated
faster monitoring mechanism on the on-going projects.
Further Recommendation
3.26 The Committee is very much peeved to see that funds could not be utilized fully
during the year 2014-15 as sufficient numbers of new proposals were not received and the

23
ones received were incomplete/not as per the guidelines.  The Committee is of the view that
if the Ministry is providing funds for the new proposals but there are no takers for the
same, it is indicative of the fact that there is some inadequacy in the structure of the
Scheme for Grant-in-Aid. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government
should review the structure of the Scheme and come up with necessary modifications and
also to look into the fact whether proper dissemination of the information in regard to the
Scheme to concerned agencies was ensured or not.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT INCLUDING MEDICINAL PLANTS
PHYSICAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF EXTRA MURAL RESEARCH
Recommendation/Observation
3.27 The Committee observes that no amount of pure research will be useful unless it leads to
health outcomes and health products accruing therefrom, percolating to the ultimate beneficiaries’
i.e the patients through health care delivery systems. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry should evaluate all the on-going research projects on the basis of the above yardsticks
and apprise the Committee of the outcome thereof.   (Para 91)
Action Taken
3.28 The direct benefit to patients through research can be given by bringing medicine in the
market through patenting etc.  CCRAS, CCRUM and CCRS have already obtained patents in respect
of medicines developed by them.
3.29 However, as recommended by the Committee, all the Research Councils are being further
requested to evaluate all their on-going projects in terms of their utility to patients, i.e., whether
the research is leading to health outcomes and health products are percolating to the ultimate
beneficiaries  i.e.  patients through health care delivery system.
3.30 The Ministry has further informed that the projects have been evaluated by the A YUSH
Research Councils and it has been observed that all the projects under various schemes of research
are a long drawn process and the benefits are going invariably to the patients.  Notwithstanding
this, the impact of any project is subject to successful realization of outcomes.  In addition to
above, the efforts made by the Councils through Health Care programme namely, National
Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes Cardiovascular Diseases & Stroke
(NPCDCS) programme, Swastha Rakshan programme and Homoeopathy for Healthy Child are
directly benefitting general public/patients. Further in order to collect evidence/data for undertaking
research, the Research Councils are providing healthcare facilities to general public through 81
institutes, spread all over the country.
Further Recommendation
3.31 The Committee desires that the on-going research projects should be put to a
rigorous evaluation in such a way that they pass muster even with modern scientific
scrutiny.

24
QUALITY CONTROL OF ASU&H DRUGS
Recommendation/Observation
3.32 The Committee observes that quality control and standardization of ASU&H drugs leaves
much to be desired. It has often been reported in the media that Ayurveda and Homoeopathy drugs,
which were given to patients for various ailments, were laced with steroids and other improper
drugs. Permissible limits of heavy metals, pesticide residue, microbial load etc. are also sometimes
breached and regulatory needs of standardization and quality control of ASU&H drugs get seriously
impaired. On the issue of setting up of a separate Drug Controller of AYUSH, the decision to
develop a vertical structure of AYUSH in the present Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
(CDSCO) headed by the Drug Controller General of India is not acceptable to the Committee. The
Committee feels that in order to strengthen regulatory mechanism and effectively oversee the
quality control of ASU&H drugs, setting up of a separate Central Drug Controller for ASU&H drugs
is an imminent necessity since a wing of AYUSH in the existing CDSCO may not produce the
desired result of effective regulation of ASU&H drugs. The Committee is of the view that a
separate Central Drugs Controller of AYUSH will help synergise the core competencies of the
Central and State Regulatory Authorities by developing dynamic relation between them and also go
a long way in building credibility in ASU&H drugs besides promoting AYUSH in foreign countries.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that action be initiated to set up an independent and
separate Central Drug Controller for ASU&H drugs at the earliest.  (Para 108)
Action Taken
3.33 The Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules thereunder provide licensing and enforcement
powers to the State Governments for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homeopathic (ASU&H) drugs.
The Central Government makes and amends the legal provisions for ASU&H drugs, which are
enforced by the State Governments and support is provided for strengthening of enforcement
framework in the States.  The proposal of a separate Central Drugs Controller General of India
for AYUSH aimed at overseeing the implementation of regulatory provisions for ASU&H drugs in
the country was moved on the basis of recommendations of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs
Consultative Committee since 2010.  The objective is to develop improved coordination between
Central and State Regulatory Authorities for quality control of ASU&H drugs and facilitate effective
supervision over enforcement of the provisions of Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules,
1945 pertaining to Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs. Recently, Government has
considered to set up a structured central regulatory regime for AYUSH medicines and the current
proposal is to have a vertical structure for AYUSH in the Central Drugs Standard Control
Organization (CDSCO). Government has initiated procedural steps for setting up the vertical
structure of AYUSH in the CDSCO and the need for creation of a separate Drugs Controller
General for AYUSH may be assessed subsequently, the time-frame for which cannot be specified
at this stage.   The draft Recruitment Rules for the posts agreed by the Department of Expenditure
are in the process of approval for onward transmission to Department of Health & Family Welfare.
Further Recommendation
3.34 The Committee reiterates its recommendation and desires to know the final outcome
in the matter.
Recommendation/Observation
3.35 The Committee in its 55
th Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13, had commented upon
the ineffectiveness of the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954.
The Report was presented on 26
th April, 2012 and despite the Committee’s repeated reference to

25
this issue, no substantive action had been taken till date. This is indicative of the Ministry’s
lackadaisical approach towards this important issue. The Committee is happy to note that the
Ministry has finally constituted a Task Force for the purpose of suggesting amendments in the
aforesaid Act. The Committee would like the Ministry to play a proactive role in expediting the
Report of the Task Force so that the shortcomings witnessed in the aforesaid Act are addressed
effectively. The Committee also desires that early action may be taken to amend the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules, 1945.  (Para 114)
Action Taken
3.36 Referring to the 84
th Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, Department of Health
& Family Welfare, under whose jurisdiction Task Force for suggesting amendments in the Drugs
& Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954 was constituted, has been requested
to expedite  consolidation of the amendment provisions recommended by the Task Force and
suggestions/views received from the stakeholders and Government Departments.
3.37 The recommendation of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board
(ASUDTAB) regarding curbing the problem of misleading advertisements of ASU drugs has been
taken up by the Ministry and action initiated for inserting a new provision of prior approval of
advertisement contents in the Drugs & Cosmetics Rules, 1945. Draft notification of the proposed
amendment rules is being processed for finalization followed by approval of the competent authority
and vetting by Law Ministry.
Further Recommendation
3.38 The Committee notes that there has been recurring delay in amending the Drugs
and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954 and the Drugs and Cosmetics
Rules, 1945.  Though the process of amending the said Act and Rules has been set in
motion, its logical culmination is still some distance away.  The Committee would like the
Ministry to vigorously pursue the matter of amending the said Act and Rules within a given
time-frame.  The Committee desires to be kept apprised of developments in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation (Para 115)
3.39 The Committee also observes that the Ministry should not be complacent by merely
forwarding the list of recalcitrant advertisers to the State Licensing authorities and instead acquaint
itself with the follow-up action taken by them.
Action Taken
3.40 The Ministry of AYUSH is closely monitoring the actions taken by State Licensing
Authorities and have asked them to provide action taken report. Recently, Ministry of AYUSH wrote
to States on 8
th April, 2015 followed by a reminder on 11th May 2015 for seeking status of the
Gazetted officers authorized under section 8(1) of the Drugs & Magic Remedies (Objectionable
Advertisements) Act 1954 for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy drugs and the action taken
in the last three years. 11 States have so far provided the required information.
Further Recommendation
3.41 The Committee desires that the matter may be pursued with the remaining States.

26
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOV-
ERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-Nil-

27
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  AT⎯ A GLANCE
CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES
The Committee is constrained to state that the action taken reply does not allay
the concerns expressed by the Committee regarding a proposal of the Government to do
away with the distinction between Special Category and Non-special Category  States as
it has not touched upon this issue.  The Ministry has simply chosen to state the existing
distinction between States for the purpose of disbursement of grant-in-aid which the
Committee is well aware of.  The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to state
in unambiguous terms whether there is any proposal to do away with the existing
distinction between Special category and Non-special Category States.  (Para 3.5)
UPDATION OF CENTRAL REGISTERS OF  INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY
The Committee desires the Ministry to fast-track the work of digitization and
complete all formalities in the matter in a time-bound matter.  (Para 3.9)
NATIONAL INSTITUTES UNDER MINISTR Y OF AYUSH
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA (NIA), JAIPUR
The Committee expects that the assurance given by the Ministry would be translated
into action and not remain mere platitudes.  The Committee finds that the issue has been
hanging fire since 2013-14 and has not been resolved with alacrity it deserves.  The
Committee would therefore like the Ministry to expeditiously finalise amendments to
Recruitment Rules within a given time-frame to ensure that senior faculty positions are
filled in the current financial year. (Para 3.12)
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY (NIH), KOLKATA
The Committee has already made an appropriate recommendation at para 3.12  The
same recommendation stands repeated here. (Para 3.15)
NORTH EASTERN INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA AND HOMOEOPATHY (NEIAH), SHILLONG
NORTH EASTERN INSTITUTE OF FOLK MEDICINE (NEIFM) P ASSISHAT ARUNACHAL
PRADESH
The Committee recommends that a deadline be fixed for full operationalisation of
NEIAH and NEIFM and non-compliance beyond the deadline should attract penalty on the
contractor/concerned persons. (Para 3.20)
SCHEME FOR GRANT-IN-AID TO NON-PROFIT/NON-GOVERNMENTAL AYUSH
ORGANIZATIONS/INSTITUTIONS FOR UP-GRADATION TO CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE
The Committee is very much peeved to see that funds could not be utilized fully
during the year 2014-15 as sufficient numbers of new proposals were not received and the
ones received were incomplete/not as per the guidelines.  The Committee is of the view that
if the Ministry is providing funds for the new proposals but there are no takers for the

28
same, it is indicative of the fact that there is some inadequacy in the structure of the
Scheme for Grant-in-Aid. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government
should review the structure of the Scheme and come up with necessary modifications and
also to look into the fact whether proper dissemination of the information in regard to the
Scheme to concerned agencies was ensured or not.  (Para 3.26)
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT INCLUDING MEDICINAL PLANTS
PHYSICAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF EXTRA MURAL RESEARCH
The Committee desires that the on-going research projects should be put to a
rigorous evaluation in such a way that they pass muster even with modern scientific
scrutiny. (Para 3.31)
QUALITY CONTROL OF ASU&H DRUGS
The Committee reiterates its recommendation and desires to know the final outcome
in the matter. (Para 3.34)
The Committee notes that there has been recurring delay in amending the Drugs
and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954 and the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules, 1945.  Though the process of amending the said Act and Rules has been
set in motion, its logical culmination is still some distance away.  The Committee would
like the Ministry to vigorously pursue the matter of amending the said Act and Rules
within a given time-frame.  The C ommittee desires to be kept apprised of developments
in this regard. (Para 3.38)
The Committee desires that the matter may be pursued with the remaining
states. (Para 3.41 )

MINUTES

31
IV
FOURTH MEETING
(2015-16)
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 18th December, 2015 in Room No. ‘67’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
   MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav ⎯ Chairman
   RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. R.Lakshmanan
3. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
4. Shri Ambeth Rajan
5. Dr. T.N.Seema
   LOK SABHA
6. Shri Thangso Baite
7. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre
8. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
9. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
10. Dr. (Smt.) Heena Vijay Gavit
11. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
12. Dr. K. Kamraj
13. Shri M.K.Raghavan
14. Dr. Manoj Rajoria
15. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
16. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
17. Shri Akshay Yadav
   SECRETARIAT
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma, Assistant Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

32
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised
them of the agenda of the meeting,  i.e. , to consider and adopt draft *** 91 st Report*** on the
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the ***
84th Report*** of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the *** Ministry of
AYUSH.
II. Consideration and adoption of draft *** 91 st Report*** of the Committee
3. The Committee took up the consideration and adoption of *** 91 st Report*** on the Action
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in ***84 th Report*** of
the Committee on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the *** Ministry of AYUSH. The Members
discussed *** the *** Report*** and adopted the same after a brief discussion.  The Committee
authorized Dr. T.N.Seema, Member, Rajya Sabha and in her absence, Dr. R.Lakshmanan, Member,
Rajya Sabha to present the *** 91
st Report*** in Rajya Sabha on the 22 nd December, 2015 and Dr.
Manoj Rajoria, Member, Lok Sabha and in his absence, Shri Akshay Yadav, Member, Lok Sabha
to lay the Report in Lok Sabha on the 22
nd December, 2015. The Committee hoped that the
Ministries concerned would take due note of them and implement them with sincerity.
III. ***
4 . ***
IV. ***
5 . ***
V. ***
6 . ***
7. The Committee then adjourned at 10.35 
A.M.
***Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURES

35
ANNEXURE-A
STATUS OF TAKING ENTRIES OF STATE REGISTERS INTO CENTRAL REGISTER OF HOMOEOPATHY
Sl.No. Name of the State Received for the period Remark
1 Andhra Pradesh April, 2013 to May, 2014. Scrutiny is over. The entries are
(received on 27.10.14) being typed for taking into Central
Register.
2 Arunachal Pradesh 10.07.2013 to 27.02.2015 Being Scrutinized.
(received on 22.05.2015)
3 Assam State Register not received after
21.7.2011.
4 Bihar 17.4.64 to 4.4.11 & 5.4.11 to 13000 English Version Data Entries
21.12.12 (Received on 6.8.13 have been done for taking into
& 2.7.14 respectively). Central Register  out of 15000
entries. Work is in progress.
5 Chhattisgarh 9.4.13 to 27.3.14 Scrutiny is over and further
(received on 16.06.14) action is being taken for
inclusion in Central Register.
6 Delhi 1.4.12 to 31.3.14 Scrutiny is continuing.
(received on 04.04.14 & 22.01.15)
7 Goa Register beyond March 2013 not
received.
8 Gujarat 01.04.13 to 31.03.15 Being scrutinized.
(received on 06.05.15 & 20.05.15)
9 Haryana 1.4.13 to 31.03.15 Sc rutiny is over & further
(received on 30.06.14 & 19.05.15) action is being taken for
inclusion in Central Register.
10 Himachal Pradesh 1.1.10 to 31.12.13 Scrutiny is over and entries are
( received on 21.02.14) being typed for taking into Central
Register.
11 Karnataka 1.1.12 to 31.12.13 Scrutiny is over & further action is
(received on 24.02.14) being taken into Central Register.

36
(1) (2) (3) (4)
12   Kerala 09.01.12 to 05.10.12 Hard Copy not received, only C.D
received. After repeated reminders,
hard copy or reply not received
from the Kerala Council.
13 Madhya Pradesh No fresh State Register after March,
2012 received.
14 Maharashtra 1.  Upto 28.02.2010 1.   Important data viz names of
     (received on 23.12.2010)      awarding authority and awarding
     year is not given in whole State
Register State Council has been
     written by CCH on 14.02.2011
     and reminders  from time to
     time. Thus it could not be
     included in Central Register
of Homoeopathy.
2.  Received on 24.03.15  2.   In Whole State Register
      Addresses, Full name of
 Awarding Authority, Awarding
 years and Date of Registration
 not given. Letters written
 on 15.04.2015 to M.C.H.
 Council but no response
 received.
15 Meghalaya As on 31.12.14 Scrutiny is over & further action for
(received on 04.02.15) taking into Central Register is being
taken.
16 Nagaland As on 1 1.02.1998 State Board/Govt. not responded to
letters of CCH & Central Govt. So
work has been stopped.
17 Orissa Upto 20.02.15 Mix State Register Part I & II
(received on 23.03.15) practitioners  received on  23.03.15
is not found in proper manner. Earlier
too a number of entries of State
Register were not taken in Central
Register as State Board has not
responded to rectify the errors
pointed out.

37
(1) (2) (3) (4)
18 Punjab   July, 2011 to  June, 2014 Scrutiny is over & further action
(received on) 11.10.13 & 07.07.14 for taking into Central Register is
being taken.
19 Rajasthan State Register beyond March, 2013
not received.
20 Tamil Nadu No State Register received after March,
2009 even after repeated reminders.
21 Tripura (Received on 04.02.15) List sent by Tripura Council is not
found in proper manner. Letter sent
on 17.03.15 to Tripura Council but
no reply received from there.
22 U.P. 03.04.2006 to 31.12.2012 Being scrutinized.
(received on 19.05.15)
23 U.T. Chandigarh State Register beyond July, 2011 not
received.
24 Uttarakhand Upto 13.07.2014 Being scrutinized.
(received on 16.02.15)
25 West Bengal (i).  Upto 31.07.2013. (i).  Regn. Nos. 15001  to 30307
taken in Central Register as updated
on 13.05.15, (except of clarifications),
Letters & reminders sent to West
Bengal Council from time to time,
but reply is awaited.
(ii) From 16.12.13 to 31.03.14 (ii) State Register not found in proper
(Received on 15.09.14) manner. Letter written to West Bengal
Council on 24.02.15 & reminder sent
on 15.06.15.

38
ANNEXURE -B
Steps taken to regulate and improve the quality education of Ayurveda, Siddha and
Unani (ASU) systems of medicine
Amendment in the IMCC Act: To regulate and improve the quality and standards of
education and infrastructure in Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani (ASU) Medical Colleges, the Indian
Medicine Central Council Act was passed in 1970. The Act was amended  vide  the IMCC
(Amendment) Act, 2003. With effect to these amendments from 07.11.2003, the power to grant
the permission for establishment of new colleges, increase in admission capacity in any course
of study/training and starting a higher or new course of study/training and also to grant
permission to existing ASU colleges vests with the Central Government.
Regulations for new colleges, new courses and increase in seats: To grant permission for
establishment of new colleges, increase in admission capacity in any course of study/training
and starting a higher or new course of study/training the new Regulations made namely “The
Establishment of New Medical College, Opening of New or Higher Course of Study or Training
and Increase of Admission Capacity by a Medical College Regulations, 2003 read with
amendment Regulations of 2013”.
Regulations for existing ASU colleges: To grant permission to existing ASU colleges the new
Regulations made namely “The Indian Medicine Central Council (Permission to Existing Medical
Colleges) Regulations, 2006”.
Other UG/PG ASU Regulations:  To control, regulate and maintain the uniform standards of
quality education in Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani (ASU) Colleges and to produce adequate
manpower, following Regulations and their amendments have been notified from time to time:
i. PG Ayurveda Regulations: The Indian Medicine Central Council (Post-graduate
Ayurveda Education) Regulations, 2005 and amendments in 2012 made for nomen-
clature of PG degree in different specialties, duration of PG course, admission
criteria, method of training, examination & assessment, qualification of teaching
staff and minimum requirement for PG Ayurveda Colleges.
ii. PG Unani Regulations: The Indian Medicine Central Council (Post-graduate Unani
Education) Regulations, 2007 made for nomenclature of PG degree in different
specialties, duration of PG course, admission criteria, method of training, examina-
tion & assessment, qualification of teaching staff and minimum requirement for PG
Unani Colleges.
iii. MSR for Ayurveda colleges: The Indian Medicine Central Council (Minimum
Standard Requirements of Ayurveda Colleges and attached Hospitals) Regulations,
2012 and amended in 2013 for requirement of land, constructed area of college &
hospital, admission capacity, requirement of hospital including beds, no. of patients
in OPD/IPD, hospital staff, requirement of college including teaching/non-teaching
staff, phase-wise specific requirement of new colleges, requirement of equipment/
instruments, etc. for Ayurveda Colleges.

39
iv. MSR for Siddha colleges: The Indian Medicine Central Council (Minimum Stan-
dard Requirements of Siddha Colleges and attached Hospitals) Regulations, 2013 for
requirement of land, constructed area of college & hospital, admission capacity,
requirement of hospital including beds, no. of patients in OPD/IPD, hospital staff,
requirement of college including teaching/non-teaching staff, phase-wise specific
requirement of new colleges, requirement of equipment/instruments, etc. for Siddha
Colleges.
v. MSR for Unani colleges: The Indian Medicine Central Council (Minimum Standard
Requirements of Unani Colleges and attached Hospitals) Regulations, 2013 for
requirement of land, constructed area of college & hospital, admission capacity,
requirement of hospital including beds, no. of patients in OPD/IPD, hospital staff,
requirement of college including teaching/non-teaching staff, phase-wise specific
requirement of new colleges, requirement of equipment/instruments, etc. for Unani
Colleges.
vi. MSE for UG Ayurveda Colleges: The Indian Medicine Central Council (Minimum
Standards of Education in Indian Medicine) (Amendment) Regulations, 2012 and
amended in 2013 for admission qualification, duration of course, nomenclature of
UG degree, subjects for 4 professional examinations, procedure of internship,
method of training, examination & assessment, qualification of teaching staff.
vii. MSE for UG Unani Colleges:  The Indian Medicine Central Council (Minimum
Standards of Education in Indian Medicine) Amendment Regulations, 2013 for
admission qualification, duration of course, nomenclature of UG degree, subjects
for 4 professional examinations, procedure of internship, method of training, exami-
nation & assessment, qualification of teaching staff.
viii. MSE for UG Siddha Colleges:  The Indian Medicine Central Council (Minimum
Standards of Education in Indian Medicine) Amendment Regulations, 2013 for
admission qualification, duration of course, nomenclature of UG degree, subjects
for 4 professional examinations, procedure of internship, method of training, exami-
nation & assessment, qualification of teaching staff.
ix. PG Diploma course in Ayurveda:  The Indian Medicine Central Council (Post-
graduate Diploma Course) Regulations, 2010 and amendment in 2013 for specialties
of PG diploma course, duration of PG diploma course, admission criteria, method
of training, examination & assessment, procedure of permission, criteria for recog-
nition, intake capacity and minimum requirement for conducting PG diploma
course.
x. PG Diploma course in Siddha:  The Indian Medicine Central Council (Post-
graduate Diploma Course in Siddha) Regulations, 2015 for specialties of PG di-
ploma course, duration of PG diploma course, admission criteria, method of
training, examination & assessment, procedure of permission, criteria for recogni-
tion, intake capacity and minimum requirement for conducting PG diploma course.

40
PG Diploma course in Unani:  The Indian Medicine Central Council (Post-graduate
Diploma Course in Unani Medicine) Amendment Regulations, 2015 for specialties of
PG diploma course, duration of PG diploma course, admission criteria, method of
training, examination & assessment, procedure of permission, criteria for recogni-
tion, intake capacity and minimum requirement for conducting PG diploma course.

51
Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005