PA R L IAM E N T  O F IND IA
R A JY A  SA B H A 34
D E PA R T M E N T -R E L A T E D P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  S T A N D IN G 
C O M M IT T E E O N H E A L T H A N D F A M IL Y  W E L FA R E
THIR TY -FOUR TH REPOR T
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF THE THR EE VACCINE PR ODUCING
PSUs, NAMELY , THE CENTRAL R ESEAR CH INSTITUTE (CRI),
KASAULI, THE PASTEUR  INSTITUTE OF INDIA (PII), COONOOR
AND THE BCG VACCINE LABORATORY (BCGVL), CHENNAI
TH  
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 18 FEBRUAR Y , 2009)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 18 FEBRUAR Y , 2009)
TH  
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 18 FEBRUAR Y , 2009)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 18 FEBRUAR Y , 2009)
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
FE B R U A R Y, 2009/M A G H A , 1930 (SA K A )FE B R U A R Y, 2009/M A G H A , 1930 (SA K A )

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF THE THREE V ACCINE PRODUCING
PSUs, NAMELY , THE CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE (CRI),
KASAULI, THE PASTEUR INSTITUTE OF INDIA (PII), COONOOR
AND THE BCG V ACCINE LABORATORY (BCGVL), CHENNAI
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................. 1—14
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A G LANCE ............................................................ 15—21
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 23—28

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2008-09)
$1. Shri Amar Singh – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Prof. P. J. Kurien
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla
5. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
6. Shrimati Maya Singh
7. Shri Digvijay Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
*10. Shri Lalhming Liana
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
12. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
13. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli
14. Shri Vinod Khanna
15. Shri Rajendra Kumar
16. Shri R.L. Jalappa
17. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
18. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
19. Shri Rasheed Masood
20. Dr. Chinta Mohan
21. Shri Nihal Chand
22. Shri D.B. Patil
23. Shrimati K. Rani
24. Shri Pannian Ravindran
25. Shrimati Yashodhara Raje Scindia
26. Dr. R. Senthil
27. Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shri Uday Singh
30. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
#31. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
$ Ceased to be Chairman and Member w.e.f. 26th November, 2008; re-nominated as Chairman and Member w.e.f.
  5th December, 2008.
* Nominated w.e.f. 12th August, 2008.
# Nominated w.e.f. 20th August, 2008.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, after having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
present this Thirty-fourth Report of the Committee on the functioning of the three vaccine-
producing PSUs, namely, the Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of
India (PII), Coonoor and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council
of States, relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Committee took
up the aforesaid subject for detailed examination and report on the 9th of July, 2008.
3. The Committee, in its meeting held on the 6th January, 2009, interacted with the officers
of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the
Directors of CRI, Kasauli, PII, Coonoor and BCG VL, Chennai, and sought clarifications on the
various issues regarding the suspension of license granted to these Institutes, constraints faced in
the Institutes becoming cGMP compliant, the proposed move to convert these Institutes into testing
labs, as well as the vaccine supply scenario in the country in the light of these developments.
4. The Committee, thereafter, considered and adopted the draft Report on the Bill in its
meeting held on the 5th February, 2009.
5. The Committee has relied upon the following documents/information in finalizing its Report:
(i) Status Note furnished on the functioning of the three vaccine-producing PSUs,
(ii) Reports of Expert Committee on conversion of manufacturing facilities of CRI, Kasauli,
PII, Coonoor and BCG VL, Chennai, respectively, into testing laboratory, training centres
etc., and
(iii) Oral evidence tendered by the Secretary and other officers of the Department of Health
and Family Welfare and Directors of the above-mentioned three vaccine-producing
PSUs.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report.
AMAR SINGH
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
February 5 , 2009 Department-related Parliamentary
Magha 16, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare.

1
REPORT
1.1 V accines are important drugs that constitute a critical component of primary health care in
the country. They play important role in the prevention of a number of deadly diseases such as
tuberculosis, pertusis, diphtheria, polio, cholera, tetanus, measles, smallpox, yellow fever, typhoid
etc., which have been plaguing the country. India, with a billion-plus population and 25 million
new-borns added every year, has been fighting a pitched battle against the vaccine-preventable
diseases for the last five decades through various immunization programmes launched under the
aegis of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, which is the nodal Ministry responsible for
implementation of the health care programmes in the country. The Government has identified
vaccines as essential drugs and has committedly followed its global partners in the coverage of
vaccination as a part of the global initiative towards achieving universal immunisation. The outcome
of the immunization initiatives in the country, especially for the new-borns, has been laudably
visible through one of the most sensitive indicators of health status of the population - the Infant
Mortality Rate, which stands today at 58 per 1000 live births.
1.2 V accines have been identified under the category of essential drugs in the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act 1945, and the rules framed thereunder, regulate formulations, manufacturing,
licensing, marketing etc., activities of the vaccine industry. In order to ensure the quality of
vaccines supplied globally to various UN agencies, WHO has a scheme of monitoring vaccine
producing units of its member states, who export vaccines, through the National Regulatory
Authority under which the units have to conform to certain Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)
regarding the facilities, the processes of production including technology, systems, procedures,
methodology and the quality of the vaccines. In order to keep pace with international standards of
quality drugs, India adopted the WHO Good Manufacturing Practices and incorporated the same in
Schedule ‘M’ of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. India went through WHO-NRA evaluation
for the first time in the year 2001, next in 2004 and lastly, in August, 2007.
1.3 The Central Research Institute, Kasauli, Pasteur Institute of India, Coonoor, and BCG
Vaccine Laboratory, Chennai, are the three pioneer public sector Institutes that have spearheaded
the large scale vaccine production in the country. During the last NRA assessment in August, 2007,
the WHO-NRA Inspection team consisting of Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
(CDSCO), Drugs Inspectors, State Drug Inspectors along with an expert and a WHO Observer,
found that some of the Public Sector Units engaged in the manufacturing of vaccines, viz., Central
Research Institute, Kasauli, Pasteur Institute of India, Coonoor and BCG Vaccine Laboratory,
Guindy, Chennai were not complying to the current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMP) norms.
It, accordingly, recommended that the Central Licensing Approving Authority (CLAA), which is the
nodal agency in the country for granting licenses to the pharmaceutical industry, may review the
matter and take necessary action. The CLAA, accordingly, issued a show cause notice to these
units, and a second team visited them on a later date to review the situation and found that the
deficiencies persisted. Thereafter, the CLAA suspended the manufacturing license of these Public
Sector Units in January, 2008 by the powers vested in it under the provision of sub-rule (1) of
Rule 85 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
1.4 The vaccine requirement in the county has been largely met through the three public sector
vaccine-producing Institutes ever since independence. Apprehending that the closure of aforesaid
three PSUs would adversely affect vaccine supply in the country and consequently the Universal
Immunization Programme, the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare, in
its 27th Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09, had recommended that the suspension of

2
manufacturing license of all three PSUs be revoked. In the absence of any pro-active action on
the part of the Ministry, reports about shortage of vaccines in the different States kept pouring in.
The Committee felt that, as the Guardian of Public Welfare and Health Interest, it could not ignore
such an important aspect of health care in the country. It, therefore, decided to holistically examine
this sensitive issue. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare were requested to furnish a detailed
Status Note on the functioning of the Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, Himachal Pradesh,
the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, Tamil Nadu and BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCG-VL),
Chennai, Tamil Nadu.
1.5 The Committee was informed that an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of the
DCG (I) had been constituted by the Government to study inter alia, the existing infrastructure/
facilities available with these Institutes and explore the feasibility of converting these facilities into
testing laboratories, utilizing the existing facilities for setting up the residential training facilities and
having some of the vaccine/anti sera production at these Institutes comply with cGMP norms.
On a detailed analysis of the Status Note, as well as the report of the Expert Committee
furnished by the Ministry subsequently, certain critical aspects about the functioning of the three
Institutes remained unclear. In order to have a better understanding of the entire subject having a
direct bearing on the welfare of our children, the Committee held intensive interaction with the
Directors of all the three Institutes on the 6th January, 2009. The Committee also sought
clarifications from the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Detailed information made available to the Committee and also its interaction with the
stakeholders enabled it to examine the functioning of the three vaccine producing units and also
the vaccine production scenario in the country in an objective manner from all conceivable aspects.
Central Research Institute, Kasauli
2.1 Established at Kasauli in Himachal Pradesh in the year 1905, CRI functions presently under
the administrative control of Director General Health Services, Government of India, as a
Subordinate Office. It has approximately 68 acres of land spreading over the three campuses with
various manufacturing units situated at reasonable distance from each other. The Institute has been
functioning without a regular Director since 1997 and the present incumbent is on deputation basis.
The Institute is now headed by the Director, Central Drugs Laboratory (CDL) which also functions
independently from the premises of CRI.
2.2 Ever since it was established in the North India with the initial function of treatment of
snake bite cases with anti-snake serum and vaccine development for typhoid fever, the Institute has
come long way to produce and supply important vaccines such as Diphtheria Anti-Toxin, Tetanus
Anti-Toxin, Anti-Rabic Serum, Yellow Fever Vaccine, T riple Vaccine (DPT), AKD T yphoid Vaccine,
Japanese Encephalitis Vaccine etc. under the Universal Immunization Programme, and a host of
Non-UIP Vaccines, IHR Vaccines. The Institute had developed into one of the premium institutions
in the field of Vaccinology in India and Asia, manufacturing and supplying 12 Biologicals to
government and private institutions. It has a network of 90 major laboratories engaged in the
manufacturing of the above-mentioned vaccines and along with that it also looks into a host of
other functions like containerization, sterilization, physical inspection, quality control, quality
assurance, instrumentation and analytical laboratory, Salmonella and Escherichia Center, Influenza
Center, National Polio Laboratory, experimental animal house, warehousing central drug laboratory
etc. It has to its credit of being the only Institute that supplied yellow fever vaccine to the entire
South-East Asian Region.
2.3 The Committee had sought details of the problems regarding infrastructure, staff etc. being
faced by all the three PSUs. CRI Kasauli has informed the following in its status note:—

3
(a) Infrastructure: Currently CRI Kasauli has 19 laboratories engaged in manufacturing
of vaccine and sera as well as in research activities. In addition, there is a large
number of accessory units, warehouses for raw and finished materials along with
support units like electricity maintenance unit, water supply, HCVC system, waste
treatment unit, etc. and these units have been functioning from old as well as new
building structures. Under the current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMP) concept,
all institutions engaged in the manufacturing of drugs, vaccine and sera are required
to maintain certain norms in relation to premises, personnel, equipments, manufacturing
process, documentation, quality auditing and self inspection, quality control, quality
assurance, animal house, marketing etc. This is envisaged to provide quality products
to the end consumers. The present buildings that are housing different laboratories at
CRI were established long before the cGMP came and lack cGMP compliance.
Renovation/modernization is required wherever possible and if alteration is not possible,
creation of new facilities is required.
(b) Staff issues: Out of the total sanctioned post of 835, the staff in position is 632 with
over all 24.3% vacancies. The vacancies were mostly in group ‘A’ ( i.e. 60 %) and ‘B’
(55.6%). The shortage of the medical scientists is the extreme. These are CHS and
non-CHS Posts and are to be filled up by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
through UPSC, based on proposals from the Institute. The post of Director has not
been filled up on regular basis after 1997 and the present incumbent is on deputation
basis. Also, the posts of the Director and the Addl. Director of CRI, Kasauli have been
temporarily decadred and then the posts were filled up on deputation basis by the
Ministry. The proposals for finalization of the recruitment rules for the post of Director
and Addl. Director, CRI, Kasauli have been submitted to the Ministry.
2.4 The WHO-NRA joint Inspecting Team, which conducted the inspection in August 2007,
comprised of an Officer of CDSCO North Zone, Officer of Drugs Control Department, Himachal
Pradesh, an expert from CDL, CRI, Kasauli and two WHO observers, as per the terms of reference
fixed by WHO. The team inspected mainly the Diphtheria and Pertusis blocks, the stores areas;
manufacturing area including gel preparation area, container and closure preparation area for bulk
production; harvesting and purification areas for Diphtheria, cold storage area; utilities including
water plant; quality control including sample receipt area, bio chemical testing room, sterility testing
area, microbiological testing area; and quality assurance. The visiting team pointed out 65
deficiencies during the inspection regarding the areas inspected.
2.5 With regard to the steps taken so far by it to correct the deficiencies pointed out by the
Inspecting team, the Institute highlighted the following points:—
• The Institute has renovated Central Drug Laboratory (CDL) by expansion and
appropriate modification of the premises, installation of the equipment, training of
personnel and adopting quality standards for work. During WHO-NRA assessment, the
CDL was adjudged 100% grade for lot release and 75% grade for laboratory work by
WHO inspection team in September, 2007.
• A proposal was approved for upgrading the Triple Vaccine manufacturing laboratory
(DPT vaccine manufacturing laboratory) of CRI, Kasauli so as to make it cGMP
compliant in 1997-98. Being the nodal agency in such matter, the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare selected M/s HSCC Noida as a turnkey agency with clear terms
of reference to construct a cGMP compliance structure for manufacturing of DPT
Vaccine. Mid-course corrections were made and the EFC was revised three times.
A total of Rs. 13.29 Crores of funds were allocated, of which Rs. 11.86 Crores
have already been released to the HSCC. However, after more than nine years in

4
December 2006, in a meeting under the chairmanship of Secretary (Health), HSCC
Chairman stated that they did not have the expertise to construct the scientific
structure of cGMP standards and were not interested to continue this project. The
efforts taken towards achieving the cGMP status at CRI that time could not succeed.
• Quality Control Division (QCD) of the Institute had been separated from the in-built
quality control during the manufacturing process and had been upgraded as per cGMP
regulations. During the second inspection by the Drug Control authorities in 7th and
8th of January 2008, the measures taken to upgrade the QCD facilities were
appreciated by the inspection team and documented in the report.
• A separate Quality Assurance Cell has been created at the CRI with separate
infrastructure facilities and manpower. The preparation of SOPs and documentation
part of all the production processes has been initiated and is likely to be completed
shortly.
• The system of documentation, validation, implementation of the auditing, maintenance
of the registers for record, etc. have been completed in all the manufacturing and allied
units.
• Necessary machineries and equipments required in the process of manufacturing of the
vaccine and sera in a cGMP compliant environment have been purchased and installed.
• Process for upgradation of the present filling line for the DPT group of vaccines has
been initiated at CRI Kasauli. However, the work has been delayed because other work
of priority was to be completed.
• The Budget outlay for upgradation of different facilities at CRI Kasauli has been
Rs.292.92 Crores during Eleventh five year plan period.
• Proposals for upgradation/renovation of different laboratories were sent to Ministry of
MOH and FW and a copy of the same was received in the office of the DGHS on
03.12.2007 which has been submitted to DCG (I) for comments on 30th Jan., 2008.
Necessary action has been pending the receipt of the report of  the Expert Committee
under the chairmanship of DCG(I) on the modalities for utilization of these institutions.
• Proposals for creation of production facilities for Yellow Fever Vaccine, production
facilities for anti-Sera, facilities for tissue culture anti-rabies vaccine were received
after issuing of suspension order and directions regarding future line of action to be
followed. Necessary action will be taken after the report of the Expert Committee is
received.
• The Institute is pursuing with the matter with local administration for sorting out water
scarcity problem by outsourcing and getting two new water connections from the new
water scheme (Giri Project) of Himachal Pradesh.
2.6 Regarding the steps taken to meet the shortages in the staff position and training
requirements, the Institute has informed that:—
• The proposals for finalization of the fresh recruitment rules for appointment of the
Director and Addl. Director of CRI Kasauli can be considered after a decision is taken
for permanent de-cadrement.
• The proposals for appointment of the staff of Group A and B categories have been
sent to Directorate of Central Health Services/Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
for making arrangements for the appointment of the Senior-level staff.

5
• Proposals have also been sent to the Screening Committee for considering the
appointment of the Group C and D Staff.
• Technical staff has been provided orientation training  about the concept of cGMP and
its implementation.
2.7 The Expert Committee, constituted under the chairmanship of DCG (I) visited the Institute
from 30th June to 2nd July, 2008. In the Executive Summary of the report, it has been informed
that the Director of the Institute had unveiled a plan whereby of Rs. 292 crores sanctioned to it
under the Eleventh Plan, Rs. 50 to 60 crores could be spent during the current Financial Year for
creating new facilities for Yellow Fever V accine, Influenza Vaccine and TCARV Vaccine. The
Institute has sent a proposal to DGHS for revival of Anti-Sera Production. However, the Expert
Committee noted that a holistic approach towards renovation and GMP compliance needs to be
adopted by Institute.
The main constraints in renovation of existing facilities observed by the Expert Committee
in its Report are:
1. The walls of existing building are thick and load bearing hence cannot be broken for
renovation.
2. There is no adjoining land in most of the units for expansion.
3. The height of the building in most of the cases does not give clearance height for
HVAC.
4. Water shortage is there and the demand of water will go high if all utilities are installed
as per GMP norms.
5. Technical personnel are not exposed to current GMP requirements in the field of
manufacturing, GMP, GLP, Containment practices, Va lidation, HV AC, Water and steam
system etc.
Therefore, the visiting team had recommended totally new facilities for the production of
Yellow Fever V accine, Influenza V accine, TCARV and AKD Vaccine for which a proper study/plan
is to be prepared and reviewed by the professional GMP experts with international/WHO experience.
BCG Vaccine Laboratory, Chennai
3.1 Established on 1st May, 1948, to produce and supply liquid BCG V accine and Tuberculin
with the help of Staten’s Serum Institute (SSI), Copenhagen, Denmark through World Health
Organization (WHO), it functions as a subordinate office of the Directorate General of Health
Services (DGHS) under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, situated at Guindy, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu near King Institute of Preventive Medicine. The Institute is currently the sole
contributor of BCG V accine under the Immunization Programme. It also plays a vital role in
controlling the spread of Tuberculosis, particularly in respect of childhood TB, Meningitis in
children, freeze-dried BCG Vaccine, therapeutic for cancer chemotherapy particularly Carcinoma of
Urinary Bladder, purified protein derivative RT-23 (Mantoux reagent) for diagnosis. It also served
as the National Quality Control Laboratory for the BCG vaccine, and provided training facilities.
3.2 Since 1998, the manufacturing capacity of BCG Vaccine Laboratory has been increased two
folds i.e. from 400 lakh doses to 800 lakh doses per annum. The country has become self-sufficient
to meet the entire requirement of 550 lakh doses of BCG vaccine per annum. The Institute holds the
credit of being awarded ISO 9001:2000 Certificate by BVQL for implementing Quality policy and
Quality management system at all levels by which this Laboratory obtained ISO 9002 Certification.

6
3.3 Status report furnished to the Committee by the Institute highlights the following problem
areas regarding infrastructure, staff etc:—
(a) Infrastructure: The present buildings that are housing BCG Vaccine Laboratory were
established long before the cGMP came into being and lack cGMP compliance and
therefore, require renovation and modernization wherever possible, and if alteration is
not possible, creation of new facilities are required.
• Drainage system is very poor and not maintained properly and is not as per the
pharmaceutical norms. There are no Effluent Treatment Plant and Sewage Treatment
Plant, which are mandatory.
• The maintenance of the building is with the civil and electrical divisions of CPWD and
they have their own priorities; hence, the execution of maintenance work of the BCG
VL has been delayed. Moreover, CPWD is not experienced to carry out the work in
the sort of Pharmaceutical set-up.
• The Institute has informed that in case cGMP compliance is not possible in the existing
old building a new facility can be constructed in the vacant area of 28000 sq. ft.
available in the premises of the Institute itself.
(b) Staff issues: – BCG VL has stated that against the total sanctioned posts of 181, the
staff in-position is 132. The vacant posts are 49 (27.00%). Most of the vacant
positions are of technical staff i.e. Jr. Technical Officer, Asstt. Technical Officer and
Refrigeration Engineer. Since cGMP compliance prescribes availability of the adequate
staff at each level and in each sub-division of the institution, the existing sanctioned
strength is not adequate to meet cGMP compliance and additional staff is required to
be sanctioned. Many categories of staff have no promotional avenues and their career
prospects are not promising. Also the existing recruitment rules and the expectation of
the cGMP compliance do not match. To make implementation of cGMP compliance
more effective, the existing recruitment rules need a re-Iook for appropriate
modification to attract better qualified personnel.
3.4 The WHO-NRA assessment team which inspected the facility on the 11th and
12th August, 2007, comprised of one Drug Inspector, CDSCO, South Zone, one Senior Drug
Inspector, Chennai, Subject Expert in the presence of one WHO Expert Observer. It pointed out
55 deficiencies in respect of cGMP compliance concerning the premises, establishment of quality
control labs on production areas, water and steam system, HBSC, warehousing, manufacturing
processes, production areas especially uni-directional flow of men and materials, containerizations,
haphazard storage of materials including sterile material, non-classification of process areas and
issues relating to maintenance of register of record concerning entering of persons into critical
areas, production activities, personnel inspection and quality auditing. The inspecting team had
accordingly, recommended that the licensing authority may review the matter and take action as
deemed fit.
3.5 The Institute has informed, in the status report submitted to the Committee that out of the
55 deficiencies pointed out by the WHO-NRA inspecting team, it had removed 45 deficiencies
concerning the unit. It has also stated that the proposal for setting up of third unit of manufacturing
BCG vaccine at Chegalpattu was submitted to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for
necessary sanction in 1999-2000. However, the same has not materialized so far. Similarly, another
proposal for upgradation of the existing units of the BCG VL was submitted in 2000-01.
3.6 The proposal for upgradation/renovation/creation of BCG VL was received on
11th January, 2008 as part of the action taken note on the deficiencies pointed out by the NRA

7
assessment team and was submitted to DCG (I) for his comments on the 30th January, 2008.
Further action was stated to be pending for the Report of the Expert Committee. The proposals
for creation of new facilities at BCG VL at the same site was received on 6th February, 2008 but
the Institute did not refer back to the Ministry in view of a proposal to convert it into a testing
lab/training unit.
3.7 Further, equipments and machinery have been purchased by BCG VL and installed. New
facility for vial capping has been installed as per cGMP set up. Preparations of standard operating
procedures for all sections of BCG VL have been completed. Training of the staff at various levels
has been organized ingeniously. Better qualified staff have been appointed for different positions
wherever possible to match the cGMP requirement.
3.8 The Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of the DCG (I) visited the Institute on 8th
and 9th July, 2008 and observed that though the Institute had made efforts to renovate the old
facility spending up till now Rs. 1.2 crores for the modification and requiring another 6 crores for
further renovation and with its inherent limitation, the renovation work would take 8 to 12 months
as stated by the Institute staff, the Institute had expressed its inability to rectify all deficiencies
completely and meet GMP requirements in some of their replies to DCG(I) dated 4.1.2008.
Therefore, if the facilities fall short of GMP requirement in certain aspects even after the
renovation, then it may not be an assured move to renovate old facilities for attaining intended
purpose.
Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor
4.1 The Institute started functioning as an autonomous body under the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, with effect from the 10th February, 1977. Established exclusively to treat dog-bite
victims, in the pre-independence era, the Institute has come a long way. Today, the following
activities are undertaken at the Institute:
• Production of DPT group of vaccine for EPI programme.
• Production of Tissue Culture Anti-rabies Vaccine for humans.
• Training programmes and post-graduate programmes.
• Providing consultancy services to other Institutions within the country and abroad.
• WHO collaborating centre for training in Rabies Vaccine Production and Quality Control.
• Extending academic programme for PhD affiliated to Bharathiar University, Coimbatore
and M.D. (Microbiology) affiliated to Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Madras.
• Continuous in-house Research and Development on existing vaccine produced by the
Institute. The Institute also offers training programmes to University students pursuing
Medicine, Pharmacy, Microbiology, Biochemistry and other related subjects.
4.2 The Institute was inspected on the 9th and 10th August, 2007 by a joint inspecting team
of WHO-NRA as per the provisions of rule 78 (d) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. The
inspecting team had found deficiencies concerning the building structure, haphazard arrangement of
the rooms in the manufacturing areas without any uni-flow system of men and material for
production activities, haphazard storage, unhygienic condition found in tetanus areas, non-
classification of production areas and non-separation of critical production activity, critical
deficiencies in manufacturing practices, quality control and testing practices.
4.3 On the 3rd January, 2008 a second team visited to observe whether the defects pointed out
earlier had been rectified by the Institute. The Institute in its reply dated 4th January, 2008 to the

8
show cause notice issued by the office of Directorate General of Health Services (Drugs Control
Division) had stated that it would not be possible to completely rectify all the deficiencies especially
those relating to structure and manpower and could instead try their level best to rectify the
deficiencies within their limits. However, the CLAA suspended the manufacturing license of the unit
in January, 2008.
4.4 Subsequently, the Expert Committee under the chairmanship of the DCGI visited the
Institute from 10th and 12th July, 2008. It has been stated in the Expert Committee Report that
the modifications carried out planned in the existing set-up as well as proposal made in connection
with the new infrastructure, comply with GMP norms. The report states that the Institute has made
some efforts to renovate the old facilities and up till now they have spent Rs. 4.84 crores for the
modification. It is pertinent to note that holistic and assured approach towards renovation and GMP
compliance has not yet been adopted by the Institute. Therefore, if the facilities fall short of GMP
requirements in certain aspects even after renovation, then it may not be an assured move to
renovate old facilities for attaining the intended purpose.
5. The Committee, after going through all the details and the discussions held with the
Directors of the three vaccine producing PSUs as also the Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare has the following observations/recommendations to make:
5.1 The Committee finds from the information furnished by the Ministry that while CRI,
Kasauli and BCG VL, Chennai have been functioning as subordinate offices under the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the PII, Coonoor, functions as an autonomous
institution under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. It observes that all these
Institutes, since their establishment, have remained in the public sector with the Ministry
as the nodal administrative and supervising agency. However, it is astonishing to find that
the building structures of these 100-year old institutions have continued to remain in their
original set up. Ideal position would have been to revamp the existing structures so as to
ensure their normal functioning as well as further expansion/strengthening in accordance
with the changing times/requirements. The Committee is not aware whether any initiative,
whatsoever, was taken either by the Ministry or the Director General Health Services to
draw up an action plan and take follow-up action in a time-bound manner.
5.2 The Committee would like to state here that the concept of Schedule ‘M’, which is
the Indian version of cGMP norms of WHO was mooted in 2001 and notified in 2005. Given
that the Director General Health Services is the administrative authority under which CRI,
Kasauli and BCG VL, Chennai are functioning as subordinate offices, and office of DCGI
is the nodal agency entrusted with the responsibility of ensuring cGMP compliance at PII,
Coonoor, it is the Ministry which should have made timely and appropriate efforts to
convert these age old structures as per Schedule M compliant standards. From the feedback
made available to the Committee, it can only conclude that no initiative was attempted for
drawing out an Action Plan for making these Institutes cGMP compliant. The Ministry’s
responsibility did not end with simply bringing out the required legislation in accordance
with the international norms. Rather, the real work was to begin thereafter which
unfortunately never happened. It is also not clear as to whether the Ministry has allocated
adequate funds to these Institutes for the purpose. The Committee also fails to understand
as to how the Ministry would ensure cGMP compliance in the private Institutes when it
cannot enforce the same in its own Institutes.
5.3 The Committee observes that the Ministry has failed to play the role of coordinator
and facilitator in the matter. It would like to draw attention to one such situation that
confirms its stand. From the Status note submitted by the Ministry, the Committee finds
that a proposal for converting the triple-vaccine manufacturing laboratory at CRI, Kasauli

9
into a cGMP compliant structure was made way back in 1997-98, when M/s HSCC, Noida was
awarded the contract to build a cGMP compliant structure at CRI. However, the entire
exercise ended in a failure, as M/s HSCC, Noida, after continuing the exercise for nine
years and spending Rs. 11.86 crores of public money on the project, expressed its inability
and disinterest in completing the project in December, 2006. The Committee fails to
understand the logic why the Ministry waited so long in such a crucial matter. The
Committee feels that the Ministry should have taken immediate appropriate steps such as
canceling the contract of M/s HSCC, Noida and asked other parties with technical
competence to complete the project. It epitomizes the cavalier fashion with which the
Ministry has treated the issue. Only achievement seems to be an expenditure of Rs. 11.86
crores by M/s HSCC, Noida, without any specification thereof. The Committee views with
serious concern the admission on the part of M/s HSCC, Noida about their not having any
expertise to construct a scientific structure of cGMP standards.
5.4 The Committee was informed that a Departmental Inquiry in the matter was
presently going on. The Committee observes that this matter has been hanging on for more
than ten years. More than two years have elapsed since the Project authorities have
comfortably withdrawn themselves. The inquiry also seems to be continuing in a comfortable
mode. Nobody seems to be bothered about the loss of public money and also the institute
not getting the required renovation. The Committee would appreciate if the enquiry
proceedings are completed expeditiously and full details of follow up action taken for fixing
up the responsibility against the concerned official(s) in the Ministry and imposing of
penalty on the project authority are apprised to it. The Committee can only emphasise that
the major responsibility of making these Institutes cGMP compliant lies with the Ministry
and holding the Institutes entirely responsible for the same goes against the principle of
natural justice. The Committee is of the firm opinion that the Ministry is responsible to a
large extent for the prevailing unsatisfactory situation in all the three Institutes which
resulted in the cancellation of their vaccine producing licenses and thereby leading to
shortage of life saving vaccines with serious impact on Universal Immunization Programme
and child healthcare programmes in the country.
5.5 The Status Note also informs that the Institutes suffer from acute shortage of
personnel especially in Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ in CRI, Kasauli and BCG VL, Chennai which are
subordinate offices under the office of DGHS. The vacancies stated above are reflected in
percentage in the table given below:
Name of Institute Shortage of Group ‘A’ staff (%) Shortage of Group ‘B’ staff (%)
CRI, Kasauli 60 55.6
BCG VL, Chennai 33 75 (Group ‘B’ Gazetted)
87.5 (Group ‘B’ Non-Gazetted)
5.6 CRI, Kasauli has also stated that it has extreme shortage of scientists. It has also
reported that there have been no regular Director at the Institute after 1997 onwards and
also that the present incumbent is on deputation basis. A considerable number of vacancies
existed in the Technical Staff at the middle and the higher levels. The Committee
understands that the power to fill up the vacancies in Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ posts in
these Institutes lies with the office of the Director General of Health Services and not the
Institutes. It is also clear from the information provided in the Status Report that the
Institutes had forwarded a number of proposals to the Ministry for filling up of vacancies
of group ‘A’ and ‘B’ services. But, it seems that the matter was not taken up in the right

10
earnest by the Ministry to fill up these vacancies. The Committee has also observed that
a number of posts have either lapsed/abolished or proposed to be lapsed/abolished. The
Committee would also like to state here that in comparison to CRI and BCG VL, the PII
which is an autonomous body functioning under the Ministry has not reported any shortage
of manpower. The Committee believes that if similar administrative autonomy had been
delegated to CRI and BCG VL, the problems relating to shortage of manpower and many
other such issues could have been sorted out early. The Committee would appreciate if a
work study about the staff requirement in accordance with GMP norms is initiated at the
earliest both at CRI and BCG VL so as to have a viable set up there.
5.7 The inspection report of the joint inspecting team points out that there were 55
major deficiencies pointed out by the inspecting team with respect to BCG VL, Chennai. The
Institute has, in its Status report, informed that 45 deficiencies had already been rectified
by it. Major deficiencies concerning production area, storage of sterilize matter, interior
infrastructure record of register for entry and exit of personnel into critical areas, water
and steam system, manufacturing area, documentation, training of personnel, self
inspection and audit, quality assurance etc. had already been rectified. The Committee finds
that on the remaining ten deficiencies either corrective action has already been initiated or
justification for the existing position has been given by the institute. Not only this, the
issue of shortage of manpower at higher and middle level is to be tackled by the Ministry/
DGHS, the decision making authorities in such matters. During the meeting with the
Committee, the Institute had informed that rest of the rectification work had been unduly
delayed due to absence of a regular Director. The Director-In-Charge had not been vested
with the financial power and as a result thereof, the orders for execution of cGMP
rectification work could not be issued by him.
5.8 The Committee was apprised that the Institute had informed the Deputy Drugs
Controller, South Zone on 26th February, 2008 and later on 20th March, 2008 to the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare about the rectification work that it had carried out
in the Institute. Also the Institute had preferred appeals twice, – one on 24th January, 2008
against DCGl’s decision to suspend its license, and again on 14th June, 2008 to the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare to revoke suspension of the license. However, the Status Note
does not mention as to what action was taken on the part of the Ministry to consider their
case in the light of the rectifications carried out by the Institute.
5.9 The Committee observes that out of 65 deficiencies pointed out by the Inspection Team
in respect of CRI, Kasauli, majority of them, although technical, remain unresolved. The
Committee would like to point out that it has been more than ten years and the Director of
such a premier institutions continues to be brought on deputation. One can well imagine the
state of affairs in an institute without a permanent Head for a prolonged period.
5.10 With regard to PII, Coonoor, the Committee finds that a number of shortcomings
were pointed out by the Inspection Team. From the feedback made available to the
Committee, it is evident that the Institute has admitted that while it would not be possible
to completely rectify all the deficiencies especially those relating to structure and
manpower, the fact remains that these shor tfalls could have been easily tackled with the
support of the Ministry.
5.11 The Committee would also like to mention here that neither of the inspecting team–
the joint inspection team of WHO-NRA or the subsequent team from the DCGl’s office that
visited the facilities to take note of the rectification of deficiencies, had made any
recommendation regarding stoppipg prodction of vaccines by these units or closing down
these units.

11
5.12 The Committee was also given to understand that the international health agency–WHO,
had offered to upgrade the technology at these three PSUs. However, the Ministry had
declined the offer and preferred to cancel their vaccine-producing license. The Committee
wonders as to why, being a member of the WHO, the Ministry did not prefer to take their
help to upgrade the technology and make these units conform to international standards.
The Committee observes that such lapses on the part of the Ministry only point out that
it has failed miserably in upgrading these units to the required standards.
5.13 The Ministry has informed that the licenses for manufacture of vaccines by CRI,
Kasauli, BCG VL, Chennai and PH, Coonoor were suspended by the DCG (I) under the
powers vested with the Central License Approving Authority (CLAA) under rule 85 (1) of
the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 which reads as under:
“The Central Licensing Approving Authority may, after giving the licensee an
opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing
stating the reasons therefor, cancel a license issued under this part, or suspend it for such
period as he thinks fit either wholly or in respect of any of the drugs to which it relates
(or direct the licensee to stop manufacture, sale or distribution of the said drugs and
(thereupon order the destruction of drugs and) the stock thereof in the presence of an
Inspector) if in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the conditions
of the licensee or with any provisions of the Act or rules made thereunder.”
The Committee is of the opinion that as provided in the aforesaid rule, the licenses
of these three units should have been suspended for a specific period. This period could
have been utilised for removal of all the shortcomings in a time-bound manner under the
overall supervision of the Ministry. This was the right course of action not only in
accordance with the law but also due to the fact that quite a few drawbacks have already
been removed inspite of the constraints being faced by these institutes.
5.14 The Committee also takes note of another disturbing development taking place after
the suspension of manufacturing licenses of the three Institutes. An Expert Committee was
constituted by the Ministry on the 11th April, 2008 for the assessment of the three Institutes.
The scope and terms of reference of the Expert Committee are self-revealing. Out of the
eight terms of reference of the Expert Committee, the foremost two are as follows:—
(i) Study of infrastructure facilities available at the three vaccine manufacturing
units and explore feasibility of conversion of existing laboratories into testing
laboratories or training units.
(ii) Scope of re-deployment of the existing staff in production units to the proposed
testing labs in view of the stoppage of production of vaccines.
The above terms of reference clearly indicate that the Ministry had already taken a
decision for final stoppage of vaccine production at the Institutes inspite of the fact that the
manufacturing license of the three institutes remained suspended till the time of
discrepancies noticed were finally removed. The Committee expresses its serious reservation
on this development. It is very clear that the three institutes fulfilling the vaccine
requirement of the country for the past so many decades were not given a fair chance. They
did not deserve such a treatment at the hands of their administrative Ministry.
5.15 It has also come to the notice of the Committee that after the show-cause notice
issued to the BCG VL regarding cancellation of its license on the 14th December, the DCG (I)
conveyed the proceedings of the CLAA suspending the license of BCG VL until the new
facilities were ready. On 20th February, 2008 the DCG (I) informed the Institute that

12
products manufactured at the Institute cannot be used for immunization purpose due to
non-conformities of GMP and hence, sought a proposal for destruction and writing off of the
stock lying with it.
5.16 The Committee would like to State here that until the inspections were carried out,
the Institute had been meeting the requirement of BCG vaccine for the entire country and
the same were supplied to the various States under the UIP without reports of any adverse
effects from the use of such vaccines. On the other hand, if the vaccines supplied under
the UIP conformed to the standards of safety, efficacy and quality, then what could be the
logic to order the destruction and writing off of the stock by the DCGI. The Committee
observes that since BCG VL was the sole manufacturer of BCG Vaccine in the country, such
a move could lead to shortage of vaccines across the States, thereby, affecting the Universal
Immunization Programme. The Committee’s apprehensions have been confirmed by media
reports regarding shortage of vaccines across the States. The Committee apprehends that
large amounts of vaccines produced at CRI and PH would have also met with a similar fate.
The Committee observes that the Ministry has not approached the issue with enough
foresight to ensure adequate and steady supply of vaccines and that such a move puts it in
poor light.
5.17 On being asked to inform the Committee about the actual requirements of different
vaccines in the country under Universal Immunization Programme during 2008-09, the
Ministry has furnished state-wise details in its Status Note as follows:
(Qty. in lakh doses)
Total vaccine T T DPT D T OPV M easles BCG
requirement
in the
country (all
States/UTs)
1708.00 1579.87 432.66 1581.86 391.20 759.21
The Ministry has informed that to meet the vaccine requirement in the country for
2008-09, the Vaccine Procurement Cell has placed the following orders with private firms
producing vaccines:—
(Qty. in lakh doses)
Supplier V accine T otal order Total Difference
placed country
requirement
12 3 4 5
B.E. LTD T T 1360.00 1708.00 348.00
HYDERABAD
B.E. LTD 800.00
HYDERABAD DPT 1579.87 416.87
S.II. PUNE 300.00
I.I.L HYDERABAD 63.00
T
OTAL 1163.00

13
12 3 4 5
B.E. LTD DT 375.00 432.66 57.66
HYDERABAD
BHARAT BIOTECH. 1350.00
LTD HYDERABAD OPV 1581.86 51.36
HBPCL, MUMBAI 184.50
(PIPELINE)
TOTAL 1530.50
S.II. PUNE 360.00
I.I.L HYDERABAD MEASLES 90.00 391.20 58.80 excess
procurement
TOTAL 450.00
S.II. PUNE BCG 600.00 759.21 159.21
From the above comparative table it is clear that in most cases, the vaccine
requirement exceeds the amount of order placed with the firms, while in one case i.e.
measles vaccine, the order placed exceeds the total requirement stated in the country
figures. The Committee wonders as to how the Ministry plans to cover the shortfall in the
vaccine requirement in the country.
5.18 Committee’s attention is also drawn to the awarding of bulk purchase orders to one
unit in particular—Biological E. Ltd., Hyderabad. The Committee would like to state here
that in the two lists of functioning and non-functioning vaccine manufacturing units,
furnished by the Ministry, the name of Biological E. Ltd., Hyderabad is found in both the
lists. On being asked regarding the veracity of status of functioning of this production unit,
the Ministry replied that the unit may have qualified for a certain category of vaccines
while for others it may be either closed or upgrading itself to cGMP standard. The
Committee is however, not convinced by the Ministry’s stand. It is clear from the submitted
lists that the Ministry is unaware whether Biological E. Pvt. Ltd. is functional as it has not
received report regarding the same in the last two years. The Committee fails to understand
how the situation could change over night and the above mentioned vaccine producing unit
could qualify all the required norms of schedule M. The Committee would like to note here
that either the Ministry had failed to provide complete information on the unit or had
chosen not to do so. In either case, it is of the opinion that more transparency in the
matter is required. The Committee is not aware about the status of private units with which
the Vaccine Procurement Cell (VPC) has placed the orders. The Committee would like to
be apprised as to whether all these units are cGMP compliant.
5.19 Another pertinent issue that draws the Committee’s attention is the procurement
price of the vaccines. The Committee believes that since the CRI, Kasauli, BCG VL,
Chennai and PH, Coonoor are in the public sector, vaccines were available to the people at
cheap price, but once the manufacturing goes into the private hands there is every
likelihood that the cost of the vaccines could go up in future, thus, defeating the very
objective of providing highly essential drugs like vaccines to the people at affordable prices.
5.20 The Committee earlier discussed that the international health agency – WHO, had
offered to upgrade the technology at the three PSUs. The Committee recommends that the

14
Ministry should explore this avenue as an alternative to build these units conforming to
international Good Manufacturing Practices.
5.21 The Committee has also been informed that a vaccine park is being proposed to be
set up in Chegalpattu near Chennai. On a specific query in this regard, the Committee was
informed that the proposed vaccine park would be in the public sector. It would be a unit
that would be established by Hindustan Latex Ltd., a public sector undertaking under the
administrative control of the Ministry. The Committee would like to point out that with
three vaccine manufacturing units already functioning for the last so many decades, the
right course of action would have been to make sincere efforts for their revamping in
accordance with the changing times. Vaccine Park coming up at the cost of already existing
units cannot be considered justified from any point of view. The Committee observes that
this project could take a couple of years before manufacturing and supply of vaccines could
actually take place. Till such time the Committee feels that procuring the country’s
requirements of various vaccines from the private sector could only increase the cost of the
vaccines thereby, adversely hitting the Exchequer. Moreover, a single centralized vaccine
producing park may not be able to cater to the needs of the billion plus and growing
population of the country.
5.22 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should revoke the
suspension of vaccine manufacturing licenses of the three vaccine producing PSUs at the
earliest. Until such time that new infrastructures are built conforming to the Schedule M
norms, these Institutes may be allowed to continue production in the old structures after
carrying out the rectifications either fully or to the extent possible. The Committee would
like to point out that all the three units have their own quality control system. Not only
this National Quality Control Authority is also involved in the quality control of vaccines
produced by these units. In such a scenario, there is little likelihood of non-standard
vaccines being produced by them. These Institutes may be allowed the time sought by them
as also provided with adequate funds for completing the rectification works but it should be
done under the aegis of the Ministry so that they do not exceed the time-frame.
5.23 The Committee also recommends that all the vacancies in all cadres should be filled
up at the earliest and the recruitments rules for those posts, which are yet to be framed,
should be framed immediately. The Committee further recommends that the existing
scientific and technical staff should be given appropriate training to make them cGMP
compliant. The Committee is not aware about the status of private units with which the
Vaccine Procurement Cell (VPC) has place the orders. The Committee would like to be
apprised as to whether all these units are cGMP compliant.

15
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee finds from the information furnished by the Ministry that while CRI,
Kasauli and BCG VL, Chennai have been functioning as subordinate offices under the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the PII, Coonoor, functions as an autonomous
institution under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. It observes that all these
Institutes, since their establishment, have remained in the public sector with the Ministry
as the nodal administrative and supervising agency. However, it is astonishing to find that
the building structures of these 100-year old institutions have continued to remain in their
original set up. Ideal position would have been to revamp the existing structures so as to
ensure their normal functioning as well as further expansion/strengthening in accordance
with the changing times/requirements. The Committee is not aware whether any initiative,
whatsoever, was taken either by the Ministry or the Director General (Health Services) to
draw up an action plan and take follow-up action in a time-bound manner. (Para 5.1)
The Committee would like to state here that the concept of Schedule ‘M’, which is
the Indian version of cGMP norms of WHO was mooted in 2001 and notified in 2005. Given
that the Director General (Health Services) is the administrative authority under which
CRI, Kasauli and BCG VL, Chennai are functioning as subordinate offices, and office of
DCGI is the nodal agency entrusted with the responsibility of ensuring cGMP compliance at
PH Coonoor, it is the Ministry which should have made timely and appropriate efforts to
convert these age old structures as per Schedule M compliant standards. From the feedback
made available to the Committee, it can only conclude that no initiative was attempted for
drawing out an Action Plan for making these Institutes cGMP compliant. The Ministry’s
responsibility did not end with simply bringing out the required legislation in accordance
with the international norms. Rather, the real work was to begin thereafter which
unfortunately never happened. It is also not clear as to whether the Ministry has allocated
adequade funds to these Institutes for the purpose. The Committee also fails to understand
as to how the Ministry would ensure cGMP compliance in the private Institutes when it
cannot enforce the same in its own Institutes. (Para 5.2)
The Committee observes that the Ministry has failed to play the role of coordinator
and facilitator in the matter. It would like to draw attention to one such situation that
confirms its stand. From the Status note submitted by the Ministry, the Committee finds
that a proposal for converting the triple-vaccine manufacturing laboratory at CRI, Kasauli
into a cGMP compliant structure was made way back in 1997-98, when M/s  HSCC, Noida was
awarded the contract to build a cGMP compliant structure at CRI. However, the entire
exercise ended in a failure, as M/s HSCC, Noida, after continuing the exercise for nine
years and spending Rs. 11.86 crores of public money on the project, expressed its inability
and disinterest in completing the project in December, 2006. The Committee fails to
understand the logic why the Ministry waited so long in such a crucial matter. The
Committee feels that the Ministry should have taken immediate appropriate steps such as
canceling the contract of M/s HSCC, Noida and asked other parties with technical
competence to complete the project. It epitomizes the cavalier fashion with which the
Ministry has treated the issue. Only achievement seems to be an expenditure of Rs. 11.86
crores by M/s HSCC, Noida, without any specification thereof. The Committee views with
serious concern the admission on the part of M/s HSCC, Noida about their not having any
expertise to construct a scientific structure of cGMP standards. (Para 5.3)
15

16
The Committee was informed that a Departmental Inquiry in the matter was
presently going on. The Committee observes that this matter has been hanging on for more
than ten years. More than two years have elapsed since the Project authorities have
comfortably withdrawn themselves. The inquiry also seems to be continuing in a comfortable
mode. Nobody seems to be bothered about the loss of public money and also the institute
not getting the required renovation. The Committee would appreciate if the enquiry
proceedings are completed expeditiously and full details of follow up action taken for fixing
up the responsibility against the concerned official(s) in the Ministry and imposing of
penalty on the project authority are apprised to it. The Committee can only emphasise that
the major responsibility of making these Institutes cGMP compliant lies with the Ministry
and holding the Institutes entirely responsible for the same goes against the principle of
natural justice. The Committee is of the firm opinion that the Ministry is responsible to a
large extent for the prevailing unsatisfactory situation in all the three Institutes which
resulted in the cancellation of their vaccine producing licenses and thereby leading to
shortage of life saving vaccines with serious impact on Universal Immunization Programme
and child healthcare programmes in the country. (Para 5.4)
The Status Note also informs that the Institutes suffer from acute shortage of
personnel especially in Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ in CRI, Kasauli and BCG VL, Chennai which are
subordinate offices under the office of DGHS. The vacancies stated above are reflected in
percentage in the table given below:
Name of Institute Shortage of Group ‘A’ staff (%) Shortage of Group ‘B’ staff (%)
CRI, Kasauli 60 55.6
BCG VL, Chennai 33 75 (Group ‘B’ Gazetted)
87.5 (Group ‘B’ Non-Gazetted)
(Para 5.5)
CRI, Kasauli has also stated that it has extreme shortage of scientists. It has also
reported that there have been no regular Director at the Institute after 1997 onwards and
also that the present incumbent is on deputation basis. A considerable number of vacancies
existed in the Technical Staff at the middle and the higher levels. The. Committee
understands that the power to fill up the vacancies in Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ posts in
these Institutes lies with the office of the Director General of Health Services and not the
Institutes. It is also clear from the information provided in the Status Report that the
Institutes had forwarded a number of proposals to the Ministry for filling up of vacancies
of group ‘A’ and ‘B’ services. But, it seems that the matter was not taken up in the right
earnest by the Ministry to fill up these vacancies. The Committee has also observed that
a number of posts have either lapsed/abolished or proposed to be lapsed/abolished. The
Committee would also like to state here that in comparison to CRI and BCG VL, the PII
which is an autonomous body functioning under the Ministry has not reported any shortage
of manpower. The Committee believes that if similar administrative autonomy had been
delegated to CRI and BCG VL, the problems relating to shortage of manpower and many
other such issues could have been sorted out early. The Committee would appreciate if a
work study about the staff requirement in accordance with GMP norms is initiated at the
earliest both at CRI and BCG VL so as to have a viable set up there. (Para 5.6)
The inspection report of the joint inspecting team points out that the there were 55
major deficiencies pointed out by the inspecting team with respect to BCG VL, Chennai. The
Institute has, in its Status report, informed that 45 deficiencies had already been rectified

17
by it. Major deficiencies concerning production area, storage of sterilize matter, interior
infrastructure, record of register for entry and exit of personnel into critical areas, water
and steam system, manufacturing area, documentation, training of personnel, self
inspection and audit, quality assurance etc. had already been rectified. The Committee finds
that on the remaining ten deficiencies either corrective action has already been initiated or
justification for the existing position has been given by the institute. Not only this, the
issue of shortage of manpower at higher and middle level is to be tackled by the Ministry/
DGHS, the decision making authorities in such matters. During the meeting with the
Committee, the Institute had informed that rest of the rectification work had been unduly
delayed due to absence of a regular Director. The Director-In-Charge had not been vested
with the financial power and as a result thereof, the orders for execution of cGMP
rectification work could not be issued by him. (Para 5.7)
The Committee was apprised that the Institute had informed the Deputy Drugs
Controller, South Zone on 26th February, 2008 and later on 20th March, 2008 to the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare about the rectification work that it had carried out
in the Institute. Also the Institute had preferred appeals twice—one on 24th January, 2008
against DCGl’s decision to suspend its license, and again on 14th June, 2008 to the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare to revoke suspension of the license. However, the Status Note
does not mention as to what action was taken on the part of the Ministry to consider their
case in the light of the rectifications carried out by the Institute. (Para 5.8)
The Committee observes that out of 65 deficiencies pointed out by the Inspection
Team in respect of CRI, Kasauli, majority of them, although technical, remain unresolved.
The Committee would like to point out that it has been more than ten years and the
Director of such a premier institutions continues to be brought on deputation. One can well
imagine the state of affairs in an institute without a permanent Head for a prolonged
period. (Para 5.9)
With regard to PII, Coonoor, the Committee finds that a number of shortcomings
were pointed out by the Inspection Team. From the feedback made available to the
Committee, it is evident that the Institute has admitted that while it would not be possible
to completely rectify all the deficiencies especially those relating to structure and
manpower, the fact remains that these shor tfalls could have been easily tackled with the
support of the Ministry. (Para 5.10)
The Committee would also like to mention here that neither of the inspecting
teams—the joint inspection team of WHO-NRA or the subsequeut team from the DCGl’s
office that visited the facilities to take note of the rectification of deficiencies, had made
any recommendation regarding stopping production of vaccines by these units or closing
down these units. (Para 5.11)
The Committee was also given to understand that the international health agency—
WHO, had offered to upgrade the technology at these three PSUs. However, the Ministry
had declined the offer and preferred to cancel their vaccine-producing license. The
Committee wonders as to why, being a member of the WHO, tbe Ministry did not prefer
to take their help to upgrade the technology and make these units conform to international
standards. The Committee observes that such lapses on the part of the Ministry only point
out that it has failed miserably in upgrading these units to the required standards.
(Para 5.12)
The Ministry has informed that the licenses for manufacture of vaccines by CRI,
Kasauli, BCG VL, Chennai and PII, Coonoor were suspended by the DCG (I) under the

18
powers vested with the Central License Approving Authority (CLAA) under rule 85 (1) of
the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 which reads as under:
“The Central Licensing Approving Authority may, after giving the licensee an
opportunity to show cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing
stating the reasons therefor, cancel a license issued under this part, or suspend it for such
period as he thinks fit either wholly or in respect of any of the drugs to which it relates
(or direct the licensee to stop manufacture, sale or distribution of the said drugs and
(thereupon order the destruction of drugs and) the stock thereof in the presence of an
Inspector) if in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the conditions
of the licensee or with any provisions of the Act or rules made thereunder.”
The Committee is of the opinion that as provided in the aforesaid rule, the licenses
of these three units should have been suspended for a specific period. This period could
have been utilised for removal of all the shortcomings in a time-bound manner under the
overall supervision of the Ministry. This was the right course of action not only in
accordance with the law but also due to the fact that quite a few drawbacks have already
been removed inspite of the constraints being faced by these institutes. (Para 5.13)
The Committee also takes note of another disturbing development taking place after
the suspension of manufacturing licenses of the three Institutes. An Expert Committee was
constituted by the Ministry on the 11th April, 2008 for the assessment of the three
Institutes. The scope and terms of reference of the Expert Committee are self-revealing.
Out of the eight terms of reference of the Expert Committee, the foremost two are as
follows:—
(i) Study of infrastructure facilities available at the three vaccine manufacturing
units and explore feasibility of conversion of existing laboratories into testing
laboratories or training units.
(ii) Scope of re-deployment of the existing staff in production units to the proposed
testing labs in view of the stoppage of production of vaccines.
The above terms of reference clearly indicate that the Ministry had already taken a
decision for final stoppage of vaccine production at the Institutes inspite of the fact that the
manufacturing license of the three institutes remained suspended till the time of
discrepancies noticed were finally removed. The Committee expresses its serious reservation
on this development. It is very clear that the three institutes fulfilling the vaccine
requirement of the country for the past so many decades were not given a fair chance.
They did not deserve such a treatment at the hands of their administrative Ministry.
(Para 5.14)
It has also come to the notice of the Committee that after the show-cause notice
issued to the BCG VL regarding cancellation of its license on the  14th December, the DCG (I)
conveyed the proceedings of the CLAA suspending tbe license of BCG VL until the new
facilities were ready. On 20th February, 2008 the DCG (I) informed the Institute that
products manufactured at the Institute cannot be used for immunization purpose due to
non-conformities of GMP and hence, sought a proposal for destruction and writing off of the
stock lying with it. (Para 5.15)
The Committee would like to state here that until the inspections were carried out,
the Institute had been meeting the requirement of BCG vaccine for the entire country and
the same were supplied to the various States under the UIP without reports of any adverse
effects from the use of such vaccines. On the other hand, if the vaccines supplied under

19
the UIP conformed to the standards of safety, efficacy and quality, then what could be the
logic to order the destruction and writing off of the stock by the DCGI. The Committee
observes that since BCG VL was the sole manufacturer of BCG Vaccine in the country, such
a move could lead to shortage of vaccines across the States, thereby, affecting the Universal
Immunization Programme. The Committee’s apprehensions have been confirmed by media
reports regarding shortage of vaccines across the States. The Committee apprehends that
large amounts of vaccines produced at CRI and PH would have also met with a similar fate.
The Committee observes that the Ministry has not approached the issue with enough
foresight to ensure adequate and steady supply of vaccines and that such a move puts it in
poor light. (Para 5.16)
On being asked to inform the Committee about the actual requirements of different
vaccines in the country under Universal Immunization Programme during 2008-09, the
Ministry has furnished state-wise details in its Status Note as follows:
(Qty. in lakh doses)
Total vaccine T T DPT D T OPV M easles BCG
requirement
in the
country (all
States/UTs)
1708.00 1579.87 432.66 1581.86 391.20 759.21
The Ministry has informed that to meet the vaccine requirement in the country
for 2008-09, the Vaccine Procurement Cell has placed the following orders with private firms
producing vaccines:—
(Qty. in lakh doses)
Supplier V accine T otal order Total Difference
placed country
requirement
12 3 4 5
B.E. Ltd. T T 1360.00 1708.00 348.00
Hyderabad
B.E. Ltd. 800.00
Hyderabad DPT 1579.87 416.87
S.II. Pune 300.00
I.I.L Hyderabad 63.00
T
OTAL 1163.00
B.E. Ltd. D T 375.00 432.66 57.66
Hyderabad
Bharat Biotech. 1350.00
Ltd., Hyderabad OPV 1581.86 51.36
HBPCL, Mumbai 184.50
(Pipeline)
TOTAL 1530.50

20
12 3 4 5
S.II. Pune 360.00
I.I.L Hyderabad MEASLES 90.00 391.20 58.80 excess
procurement
TOTAL 450.00
S.II. PUNE BCG 600.00 759.21 159.21
From the above comparative table it is clear that in most cases, tbe vaccine
requirement exceeds the amount of order placed with the firms, while in one case i.e.
measles vaccine, the order placed exceeds the total requirement stated in the country
figures. The Committee wonders as to how the Ministry plans to cover the shortfall in the
vaccine requirement in the country. (Para 5.17)
Committee’s attention is also drawn to the awarding of bulk purchase orders to one
unit in particular—Biological E. Ltd., Hyderabad. The Committee would like to state here
that in the two lists of functioning and non-functioning vaccine manufacturing units,
furnished by the Ministry, the name of Biological E. Ltd., Hyderabad is found in both the
lists. On being asked regarding the veracity of status of functioning of this production unit,
the Ministry replied that the unit may have qualified for a certain category of vaccines
while for others it may be either closed or upgrading itself to cGMP standard. The
Committee is however, not convinced by the Ministry’s stand. It is clear from the submitted
lists that the Ministry is unaware whether Biological E. Pvt. Ltd. is functional as it has not
received report regarding the same in the last two years. The Committee fails to understand
how the situation could change over night and the above mentioned vaccine producing unit
could qualify all the required norms of schedule M. The Committee would like to note here
that either the Ministry had failed to provide complete information on the unit or had
chosen not to do so. In either case, it is of the opinion that more transparency in the
matter is required. The Committee is not aware about the status of private units with which
the Vaccine Procurement Cell (VPC) has placed the orders. The Committee would like to
be apprised as to whether all these units are cGMP compliant. (Para 5.18)
Another pertinent issue that draws the Committee’s attention is the procurement
price of the vaccines. The Committee believes that since the CRI, Kasauli, BCG VL,
Chennai and PII, Coonoor are in the public sector, vaccines were available to the people at
cheap price, but once the manufacturing. goes into the private hands there is every
likelihood that the cost of the vaccines could go up in future, thus, defeating the very
objective of providing highly essential drugs like vaccines to the people at affordable prices.
(Para 5.19)
The Committee earlier discussed that the international health agency – WHO, had
offered to upgrade the technology at the three PSUs. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should explore this avenue as an alternative to build these units conforming to
international Good Manufacturing Practices. (Para 5.20)
The Committee has also been informed that a vaccine park is being proposed to be
set up in Chegalpattu near Chennai. On a specific query in this regard, the Committee was
informed that the proposed vaccine park would be in the public sector. It would be a unit
that would be established by Hindustan Latex Ltd., a public sector undertaking under the
administrative control of the Ministry. The Committee would like to point out that with

21
three vaccine manufacturing units already functioning for the last so many decades, the
right course of action would have been to make sincere efforts for their revamping in
accordance with the changing times. Vaccine Park coming up at the cost of already existing
units cannot be considered justified from any point of view. The Committee observes that
this project could take a couple of years before manufacturing and supply of vaccines could
actually take place. Till such time the Committee feels that procuring the country’s
requirements of various vaccines from the private sector could only increase the cost of the
vaccines thereby, adversely hitting the Exchequer. Moreover, a single centralized vaccine
producing park may not be able to cater to the needs of the billion plus and growing
population of the country. (Para 5.21)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should revoke the
suspension of vaccine manufacturing licenses of the three vaccine producing PSUs at the
earliest. Until such time that new infrastructures are built conforming to the Schedule M
norms, these Institutes may be allowed to continue production in the old structures after
carrying out the rectifications either fully or to the extent possible. The Committee would
like to point out that all the three units have their own quality control system. Not only
this National Quality Control Authority is also involved in the quality control of vaccines
produced by these units. In such a scenario, there is little likelihood of non-standard
vaccines being produced by them. These Institutes may be allowed the time sought by them
as also provided with adequate funds for completing the rectification works but it should be
done under the aegis of the Ministry so that they do not exceed the time-frame.  (Para 5.22)
The Committee also recommends that all the vacancies in all cadres should be filled
up at the earliest and the recruitments rules for those posts, which are yet to be framed,
should be framed immediately. The Committee further recommends that the existing
scientific and technical staff should be given appropriate training to make them cGMP
compliant. The Committee is not aware about the status of private units with which the
Vaccine Procurement Cell (VPC) has placed the orders. The Committee would like to be
apprised as to whether all these units are cGMP compliant. (Para 5.23)

MINUTES

25
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 6th January, 2009 in Committee
Room ‘A’,  Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Shimati Viplove Thakur
3. Prof P. J. Kurien
4. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
5. Shrimati Maya Singh
6. Shri Lalhming Liana
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
8. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
9. Shri Rajendra Kumar
10. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
11. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
12. Dr. Chinta Mohan
13. Shri Pannian Ravindran
14. Shrimati Yashodhara Raje Scindia
15. Dr. R. Senthil
16. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
17. Shri Vinod Kumar
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai
1. Dr. C.H.D. Vinod Kumar, Director-in-charge
2. Shrimati Selvi Anbudurai, Technical Supervisor
3. Shri R. Anandan, E&M Supervisor

26
Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor
1. Dr. B. Sekar, Director on Addl. Charge
2. Dr. K.N. Venkataramana, Asstt. Director
Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasuali
1. Dr. K.R. Mani, Director
2. Dr. K.N. Venkataramana, Asstt. Director
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
1. Shri Naresh Dayal, Secretary
2. Dr. R.K. Srivastava, Director General Health Services
3. Dr. Surinder Singh, Drug Controller General (India)
4. Shri Debashish Panda, Joint Secretary
5. Shrimati Shakuntala D. Hamlin, Joint Secretary
6. Shri B.K. Prasad, Joint Secretary
7. Shri R.S. Shukla, Joint Secretary
2. * * *
3. The Committee, then, took oral evidence of the Directors of the three Vaccine-producing
PSUs, namely the Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII),
Coonoor and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai on the functioning of these institutes
and allied issues. The Members raised a number of queries regarding the suspension of license
granted to these Institutes, constraints faced in the Institutes becoming CGMP compliant, the
proposed move to convert these Institutes into testing labs, as well as the vaccine supply scenario
in the country in the light of these developments.
4. Thereafter, the Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary and other officers from the
Department of Health and Family Welfare on the above issues. The Chairman and other Members
of the Committee raised a number of queries on the future course of action contemplated by the
Department in respect of these Institutes.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

27
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 5th February, 2009 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Shri Lalhming Liana
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Rajendra Kumar
6. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
7. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
8. Shri Rasheed Masood
9. Dr. Chinta Mohan
10. Shri Pannian Ravindran
11. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai
** *
2. * * *
3. The Committee then considered the Draft Report on the functioning of the three vaccine
producing PSUs, namely, the Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, Himachal Pradesh; the
Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, Tamil Nadu and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL)
Chennai, Tamil Nadu and after some discussion adopted the Report.
4. The Committee decided to present its Thirty-fourth Report on the functioning of the vaccine
producing PSUs in the unsuing session of Parliament and authorized the Chairman and in his
absence Shri P.J. Kurien and Shrimati Viplove Thakur to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha.
The Committee further authorized Dr. Karan Singh Yadav and in his absence Dr. R. C. Dome to
lay copy of the Report in Lok Sabha.
27
*** Relates to other matters.

28
5. * * *
6. A Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.25 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.