Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SIXTY-THIRD REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th March, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th March, 2013)
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Fifty-sixth Report on Demands 
for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 48) of the Department 
of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
 
 
REPORT NO. 
63


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SIXTY-THIRD REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Fifty-sixth Report on Demands
for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 48) of the Department
of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  19 th March, 2013)
(Laid on the table of Lok Sabha on  19 th March, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—14
Chapter I – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee .......................... 2—5
Chapter II – Recommendations/Observations which the  Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................ 6—9
Chapter III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 10—13
Chapter IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................... 14
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 15
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 17—20
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 21—23

(i)(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
*3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri H. K. Dua
10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
@11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shri Kirti Azad
13. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
14. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
15. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
16. Shrimati Priya Dutt
17. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
18. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
19. Dr. Monazir Hassan
20. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
#31. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9 th January, 2013.
# Nominated as a Member to the Committee w.e.f.  14 th December, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, hereby
present this Sixty-third Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee’s 56
th Report on Demands for Grants
2012-13 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare for the year 2012-13.
2. The Fifty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health
and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26
th and 25 th April,
2012 respectively. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report,
received from the Department of Health Research were considered by the Committee at its meeting
held on the 8
th February, 2013 .
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on the
8th February, 2013.
 BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
8th February , 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Magha 8, 1934 ( Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare

(iv)
LIST OF ACRONYMS
CCEA – Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
DHR – Department of Health Research
DCGI – Drugs Controller General of India
DARE – Department of Agricultural Research and Education
DBT – Department of Bio-Technology
EFC – Expenditure Finance Division
ICMR – Indian Council of Medical Research
IFD – Integrated Finance Division
MRUs – Multi-Disciplinary Health Research Units
MTAB – Medical Technology Assessment Board
MRHRU – Model Rural Health Research Unit
NDMA – National Disaster Management Authority
PPP – Public Private Partnership
PAO – Pay and Accounts Office
TRIPs – Trade-related Intellectual Property Rights

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Fifty-sixth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 48) of
the Department of Health Research for the year 2012-13.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
been accepted by the Committee: 2.12, 2.13, 3.26, 3.28, 5.8, 5.9, 5.11 Total–7
(Chapter I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: 2.6, 2.14, 4.7, 4.8, 4.10, 5.5, 5.10, 6.6
Total–8 (Chapter II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 3.20 Total–4 (Chapter III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: Nil Total–Nil (Chapter-IV)
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 The Committee notes that in-principle approval of the Planning Commission has already
been obtained for most of the Schemes which could not take off during the Eleventh Plan due
to lack of necessary approvals. The Schemes or sub-components of the Schemes, which have
received Planning Commission’s in-principle approval, include Promotion and Guidance on
Research Governance Issues, Inter-sectoral Coordination in Medical, Biomedical and Health
Research, Advanced Training in Research in Medicine and Health, Matters relating to
Epidemics, Natural Calamities and Development of Tools; Coordination in the field of Health
Research with Governments, Organisations and Institutes; Matters relating to Scientific
Societies and Associations; Charitable and Religious Endowments in Medicine and Health
Research areas etc. The Committee takes note of the submission of the Department of Health
Research that the allocated funds for the year 2012-13 would be able to meet only part of the
cost of the new activities and this resource crunch from the beginning would seriously affect
the goals of Department, especially new activities. The Committee, therefore, views with
serious concern the considerably reduced BE allocation vis-à-vis  projected outlay for 2012-13 .
(Para 2.12)
Action Taken
DHR has planned its schemes as per the projected outlay for the 12th Plan. However, DHR
will initiate its activities within allotted budget for 2012-13 and will request the Finance Division/
Planning Commission to increase the allocation at RE stage. Department will try its best to achieve
the targets depending upon the availability of the funds.
The Department is thankful to the Hon’ble Committee for accepting its submission that the
funds allocated will enable it to only meet a part of the costs of the new activities and for its
concern for the adverse impact this will have on the Department’s goals.
Recommendation/Observations
1.2 Considering the fact that scientific knowledge generated through health and biomedical
research is used to develop drugs, diagnostics, vaccines, and devices that ultimately find place
in the health care delivery systems of the country as also the fact that health research has a
vital role to play in discovery and development of indigenous health products, the Committee
recommends that the allocation for the Department for 2012-13 be suitably enhanced at RE
stage. The Committee would simultaneously recommend that the Department should deploy its
resources in a more efficient manner and ensure optimal utilization of the allocated funds.
(Para 2.13)
2

3
Action Taken
The Department is thankful to the Hon’ble Committee for recommending an enhancement
of the allocations made to the Department for 2012-13 at the RE stage.
The Department will like to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it will strive hard to ensure
efficient and optimal utilisation of the funds allocated to it.
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
Recommendation/Observation
1.3 The Committee observes that in a resource-constrained country like India judicious
utilization of funds is of paramount importance. Equally important is the fact that the attention
should be focused on health outcomes rather than health outlays. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Department to get all on-going research projects, being funded, wholly or partially with
Government money, evaluated by an independent agency and place the findings in the public
domain. (Para 3.26)
Action Taken
As advised, the Department will formulate the strategies for analysing the research outputs
in terms of health outcomes. Currently the final reports of all the projects are evaluated by ‘external
and independent’ Project Review Committees constituted for different subjects. The Department
will take action to put these findings and opinions of the Expert Committees as well as specific
evaluation of health outcome in public domain as recommended by the Standing Committee.
The Department is thankful to the Hon’ble Committee for endorsing its assessment that the
efforts in the domain of health research should be targeted at health outcomes, and benefits
accruing to the common man through more efficient therapeutics, affordable diagnostics and
products.
The Department will implement the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to get the
research activities (intramural/extramural), currently being peer reviewed by non-CMR subject
experts, evaluated by an independent agency and place the findings in the public domain.
Recommendation/Observation
1.4 The Committee appreciates the achievements made by ICMR. However, for the sake of
greater clarity, the Committee would like to recommend to the Department to introduce the above
achievements into the public health systems of the country at the earliest opportunity. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this direction. (Para 3.28)
Action Taken
For the purpose of the assessment of technology/knowledge advancement into public health
care system, the department has already constituted an advisory group for working out the
constitution of Medical Technology Assessment Board. The Board has to be constituted for review
and to make recommendations for inclusion of technology/knowledge advancement in public health
system. The progress of the same will be communicated to the Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Health and Family Welfare. The Department is thankful to the Hon’ble Committee for its
appreciation of ICMR’s achievements.
The progress made in regard to the 30 leads being pursued for conversion into diagnostics
etc., is indicated in the Annexure.

4
Grant-in-Aid Scheme for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance on
Research Governance Issues
Recommendation/Observation
1.5 The Committee is not privy to the reasons adduced by the Planning Commission for pegging
the BE 2012-13 at Rs. 34.00 crore vis-à-vis the projected demand of Rs. 200.00 crore under the
above head. However, considering the fact that the EFC approval has already been accorded to the
Scheme, the Committee feels that meagre allocation of Rs. 34.00 crore would not be adequate to
meet the fund requirements. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to move
the Planning Commission once again for allocation of more funds at RE Stage and apprise the
Committee of their response thereto, indicating the reasons for not acceding to the request for
enhanced allocation under the head. (Para 5.8)
Action Taken
The Planning Commission has been apprised of the Hon’ble Committees’ views on the
Department’s reduced allocation for 2012-13.
Recommendation/Observation
1.6 The Committee observes that accomplishment of the targets set under the New Scheme
would require involvement of a number of agencies/organizations. Anticipating this, the Committee
in its 40th Report presented to Parliament on the 28th April 2010, had inter-alia recommended to
the Department to create an institutional coordination mechanism for synergizing the core
competencies of the different research organizations/agencies. In pursuance of the Committee’s
recommendation, the Department has constituted a Group of Secretaries for the purpose of
coordination. However, it is not clear as to whether it is an institutionalized mechanism or a stop-
gap arrangement. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to shed more light on the
issue as also apprise it of the updated development in this direction. (Para 5.9)
Action Taken
The Department will like to apprise the Hon’ble Committee that it has envisaged the
institutional coordination mechanism as an institutionalised arrangement. Steps are underway to put
in place the procedure etc., for the operation of this mechanism. This exercise is likely to be
completed by the end of the current year. The Group of Secretaries and the sub-committees
approved by it, will be permanent in nature for identifying and coordinating such programmes. As
of now interdepartmental groups such as DHR/ICMR and DARE/ICAR as well as DHR/ICMR and
DBT; DHR and NMDA as well as ICMR/DHR and Dept. of Environment & Forest have started
functioning on issues of common interest.
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 The Committee takes note of the fact that the Scheme inter-alia , aims at making
affordable health care available to the poor/marginalized groups/communities. The Committee
observes that in the post Trade-related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) era, development of
indigenous pharma products and medical devices are of momentous importance without which
making affordable healthcare a reality to the marginalized sections of the society would remain
a chimera. The Committee, would therefore, like the Department to sufficiently prioritize research
activities which are oriented towards developing indigenous pharma products and medical
devices . (Para 5.11)

5
Action Taken
DHR will prioritize its research activities incorporating the recommendations of the
Committee. ICMR has Translational Research Unit which deals with the research activities
important from Public Health point of view. The unit has identified 30 such innovative activities
important from public health point of view. These activities are in advanced stage of translation and
expected to be completed in the next one to two years. These leads will be processed further to
be developed into products and make them available for patient care/public health application.
The Department will like to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it is in complete agreement
on the need to provide the common man access to affordable health care based on indigenously
developed products and medical devices. This remains the focus of its translational activities the
progress of which has been detailed under recommendation 3.28.

6
6
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee is constrained to observe that there is a huge mismatch to the tune of
Rs. 2379.43 crore between the Eleventh Plan outlay and the Plan allocations made for the
Department of Health Research. The Committee feels that the financial outlay earmarked for the
Eleventh Plan was based more on theoretical anticipation rather than factors like past trends of
expenditure, stages of formulation/implementation of various projects, the status of pre-project
approvals etc. The Committee would, therefore, strongly recommend that all possible measures
should be put in place to exercise greater financial prudence for the purpose of earmarking realistic
outlays for the Twelfth Plan Period. (Para 2.6)
Action Taken
Against the approved plan outlay of Rs.4496.08 crores by the Planning Commission, the
actual allotment of funds to the D/o Health Research amounted to Rs.2116.65 crore and the actual
expenditure was Rs.1933 crores. It would therefore, be observed that utilisation against actual
allocation was 91.30 percent. The minor shortfall was due to the establishment of the department
in the later half of 2007, belated ‘in principle’ approval to the schemes of DHR by the Planning
Commission in December 2010 and non-approval of the two schemes within the Eleventh Plan due
to procedural delays and partial approval of other two schemes by the internal finance division of
the Ministry with their scope reduced to include only the remaining period of Eleventh Plan, that
too only for the last few months of the last year of the Eleventh Plan, i.e. 2011-12.
The Department would follow the financial prudence while drafting its demands for fund
in future. The Twelfth Plan was prepared after detail discussion. The department has taken up the
matter with the Planning Commission for earmarking outlay commensurate with the projects/
schemes of the Department.
Recommendation/Observation
2.2 The Committee understands that the 12th Plan outlay of the Department is yet to be
approved. The Committee observes that the delay in formal approval of the 12th Plan outlay has
a direct bearing on the process of EFC/CCEA approvals of various schemes/programmes of the
Department and their implementation. The Committee observes that the 11th Plan has already
concluded in March, 2012 and the process of approval of the 12th Plan should have been
completed much before so as to obviate procrastination. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
to the Government to quickly complete all the formalities related to planning process and approve
the 12th Plan outlay in right earnest so that the implementation of various schemes/programmes of
the Department is not hampered by lack of approvals. (Para 2.14)

7
Action Taken
DHR has incorporated the recommendations of the Standing Committee while preparing
EFCs of the four schemes for submission to Government. The EECs of the four schemes have
been submitted for appraisal and requisite approvals. The Department has done the ground work
to launch its schemes as soon as the approvals are granted.
The Hon’ble Committee’s concern at the delay in the finalisation of the Departments’ 12th
Plan outlay, and its consequential adverse impact on the schemes/programmes of the Department
has been communicated to the Planning Commission.
Development of Infrastructure for Promotion of Health Research
Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Department for establishment of MRUs
and MRHRUs. The Committee observes that while there is clarity about the fact that the
government medical colleges would be given support for development of infrastructure in terms of
establishment of multidisciplinary research units, there is lack of clarity on the policy stance of the
Development about the model ( i.e. government, private or PPP) to be adopted for establishing the
MRHRU. The Committee expects the Department to remove this ambiguity. (Para 4.7)
Action Taken
The Department will like to inform the Hon’ble Committee that in its considered view the
proposed MRHRUs’ are proposed to be set up as a Government activity and not in a PPP mode.
The scheme has been formulated by the Department in two parts provides for (1) establishment
of Multi-Disciplinary Health Research Units (MRUs) in Government Medical Colleges with 100%
financial support by the DHR for period of five years and thereafter, transfer of recurring
expenditure liability to the concerned State Government/Medical Colleges; and (2) establishment of
Model Rural Health Research Unit (MHRUs) to be run as Departmental Units with 100% funding
by the Department of Health Research and the State Governments responsibility will be limited for
providing requisite land.
The MRHRU will drive the research agenda as per local/regional needs so that the
technology is introduced into the States as per their needs on dynamic basis. This aspect has since
been clearly delineated in the proposal for the EFC.
Recommendation/Observation
2.4 The Committee notes that the above initiatives are targeted to bridge the gap in the
availability of infrastructure for research in medical colleges and create infrastructure for transfer
of technology to the beneficiaries in rural areas. From the information furnished by the Department,
the Committee gathers that EFC for this scheme is yet to be approved whereas the Planning
Commission has accorded its in-principle approval to it. For enabling operationalization of the
Scheme at the earliest, the Committee would expect the Department to make vigorous efforts to
get the clearance of EFC at the earliest and obviate further delays. The Committee desires to be
apprised of the steps taken by the Department to get the EFC approval expedited. (Para 4.8)
Action Taken
Department has already started its efforts to get the approval of its scheme in question. The
EFC for the Scheme for Twelfth Plan Period have already been prepared and processed through

8
IFD for circulation amongst the appraisal agencies and obtaining requisite approvals, as per the
prescribed procedure.
Recommendation/Observation
2.5 The Committee apprehends that meagre outlay of Rs. 44 crore would not be sufficient to
meet the requirement of funds under this head, especially in view of the fact that development of
infrastructure is a capital-intensive activity and 60 proposals for establishment of MRUs and
detailed proposals for establishment of MRHRUs from five States have already been received. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Planning Commission have a re-look at the allocations
made under the above head and revise it upwardly at RE stage. (Para 4.10)
Action Taken
The Planning Commission has been apprised of the Hon’ble Committee’s concerns about the
adverse effects of the reduced outlay on this capital intensive scheme, and its desire that the outlay
be enhanced at the RE stage.
Grant-in-Aid Scheme for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and Promotion and Guidance on
Research Governance Issues
Recommendation/Observation
2.6 To address this need, the DHR has been advised to set up apex drug testing laboratories
and related regulatory in every state in synergy/ coordination with DCGI and other appropriate
mechanisms. DHR has also been advised to set up a Medical Technology Development Board to
promote development of indigenous medical technologies. (Para 5.5)
Action Taken
The Department will like to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it will endeavour to finalise
the roadmap for establishing drug testing laboratories in consultation with the DCGI and the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ministry has already constituted an advisory group for
the establishment of the Medical Technology Assessment Board (MATB) under DHR.
The Advisory Group constituted to initiate the process of establishing a Medical Technology
Assessment Board (MTAB) has commenced its work (First meeting held on 3rd August, 2012). The
MTAB will evaluate the appropriateness and cost-effectiveness of medical technologies.
Recommendation/Observation
2.7 The Committee observes that the activities envisaged under this head are of very vital
importance. However, the real challenge would be witnessed in taking them to their logical
conclusion in a time-bound manner. The fact that a number of activities under the above Scheme,
which were targeted to be finalized during 2008-09, but could not be finalised even after lapse of
4 years, is indicative of the challenges ahead. The Committee, would therefore, like the Department
to lay greater emphasis on the completion of the pre-project activities within a specific time-line.
(Para 5.10)
Action Taken
DHR has already initated action to prepare the EFC note for the scheme for the Twelfth Plan

9
period, indicating the time line/project implementation schedule. The Department has initiated its
pre-project activities for its four proposed schemes.
The Department will like to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it will ensure that all the pre-
project activities are completed well in advance so as to ensure the initiation of action immediately
on receipt of the approval of the Scheme.
Human Resource Development for Health Research
Recommendation/Observation
2.8 The Committee is supportive of the Programme and observes that without a strong human
resource development base all other health research programmes would be rendered ineffective. The
Committee therefore, recommends that the resource crunch should not be allowed to come in the
way of implementation of this important Scheme. (Para 6.6)
Action Taken
The Department is thankful to the Hon’ble Committee for its recommendation for enhanced
funding of the Department. The Department on its part will once again like to assure the Hon’ble
Committee of its commitment to pursue health research in a holistic manner in order to achieve
the multiple goals identified by it ranging from augmenting the human resource pool of researchers;
research infrastructure in medical colleges, and in the rural areas; available laboratory infrastructure
to deal with epidemics; and inter-sectoral coordination among the stakeholders in the Health Sector.
The Department has already prepared the scheme regarding Human Research Development on
Health Research and submitted the same for comments of IFD before circulation to the appraisal
agencies.
The Department has already requested the Planning Commission to increase its allotment so
that sufficient budget is available for its activities.

10
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 The Committee also finds that there has been persistent and huge shortfall in utilization of
the allocated expenditure under various heads of the Department during the last three years. The
shortfall witnessed in utilization of funds allocated under the various heads for 2009-10, 2010-11
and 2011-12 is given below (Table at Annex ). (Para 2.7)
Action Taken
3.2 The shortfall in the utilisation of funds for the years 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 is
mainly due to the following reasons:–
• In principle approval of the Planning Commission to the four schemes formulated by the
DHR was received in December, 2010 only.
• The Planning Commission observed that the schemes to be restricted to one year i.e.
2011-12, as being the last year of Eleventh Plan Period.
• The schemes moved by the department in 2010-11 could not materialise due to
procedural delays in getting the requisite clearances.
• Finally at the end of Eleventh Plan the two proposals related to ‘Human Resource
Development’ and ‘ Grant-in-Aid Scheme for Inter-Sectoral Convergence and
Promotion and Guidance on Research Governance Issues’ with a small expenditure,
restricting to the last year of the Eleventh Plan (2011-12 were only approved
• Now the EFCs have been prepared for the entire Twelfth Plan Period. All the four
schemes have been formulated by the Department for Twelfth Plan Period and the
process has been initiated to get them approved.
• So far as non-utilisation of funds earmarked in Secretariat-Social Services is concerned,
that was due to the fact that separate Administrative set-up/PAO has not yet been set
up for the department and Department of Health and Family Welfare continue to extend
support for Secretariat expenditure of the Department of Health Research.
Further recommendation
3.3 The Committee notes that the administrative setup/PAO has not yet been set up for
the Department of Health Research and Department of Health and Family Welfare is
extending support for Secretariat expenditure of Department of Health Research. The
Committee observes that it has almost been four years since the Department was created
and if administrative set up with adequate manpower is yet to materialize, it is certain to
have a bearing on the working of the Department. The Committee would, therefore,
10

11
recommend to the Department to take immediate necessary steps to have separate
administrative set up.
Recommendation/Observation
3.4 It is evident from the above Table that except for ICMR, all other schemes witnessed
massive under/nil financial performance in terms of utilization of BE allocations for 2009-10,
2010-11 and 2011-12. The Department has attributed the reasons for under/nil utilization of BE
allocations to the non approvals of various schemes/projects for implementation. The Committee
deprecates the Department for its failure in obtaining necessary approvals for implementation of the
above schemes/projects and making projection of fund requirements in an unrealistic manner.
(Para 2.8)
Action Taken
3.5 The Department got ‘in-principle’ approvals of its four Schemes on 9th December, 2010
from the Planning Commission. After that the Department prepared EFCs for the four schemes for
a period of five years and submitted to IFD division of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for
comments and approval. The IFD observed that the schemes cannot be approved for five years
as it was the last year of the Eleventh Plan Period and funds for the Twelfth Plan period were
not yet committed. Thereafter the Schemes were redrafted with the activities limited to the
remaining period of the Eleventh Plan, but could not be approved. However the two schemes (as
mentioned above) were initiated in the last month of 2011-12 with allocations of small amount.
The Department on its part made concerted efforts in submitting the proposals for all the
four schemes since 2010-11 i.e. after receipt of the in principle approval to the schemes by the
Planning Commission in December 2010, but it is regretted that the schemes could not be approved
due to the stand taken by the IFD and Planning Commission that the activity should be limited to
the balance period of the Eleventh Plan and in the entire process of repeated revisions of the EFCs,
the Eleventh Period was over.
Severe shortage of manpower with the newly created department was an added factor and
a major constraint in this regard. Even till date, the department has only 7 personnel to run the
Department.
Further recommendation
3.6 The Committee notes from the above action taken note that the Department is
reeling under acute shortage of manpower as is evident from the fact that there are only
7 personnel to run the Department. The Committee observes that given the critical role
envisaged to be played by the Department of Health Research, this state of affairs is
unacceptable. The Committee is not aware whether the Department had taken up the
matter with the concerned authorities for augmentation of manpower. The Committee,
therefore, recommends to the Department to take up the matter of shortage of manpower
with the authorities concerned so that if may not hinder the working of the Department.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures initiated by the Department to
overcome the shortage of manpower and the outcome thereof.
Recommendation/Observation
3.7 The Committee notes that the Department of Health Research was created in September
2007 and became functional in November, 2008 with appointment of the first Secretary who is also
the DG, ICMR. More than three years have elapsed since then and therefore the reasons for delay

12
in obtaining the necessary approvals for implementation of various schemes/projects are beyond the
comprehension of the Committee. Now that the in-principle approval of the Planning Commission
for all four Schemes has been obtained, the Committee would expect the Department to expedite
the approvals for the remaining two Schemes and ensure that the Schemes are operationalized
within the shortest possible time, the allocations made for the purpose are utilized optimally, huge
variations in the Budget Estimates and the Actual Expenditure do not recur, and the scarce
resources are not kept locked up and surrendered later. The Committee desires to be apprised of
the measures taken in this regard. (Para 2.9)
Action Taken
3.8 The Department has already submitted the three schemes for Twelfth Plan Period to IFD
division of MoHFW for comments and approval. The remaining one scheme is at the advanced
stage of formulation and will be submitted for appraisal shortly.
The pre-project/spade work to operationalize the schemes is being/has been done by the
DHR. Implementation of the four schemes can be initiated as soon as the necessary approvals are
received. The list of Government Medical Colleges have been finalized for undertaking the activities
in 1st stage. The Expert Committees for different purposes has already been finalized subject to
the approvals of the schemes by the Government.
The Department will make all efforts for maximum utilization of the funds allocated for
various schemes for 2012-13, subject to necessary approvals to the schemes.
Further recommendation
3.9 The Committee observes that though three out of the four Schemes have been
submitted by Department of Health Research to the Internal Finance Division (IFD) of
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the approval of IFD is apparently yet to be
accorded. The Committee desires that early approval may be given to all the four schemes.
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
Recommendation/Observation
3.10 The Committee observes that the shortfall between the projected demand and the Budget
Estimate for ICMR for 2012-13 is to the tune of Rs. 1183.00 crore, which is massive by any
standards and is certain to have an adverse bearing on the implementation of various intramural and
extramural research projects of ICMR. Given the excellent track-record of ICMR in utilizing the
budgeted funds, the Committee wonders as to what financial yardstick was applied leading to
substantially reduced allocation of funds in BE 2012-13 vis-à-vis the projected demand. In view of
the dynamic international health research environment and the current and future health challenges
of the country, the role of ICMR is very crucial in generating new knowledge in frontier areas of
research on health and related issues and if its projects are allowed to be plagued with under-
funding to such a large extent, it can have very serious repercussions for generation of new
scientific knowledge and undermine the desired outcomes in health sector. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that more funds be allocated to ICMR. The Committee simultaneously
impresses upon the Department to deploy its financial resources in a more efficient manner.
(Para 3.20)
Action Taken
3.11 The Department is thankful to the Hon’ble Committee for its appreciation of the ICMR’s

13
efforts in utilisation of budgeted funds and its achievements. The Committees’ concerns regarding
the adverse impact of the reduced outlay for 2012-13 on the generation of new scientific
knowledge, and the likely undermining of the desired outcomes in the health sector have been
brought to the notice of the Planning Commission.
The Department once again assures the Hon’ble Committee of its resolve towards an
efficient and optimal utilisation of the funds placed at its disposal.
Further recommendation
3.12 Though the Department has brought the recommendation regarding allocation of
more funds to the notice of Planning Commission, the Committee is not aware of the
reaction of the Planning Commission thereto. The Committee, therefore, desires to be
apprised of the reaction of Planning Commission in this regard. The Committee desires that
the Planning Commission may consider the fund requirement of ICMR and make allocation
keeping in view the health research needs in the country.

14
14
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
– Nil –

15
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee notes that the administrative setup/PAO has not yet been set up for
the Department of Health Research and Department of Health and Family Welfare is
extending support for Secretariat expenditure of Department of Health Research. The
Committee observes that it has almost been four years since the Department was created
and if administrative set up with adequate manpower is yet to materialize, it is certain to
have a bearing on the working of the Department. The Committee would, therefore,
recommend to the Department to take immediate necessary steps to have separate
administrative setup. (Para 2.7)
The Committee notes from the above action taken note that the Department is
reeling under acute shortage of manpower as is evident from the fact that there are only
7 personnel to run the Department. The Committee observes that given the critical role
envisaged to be played by the Department of Health Research, this state of affairs is
unacceptable. The Committee is not aware whether the Department had taken up the
matter with the concerned authorities for augmentation of manpower. The Committee,
therefore, recommends to the Department to take up the matter of shortage of manpower
with the authorities concerned so that if may not hinder the working of the Department.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures initiated by the Department to
overcome the shortage of manpower and the outcome thereof. (Para 2.8)
The Committee observes that though three out of the four Schemes have been
submitted by Department of Health Research to the Internal Finance Division (IFD) of
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the approval of IFD is apparently yet to be
accorded. The Committee desires that early approval may be given to all the four schemes.
(Para 2.9)
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
Though the Department has brought the recommendation regarding allocation of
more funds to the notice of Planning Commission, the Committee is not aware of the
reaction of the Planning Commission thereto: The Committee, therefore, desires to be
apprised of the reaction of Planning Commission in this regard. The Committee desires that
the Planning Commission may consider the fund requirement of ICMR and make allocation
keeping in view the health research needs in the country. (Para 3.20)
15

MINUTES

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Thursday, the 8 th February, 2013 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Rasheed Masood
4. Shri D. Raja
5. Shri H.K. Dua
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
8. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
9. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
10. Dr. Monazir Hassan
11. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
12. Dr. Tarun Mandal
13. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
14. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
15. Dr.Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
16. Shri P.T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them of the agenda of the
meeting viz. (i) to consider and adopt draft *, * and 63
rd Reports of the Committee on Action
Taken by the Government on Recommendations/Observations contained in its Reports on Demands
for Grants (2012-13) pertaining to Departments of *, * and Health Research, respectively, of the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and (ii) * *.
19
*** Relates to other matters.

20
II. Consideration and adoption of draft *, * and 63 rd Reports
3. The Committee considered and draft *, * and 63 rd Reports of the Committee on Action
Taken by the Government on Recommendations/observations contained in its Reports on Demands
for Grants (2012-13) pertaining to Departments of *, * and Health Research, respectively of the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Reports
with minor amendments.
4 . ***
5 . ***
6 . ***
7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

21
ANNEXURE

23
ANNEXURE
(Rs. in crore )
Sl. No. Sub Component 2009-10 2009-10 2010-11 2010-11 2011-12 2011-12
BE Exp BE Exp BE AE
a. Secretariat-Social Services 2 0402 3.74
b. Medical & Public Health
1 Human Resources Advanced training 3 0.05 8 0 15 4.02
Development for in research in
health research medicin and health
Inter-sectoral co- 25 5 0 15 13.24
ordination in
medical, biomedical
and health research
Promotion & 10 3 0 0.5
Grant in aid scheme guidance on research
for inter sectoral governance issues
2 convergence & Matters relating to 1 5 0 1
Promotion and scientific societies
guidance on and associations,
research charitable and
governance religious
issues endowments in
medicine and
health research
areas
Coordination with 3 0 0.5
Government/
organisations/
institutions
3 ICMR 260+40 399.5 360+50 510 500 533
4 Managing Matter relating to 5 5 5 20 10
epidemics and epidemics, natural
national calamities and
calamities development of
tools to prevent
outbreaks
5 Development of Promotion, co- 66 49 40 0
Infrastructure for ordination and
Promotion of development of
Health Research basic, applied and
clinical research
International 5 0.25 8 0.12 6 0.05
cooperation in
medical and health
research
G
RAND TOTAL 420 399.8 500 515.12 600 564.05

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.