 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO.  
146 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON  
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED  
IN THE 138TH REPORT ON THE  
“MEDICAL DEVICES: REGULATIONS AND CONTROL” 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th August, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2023) 
 
  
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON  
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED  
IN THE 138TH REPORT ON THE  
“MEDICAL DEVICES: REGULATIONS AND CONTROL” 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th August, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2023) 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
1.  Composition of the Committee (i) 
2.  Preface (ii) 
3.  Acronyms (iii)-(iv) 
4.  REPORT 
Chapter- I       
Recommendations/Observations Which 
Have Been Accepted By The Ministry 
Chapter-II   
                 Recommendations/Observations On Which 
The Committee Does Not Desire To Pursue 
In View Of The Ministry’s Replies 
 Chapter - III   
                 Recommendations/Observations In Respect 
Of Which Replies Of The Ministry Have 
Not Been Accepted By The Committee 
Chapter - IV  
Recommendations/Observations In Respect 
Of Which Final Replies Of The Ministry 
Have Not Been Received 
 
1 - 33 
 
2 - 7 
 
 
8 - 23 
 
 
24 - 31 
 
 
 
32 - 33 
5.  Recommendations/Observations — At a Glance 34 - 35 
6.  Annexure  36 - 46 
7. * Minutes  
* appended at the circulation stage. 

 i  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2022-23) 
 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel 
6. Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
8. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
9. Dr. Santanu Sen 
10. Shri A. D. Singh  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Shri K. Navas Kani 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Rao Munde 
22. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S.  
27. Dr. Jadon Chandra Sen  
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3. Shri Rajendra Tiwari                       Director 
 
 
 

 ii  
 
PREFACE 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health  
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its  
behalf, present this One Hundred Forty Sixth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 138th Report on Medical 
Devices: Regulations and Control pertaining to Department of Health & Family Welfare 
 
2.  The One Hundred Thirty Eighth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on 
the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th December, 2022. The Action Taken Notes of the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Report was received from the Departments in April, 2023. 
 
3.  The Committee made a total of 49 recommendations in the 138th Report, out of which 9 
recommendations have been accepted by the Ministry and has been categorized under Chapter -I. 
There are 26  recommendations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Ministry’s replies that have been categorized under Chapter -II. There are 11  recommendations/ 
observations, in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the 
Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon and have been 
categorized under Chapter -III while 3 recommendations/observations in respect of which fi nal 
replies of the Ministry have not been received, have been categorized under Chapter- IV. 
 
4.  The Committee, in its meeting held on the 31 st July, 2023 considered the Draft  
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
31st July, 2023 
Sravana 9, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
BHUBANESWAR  KALITA 
Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
  

 iii  
 
                          ACRONYMS 
 
ABDM Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission 
AERB 
AIIMS 
ADC 
Atomic Energy Regulatory Board  
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
Ana log to Digital Convertor 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
CDSCO Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation 
CSIR 
CE 
COE 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
Conformities European 
Centre of Excellence 
D&CA Drugs and Cosmetics Act 
DCC 
DoP 
DPIIT 
DPCO 
DRDO 
DGHS 
EFC 
Drugs Consultative Committee 
Department of  Pharmaceuticals 
Department For Promotion OF Industry and Trades 
Drugs (Prices Control) Order 
Defence Research and Development Organisation 
Director General Health Services 
Expenditure Finance Committee 
ETP 
EPC 
Effluent Treatment Plant  
Export Promotion Council 
GST 
GSR 
HR 
HIV 
HCV 
Goods and Services Tax 
General Statutory Rules 
Human Resources 
human immunodeficiency virus 
hepatitis C virus 
ICMED Indian Certification of Medical Devices 
ICMR 
IEC 
IISC 
IIT 
ISO 
Indian Council of Medical Research 
International Electrotechemical Commission  
Indian Institute of Science 
Indian Institute of Technology 
International Standards Organisation  
IVD 
INI 
IPC 
In-vitro Diagnostics 
institutes of National Importance 
Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission 
MoH&FW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MvPI Materiovigilance Programme of India  
MDR 
MDO 
MD 
MRP 
MNC 
MDMC 
Medical Device Rules 
Medical Device Officer 
Medical Device 
Maximum Retail Price 
Multi National Companies 
Medical Devices Adverse Event Monitoring Centres 
NABL 
NITs 
NIB 
National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories 
National Institute of Technology 
National Institute Of Biological 
NIPER 
NIMER 
NPPA 
NLEM 
NOC 
PMDA 
National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
National Institute of  Medical Devices Education and Research 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
National List of Essential Medicines 
No Objection Certificate 
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency 

 iv  
 
PRIP 
PLI 
PPO 
QCBS 
QC 
QMS 
QCI 
R&D 
RLI 
SLA 
SMEs 
TGA 
TMR 
USFDA 
UK 
US 
 
Promotion of Research and Innovation in Pharmaceutical 
Production Linked Incentive 
Public Procurement Order 
Quality-cum –Cost Based Selection 
Quality Check 
Quality Management System 
Quality Council Of India 
Research and Development 
Research Linked Incentive 
State Licensing Authority 
Small & Medium Enterprises 
Thermo gravimetric Analysis 
Trade Margin Rationalisation 
U.S Food and Drugs Administration 
United Kingdom 
United State 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 1  
 
REPORT 
               The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 138th Report  on Medical Devices: 
Regulations and Control pertaining to Department of Health & Family Welfare, Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare. 
2.   Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Health & Family 
Welfare in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. They have been 
categorized as follows: 
Chapter–I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:    
Paragraph Nos: 2.15, 2.18, 2.36, 3.12, 3.24, 3.27, 3.45, 4.28 and 4.63. 
TOTAL- 9 
 
Chapter–II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue  
in view of the Government's replies: 
Paragraph Nos:  2.7, 2.8, 2.10, 2.14, 2.21, 2.22, 2.27, 2.28, 3.7, 3.8, 3.13, 3.20, 3.22, 3.23, 
3.28, 3.30, 3.38, 3.39, 4.11, 4.30, 4.31, 4.33, 4.36, 4.64, 4.66 and 4.67. 
TOTAL- 26 
 
Chapter –III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government  
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Paragraph Nos:  2.9, 2.13, 2.33, 3.10, 3.18, 3.19, 3.41, 3.43, 4.27, 4.32 and 4.34. 
TOTAL- 11  
 
Chapter –IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the  
Government are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos:  3.31, 3.40, and 4.29. 
TOTAL- 3 
3.   The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the 
Report. 
 

 2  
 
CHAPTER-1 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
1.1     INVOLVEMENT OF HIGH -TECH INSTITUTIONS TO TEST MEDICAL 
DEVICES 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1.1 The Committee recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to allow the 
new regulator to involve institutions like IISC, CSIR, DRDO and network of IITs to test 
medical devices for safety and efficacy. The Committee is of the firm view  that these institutes 
have high- tech labs and thus can be used to test medical devices for their Electronic, 
electromagnetic, biochemical -run aspects. The Committee further recommends that 
additional investments should be made to raise the standards of these labs as per the 
requirements. 
(Para - 2.15 of 138th Report) 
Action Taken 
1.1.2   The recommendation of Honorable Committee to involve the institutions like CSIR, 
DRDO, IISC, IITs for testing of medical devices is noted. 
 
1.1.3   There is already a prov ision under Medical Devices Rules (MDR) 2017, that the 
laboratory of various institutions may get registered with CDSCO for testing of Medical 
Devices on behalf of manufacturers. CDSCO has reached out to various institutions for 
registering testing laboratory on CDSCO website under MDR 2017. 
 
1.1.4   Further, there is provision in rule 19 of Medical Devices Rules (MDR) 2017 that, the 
Central Government may notify/designate any laboratory for the purpose of testing and 
evaluation of Medical Devices. The laboratories of institution like IISC, CSIR, DRDO and 
network of IITs will be utilized for the purpose based on their competence & willingness. 
Presently, CDSCO is already utilizing the laboratories of ICMR for testing and validation 
purpose. 
 
1.2 SINGLE WINDOW CLEARANCE/APPROVAL 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.2.1   The Committee notes that multiplicity of regulations exists at the component level from 
different departments/ministries. The Committee recommends that CDSCO which operates a 
single window clearing platform for application of license for manufacturing, ex port, import 
shall also integrate all these bodies involved in the regulation of medical devices. A single 
window clearance for all the department/ ministries would significantly boost investment in 
R&D in the field of medical devices and would also reduce  the time required for obtaining 
approvals from different departments/ ministries. The Ministry must incorporate such an all -
encompassing “single window clearing/approval system” in the proposed new separate Act 
for the regulation of Medical Devices.         
         (Para - 2.18 of ibid) 

 3  
 
Action Taken 
 
1.2.2   CDSCO is receiving all applications for grant of Import License/ manufacturing 
license and for other approvals through www.cdscomdonline.gov.in in a single window. If 
there is any requirement, like NOCs from other allied department viz; AERB, etc, then the 
firm can submit the NOC in the checklist at a single place and document received are 
reviewed as per the requirement of MDR 2017 without further referring to other department, 
in order to comply the timelines as per MDR and to avoid further delay for getting the 
approvals. 
 
 
1.3   FINANCIAL SUPPORT TO THE LOCAL MANFACTURERS IN CAPACITY 
BUILDING 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.3.1   The Committee further recommends that till such time the Indian Medical Device 
Industry comes up with comparable standards and certification process, the Ministry should 
extend financial support to the local manufacturers in capacity building for compliance to 
USFDA/CE regulations considering that USFDA and CE certification processes are costly 
affairs. The Government support would facilitate local manufacturers to gain access to US 
and European markets thereby boosting exports. 
(Para - 2.36 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.3.2  Licenses are granted by regulatory authorities at central and state level after satisfactory 
compliance of regulations as per global practice in line with stringent regulations of Medical 
Devices in the countries like USA, Japan, Canada, Australia is carri ed out by the regulatory 
agencies like USFDA, PMDA -Japan, Health Canada and TGA Australia through licensing 
system. The conformity assessment is carried out by the officials as per regulations. 
 
1.3.3   Further, recently, Separate Export Promotion Council for Medical Devices have been 
notified under the Department of Pharmaceuticals and all efforts will be taken with the help of 
this new EPC to facilitate Indian Manufacturers for boosting the exports. 
 
1.3.4   Recommendation of the Committee to provide support  for Capacity Building of Local 
Manufacturer has been noted. 
 
1.4    CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE IN MEDICAL DEVICES AT NIPERs 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.4.1   The Committee realizes that biomedical engineers are integral to develop ecosystem 
for research in medical devices in India. These engineers are trained in the principles of 
physics and mathematical computation for the development of safe and effective medical 
devices t hat best fit the needs of medical providers and patients. However, biomedical 
engineers generally do not interface directly with patients to the same extent as physicians; 
therefore, biomedical engineers may not fully understand the specific needs of patie nts in the 
same way that medical professionals and manufacturers do. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends the Department to facilitate regular interactions of biomedical 
engineers with leading physicians and manufacturers and thus encourage them t o undertake 
research on medical devices. Furthermore, the Committee recommends expediting setting up 

 4  
 
centers of excellence in medical devices at all the National Institutes of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research (NIPERs). The courses may commence in thes e centers of excellence 
to train and educate biomedical engineers on ongoing challenges faced by medical device 
industry. 
(Para- 3.12  ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
1.4.2   As informed by DoP, the department has moved the proposal for establishing 7 
Institutes of National Importance (INIs) called National Institute for Medical Devices 
Education and Research (NIMERs) on the lines of NIPERs. The proposal awaits formal 
approval. This will address the needs for qualified HR for the medical devices industry in the 
coming years. 
 
1.4.3    Meanwhile, M.Tech (MD) course has been started in four NIPERs to train and educate 
biomedical engineers on ongoing challenges faced by medical device industry. Process has 
been initiated to develop Medical Device Testing facilities in all the NIPERs, for addressing 
the testing needs of the medical devices industries. 
 
1.4.4   DoP has proposed a scheme - Promotion of Research and Innovation in Pharmaceutical 
Sector (PRIP) scheme –  for establishment of CoEs at NIPERs and incentivizing research 
projects, related to pharma and Medtech sector. The Scheme awaits appraisal by the EFC. 
 
1.5   PLI SCHEME FOR RAW MATERIAL AND COMPONENT  
MANUFACTURING UNITS 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.5.1   The Committee believes that indigenous manufacturing can only be fostered if there is 
local availability of raw materials and critical components; the 80% dependency on imported 
products is primarily due to the lack of (i) high end technology and (ii) poor availability of 
raw materials. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government mus t incentivize 
such institutes, start -ups, manufacturing units which are engaged in manufacturing of raw 
materials and spare parts locally. Academic institutions like IITs, AIIMS & IISCs and 
research bodies like CSIR who have the technical know -how and the technology required 
should be allowed and encouraged to produce certain raw materials like antibodies, synthetic 
antigens, proteins etc. Additionally, the Committee recommends that PLI scheme should be 
expanded to cover raw material and component manufacturing as well so that India can 
become a hub for raw material for the world. 
(Para - 3.24  ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.5.2   As informed by CSIR, they have welcomed suggestions of the committee regarding 
incentivization of institutes, start- ups, manufacturing units which are engaged in 
manufacturing of raw materials and spare  
parts locally and allowing and encouraging academic institutions like IITs, AIIMS & IISCs 
and research bodies like CSIR to produce certain raw mate rials like antibodies, synthetic 
antigens, proteins etc. besides extending PLI scheme to cover raw material and component 
manufacturing as well, so that India can become a hub for raw material for the world. It is 

 5  
 
submitted that CSIR is working in the area  of antibodies, synthetic antigens and proteins. 
Streptokinase and Hepatitis B vaccine are some of the examples of these developments which  
are in the market. 
 
1.5.3  As informed by DoP, the r ecommendation of the committee for encouraging the 
academic inst itutions to produce certain raw materials like antibodies, synthetic antigens, 
proteins has been noted. 
 
1.5.4   Present PLI Scheme for Medical Devices also covers certain key components which 
constitute major part of finished medical devices such as Rotat ing Anode Tube, Stationary 
Anode Tube, MRI Magnet, Flat Panel Detector and similar components and has a distinct HS 
code for itself, as eligible products under the scheme. 
 
1.6 IMPORT OF REFURBISHED MEDICAL DEVICES WITH SAFETY 
PARAMETERS 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.6.1  The Committee feels that the Medical Devices segments in which India is 80% 
dependent upon imports are the highly capital intensive, having long gestation period and 
requiring more R&D segment. Simultaneously, the devices are essential for the people as they 
are mostly the diagnostic devices which help one detect any disease. If such detections are 
early, the chances of their control would also be more. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government must chalk out specific strategy for import of refurbished 
diagnostic devices to increase the penetration of such devices in each district of the country, 
till such devices are not manufactured at low cost domestically. The Committee also 
recommends that domestic manufacturers should be supported in installation of 
manufacturing plants in collaboration with international players, thus promoting production 
of high quality medical devices at low cost. The Committee also recommends that the safety 
parameters of the incoming medical devic es should be ensured so that only those medical 
devices which qualify the set parameters of safety and quality enter the Indian market. Sub-
standard and obsolete medical devices shall not be allowed to enter the Indian market. 
(Para - 3.27 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.6.2   The suggestion has been noted. Director General Health Services (DGHS) technical 
wing of MoHFW is working with Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change in 
this regard. 
 
1.7    SKILLED MANPOWER FOR MEDICAL DEVICE INDUSTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.7.1   The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Department of Pharmaceuticals in up 
scaling of manpower for the sector, however, feels that considering the potential of growth of 
the medical device sector, there is an urgent need to prepare a mammoth skilled manpower at 
various levels; hence more steps should be taken on priority. 
(Para - 3.45 ibid) 
  

 6  
 
Action Taken 
1.7.2  As informed by DoP, the department has moved the proposal for establishing 7 
Institutes of National Importance (INIs) called National Institutes for Medical Devices 
Education and Research (NIMERs) on the lines of NIPERs. The proposal awaits formal 
approval. This will address the needs for qualified HR for the medical devices industry in the 
coming years. 
 
1.7.3   Meanwhile, M.Tech (MD) course has been started in four NIPERs to train and educate 
biomedical engineers on ongoing challenges faced by medical device industry. 
 
1.8   INNOVATION AND TRAINING  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.8.1   The Committee feels that for a strong regulator it needs to be supported with required 
expertise from the backgrounds of Medical, Biomedical Engineering, Product Development 
and Marketing. The Committee further recommends that there is utmost requirement of 
training programm es for regulatory officials (both central and State level) as well as for 
industry persons for effective implementation of the rules and regulations. The Committee 
feels that developing skilled and trained manpower possessing technical know -how of the 
medical devices is essential for smooth implementation of the regulations. This could be done 
through long- term, short -term and crash courses on medical device manufacturing and 
quality control in institutes like IITs, NITs and medical colleges for new regulat ory officers. 
The Ministry of Skill Development may also be requested to formulate courses related to 
medical devices, manufacturing, use and maintenance. There is a need for devising a 
mechanism to pre -empt exigencies and provision for "emergency use authorization" of 
medical devices in case of emergencies. The Ministry should also lower high fee charged by 
notified medical devices testing laboratories like NIB particularly for Class C&D devices. 
The Committee observes that there is lack of co -ordination between academic institutions and 
industrial requirements. The Committee recommends that the innovators and scientists at 
research institutions should be made aware of the required standards and regulations, 
otherwise it's difficult to commercialize their innovation/creation. 
(Para – 4.28 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.8.2  Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for further 
appropriate action in consultation with the stakeholders.  
 
1.8.3   Government is continuously engaged in strengthening Central Drugs Standards Control 
Organization (CDSCO) as a regulator in terms of man power to strengthen the medical device 
regulation in the Country. In this regard, CDSCO has recruited manpower from vari ous 
engineering fields (recruitment rules provide for manpower for Medical Devices regulation to 
be sourced, inter alia, from Bio- Medical engineering, Chemical engineering, Bio -Technology 
or Electrical engineering, Electronics, Instrumentation engineering,  Polymer engineering, 
Computer science fields) in order to strengthen and effectively regulate the medical devices 
sector. 
1.8.4  Further, various subject expert committees have already been constituted for review/ 
deliberation for the approval of new medi cal devices, which include medical practitioners, 
who actually use or conduct Clinical investigation on medical devices. For various in- vitro 

 7  
 
diagnostics, the product development and evaluation scientists are part of Subject Expert 
Committees for evaluation. 
 
1.8.5   CDSCO has conducted various training programs region wise to cover all the states, 
central regulators and other stake holders including importers and manufacturers across India 
for implementation of Medical Devices Rules, 2017 and operation of Online Syste m/Portal 
for Medical Devices.  
 
1.8.6    The details of training programmes on Medical Devices are attached as Annexure-1. 
 
1.8.7  The suggestion for long -term, short -term and crash courses on medical device 
manufacturing and quality control in institutes like IITs, NITs and medical colleges for new 
regulatory officers is noted for further action. 
 
1.8.8  The provision for giving approvals in emergency situation is not barred/ prohibited 
under MDR 2017 & provisions of MDR can be used to give marketing authorization in 
emergency situations. 
 
1.8.9   With respect to lowering of fees charged by testing laboratories for Class C&D 
medical devices by NIB - the matter has been taken up with NIB for rationalization of fees. 
 
1.8.10  As informed by DoP, the departmen t has moved the proposal for establishing 7 
Institutes of National Importance (INIs) called National Institutes for Medical Devices 
Education and Research (NIMERs) on the lines of NIPERs. The proposal awaits formal 
approval. This will address the needs for  qualified HR for the medical devices industry in the 
coming years. Meanwhile, M.Tech (MD) course has been started in four NIPERs to train and 
educate biomedical engineers on ongoing challenges faced by medical device industry. 
 
1.8.11  The proposed R&D Policy of DoP, strives to address various issues of R&D and 
Innovation in pharma and medtech sector, including the Industry Academic linkages. Industry 
Associations will be involved in creating awareness of Standards and Regulations of 
MedTech Sector to the Innovators and Scientists at Research Institutions. 
 
1.9   CAPACITY BUILDING PROGRAMME 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.9.1  The  Committee endorses the views of some of the State Governments for Zone wise 
special trainings for Medical Device Officers. Trainings for Medical Device Testing Officers 
can be organized by National Drug Authority on routine basis so that technical experti se of 
officers gets enhanced. The Committee feels that Capacity Building Programmes/ Skill 
Enhancement Workshops will also help the regulators to perform their legitimate duties in a 
better and pragmatic manner. 
(Para – 4.63 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.9.2 Training programme for strengthening State/ Central Regulators are conducted from 
time to time. Inclusion of Medical Device Testing Officers in such trainings will also be 
considered in future trainings. 
1.9.3 The details of training on Medical Device Regulation is as Annexure-1. 

 8  
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY’S REPLIES 
 
2.1 SEPARATE REGULATION FOR MEDICAL DEVICES 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.1.1 The Committee notes that Drugs and Cosmetics Act lacks the provision of offences and 
penalties for malpractices like manufacturing of sub- standard devices, fake USFDA/CE 
certifications. 
The D&C Act does contain a penal provision for the manufacture of sub -standard drugs but 
does not penalize the manufacturers of substandard medical devices (although medical 
devices are legally defined in terms of drugs) because the legally binding standards which are 
recognised in the Act pertain only to drugs. Therefore, due to lack of penal provi sions for 
Medical Devices in the said Act, the manufacturers of sub- standard medical devices move 
scot free. The scope of Medical Devices Rules, 2017 is restricted to only those medical 
devices which are notified by the Government from time to time as „drugs‟. The Committee 
appreciates the initiatives of the Ministry to change the definition of Medical Devices in 2020 
to make it more inclusive and thus include almost all medical devices for regulation. 
However, the Committee feels that the definition of "Me dical Devices" be such that any 
product which falls under the definition is automatically eligible for regulation. 
(Para - 2.7 of 138th Report) 
Action Taken 
2.1.2  MOH&FW vide notification vide S.O. 648 (E) dated 11.02.2020 has exhaustively 
defined medical devices at par with the global definition. Further, as regard regulation of all 
medical devices falling under definition, it is submitted that all such medical devices  are 
under regulation in a phase wise manner by virtue of notification GSR 102(E) dated 
11.02.2020 and S.O. 648(E) dated 11.02.2020. Category A and B Medical Devices have 
already come under licensing regime w.e.f. 01.10.2022, whereas Category C & D Medical  
Devices shall come under licensing regime w.e.f. 01.10.2023, though these are presently 
under compulsory registration regime.  
 
2.1.3  In respect of all the Medical Devices which have been notified as drugs under Section 
3(b)(iv) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 all the penal provisions applicable to drugs are 
applicable to Medical Devices as well. 
 
2.1.4  However, it is to inform that the Ministry has already initiated the process of drafting 
and preparing a new Bill “The Drugs, Medical Devices & Cosmetics Bill 2022”  in which a 
separate chapter for comprehensive regulation of medical devices for import, manufacture, 
sale, distribution and clinical investigation, has been proposed with specific penal provisions 
for various contraventions of quality and safety, and provisions of the medical device chapter. 
2.1.5  The proposed bill includes more stringent penal provision i.e., the bill proposes to 
enhance the period of imprisonment between 1- 10 years which may extend to life 
imprisonment and amount of fine up to Rs. 15 lakhs for any contravention of provisions of the 
bill.  

 9  
 
2.1.6  The proposed bill, which establishes a distinct definition for medical devices, prohibits 
the manufacture, import, sale or distribution of medical devices that are not in conformity 
with the prescribed standards of quality, safety, and performance. 
2.2 WELL -RESEARCHED, ORGANISED AND INCLUSIVE LEGAL 
ARCHITECTURE FOR MEDICAL DEVICES 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.2.1  The Committee notes that in the recent years the Medical Devices has become a vast 
industry. Improvements in economy, life - expectancy, rise in income levels and overall rise in 
awareness about health coupled with surge in communicable and non-communicable diseases 
have been some of the key drivers behind growth of the industry. This has necessitated better 
regulation and control of the industry. The Committee believes that there is a need for a well -
researched, organised and inclusive legal architecture for r egulating activities of 
manufacturing units, medical institutions, laboratories, clinical trials having well defined 
responsibility, roles and accountability for all the stakeholders of the industry. 
(Para - 2.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.2.2  Ministry is in process of drafting and preparing a new Bill “The Drugs, Medical 
Devices & Cosmetics Bill 2022” in which a separate chapter for comprehensive regulation of 
medical devices for import, manufacture, Central/State medical device testing centres, sale, 
distribution and clinical investigation has been proposed. 
 
2.3 COMPREHENSIVE LAW SUPPORTED BY INSTITUTIONAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR MEDICAL DEVICE INDUSTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.3.1 The Committee believes that the new legislation on Medical Devices should have the 
provisions to transform the medical devices industry and bring about a Medical Device 
Revolution in the country. The Committee further recommends that instead of the panel the 
Government should come up with a “National Commission on Medical  Devices” to examine 
all aspects of the Industry in detail and bring forth a comprehensive law supported by a 
holistic policy and institutional infrastructure for the purpose. The Committee further 
recommends that this Commission should study the aspect of  centralizing the Medical Device 
licensing with the Central regulator so as to make the approval process easy. The Ministry 
should also focus on guaranteeing transparency by designing this legislation so that the 
citizens/ experts get a right to participat e in decision making. The legal provisions should be 
such that citizens/ experts can participate in the regulatory process & register their 
objections. The blueprint for the new legislation must also include a 10-15 year roadmap with 
a clear policy plan & targets. The Committee strongly believes that with a 15 year roadmap 
with annual targets for the Medical Device industry, India would emerge as the world's 
biggest centre for manufacture & service of Medical Devices and thus also a leader in 
medical tourism. 
(Para - 2.10 ibid) 
  

 10  
 
Action Taken 
2.3.2  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has proposed a new Drugs, Medical 
Devices and Cosmetics Bill, 2022 which is a comprehensive legislation to ensure that the 
medical products including medical devices sold in Country are safe and effective, and 
conform to prescribed quality standards.  
2.3.3  The proposed bill has a distinct definition for medical devices. The Bill also proposes to 
constitute a separate Medical Devices Technical Advisory Board to advise the government on 
technical matters pertaining to medical devices, which shall include officials from the various 
Government Departments and experts nominated by the government from the field of medical 
devices industry.  
2.3.4  Although no National Commission on medical device has been set -up, the said new 
Drugs, Medical Devices and Cosmetics Bill, 2022 has been prepared after exhaustive 
consultation with the stakeholders including manufacture associations, State/Central 
Regulators, Experts, and Consumer Associations etc. It is to bring a comprehensive La w 
striking balance to have provisions for ensuring the quality, safety, performance of medical 
products without hindrance to the growth of the medical device sector/industry. 
2.3.5  The proposed bill contains detailed provisions for clinical investigations , definitions of 
clinical investigation, clinical performance evaluation for in -vitro diagnostics, investigational 
and predicate medical devices, apart from detailed comprehensive chapter on medical devices. 
This is to make the regulatory ecosystem of medi cal devices more predictable and robust, 
thereby contributing to innovation research and development, in the sector of medical devices 
and overall growth of the medical devices industry. This will naturally give boost to domestic 
manufacturing of medical d evices as well as attract huge investments in India in healthcare 
sector. 
 
2.4   REGULATIONS TO BOOST MEDICAL DEVICE INDUSTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.4.1  The Committee recommends that the new legislation should set up a new set of 
regulator at different levels for regulating the Medical Devices industry. Unlike the present 
structure, the proposed regulator should license the manufacturing of all classes of medical 
devices i.e. Class A, B, C, and D. This would help harmonise the regulation process 
throughout the country as it would do away with different regulating procedures employed by 
different States. This step would greatly help the manufacturers and will r educe the time 
required to start a manufacturing unit thereby facilitating ease of doing business. The 
Committee also recommends that to undertake the regulation for all Classes of medical 
devices throughout the country, the proposed regulator should be adequately staffed with 
workforce which is technically skilled and is well- versed with the functioning of medical 
devices industry. The Committee recommends the Ministry to work in synergy with State 
Governments and impart the necessary skills to the local m edical device officers and also 
devise a mechanism to regularly designate State Medical personnel as Medical Device 
Testing Officers so that the mandate of the legislation can be implemented effectively. The 
Committee believes that with industry growing by leaps & bounds, the government should not 
afford regulation of medical devices by Pharma experts and its time that at ground level the 
medical device regulations are dispensed with by qualified and well -trained Medical Device 
Officers to give a fillip to the Medical Device industry in the country. 
(Para - 2.14 ibid) 

 11  
 
Action Taken 
2.4.2  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has proposed a new Drugs, Medical Devices 
and Cosmetics Bill, 2022 which is a comprehensive legislation to ensure that the medical 
products including medical devices sold in Country are safe and effective, and conform  to 
prescribed quality standards.  
2.4.3   The proposed bill has a distinct definition for medical devices. The Bill also proposes to 
constitute a separate Medical Devices Technical Advisory Board to advise the government on 
technical matters pertaining to  medical devices, which shall include officials from the various 
Government Departments and experts nominated by the government from the field of medical 
devices industry. 
2.4.4   The Medical Devices Rules (MDR), 2017 are in line with the international reg ulatory 
practices and provide comprehensive legislation for the regulation of Medical Devices, 
which will foster Make in India also. 
2.4.5   Currently, as per MDR 2017 Medical Devices are classified into into four classes 
(A, B, C and D) as per the risk of the intended use and purpose. 
According, import of all classes of Medical Devices as well as manufacture of Class C&D 
(High Risk) Medical Devices are regulated by CDSCO, while manufacture of Class A&B 
(Low Risk) Medical devices are regulated by the concer ned State Licensing Authorities 
(SLA) appointed by the State Governments. 
 
2.4.6   The online system for accepting the applications for grant of manufacturing license, 
import licence, free sale certificate, market standing certificate, non - conviction certificate, 
is functional. This has digitised & streamlined the regulatory submission procedures and 
expedited licensing process for ease of doing business. 
 
2.4.7  Government is continuously engaged in strengthening CDSCO in terms of man power 
and infrastructure to strengthen the medical device regulation in the country. 
2.4.8  In this regard, CDSCO has recruited manpower from various engineering fields 
(recruitment rules provide for manpower for Medical Devices regulation to be sourced, inter 
alia, from Bio -Medical engineering, Chemical engineering, Bio -Technology or Electrical 
engineering, Electronics, Instrumentation engineering, Polymer engineering, Computer 
science fields) in order to strengthen and effectively regulate the medical devices sector. 
2.4.9  Presently there are 23 Drugs Inspectors (Medical Devices), 236 Medical Device 
Officers (MDO) and 03 ADC (Medical Devices) working in CDSCO. Further, recently the 
Government has created additional 219 posts at various levels to strengthen CDSCO in 
medical device regulations.  
2.4.10  Further, in order to increase skills, knowledge of central/ state regulators, various 
training programmes are being conducted. Moreover, a mechanism to regularly designate 
State Medical personnel as Medical Device Testing Of ficers so that the mandate of the 
legislation can be implemented effectively; is already in place. 
 
  

 12  
 
2.5    BENCHMARKS AND STANDARDS OF MEDICAL DEVICES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.5.1 The Committee opines that while setting the standards and benchmark of medical 
devices the foremost factor which should be considered is “health”, the standards devised 
must prioritize health and wellness. In this regard, the Committee believes that BIS should 
focus on harmonizing  the Indian standards with world- class and globally accepted quality 
standards. Adapting Indian standards as per global standards would also help Indian medical 
device manufacturers in global market as it would make them more compe titive and 
acceptable, which in turn would transform India into a net exporter of medical devices, spare 
parts and services. The Committee, therefore, recommends BIS to periodically update Indian 
Standards to corresponding global medical device standards as complying with Indian 
standards is affordable for local manufactures in comparison to global standards. 
(Para - 2.21 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.5.2 As informed by BIS, under Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning department, BIS 
has published 620 Indian Standards harmonized with International Standards (ISO or IEC). 
BIS harmonizes Indian Standards with International Standards, taking into consideration the 
interest of the country, where ever feasible. 
  
 
2.6   ADHERENCE TO INDIAN STANDARDS OF MEDICAL DEVICES. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.6.1 The Committee further recommends that BIS should encourage manufacturers to 
demonstrate/adhere to conformance to essential principles of the medical device concerned, 
as this would reorganise Indian products achieve greater international acceptance. This will 
engineer a shift towards increase in India's global share in the medical devices sector. 
(Para - 2.22 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.6.2 As informed by BIS, it has published Indian Standard IS 23485 covering the essential 
principles for safety and performance of medical devices. 
 
2.7 LOW COST MEDICAL DEVICE TESTING LABORATORIES 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.7.1 The Committee notes that the country has only 18 certified Medical Device Testing 
Laboratories that have been approved by CDSCO and that is grossly insufficient keeping in 
view the size of the country. The Committee is of the considered opinion that having adequate 
common infrastructure including accredited laboratories in different regions of the country 
for standard testing would significantly encourage local manufacturers to get their products 
tested for standards and such measures undertaken would also help in reducing the cost of 
production which ultimately will improve the availabi lity and affordability of medical devices 
in the domestic market. 
(Para - 2.27 ibid) 

 13  
 
Action Taken 
2.7.2  Currently, 6 Central Medical device testing laboratories are notified by Government of 
India for carrying out test and evaluation of various medical de vices, and 26 medical device 
laboratories are registered by CDSCO to carry out testing on behalf of device manufacturers 
for various medical devices. All these laboratories are NABL accredited. 
 
2.7.3  Further, CDSCO engages with BIS, QCI and ICMR to provide the list of their 
Laboratories who are involved in testing of Medical Devices and in test/ evaluation of 
specified In-vitro Diagnostics Reagents/ kits, Analyzers, Instruments and Software in order to 
increase the number of medical device testing laboratories across the country. This will 
significantly encourage the local manufacturers to get their products tested and ultimately will 
improve the availability and affordability of medical devices in the domestic market. 
 
2.7.4.  This is a dynamic process. Further, the laboratories which are NABL accredited and 
having adequate infrastructure for testing of medical device/ IVDs may also apply to CDSCO 
for registration.  
 
2.7.5  As informed by BIS, it has its own 08 laboratories spread across the country which are 
carrying out testing of samples under conformity assessment schemes being operated by BIS. 
In addition, BIS also recognizes outside laboratories from public and private se ctor under its 
laboratory recognition scheme (BIS LRS2020) for testing samples meant for the purpose of 
conformity assessment schemes being operated by BIS. As on date 293 such laboratories have 
been recognized. 
 
2.7.6  List of Indian standards pertaining to medical devices and laboratories having test 
facilities for carrying out testing of these Indian standards is attached at Annexure -2. The IS 
wise list of laboratories available for testing products is also available at www.lims.bis.gov.in 
 
 
2.8   IT ENABLED  POST MARKET SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM FOR MEDICAL 
DEVICES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.8.1  The Committee finds that there is a dire need for developing a robust IT enabled 
feedback driven post market surveillance system for Medical Devices to evaluate the 
efficiency of specific Medical Devices. A medical device registry, particularly for implants 
should also be made to ensure traceability of patient who has received the implant in order to 
assess the performance of the implant and ascertain up to what extent the implant has made 
the life of the patient comfortable and also to seek feedback of functi onal capacity of medical 
devices. Such measures would ensure that patients get access to good quality and approved 
medical devices. 
(Para - 2.28 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.8.2  Observations/ Recommendations of the Honourable Committee have been noted.  
 
2.8.3  Materio-vigilance Programme of India (MvPI) was approved by the Govt. of India on 
10.02.2015. The Programme was formally launched at IPC, Ghaziabad on 6.07.2015 to ensure 
the safety of medical devices in the country. 

 14  
 
2.8.4  293 Medical Devices Adverse Even t Monitoring Centres (MDMCs) have been 
identified and recognized across the country and more are in pipeline. MDMCs report adverse 
events associated with the use of Medical Devices. The adverse reactions/ Serious Adverse 
events related to medical device are regularly analysed by the concerned technical committee. 
 
2.9     PREFERENTIAL PURCHASE OF DOMESTIC PRODUCTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.9.1 The Committee is of the considered view that in order to encourage indigenous 
manufacturing, the Government should provide incentives or encourage preferential purchase 
for domestically manufactured products in Government procurement. In this regard, the 
Department should ensure that in all public procurement, the preference must be given to 
Indian manufactured medical devices having domestic content of at least 50%.Given the size 
of Government's (both Central and State) purchase, the Preferential 
Purchase Agreement would have a significant pull for a number of medical devices 
companies to manufacture medical dev ices in India. Also, the PLI scheme should be broad 
based and all the medical devices should be covered under the scheme. 
(Para - 3.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.9.2  As informed by DoP, vide OM dated 16.02.2021 guidelines have been issued for 
implementing the provisions of Public Procurement Order, 2017 with respect to procurement 
of goods & services in Medical Devices. As per these Guidelines, preference is given by the 
Central Procurement agencies, to Class -I local supplier of Medical Devices, where local 
content is more than or equal to 50%. 
 
2.9.3  Further, pursuant to the DPIIT’s Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) 
Order (PPO), 2017 dated 16.09.2020, DoP has also issued guidelines dated 16.02.2021 for 
implementation of the Order. DoP vide Order  dated 16.02.2021 and 25.03.2021 further 
notified 135 & 19 medical devices respectively where there is sufficient local capacity and 
local competition available in the country, under Para 3(a) of PPO Order dated 16.09.2020 to 
enable procurement of these medical devices only from the “Class-I local suppliers. 
 
2.9.4  Further, a list of 340 medical devices, where claims of local manufacturing have been 
received, were shared with Central Procurement Agencies. 
The PLI scheme for Medical Devices is being implemented with the objective to boost 
domestic manufacturing capacity of the Medical Devices, under four segments, whose import 
dependency is considerably high, with a budget outlay of Rs.3,420 Cr for incentivizing the 
manufacturing for a period of five years. A note on the status of implementation of PLI 
scheme and the list of medical devices covered thereon are given in Annexure-3. 
 
2.10     ROBUST FUNDING MECHANISM FOR INNOVATION FOR MEDICAL 
DEVICES INDUSTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.10.1 The Committee notes that most of the high- end technology and innovative products 
originate from a well -developed ecosystem and innovation cycle. The Committee is pained to 

 15  
 
note that despite boasting of several IT hubs like Bengaluru, Pune, Hyderabad, De lhi NCR 
the desired ecosystem for manufacturing of highly advanced medical devices is yet to be fully 
developed in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends prioritizing and developing 
a robust funding mechanism to nurture an ecosystem for innovati on for medical devices 
industry. In this regard, the Committee recommends the Department of Pharmaceuticals to 
have a dedicated corpus to fund start -ups and Small & Medium Enterprises (SMEs) 
undertaking research projects that aim for improving quality, eff iciency of existing devices 
and other healthcare outcomes.  
(Para – 3.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.10.2 As informed by DoP, they are taking action for bringing out a Policy to catalyze 
Research & Development and Innovation in Pharma -MedTech Sector with an objective to 
create an ecosystem for innovation. This policy awaits approval of the Cabinet. 
 
 
2.11     INTERNATIONAL EXPOSURES TO DOMESTIC MANUFACTURES 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.11.1 The Committee also recommends that the Government should arrange to provide 
international exposures to domestic manufactures and to their products. 
(Para – 3.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.11.2       As informed by DOP, after the operationalization of the separate Export Promotion  
Council for Medical Devices, same will be undertaken by this council. 
 
 
2.12    DEVELOPMENT OF MEDICAL DEVICE PARKS 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.12.1 The Committee further recommends that some of the Mediparks  should focus on 
manufacturing medical device components and thus make the country self reliant on spare 
parts with provision for extending necessary services. This can further strengthen into India 
emerging as hotspot for medical devices spare parts and hub for medical devices  repairing 
and service centres for other countries. Thus Medical Devices industry would have added 
advantage of huge employment generation capacity. 
(Para – 3.20 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.12.2 As informed by DoP, the suggestions have been noted and the same has been conveyed 
to the four States given in principle approval ( Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Madhya 
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh) and inputs in this regard will again be shared with the four States 
developing the medical device parks. 

 16  
 
2.13   P OLICY TO CATALYZE RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT AND 
INNOVATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.13.1  The Committee observes that India imported medical devices worth USD 8.5 billion in 
2021-22 and the corresponding export figure for 2021- 22 was only 2.9 billion. The 
Committee is of the firm view that three segments viz. electronic equipments, implants and 
surgical instruments account for the highest imports in the medical devices sector. These 
segments include highly important and widely used high- end technology devices such as CT 
Scanners, MRI, Ultrasound & X -Ray machines, knee and hip implants, dental fixtures, 
Cancer diagnostics and other sophisticated surgical instruments. The Committee observes 
that manufacturing of high- end technology devices would require evolved medical devices 
sector having a robust Research and Development infrastructure and trained workforce, 
therefore, the Government must strive towards improving R&D infrastructure in the country. 
(Para – 3.22 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.13.2 As informed by DoP, t hey have initiated action for bringing out a Policy to catalyze 
Research & Development and Innovation in Pharma - MedTech Sector with an objec tive to 
create an ecosystem for innovation. The policy awaits approval of the Cabinet. 
 
2.14   CONVERGENCE AND COLLABORATION BETWEEN THE INDUSTRY AND 
ACADEMIA 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.14.1 The Committee recommends that to realise the goal of making India a USD 50 billion 
market by 2025, all the three pillars of the medical devices sector viz. Government, Industry 
and Academia should work in synergy on a common vision and roadmap. With the ultimate 
goal of becoming "self -reliant" the focus should be on increasing the manufacturing capacity 
by having a simplified yet effective regulatory regime and liberal taxation system. The 
Government must also focus and invest in R&D in premier technological institutions like 
IITs; stress must also be laid on skill development to have a trained and qualified workforce 
for the sector. The Committee strongly feels that Industries must also take a lead in R&D and 
the leading manufacturers and manufacturers' associations should establish convergence and 
collaboration between the Industry and academia. 
(Para – 3.23 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.14.2  As informed by DoP, they have initiated action for bringing out a policy to catalyze 
Research & Development and Innovation in Pharma - MedTech Sector with an objective to 
create an ecosystem for innovation. The policy awaits approval of the Cabinet. 
2.14.3  Collaboration between the Industry and academia like IITs will be achieved by Inter -
Departmental R&D Council proposed to be set up, for whic h draft Cabinet note has been 
circulated. 
 
  

 17  
 
2.15  PROMOTION OF LOCAL MANFACTURERS 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.15.1  The Committee observed following factors that affect Indian domestic  manufacturers 
and recommends certain additional measures for boosting manufacturing and exports and 
improve ease of doing business which inter-alia include 
i Reviewing import duty structure - Lower import duty makes it cheaper to import than 
manufacture in India. Lower import duty on imported devices coupled with 12% GST on 
locally manufactured products discourages manufacturing in India. Moreover, 18% GST on 
sanitizer and IVD equipments is regressive and should be reduced to 12%.  
ii US/UK manufacturers design medical products like implants on bone structures of 
Caucasian pe ople, such products are not ideal for Indian population; however, due to 
deficiency of Indian designs, surgeons recommend such products to the patients. In this 
regard, the Department shall reward/ incentivize products that carry Design India Certificate 
issued by Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT). Incentivizing 
products built on Indian design would boost innovation in India.  
iii Due to lack of local availability, machinery for setting up manufacturing plants is imported 
from countries like China, till the time India is capable of producing such machinery on its 
own, the Government should reduce excise duty on importing of machinery to set up plants. 
High excise duty on raw materials and parts of devices adds to the cost of production and this 
encourages import of finished products.  
iv Considering the potential of growth in the medical device industry, the Committee strongly 
recommends that there is urgent need to have a separate EPC for promotion of exports in the 
medical devices sector. 
(Para - 3.28 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.15.2  As informed by DoP, most of the medical devices fall in standard rate of import tariff 
and an additional Health Cess on full import value is charged on many of the medical devices. 
Any further increase in import tariff will impact the procurement budgets of the Central 
Government and the State Governments. Hence a holistic view is required for tariff increase.  
 
2.15.3   Further, GST rate slab is also decided keeping in mind that the manufacturer is able to 
set off the GST credit which accumulates at the time of purchase of inputs and services. 
Further, GST rate slabs are not decided by the Central Government alone but b y the GST 
Council which is a federal body for taking all decisions on GST. Requests relating to GST 
rate slab will be forwarded to GST Council for consideration. 
 
2.15.4  Excise duty is no more levied  after the introduction of GST. Specific instance/ 
example is required for it to be shared with GST Council. 
 
2.15.5   As informed by the Department of Pharmaceuticals, the Department of Commerce 
has conveyed the approval for setting up of a separate Export Promotion Council for Medical 
Devices under the admini strative charge of the D/o Pharmaceuticals. Its formation is under 
process. 
 
  

 18  
 
2.16   INCLUSION OF STRINGENT DATA PROTECTION NORMS IN THE DRAFT 
MEDICAL DEVICE POLICY, 2022 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.16.1 The Committee commends the Department for preparing the Draft Medical Device 
Policy 2022 that proposes regulations to ease patent processes, create ecosystem for R&D, 
skilling the regulatory workforce, streamline regulatory clearances, and establish “Centres of 
Excellence‟. The, Committee, however  expresses its concern over absence of provisions 
regarding data security of patients in the proposed policy. With the Government's push for 
health records digitization under Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM), the Committee 
understands that there is an urgent need to regulate digital devices likes "wearables (smart 
watches)" to protect health data of people. Therefore, considering huge data generation, the 
Committee recommends the Department to include stringent data protection norms in the 
Draft Medical Device Policy, 2022.. 
(Para – 3.30 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.16.2  As informed by DoP, personal data protection is being dealt with by MeitY and 
recently, a bill is proposed by MeitY  on the personal data protection. Department of 
Pharmaceuticals will work with the medical devices manufacturers and healthcare facilities in 
this regard. 
 
2.17 PRICING MECHANISM FOR MEDICAL DEVICES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.17.1 The Committee notes that there are only 4 Medical Devices (Cardiac stents, drug 
eluting stents, condoms and intra uterine devices) that have been included in the National List 
of Essential Medicines. The Ceiling Prices are notified for these 4 Scheduled Medical Devices 
by National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA). Apart from the above, the remaining 
medical devices come under non -scheduled Medical Devices under the DPCO, 2013. The 
Committee has learnt that NPPA monitors the Maximum Retail Prices of all non -scheduled 
medical devices and ensures that no manufacturer increases the maximum retail price of any 
medical device more than ten percent of maximum retail prices during preceding twelve 
months. The Committee believes that allowing a maximum increase of 10% may result in 
serious jump in prices in a span of few years. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
that instead of this „same size fits all‟ approach; the Department like risk -based 
classification of devices should create separate baskets for medical devices for pricing 
depending upon their cost, availability, need and affordability by the patients. The devices 
which are required for critical care to the patients should ideally be categorized under 
"Scheduled Medical Devices" and be listed under National List of Essential Medicines. 
(Para - 3.38 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.17.2   It is to inform that Medical Devices by definition have been notified as Drugs under 
Section 3(b)(iv) of the Drugs and Cosmetic Act,1940 (Notification dated 11th February, 
2020) w.e.f. April 2020. Accordingly, NPPA issued Order dated 31.03.2020 notifying that all 
Medical Devices shall be governed under the provisions of the DPCO, 2013 w.e.f. April, 
2020. Hence, Medical Devices which are included in the NLEM, 2015 are treated as 

 19  
 
scheduled drugs for their regulations. Other than these, all medical devices are treated as non-
scheduled drugs for their monitoring of prices under Para 20 of DPCO, 2013. 
2.17.3  In respect of non -scheduled drugs, a manufacturer is at liberty to fix its Maximum 
Retail Price (MRP) but cannot increase the same by more than 10% of what was prevalent 
during the preceding 12 months. The  extent of price change depends upon the decision made 
by the manufacturer while taking note of market dynamics, demand -supply situation, relative 
profitability, ease of entry, access to technology, etc. The interplay of these factors may 
ensure that there is no unbridled increase in prices and the effective increase in prices are 
lower than the maximum permissible level of 10% every year. 
 
 
2.18   BALANCE BETWEEN PRODUCTION COST AND PRICING 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.18.1 Additionally, the pricing of medical devices should also take into consideration the 
cost of the manufacturing and the value the medical device adds to the patient experience and 
ease it brings to the physician. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to 
strike a balance between providing affordable healthcare and providing quality healthcare. 
As mere providing healthcare services without considering how a product can best deliver 
desired outcomes for sustainable period goes against the basic policy and principles of the 
welfare State. In this regard, the Committee welcomes the Government's decision to move 
from L1 (lowest price) procurement method to Quality -cum-Cost Based Selection (QCBS), 
thus incorporating the element of quality in public procurement.  
(Para - 3.39 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.18.2  As informed by NPPA, as per National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy, 2012, DoP has 
shifted from cost -based pricing to market -based pricing method. Other observations of the 
committee have been noted. 
 
2.19   BRINGING DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS UNDER THE 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.19.1 The Committee feels that the mandate of the Department of Pharmaceuticals is very  
much related to the health sector like drugs & medical devices, their production,  
development, control, promotion, education, training & research. Hence, the Committee  
strongly feels that, for better coordination, the Department should be brought along with the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
from the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers by amending the Government of India 
(Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961.  
(Para – 4.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.19.2   The suggestion has been noted. 
 

 20  
 
2.20    ROADMAP FOR GROWTH OF MEDICAL DEVICE INDUSTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.20.1 Taking into account the potential growth and independent development of Indian 
Medical Devices in the country, the Committee recommends that the separate Act on medical 
devices should have rules and regulations with clearly defined roles and responsibilities of 
regulating bodies; supportive polices like predictive tariff policy, refurbished imports to 
enable spread of unavailable medical devices at a low cost for deeper penetrat ion in the 
smaller cities and rural areas and preferential public procurement to boost domestic 
manufacturing. The Committee has already recommended for a single window clearance 
system. The Committee further recommends that interface between ministries dealing with 
Medical Device Rules, 2017 should be organised to carve out Road Maps for growth and 
development of Medical Device Industry in the country. The Committee is of the considered 
view that development of more number of medical device parks in differ ential space would 
operationlise linkage along with lending support to ancillary industry that can proliferate the 
Medical Device Industry in the country. 
 
(Para – 4.30 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.20.2  Ministry has initiated the process of drafting and preparing a new Bill “The Drugs, 
Medical Devices & Cosmetics Bill 2022”  in which a separate chapter for comprehensive 
regulation of medical devices for import, manufacture, sale, distribution and clinical 
investigation, has been proposed with specific penal provisions for various contraventions of 
quality and safety, and provisions of the medical device chapter.  
 
2.20.3  The Department of Pharmaceuticals is working on a National Medical Device Policy 
with the aim to provide a road map for promotion of medical device industry. Focussed 
interventions, as suggested such as singl e window clearance system for all regulators of the 
medical devices, promotion of more MD clusters, etc will be taken up as per the Policy. 
 
2.21   LEGISLATION TO BOOST MEDICAL DEVICE INDUSTRY  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.21.1 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to expedite the process of formulating 
the new separate legislation having adequate provisions to give Medical Devices industry in 
the country a kick start for pacing up with global market. 
(Para – 4.31 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.21.2  Ministry has already initiated the process of drafting and preparing a new Bill “The 
Drugs, Medical Devices & Cosmetics Bill 2022” in  which a separate chapter for 
comprehensive regulation of medical devices for import, manufacture, sale, distribution and 
clinical investigation, has been proposed with specific penal provisions for various 
contraventions of quality and safety, and provisions of the medical device regulation. 
  

 21  
 
2.22   QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND QUALITY ASSURANCE SYSTEM FOR 
MEDICAL DEVICES 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.22.1 The Committee is given to understand that in medical devices, India is dependent on 
imports to the tune of 80% and the imports crossed Rs. 63,000 crores in 2021- 22 and the 
estimated market is of Rs. 1, 60,000 crores. The Committee, therefore, recommends a 
separate simple, implementable regulation for Medical Devices to encourage 'Make in India' 
of Medical Devices to deal with the 80% import dependence. The Quality Management 
System (QMS) and Quality Assurance of the medical devices should be ensured to prevent 
zero defectives from reaching the market and for consistent performance. 
(Para – 4.33 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.22.2  The MDR, 2017 were enacted in consultation with the associations and stakeholder 
and implemented from 01.01.2018. These rules are harmonised in line with International 
practices, to facilitate speedy disposal while ensuring quality, safety and performance. These 
rules cover Import/ manufacturing/ sale and distribution/ Clinical Investigation etc. The 
manufacturer has to comply with all requirements laid down in Fifth Schedule for Quality 
Management System and the standards as per MDR , 2017 to ensure quality of the Medical 
Devices.  
2.22.3  Existing regulatory framework will definitely help to ensure the quality and increase 
the exportability of the licensed product. Such licensed products under MDR , 2017, will be 
accepted not only in India but any part of the globe, thereby promoting the export ecosystem. 
 
2.23 CREATION OF BONE BANKS 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.23.1 The Committee appreciates the views of Chairman and Managing Director of Shalby  
Multi-Specialty Hospitals and the need for bone banks for grafting. The Committee 
recommends the MoH&FW to consider creating "Bone Banks" to facilitate its easy 
availability. The Committee also recommends that the "Biocompatibility studies" should be 
made mandatory so as to prevent poor quality products from entering the market and failure 
of implants that end up being life -threatening should have stringent penalty to discourage 
such faulty products. 
(Para – 4.36 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.23.2  It is pertinent to mention that Biocompatibility is already mandatory for implantable 
medical devices under MDR 2017.  
 
2.23.3  Creation of “Bone Banks” may be considered by appropriate institution/ entities after 
consultation with stakeholders. However, such activities are usually not a part of regulation. 
 
  

 22  
 
2.24    SAFETY AUDIT OF MEDICAL DEVICES 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.24.1 The Committee feels that Materiovigilance Programme of India (MvPI) may be 
extended to medical devices to ensure the safety of medical devices in the country and 
uniformity of the inspection procedure may be ascertained. The Committee also recommends 
that lower rates of audit fee by the Government would also encourage indigenous 
manufacturers. 
(Para – 4.64 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.24.2   Materiovigilance Programme of India (MvPI) was approved by the Govt. of India on 
10.02.2015. The Programme was formally launched at Indian Pharmacopoeia  Commission, 
Ghaziabad on 06.07.2015 to ensure the safety of medical devices in the country, is alr eady 
implemented. 
 
2.24.3  Materiovigilance Program of India is already being strengthened by MoHFW, in order 
to ascertain the safety of medical devices which are commercially available in the market. 
Further, the MDR 2017 describes requirements of quality management system & product 
characteristics, conformity assessment in stepwise manner – which is used for inspection by 
all for ensuring uniformity in inspection. 
 
2.24.4  The application fee for grant of manufacturing li cense (for Class A/B/C/D) is 
prescribed in Second schedule of MDR, 2017. The fees were decided after consultation of 
stakeholders. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. 
 
2.25   EXCLUSIVE LEGISLATION FOR MEDICAL DEVICES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.25.1 The Committee, in this report has extensively examined the subject and identified key 
concern areas and challenges that are yet to be resolved. The Committee believes that 
separate legislation exclusively for the Medical Devices and bri nging the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals (DoP) under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare would really help 
solve some of the major challenges being faced by the medical device manufacturers. 
 
(Para – 4.66 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.25.2  Ministry has already initiated the process of drafting and preparing a new Bill “The 
Drugs, Medical Devices & Cosmetics Bill 2022” in which a separate chapter for 
comprehensive regulation of medical devices for import, manufacture, sale, distribution and 
clinical investigation, has been proposed with specific penal provisions for various 
contraventions of quality and safety, and provisions of the medical device regulation. It is a 
comprehensive legislation to ensure that the medical products including medical devic es sold 
in Country are safe and effective, and conform to prescribed quality standards.  
2.25.3  The proposed bill has a distinct definition for medical devices. The Bill also proposes 
to constitute a separate Medical Devices Technical Advisory Board to ad vise the government 

 23  
 
on technical matters pertaining to medical devices, which shall include officials from the 
various Government Departments and experts nominated by the government from the field of 
medical devices industry.  
2.25.4   It is to bring a com prehensive Law striking balance to have provisions for ensuring 
the quality, safety, performance of medical products without hindrance to the growth of the 
medical device sector/industry. 
2.25.5  The proposed bill contains detailed provisions for clinical investigations, definitions of 
clinical investigation, clinical performance evaluation for in -vitro diagnostics, investigational 
and predicate medical devices, apart from detailed comprehensive chapter on medical devices. 
This is to make the regulatory ecosystem of medical devices more predictable and robust, 
thereby contributing to innovation research and development, in the sector of medical devices 
and overall growth of the medical devices industry . This will naturally give boost to domestic 
manufacturing of medical devices as well as attract huge investments in India in healthcare 
sector 
 
2.25.6   Recommendations of the Committee have been noted. 
 
 
2.26  COMPREHENSIVE ROADMAP WITH PRACTICAL AND ACTIONABLE 
STRATEGY 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.26.1 The Committee notes that the Covid- 19 pandemic has highlighted the need to support 
indigenous manufacturers of Medical Devices. The pandemic laid bare various issues like 
insufficient infrastructure and  fund for research and development, lack of public funding for 
research, dearth of skilled manpower, lack of synergy between Central -State regulatory 
authorities, inappropriate regulations for medical devices, lack of global -level quality 
standards etc plaguing the medical device industry in India. With the immense potential for 
the medical devices industry anticipated, the Ministry should focus on resolving the 
challenges and develop a detailed "Roadmap with Practical and Actionable Strategy". 
 
(Para – 4.67 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.26.2 Recommendations of the Committee have been noted. Ministry is in process of 
drafting and preparing a new Bill “The Drugs, Medical Devices & Cosmetics Bill 2022” in 
which a separate chapter for comprehensive regulation of medical  devices for import, 
manufacture, Central/State medical device testing centres, sale, distribution and clinical 
investigation has been proposed to ensure safety, quality and performance without hindrance 
to growth of the sector.  
 
2.26.3 As informed by DoP , they are  working on a National Medical Device Policy with the 
aim to provide a road map for promotion of medical device industry. Focussed interventions  
on promotion of more MD clusters, R&D promotional interventions, etc  will be taken up as 
per the Policy. 
 
  

 24  
 
CHAPTER- III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
3.1     CREATION OF DEPARTMENT OF MEDICAL DEVICES UNDER MINISTRY 
OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.1.1 The Committee, while welcoming, the initiative of the Ministry to set up a panel to make 
the new Drugs, Medical Devices and Cosmetics Bill with separate provisions for Medical 
Devices strongly recommends that instead of drafting a combined legislati on for Drugs, 
Medical Devices and Cosmetics, the Ministry should appreciate the potential of the Medical 
Device industry and formulate a separate legislation for Medical Devices. 
(Para - 2.9 of 138th Report) 
Action Taken 
3.1.2 Appreciating the potential of  the Medical Device industry, M inistry has prepared and 
proposed a new Bill “The Drugs, Medical Devices & Cosmetics Bill 2022” . Although the 
proposed Bill “The Drugs, Medical Devices &  Cosmetics Bill, 2022’’ is combined bill for 
regulation of drugs, cosmetics and medical devices, it is proposed to have separate chapter for 
regulation of medical devices for import, manufacture, sale, distribution, Central/State 
medical device testing centres and clinical investigation.  
3.1.3 The Bill also proposes to constitute a separate Medical Devices Technical Advisory 
Board to advise the government on technical matters pertaining to medical devices, which 
shall include officials from the various Government Departments and experts nominated by 
the government from the field of medical devices industry. 
 
 
3.2    SEPARATE REGULATORY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR MEDICAL DEVICES 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.2.1 The Committee observes that the functions of CDSCO primarily focus on the regulation 
of drugs as the regulatory body was originally set up to regulate Pharma and other related 
segments. The MDR 2017 mandated the CDSCO to regulate the Medical Devices segment as 
well. However, the existing structure and expertise (which is more pharma centric) of the 
workforce in CDSCO is falling short in effectively regulating the medical devices industry. 
(Para - 2.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.2.2 Government is continuously engaged in strengthening Central Drugs Standards Control 
Organization (CDSCO) in terms of manpower and infrastructure to strengthen the medical 
device regulation in the Country. 
3.2.3 In this regard, CDSCO has recruited manpower from various engineering fi elds 
(recruitment rules provide for manpower for Medical Devices regulation to be sourced, inter 

 25  
 
alia, from Bio -Medical engineering, Chemical engineering, Bio -Technology or Electrical 
engineering, Electronics, Instrumentation engineering, Polymer engineeri ng, Computer 
science fields) in order to strengthen and effectively regulate the medical devices sector. 
3.2.4 Presently there are 23 Drugs Inspectors (Medical Devices), 236 Medical Device 
Officers (MDO) and 03 ADC (Medical Devices) working in CDSCO. Further, recently the 
Government has created additional 219 posts at various levels to strengthen CDSCO in 
medical device regulations. 
3.3      STRINGENT STANDARDS AND CERTIFICATION PROCESS  FOR CLASS C 
& D PRODUCTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.3.1 The Committee is of the considered view that quality and affordability are two vital 
factors regarding medical devices. Indian Medical Devices Industry presently lacks research 
ecosystem and infrastructure for manufacturing of high tech, advanced medical devices 
(Class C&D) and Indian Medical Devices Industry doesn‟t have facilities to produce such 
medical devices comparable to global standards. Here, the Committee appreciates QCI for 
filling up the vacuum in quality certification space by extending the opt ion of Indian 
Certification of Medical Devices (ICMED) 13485. The Committee believes that QCI can play 
a pivotal role in establishing norms of quality and ensuring that Indian manufactured 
products have competitive product advantage, vis -à-vis, the international standards in terms 
of quality. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to introduce standards and 
certification process (particularly for Class C&D products) comparable to global standards. 
The Ministry, along with compulsory compliance to Quality Management System as per 
schedule 5 of the MDR, 2017, should also allow cognizance to 3rd party assurance schemes 
like ICMED 13485.  
(Para - 2.33 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.3.2 Rule 7 of the Medical Devices Rules, 2017 provides the product standards for medical 
device: (1) The medical device shall conform to the standards laid down by the Bureau of 
Indian Standards established under section 3 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act , 1985 (63 
of 1985) or as may be notified by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in the Central 
Government, from time to time. (2) Where no relevant Standard of any medical device has 
been laid down under sub-rule (1), such device shall conform to the standard laid down by the 
International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) or the International Electro Technical 
Commission (IEC), or by any other pharmacopoeial standards. (3) In case of the standards 
which have not been specified under sub-rule (1) and sub-rule (2), the device shall conform to 
the validated manufacturer’s standards. 
3.3.3 Further, the Quality Management System as per schedule V of the MDR, 2017, and 
essential principles for safety and performance are required to be complied with by  the 
manufacturers of Medical Devices. 
3.3.4 The scheme for ensuring the quality, safety and performance of medical devices, as per 
the Medical Devices Rules, is through grant of licenses, which is also a mechanism 
harmonized with and adopted by many regul atory authorities globally. The regulator is 
responsible to ensuring the above through compliance with the QMS and product standards as 
mandated in the Rules. 
 

 26  
 
3.4   PROMOTION OF RESEARCH AND INNOVATION IN PHARMACEUTICAL 
SECTOR (PRIP) SCHEME 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.4.1 To invigorate the culture of research and development in medical devices in the 
Institutions like IITs, NITs and other academic institutions the Committee recommend the 
Department to start Research Linked Incentive (RLI) Scheme in Line w ith PLI scheme. The 
Department should facilitate academia-  industry partnership for undertaking research 
projects on industry challenges and incentivize the successful outcomes. 
(Para – 3.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.4.2 As informed by DoP. a  scheme - Promotion of Research and Innovation in 
Pharmaceutical Sector (PRIP) – for establishment of Centres of Excellence (CoEs) at National 
Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPERs)  and incentivizing research 
projects, related to phar ma and Medtech sector has been proposed. The Scheme awaits 
appraisal by the EFC. 
 
3.5     SCHEME FOR PROMOTION OF MEDICAL DEVICE PARKS IN INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.5.1 The Committee commends the Department for launching Scheme for Promotion of 
Medical Device Parks in India. The Committee believes that India has huge growth potential 
in manufacturing of medical devices. Well -coordinated inter -ministerial and inter -
governmental (central and state) strategies aimed at offering manufacturers competitive 
advantage in manufacturing in India will result in importers finding it more profitable to 
manufacture in India than to import it. The Committee believes that logistical support in 
shared manufacturing facilities like Medtech parks would significantly reduce capital 
expenditure of manufacturers and thus giving a boost to manufacturing in India.  
(Para - 3.18 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.5.2   DoP has informed that the suggestions are noted 
 
3.6 FACILITIES IN MED TECH PARKS  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.6.1  The Committee recommends following steps for improving the efficiency and overall 
facilities of Medtech Parks in India:- 
 
i. The Mediparks  should have NABL (National Accreditation Board for Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories) approved medical device testing laboratories to reduce time 
required in manufacturing a product; 
ii. Each park should have dedicated office for skilled and unskilled labour force. This said 
office should maintain a registry of registered workers so as to Maintain the continuous 
availability of workforce; 
iii. To control pollution, each Medipark should have Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP); 

 27  
 
ix. Availability of subsidized power and water; and 
iv. For promoting the Indian medical device market, Mediparks should organize -"Medical 
Device Exhibitions" and workshops. 
(Para - 3.19 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.6.2  As informed by DoP, the s uggestions of the Committee for promotional activities by 
the four medical device parks, ETP and dedicated offices for HR will be shared with States. 
 
3.6.3  Further, DoP is proposing a scheme to increase the number of NABL approved Medical 
Devices Testing Labs in the Country and the scheme awaits i n-principle approval of the 
Department of Expenditure (DoE). Post approval, actions will be initiated to bring out a 
schematic intervention 
 
3.7   STRICT COMPLIANCE OF EXISTING  LAWS/REGULATIONS BY 
MANFACTURES 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.7.1  The Committee has been given to understand that besides the factors like availability of 
technology and raw materials, the phenomenon of inflation in medical devices is due to unfair 
trade practices by certain entities. The Committee lists following measures to provide a level 
playing field to the domestic medical device manufacturers and curb the artificial inflation in 
the prices of medical devices:-  
 
i. Certain MNCs (Multi-National Companies) avoid printing of MRP on each unit of product, 
so that the buyer (large distributors and hospitals) can list such a price to derive high profits, 
resulting in unnecessary surge in prices of medical devices. The DoP, in co- ordination with 
Ministry of Finance, must ensure strict adherence to the compliance of the rule, w hich 
necessarily mandates the printing of MRP on each product. The Department through the 
Ministry concerned should instruct the Port officials to check each medical device 
consignment for compliance of the said rule, so that the issue can be addressed at the origin.  
 
ii. Some manufacturers indulge in manufacturing of low -cost but substandard products that 
wholly disturbs the market for genuine manufacturers who comply with all the regulations 
and standards. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends for strict surveil lance over 
entry of sub-standard Medical device into Indian Market so as to avoid hazardous impact on 
patients’ health. 
(Para – 3.41 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.7.2  As informed by DoP, a s per Para 24&25 of DPCO, 2013, it is mandatory for every 
manufacturer to display MRP on the label of the container of formulation and the minimum 
pack thereof. Same is being monitored scrupulously. 
 
3.7.3  Licenses are issued only after satisfactory compliance of regulatory requirements and 
unlicensed manufacturers are not allowed to sell their products in market. Moreover, post 
market surveillance is in practice by regulatory authoritie s both at Center and S tate levels by 
means of routine inspections, sampling, and surveys . A comprehensive Materio vigilance 
Programme has also been put in place by DoHFW for the same.   
 
 

 28  
 
3.8   IMPLEMENTATION OF TRADE MARGIN REGULARISATION POLICY 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.8.1 The Committee recommends the Department to effectively implement the "Trade Margin 
Rationalization" policy to address the issue of arbitrary pricing by importers. Considering the 
number of supply chain in a vast country like India, the Department needs to have 
consultation with all the stakeholders in the industry. The Committee believes that thorough 
consultation with all t he stakeholders would help the Department in arriving at a justified 
trade margin by which not only the interests of consumers, suppliers and manufacturers 
would be taken care of but also the problem of irrational pricing would be resolved. Effective 
implementation of "Trade Margin Rationalisation" (TMR) would result in lower out -of-pocket 
expenditure which ensures that families are not pushed below the poverty line due to the 
medical expenses. 
(Para – 3.43 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.8.2  As informed by DoP, the Issue of Trade Margin is under active consideration of the 
Department in consultation with the stakeholders. 
 
3.9      SHORTCOMINGS IN MEDICAL DEVICE TESTING SYSTEM 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.9.1 The Committee, during its deliberations on the subject observed issues in the 
functioning of current regulation and the Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
incorporating suitable provisions in the new Bill so as to overcome the shortcomings in MDR. 
As per MDR -2017, sale and testing of Class A/B/C/D medic al devices along with IVD (In -
vitro diagnostics) is vested with the State Governments, however, the Drug Testing 
Laboratories are not notified and Medical Device Testing Officers of State are not designated 
regularly by the CDSCO thus causing inordinate de lay in granting approvals. Presently, 
there is neither a provision in the online portal for referring the licensed manufacturing unit 
(for Class A devices) for audit by the notified body nor there is any feedback mechanism in 
the CDSCO portal to refer the technically deficient audit reports which are prepared by 
notified bodies. Further, there is no mechanism for registering complaints regarding 
functioning of CDSCO portal. The Committee also found that there is non- adherence of 
timelines for audit and report as per MDR-2017 by the notified bodies. 
(Para – 4.27 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.9.2 Observation/Recommendations of the Committee have been noted.  
 
3.9.3 Further, as per the existing provisions under MDR 2017 the medical device testing 
laboratories and medical device testing officers are being notified by the Central Government 
and State Governments.  
 
3.9.4 On the basis of request of stakeholders & as per international practices, M oHFW has 
published GSR 754(E) dated 30.09.2022, to exempt Class A (Non Sterile and Non 
Measuring) from audit. This initiative taken by MoHFW will rationalise regulation & also 
ensure ease of doing business. 

 29  
 
 
3.9.5 Even in case of the class A (Sterile and measuring) medical device, the audit prior to 
issue the manufacturing license is not required. The license is granted by the concerned State 
Licensing Authority after the review of the documents. The audit may be carried out within 4 
months from the date of issue of the manufacturing license, without interruption of 
manufacturing and supply of the products. Currently the licensing authority are informing to 
Notified Body through email. However, the mechanism for considering online a pplications is 
under active consideration. 
 
3.9.6 As per MDR 2017, in case of Class B medical devices, prior to grant of the license, 
audit is compulsory. As the Licensing authority for Class B is the concerned State Licensing 
Authority, if there are any non -conformities as per the report, then there is a provision on 
online licensing portal and Notified bodies have to submit audit report on portal. This is the 
feedback mechanism. 
 
3.9.7 IT help desk email id has been provided to stakeholders – to register complaints 
regarding functioning of portal. 
 
3.9.8 Further, with respect to non- adherence of timelines for audit and report as per MDR 
2017, by the notified bodies, CDSCO has convened several meetings with the notified bodies 
to stress on the time lines and also to augment their infrastructure. 
 
 
3.10    INTER-MINISTRY CO -ORDINATION FOR PROMOTION OF MEDICAL 
DEVICE INDUSTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.10.1 The Committee  expresses concern over the fact that the highly technical medical 
devices industry, having no synergy with the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers is being 
promoted by them instead of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee, 
therefore, recomm ends that since the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is the key 
stakeholder and the medical devices' being very diverse in range with respect to technology 
and material sciences, inter -ministry co-ordination is required between various departments, 
which should be done by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare only. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that to nurture the nascent medical devices industry, the 
government should consider creation of a separate Department of Medical Devices for 
playing the role of a policy maker, facilitator as well as regulator. The Committee 
recommends that the new Department of Medical Devices can co -ordinate with the Ministries 
connected with the industry to perform the following key functions:-  
 
i. Catalyze Growth of the Indian Medical Device Sector;  
ii. Define Priority Devices to fight Priority Diseases in consultation with national and 
international bodies; 
iii. Implement Strategy to Shift India's Import Dependency from around 80% to less than 
30% in next 5 years for Priority Devices and Next 10 years for all Devices;  
iv. Facilitate Creation and Development of clusters for Medical Devices; 
v. Facilitate Creation of Laboratories and service centers under PPP; 
vi. Facilitate Skill Development of Personnel in the field of manufacturing, sales, service 
and regulations of medical devices;  
vii. Create a forum for close cooperation between user, developers, manufacturers and 
academia; 

 30  
 
viii. Create and manage a Special Purpose Vehicle Fund for long gestation R&D projects 
under Made by India and Make for India projects for enterprises. 
 (Para – 4.32 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.10.2 Observation/Recommendations of the Committee have been noted.  
 
3.10.3 The regulatory body namely Central Drugs Standards Control Organization has a 
vertical on Medical Devices with 23 Drugs Inspectors (Medical Devices), 236 Medical 
Device Officers (MDO) and 03 ADC (Medical Devices) working in CDSCO. Further, 
recently the Gov ernment has created additional 219 dedicated posts at various levels to 
strengthen CDSCO in medical device regulations. 
 
3.10.4 DoP has also suggested that there may not be any need for creation of a separate 
Department for medical devices,  however the medical device division can be strengthened 
with more manpower to address the growing needs of the sector. 
 
3.10.5 It is also informed that the DoP has taken various initiatives for the last 7 years for the 
Medical Devices sector and same is given in Annexure-4.  
 
3.11 CERTIFICATION SYSTEM FOR INDIGENOUS MEDICAL DEVICES 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.11.1 The Committee feels that the law to regulate Medical Devices need to have provision 
for risk proportionate regulatory controls and for risk proportionate penal system and 
provide clarity of exemptions or diluted regulatory requirements for very Low Risk Non 
Sterile Surgical Instruments and other non measuring Non Sterile Medical Devices. The 
Committee feels that in the new legislation regulato ry controls need to be shared between 
Centre, State and Conformity Assessment Notified Bodies in Law. There should be no 
duplication of State and Central Government regulations. There needs to be accountability 
fixed on State Regulator to the Central Licensing Authority (or a National Regulator) to 
ensure harmonious enforcement. As regards the quality certification of the medical devices, 
the Committee feels that following the international practices, voluntary certification system 
for indigenous medical de vices should also be promoted to a large extent for their better 
acceptability in the world market. 
(Para – 4.34 ibid) 
Action Taken 
3.11.2 The present Medical Devices Rules, 2017 have risk based classification and the same 
is also included in the proposed Bill. T he regulatory controls are carried out on the basis of 
risk based approach. If a device is declared to be defective the root cause analysis is to be 
carried out by the manufacturers and, accordingly, the manufacturer has to initiate the 
corrective and preventive action. 
 
3.11.3 In this regard, CDSCO has followed International practices and based on request of 
stakeholders and associations MOHFW has already published a notification vide GSR 777(E) 
dated 14.10.2022 wherein Class A (Non Sterile and Non measuring) devices are exempted 
from Chapter IV,V, VII, VIII and XI of MDR 2017. 

 31  
 
3.11.4 The duties of Central Licensing Authority, State Licensing Authority and Notified 
Bodies are clearly defined under Medical Devices Rules 2017.  
3.11.5 There is a mechan ism in the Act and Rules for uniform implementation through Drugs 
Consultative Committee (DCC).  Further, the Central Licensing Authority is convening 
meetings on regular basis with State Licensing Authorities for the deliberation of various 
issues raised by State Licensing Authorities. The issues are deliberated and decision is taken to 
harmonize the enforcement across the country. 
3.11.6 Rule 7 of the Medical Devices Rules, 2017 provides the product standards for medical 
device: 
(1) The medical device shall conform to the standards laid down by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards established under section 3 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1985 (63 of 
1985) or as may be notified by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in the  Central 
Government, from time to time. (2) Where no relevant Standard of any medical device has 
been laid down under sub-rule (1), such device shall conform to the standard laid down by the 
International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) or the Inter national Electro Technical 
Commission (IEC), or by any other pharmacopoeial standards. (3) In case of the standards 
which have not been specified under sub-rule (1) and sub-rule (2), the device shall conform to 
the validated manufacturer’s standards. 
3.11.7 Further, the Quality Management System as per schedule V of the MDR, 2017, and 
essential principles for safety and performance are required to be complied with by the 
manufacturers of Medical Devices. 
3.11.8 The scheme for ensuring the quality, safety and performance of medical devices, as per 
the Medical Devices Rules, is through grant of licenses, which is also a mechanism 
harmonized with and adopted by many regulatory authorities globally. The regulator is 
responsible to ensuring the above through compliance with the QMS and product standards as 
mandated in the Rules. 
3.11.9    Voluntary certification, in addition to the license, is the choice of the manufacturer.  
 
  

 32  
 
CHAPTER- IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
4.1 MEDICAL DEVICE POLICY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.1.1 The Committee further recommends that the government should come up with an 
enabling environment for the growth of the industry in multiple ways viz. manufacturing, 
import, capacity building, spare parts and a centre for repairs of medical devices thus 
bringing forth a medical device revolution in the country. The policies should contain 
Supportive and continuous tax structure for encouraging international players to set up 
industries in India thus reducing the cost of the medical devices. 
(Para - 3.31 of 138th Report) 
 
Action Taken 
4.1.2  As information by DoP, the Department is working on a National Medical Device 
Policy with the aim to provide a road map for promotion of medical device industry. Focused 
interventions, as suggested, will be taken up as per the Policy. 
 
 
4.2 R&D AND INNOVATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.2.1 The Committee further believes that quality comes from innovation and in medtec h 
sector, more than completely new inventions, incremental innovations to add features and 
improve accuracy & efficiency of the existing devices is the norm, so much so that more than 
60% of the innovation is incremental innovation. A lot of effort and cos t go into R&D, 
designing, testing, approvals and marketing before innovative products are provided to the 
needy persons. The Committee is of the opinion that till the time the desired synergy between 
Government policies, initiatives, academic institutes an d Medtech industry is established to 
create an ecosystem for innovation and R&D in India, so that cost of production of innovative 
products comes down, the Government shall continue with steps like price exemptions, value 
based procurement and subsidy support to the domestic manufacturers. The Committee is of 
the opinion that the measures so undertaken would result in boost of demand generation as 
good quality products would be available at affordable prices.  
(Para - 3.40 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.2.2 As informed by NPPA/DoP, Para 32 of DPCO, 2013 provides exemptions to domestic 
manufacturers to promote innovation. Other observations of the committee have been noted. 
 
 
  

 33  
 
4.3   NON-AVAILABILITY OF BIO-SPECIMENS FOR QC PANELS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.3.1 Another major issue that hampers R&D and delays operations in IVD (in- vitro 
diagnostic) industry is the non- availability of bio -specimens required for the preparation of 
QC (Quality Check) panels for testing manufactured products. Such panels are also r equired 
for testing the working of new /improved projects. In this regard, the Ministry must devise a 
mechanism so that such specimens and related data are shared by labs and hospitals with the 
IVD manufactures. 
(Para – 4.29 ibid) 
Action Taken 
 
4.3.2 Following panels are available at National Institute of Biologicals (NIB) to the 
indigenous IVD manufacturers on request to strengthen the QC of their products: 
1. HIV 
2. HBSAg 
3. HCV 
4. SYPHILIS 
5. VTMs (COVID positive and    negative) 
NIB is making efforts to make panels for more infections available in future. 
 

 34  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee welcomes the proposal of Government to constitute a separate 
Medical Devices Technical Advisory Board to advise the Government on technical 
matters pertaining to medical devices. However, the Committee feels that though both 
are the medicals products but the medical devices are not pharmaceuticals.  To bring a 
world class regulatory frame work,  give boost to medical device industry and minimise 
the dependency on imports, a separate Department and separate legislation is required. 
Accordingly, the Committee again recommends that instead of bringing  a combined 
legislation for Drugs, Medical Devices and Cosmetics, the Ministry should formulate a 
separate legislati on for Medical Devices and create a new Department namely - 
Department of Medical Devices under Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.   
(Para 3.1.4) 
The Committee has observed that in the recent years indigenous medical 
industry is growing fast and to match with the pace existing Drug Inspectors (Medical 
Devices) and Medical Device Officers working under CDSCO would not be able to cater 
the needs of the industry. Therefore, a  separate regulatory infrastructure for medical 
devices with dedicated work force instead of adjoining with the CDSCO would serve the 
purpose better.  
(Para 3.2.5) 
The Committee is of the considered view that to compete with global standards of 
medical devices, quality control and quality assurance in conformity with international 
standards play a major role. Accordingly, the Committee re -iterates that in the 
suggested Medical Devices Bill, there should be stringent standards and certification 
process, particularly for Class C & D products.  
(Para 3.3.5) 
The Committee appreciates Government move for envisaging the Promotion of 
Research and Innovation in Pharmaceutical  Sector (PRIP) Scheme for establishment of 
Centres of Excellence (CoEs) and further recommends that DoP must approach EFC for 
immediate appraisal of the Scheme for final approval by the Government.  
(Para 3.4.3) 
The Committee once again recommends that Gov ernment may expeditiously 
provide logistic support for shared manufacturing facilities like Medtech Parks to 
reduce the capital expenditure of manufactures, which will give a boost to indigenous 
manufacturing of medical devices.  
(Para 3.5.3) 

 35  
 
The Committee  hopes that to improve the efficiency and overall facilities of 
Mediparks, expeditious action on its suggestions would be taken by the Government. 
Necessary approval of Department of Expenditure in this regard may also be expedited.  
(Para 3.6.4) 
The Committee notes that despite provisions for regulatory mechanism and its 
regular monitoring and surveillance, violations of norms are still being done by some 
manufacturers. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Government must 
ensure that the strict compliance of different provisions of existing laws/regulations are 
done by each and every manufacturer and penalty provisions are invoked.  
(Para 3.7.4) 
The Committee appreciates Government’s move in this direction and 
recommends that DoP  must ensure expeditious implementation of Trade Margin 
Regularisation Policy.  
(Para 3.8.3) 
The Committee recommends that action may be initiated at the earliest. 
(Para 3.9.9) 
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Government for strengthening 
of CSCO, however it feels that since the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is the 
key stakeholder of medical devices, the inter-ministry co-ordination for promotion of the 
industry should be done by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare only.  
(Para 3.10.6) 
The Committee recommends that Government may ensure that there are 
adequate provisions in the New Medical Devices Policy for risk proportionate regulatory 
controls, accountability mechanism, stringent  action on violation of norms and risk 
proportionate penal system.  
(Para 3.11.10)  

 36  
 
Annexure-1 
 
List of Trainings conducted on Medical Devices Rules, 2017 
 
This office has conducted training program regional wise to cover all the state, central 
regulators and other stakeholders including importers and manufacturers in India for 
implementation of e-Governance and Medical Devices Rules 2017. 
S.No Training details Training period 
1.  CDAC training on MD Online portal  19/02/2018 
2.  CDAC training on MD Online portal – SLA, Delhi 17/03/2018 
3.  National Workshop on regulatory compliances for 
innovations dated 10/12/2018 at ICGEB 
10/12/2018 
4.  Workshop on e -Governance initiatives of CDSCO, 
Jaipur 
27/04/2018 
5.  Workshop on e -Governance initiatives of CDSCO, 
Gurgaon 
11/01/2020 
6.  Workshop on e -Governance initiatives of CDSCO, 
Mumbai 
01/02/2020 
7.  Training of new Drugs Inspectors (Medical Devices)  03/02/2020  
to 04/05/2020 
8.  Workshop on e -Governance initiatives of CDSCO, 
Ahmedabad 
08/02/2020 
9.  Workshop on e -Governance initiatives of CDSCO, 
Bangalore 
22/02/2020 
10.  Industry awareness workshop on “MDR 17 – 
Regulation of Medical Devices” , New Delhi 
29/02/2020 
11.  Workshop on e -Governance initiatives of CDSCO, 
Hyderabad 
29/02/2020 
12.  Workshop on e -Governance initiatives of CDSCO, 
Kolkata 
07/03/2020 
13.  Workshop on e -Governance initiatives of CDSCO, 
Chennai 
14/03/2020 
14.  Workshop on e -Governance initiatives of CDSCO, 
Chandigarh 
21/03/2020 
 
  

 37  
 
     Annexure-2 
S. 
No.  
IS No. Product Name Labs with 
facility for 
Medical 
device 
BIS recognized OSL under BIS 
LRS/ OSL with test facility as per IS 
and OSL 
code 
 IS 3390:1988 Sphygmomanometers, 
mercurial (Second 
Revision) 
CL –P 
WROL – P 
- 
 IS 7652:1988 Specification for 
Sphygmomanometer, 
Aneroid 
Type (First Revision) 
CL –C 
WROL – P 
- 
 IS 4148 : 1989 Surgical Rub’ber 
Gloves 
CL – C 
SROL – C 
NROL – C 
Atmy Analytical Labs Pvt Ltd  
(8167506) 
Central Institute of Plastic Engg. & 
Tech.(CIPET)(5102634) 
Centre for Bio-Polymer Science & 
Technology(CBPST) (6137634) 
Indian Rubber Manufacturers Research 
Association, (7119305) 
Intertek India Pvt Ltd (8166336) 
Shriram Institute For Industrial 
Research (8102006) 
Sleen India Biz Venture Private 
Limited (9139736) 
Trustin Analytical Solutions 
PvtLimted(6139136) 
 IS 3319: 1995/ 
ISO 
7740:198 
Surgical Blades CL – P 
SROL – P 
WROL – P 
- 
 IS 13422:1992 Disposable Surgical 
Rubber 
Gloves 
BNBOL – 
C 
CL – P 
WROL – P 
SROL – C 
Central Institute of Plastic Engg. & 
Tech.(CIPET) (5102634) 
Choksi Laboratories Ltd (8136916) 
Intertek India Pvt Ltd (8166336) 
Trustin Analytical Solutions 
PvtLimted(6139136) 
 IS 8521 (Part 
1) : 1977 
Specification for 
industrial safety 
face shields Part 1 
with plastics visor 
CL - C Central Institute of Plastic Engg. & 
Tech.(CIPET) ( 5102634) 
 
Sleen India Biz Venture Private 
Limited(9139736) 
 IS 9473:2002 (Respiratory 
Protective devices – 
Filtering half masks to 
protect 
against particles) 
CL- P Alpha Test House (8162006) 
Defence Research & Development 
Establishment (8144304) 
Defence Research & Development 
Establishment (DRDE) (8144304) 
Intertek India Pvt Ltd (8166336) 
SGS India Private limited (6162436) 

 38  
 
Sleen India Biz Venture Pvt. Ltd. 
(9139736) 
TUV Rheinland (India) Pvt. Ltd. 
(6167206) 
Viridian Testing Laboratories LLP 
(6169806) 
 IS 15354 : 
PART 1 : 
2018 
Single-Use Rubber 
Examination 
Gloves) 
CL –P 
SROL – C 
1. Central Institute of Plastic Engg. & 
Tech.(CIPET)( 5102634) 
2. Intertek India Pvt Ltd (8166336) 
3. Sleen India Biz Venture Private 
Limited (9139736) 
 IS 13422:1992 Disposable Surgical 
Rubber 
Gloves 
BNBOL – 
C 
CL – P 
SROL – C 
WROL – P 
Central Institute of Plastic Engg. & 
Tech.(CIPET) ( 5102634) 
Choksi Laboratories Ltd (8136916) 
Intertek India Pvt Ltd (8166336) 
Trustin Analytical Solutions 
PvtLimted(6139136) 
 IS 5983 : 1980 Specification for eye – 
Protectors 
CL – P - 
 IS 17334:2019 Medical Textiles -
Surgical gowns 
and surgical drapes -
Specification 
 The South India Textile Research 
Association (6165234) 
Viridian Testing Laboratories LLP 
(6169806) 
Intertek India Pvt Ltd (8166336) 
TUV Rheinland (India) Pvt Ltd 
(6167206) 
 IS 16289:2014 medical textile -
surgical face 
mask 
CL – N Defence Research & Development 
Establishment (8144304) 
Defence Research & Development 
Establishment(DRDE) (8144304) 
Eurofins Product Testing India Pvt Ltd 
(6166036) 
Intertek India Pvt Ltd(8166336) 
Viridian Testing Laboratories LLP 
(6169806) 
Sleen India Biz Venture Private 
Limited 
(9139736) 
Spectro Analytical Labs Limited 
(8167836) 
The South India Textile 
ResearchAssociation (6165234) 
TUV Rheinland (India) Pv t Ltd 
(6167206) 
 IS 17423 
:2020 
Medical Textiles -
Coveralls 
CL –C 
EROL – C 
SROL – C 
Central Institute of Plastic Engg. & 
Tech.(CIPET) (5102634) 
Eurofins Product Testing India Pvt Ltd 
(6166036) 
Institute of Nuclear Medicine & Allied 
Sciences (8144904) 
Institute of Nuclear Medicine & Allied 

 39  
 
 
BIS has published following Standards for Medical Devices as on today. 
 
S.no. Category No of published 
Standards 
1. Surgical Instruments 116 
2. Orthopaedic Instruments, Implants And Accessories  127  
3. Obstetric And Gynaecological Instruments And 
Appliances  
70  
4. Ear, Nose And Throat Surgery Instruments  82  
5. Ophthalmic Instruments And Appliances  91  
6. Thoracic And Cardiovascular Surgery Instruments  68  
7. Neurosurgery Instruments Implants And Accessories  53  
8. Dentistry  206  
9. Artificial Limbs, Rehabilitation Appliances and 
Equipment for the Disabled  
116  
10. Medical Laboratory Instruments  33  
Sciences (8144904) 
Intertek India Pvt Ltd(8166336) 
Northern India Textile Research 
Association (8163504) 
Sleen India Biz Venture Private 
Limited(9139736) 
Spectro Analytical Labs Limited 
(8167836) 
Textile Committee (6150704) 
Textile Laboratory (7149904) 
Textile Laboratory (7149904) 
Textile Laboratory, (Ministry of 
Textiles) (6150704) 
The South India Textile Research 
Association (6165234) 
Viridian Testing Laboratories LLP 
(6169806) 
 IS 13450:2018 
P:1 
Medical electric 
equipment-Pt- 
1:general requirement 
for basic 
safety and essential 
performance 
 Bharat Test House Pvt Ltd (9137826) 
 IS 13450:2018 
P:2 Sec:25 
Medical Electrical 
Equipment- 
Electro cardiograph 
 AA Electromagnetic Test laboratory 
Pvt Ltd (8165826) 

 40  
 
11. Anaesthetic, Resuscitation And Allied Equipment  65  
12. Hospital Equipment and Surgical Disposal  156  
13. Veterinary Hospital Planning And Surgical Intruments 17  
14 Hospital Planning  53  
15 EletromedicalDignostic Imaging and Radiotherapy 
equipment  
106  
16. Health Informatics  108  
17. Imaging & Radiotherapy Equipment  0  
18. Biological Evaluation of invitro Diagnostic Medical 
Devices  
40  
19. Medical Biotechnology And Medical Nanotechnology  6 
20. Hospital Bio Medical Waste Management And 
Infection Control  
0 
21. Anatomy and Forensic Sciences Equipment  8 
 
  

 41  
 
Annexure-3 
Note on PLI scheme of Medical Devices  
A. Medical Devices covered under PLI scheme for MDs:  
S.no. Name of the Target 
Segment  
 
Indicative Eligible Products 
for Category-A applicants  
 
Indicative Eligible 
Products for Category- B 
applicants  
 
1. Cancer care / 
Radiotherapy medical 
devices  
 
Rotational Cobalt Machine, 
Linear Accelerator (LINAC).  
 
Brachytherapy Systems, 
Radiotherapy Simulation 
Systems, Workstations -
Radiotherapy Planning, 
Proton therapy system and 
other products * in this 
target segment.  
 
2. Radiology & Imaging 
medical devices (both 
ionizing & non- ionizing 
radiation products) and 
Nuclear Imaging 
Devices  
 
CT Scan, MRI, 
Ultrasonography, X -ray 
equipment, C -arm, Cath -Lab, 
Positron Emission 
Tomography (PET) Systems, 
Single photon emission 
tomography (SPECT), 
Mammography, Collimator, 
Flat Panel Detector, Surgical 
X Ray C -Arm, Fixed LF and 
HF X Ray Products, X Ray 
Panels, MRI Coils and 
Monitors  
 
Cyclotrons and other 
products* in this target 
segment.  
 
3. Anesthetics &  Cardio-
Respiratory medical 
devices including 
Catheters of Cardio 
Respiratory Category & 
Renal Care Medical 
Devices  
 
Dialyzer, Anesthesia Unit 
Ventilators, Patient 
monitoring system, 
Anesthesia Workstation, 
Automated External 
Defibrillators (AEDs), ECG, 
Syringe Pump, Defibrillators, 
Stress Test System and 
Oxygen Concentrator, 
Dialysis Machine, Peritoneal 
Dialysis kits Fistula, Blood 
Line, Haemodialysis Catheter 
and Transducer Protector, 
Anaesthesia Unit Gas 
Scavengers, Anaesthesia Unit 
Vaporizers, Anaesthe sia Unit 
Ventilators, Bi-  Phasic 
Defibrillators, Infusion pumps 
- Syringe and Volumetric, 
Intensive Care Ventilators, 
Needles-Anesthesia, 
Syringes-Anesthesia,, , 
Anesthesia Kits, Masks –
Anesthesia, , Biopsy Kits - 
Renal, Dialyser 
reprocessing system, 
Lithotripters Extracorporeal 
–Renal and other products* 
in this target segment.  
 

 42  
 
Emergency Ventilators 
(Portable Ventilators), High 
Flow Oxygen Devices, Multi -
parameter Monitor, Suction 
Machine. 
 
4. AII Implants including 
implantable electronic 
devices  
 
Heart Valves, Stents, PTCA 
Balloon, Dilatation Catheter, 
Heart Occluders, PTCA 
Catheter, Hip Implants, Knee 
Implant and Trauma Implant, 
Drug Eluting Stents and Drug 
Eluting Balloons  
 
Cochlear Implants, Spinal 
and neuro -surgical 
implants, Urogynecologic 
Surgical Mesh Implants, 
Hernia Surgical Mesh  
Implants, Cerebral Spinal 
Fluid (CSF) Shunt Systems, 
Implanted Pacemakers, 
insulin pump, implanted 
neuro-stimulated device 
like Deep Brain Stimulator, 
Intraocular lenses and other 
products* in this target 
segment.  
 
 
 
*-Other products – For products not specifically mentioned in the table above, the Technical 
Committee shall decide whether such products shall be considered eligible under the Target 
Segment.  
 
Note: A key component which constitutes major part of the finished medical device (such as 
Rotating Anode Tube, Stationary Anode Tube, MRI Magnet, Flat Panel Detector and similar 
components), and has a distinct HS code for itself, will be considered as included in the 
corresponding target segment.  
 
B. Status of implementation of PLI scheme for Medical Devices & PLI scheme for 
Pharmaceuticals (where 5 applicants selected under In -Vitro Diagnostics (IVDs) 
category of Medical Devices).  
 
I. Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Promoting Domestic  Manufacturing of 
Medical Devices:  
 
The Scheme is being implemented through a Project Management Agency (PMA) which is 
responsible for providing secretarial, managerial and implementation support and carrying out 
other responsibilities. An Empowered Commi ttee under the chairmanship of CEO, NITI 
Aayog considered applications for approval under the Scheme.  
 
In total 42 applications were received in two round of application window. Out of 42 
applications, 21 applications have been approved with a total commi tted Investment of 
Rs.1,059 Crore and expected incentive utilisation of Rs 2,541 crore. 13 projects have already 
been commissioned for 31 products as on September 2022. Further, Guidelines has been 
amended on 18.8.2022 for Category – B applicant and Round- III application window opened 
for application from 01st Sept. 2022 and the last date of application window is 21.11.2022. 

 43  
 
 
The details regarding actual investment up to September, 2022 are as follows: 
 
Description   Projected for full 
tenure of the 
scheme 
Projections as on 
March 2023  
 
 
Actual Reported as 
on Sept. 2022  
      
Investment (in Rs 
Cr)  
 1,058.97  766.94   676.14  
Production (in Rs 
Cr)  
 33,125.12  3,592.43   630.55  
Exports Expected 
(in Rs Cr)  
 
 
11,286.91  1,066.40   257.17  
Employment (in 
Nos. of persons)  
 
 
6,411  3,198   2,940  
 
 
Status of Projects/ Plants: Investment as per Quarterly review report of September 2022 
 
Target 
Segment 
(TS) 
 
 
 
Approvd
Projects 
 
 
Approvd
Products 
 
 
Products
Commisi
oned 
 
 
 
Commite
d Inv. 
for 
theSche
me 
Tenure 
(₹ in 
crore) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cumulative 
Projected 
Investment 
Upto March 
2023 
 
Actual 
Investment 
Sept. 2022 
 
TS-1 
(cancer 
care)  
 
 
1   2   2   24.50   14.30  13.89  
            
TS-2 
(Radiolo
y and 
Imaging
)  
 
 
 
7   15   7   372.14   304.17  235.73  
TS-3 
(Anesthe
tics& 
Cardio-
Respirat
ory) 
 
 
 
 
 
7   25   16   354.50   260.54  231.89  
TS-4 
(All 
Implant
able)  
 
 
6   7   6   307.83   187.93  194.63  

 44  
 
 
Total   21   49   31   1,058.97   766.94  676.14  
        
  
II. Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for Pharmaceuticals:  
 
To enhance India’s manufacturing capabilities by increasing investment and production in the 
sector and contributing to product diversification to high value goods in the pharmaceutical 
sector, a scheme called “Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Pharmaceuticals” has been 
approved by the Government of India on 24th February, 2021. The Scheme has been notified 
vide Gazette Notification No. - 31026/60/2020-Policy dated – 3rd March, 2021.  
 
The guidelines of the scheme were issued on 1st June, 2021. The scheme covers In -vitro 
diagnostic devices amongst other pharmaceutical goods. Five (5) industry applicants have 
been selected under the scheme for In -vitro diagnostic medical devices and the sche me 
provides for incentives based on their incremental sales for 6 years. The tenure of the scheme 
is from FY 2020-2021 to 2028-29. 
 
Sl. No.   Category 
of 
Applicant
s  
Total 
Applic
ants 
approv
ed  
Total 
Commit
ted 
Investm
ent  
(₹ in 
crore)  
Total 
Commit
ted 
Investm
ent up 
to 
March 
2023  
(₹ in 
crore)  
Actual 
Investm
ent up 
to June 
2022  
(₹in 
crore)  
No. of 
mfg. 
location
s 
propose
d  
No. of 
mfg. 
locatio
ns 
alread
y 
commi
ssione
d  
 No. of 
R&D 
location
s  
           
1  Group C - 
IVD 
5 164 65.54 66 13 10  2 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 45  
 
Annexure-4 
 
Initiatives undertaken by the Department of Pharmaceuticals for the promotion of the  
Medical Devices Sector 
 
• To give a policy guidance, the Department of Pharmaceuticals is working on a National 
Medical Device Policy with the aim to provid e a road map for promotion of medical 
device industry.  
 
• Recognizing the importance and need for investments in the sector, 100% FDI through 
automatic route was allowed in the medical devices sector in 2014.  
 
• The Medical Devices Rules, 2017 were notified under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940 by the Department of Health and Family Welfare. These rules lay out the regulatory 
framework for medical devices in terms of their quality, safety and efficacy. This 
expanded the regulatory oversight to the entire ga mut of devices and classified them into 
four categories based on the level of risk associated with the medical devices. About 23 
medical devices are under licensing with the remaining devices under different categories 
expected to come under licensing from October 2022 and October 23.  
 
•  In 2019, under the Department of Pharmaceutical’s sub- scheme named “Assistance to 
Medical Device industry for Common Facility Centre” , financial assistance of Rs 25 
crore was approved to the Andhra Pradesh MedTech Zone (AMT Z) for setting up a 
common infrastructure of a superconducting magnetic coil testing facility, which has 
been completed in 2022. 
 
• In 2020, revised scheme named “Scheme for Promotion of Medical Device Parks” was 
launched. Under this scheme, financing support of Rs 100 crore each has been approved 
for creation of common facilities in four medical devices parks coming up in Uttar 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh, which are being 
developed by these State Governments. This is an infrastructure support scheme wherein 
the common facilities will be accessed by the industrial units in the parks. These parks 
will come up as manufacturing hubs and provide enabling ecosystem dedicated solely for 
medical devices. 
 
• Further in 2020, a scheme named “ Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Medical 
devices” was introduced. The scheme has a financial outlay of Rs. 3,420 crores, over a 
period of FY 2020- 21 to FY 2027- 28. The objective of the scheme is to support the 
domestic manufacturing of certain identified high -technology medical devices through 
incentivizing domestic manufacturers. The identified medical devices under the scheme 
are Cancer Care /Radiotherapy medical devices; Radiology & Imaging medical devices 
(both i onizing and non- ionizing radiation products) and nuclear imaging devices; 
Anesthetics& Cardio -Respiratory medical devices including catheters of Cardio 
Respiratory Category and Renal Care Medical Devices; and all Implants including 
implantable electronic devices like Cochlear implants and pacemakers. Status is given at 
Appendix-B.  
 
• The scheme “Pradhan MantriBharatiya Jan AushadhiPariyojana (PMBJP)” are 
making available close to 250 types of surgical supplies in over 8800 Jan 
AushadhiKendras at highly affordable prices.  

 46  
 
 
• The National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) monitors the prices of Non -
Scheduled Medical Devices and fixed the ceiling prices for Scheduled Medical devices. 
In view of the extraordinary circumstances due to COVID pandemic and with the aim of 
making medical devices affordable, the prices of (i) Pulse Oximeters, (ii) Blood Pressure 
Monitoring Machines, (iii) Nebulizers, (iv) Digital Thermometers, (v) Glucometers and 
(vi) Oxygen Concentrators were brought under price cap using Trade Ma rgin 
Rationalization. 
 
• The Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) brought out the 
policy of “Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) in 2017” and designated 
the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) as the Nodal Department f or implementing the 
provisions related to medical devices. DoP thereafter laid out the definition of Class -I, 
Class-II and Non-Local supplier under the said Policy. Initiatives have been taken under 
the policy to give preference to domestic manufacturers in public procurement of medical 
devices done by the hospitals of the Central Government. The Public Procurement 
(Preference to Make in India) policy is an important pillar of the Atmanirbhar Bharat 
program.  
 
•  The medical device sector in India has partici pation both from domestic manufacturers 
as well as multi- national companies. Therefore, owing to the divergence of views of the 
industry, a “Standing Forum of Medical Device Industry associations” has been set up 
by the Department of Pharmaceuticals on 25t h August, 2021 which provides a platform 
to the different associations to deliberate on the common issues of the industry and arrive 
at a consensus before the same are taken up by the Department for examination. The 
mechanism has been very much appreciated by the industry.  
 
• Constitution of “ National Medical Devices Promotion Council (NMDPC)” under the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals since 5th August 2022. The council consists of 
stakeholders from Government and industry and provides a platform to deliberate and 
resolve various issues for ease of doing business and promotion of the sector.  
Major Initiatives of other Departments 
 
• To foster Make -in-India product development and nurture the clinical validation 
ecosystem in the MedTech sector, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has 
established the “Medical Device and Diagnostics Mission Secretariat (MDMS)” . This 
program aims to support and catalyze research, development and indigenous 
manufacturing of cost -effective medical devices to strengthen healthcare sector in India 
and reduce import dependence through a mission mode consortia approach.  
 
• “Health Technology Assessment in India (HTAIn)” scheme of Department of Health 
Research conducts studies that provide evidences related to cost -effectiveness, clinical- 
effectiveness and safety of medicines, devices and health programs to support evidence -
based decision making in healthcare services for  development of quality and affordable 
medical devices in the country.  
 
• Health and Wellness Centers across the country are being equipped with medical devices 
required for primary diagnostic services under “Ayushman Bharat program  
 