Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2014/Pausha, 1936 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
 
 
REPORT NO. 
81
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23rd December, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23rd December, 2014)
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Seventy-second Report on 
Alleged Irregularities in the Conduct of Studies using
Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) Vaccine by PATH in India
EIGHTY FIRST REPORT
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)

67
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
EIGHTY FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Seventy-second Report on
Alleged Irregularities in the Conduct of Studies using
Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) Vaccine by PATH in India
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  23 rd December, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  23 rd December, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2014/Pausha, 1936 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i )-(iv)
(i) 2013-14 ........................................................................................................................... (i)- (ii)
(ii) 2014-15 ........................................................................................................................... (iii )-(iv)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (v)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( vi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—35
Chapter–I – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee ........................ 2
Chapter–II – Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .................... 3—18
Chapter–III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 19—29
Chapter–IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................... 30—35
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 36
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 37—40
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 41 —61
8. L IST OF R EPORTS P RESENTED E ARLIER ............................................................................... 62—66

(i)
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 19 th September, 2013.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
3. Shrimati B. Jayashree
4. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
 
*7. Shri Rasheed Masood
8. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
9. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
10. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Kirti Azad
12. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
14. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
15. Shrimati Priya Dutt
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
18. Dr. Monazir Hassan
19. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
20. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ranjib Biswal
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
%4. Shri Vijay Goel
5. Shrimati B. Jayashree
6. Dr. R. Lakshmanan
7. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
&8. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
9. Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem
10. Dr. T.N. Seema
@11. Shri Jairam Ramesh
LOK SABHA
12. Shri Thangso Baite
13. Dr. Subhash Bhamre
14. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chouhan (Nandu Bhaiya)
15. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
16. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
17. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
18. Dr. K. Kamaraj
19. Shri Arjunlal Meena
20. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri M.K. Raghavan
23. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
24. Shri Alok Sanjar
#25. Dr. Mahesh Sharma
26. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
27. Shri Raj Kumar Singh
28. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar
29. Shrimati Rita Tarai
30. Shri Manohar Untwal
31. Shri Akshay Yadav
*32. Shrimati Ranjanaben Bhatt
**33. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde
(iii)
% Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 2 nd December, 2014.
& Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th November, 2014.
@ Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th November, 2014.
# Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9 th November , 2014.
* Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  22 nd December, 2014.
** Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  22 nd December, 2014.

(iv)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
hereby present this Eighty-first Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee’s Seventy-second Report on “Alleged
Irregularities in the Conduct of Studies using Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) Vaccine by PATH in
India”.
2. The Seventy-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
30
th August, 2013. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report,
received from the Department of Health Research were examined by the previous Committee.
However, the previous Committee could not finalise its Report due to dissolution of the 16
th Lok
Sabha. The replies were further examined by the Committee after its reconstitution on the
1
st September, 2014.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
the 22 nd December, 2014.
 SATISH CHANDRA MISRA
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
22nd December, 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Pausha 1, 1936 (Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare

ACRONYMS
AIIMS : All India Institute of Medical Sciences
AP : Andhra Pradesh
A E : Adverse Eevents
AEFI : Adverse Events Following Immunizations
CDC : Center for Disease Control
CDSCO : Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
CORT : Centre for Operations Research and Training
DCGI : Drug Controller General of India
DHR : Department of Health Research
FERA : Foreign Exchange Regulation Act
FEMA : Foreign Exchange Management Act
FCRA : Foreign Contribution Regulations Act
GCP : Good Clinical Practice
GSR : General Statutory Rules
GOI : Government of India
GSK : Glaxo Smith Kline
HPV : Human Papilloma Virus
HMSC : Health Ministry Screening Committee
ICMR : Indian Council of Medical Research
IND : Investigational New Drugs
MHA : Ministry of Home affairs
MEA : Ministry of external Affairs
MOU : Memorandum of Understanding
MoHFW : Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
NTAGI : National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization
NRHM : National Rural Health Mission
NDAC : New Drug Advisory Committee
NHRC : Nati onal Human Rights Commission
NHM : National Health Mission
O&G : Obstetrics and Gynaecology
PBC : Public Benefit Corporation
PA TH : Programme for Appropriate Technology in Health
PI : Principal Investigator
PSURs : Periodic Safety Update Reports
PAN : Permanent Account Number
RoC : Registrar of Company
RBI : Reserve Bank of India
SAE : Serious adverse events
UIP : Universal Immunization Programme
(vi)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Department of Health
Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare) on the recommendations contained in the
Seventy-second Report of the Committee on the “Alleged Irregularities in the Conduct of Studies
using Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) Vaccine by PATH in India”.
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
been accepted by the Committee: Nil
Total–0 (Chapter-I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: 1.2, 1.7, 1.12, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 3.6, 3.7, 3.8,
3.22, 4.1, 5.1, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.10, 6.11, 6.18, 6.19, 6.20, 6.21, 6.22,
6.24, 6.29, 6.30, 6.31, 6.32,
Total–31 (Chapter-II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 3.5, 3.10, 3.18, 3.19, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 6.14, 6.15,
6.16, 6.17, 6.25, 6.26, 6.33, 6.34, 6.35, 6.36, 6.37
Total–18 (Chapter-III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: 2.5, 6.12, 6.13, 6.28, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 7.6, 7.7, 7.8, 7.9,
7.10, 7.11, 7.12, 7.13, 7.14, 7.15
Total–19 (Chapter-IV)
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
–Nil–
2

3
3
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTS REPLIES
I. BACKGROUND
Observation/Recommendation
2.1 Several questions were asked and concerns expressed in the media and well meaning
quarters on the role of government agencies including Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
and Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI) in approving and facilitating the trials, which was
against all laws of the land and even international ethical norms and rules; misuse of government
funds, man-power, facilities and infrastructure for a private project of dubious nature; use of logo
of National Rural Health Mission (NRHM), an official programme of the Union Government during
these vaccination drives to give it respectability and official endorsement; and above all the blatant
violation by PATH of all regulatory and ethical norms laid down by the Government of India for
the purpose as also possible violations of such norms prescribed and very scrupulously enforced
in the Country of its origin viz. United States of America. (Para 1.2)
Reply of the Ministry
2.2 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare constituted a Committee under the chairmanship
of Dr. S.S. Agarwal, former Director, Advanced Centre for Training, Research, Education on
Cancer to enquire into the alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies on Human Papilloma Virus
(HPV) vaccine by PATH in India. The Inquiry Committee in its report identified various deficiencies
in the planning and conduct of the study by PATH.
2.3 The Inquiry Committee was of the view that by whatever name it was called, the project
proposal had been carried out as research on human participants. As such, it had to follow all
guidelines and statutory requirements applicable on research on human participants. The Committee
further reported that the deaths were most probably unrelated to the vaccine under trial, as there was
no characteristic and uniform pattern of illness preceding the death, or temporal/spatial clustering. The
Committee also observed that in the absence of control group, it was not possible to say whether
there were excess deaths in the vaccinated group or not. Based on the data of background deaths
from routine mortality reporting system from the same area for the vaccination period as collected
by the Committee, it opined that overall death rate during the period of vaccination was not
significantly different, supporting the contention that reported deaths are independent of the HPV
vaccination. It further stated that internationally as on the 31
st January, 2010, 49 deaths were reported
in the USA against approximately 28 million doses of Gardasil vaccine distribution. Out of these, 28
deaths have been traced. According to CDC (Center for Disease Control, USA),there was no unusual
pattern or clustering to the deaths that would suggest that they were caused by the vaccine. It is
further added that these two vaccines are included in the National Immunization Programmes for
prevention of cervical cancer in women in many countries, like, USA, Canada, New Zealand, France
Germany, Sweden, Australia, Russia, UK, Mexico, etc.
2.4 The Inquiry Committee in its report had, however, identified various deficiencies in the
planning and conduct of the study by PATH. The gist of the same is as under:

4
● Consent forms and the actual implementation of the consent process.
● Method of monitoring the adverse effects and the serious adverse effects and
remedial measures for such events
● Inclusion of vulnerable tribal population groups.
● Blurring of distinction between National Immunization Program and PATH study.
● Insurance coverage for the study participants
● Free supply of vaccine by the manufacturer and the statement in the consent forms
that “you will not be charged for your daughter to receive the vaccine” that could
be considered as covert inducement and indirect coercion.
2.5 The penal provisions regarding the import of drugs are provided under Section 13 of the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act while penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of drugs is provided under
Section27 of the Act. There are no specific penalties for violation of the provisions relating to
clinical trial under the Act.
2.6 The Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 made under the said Act, under Part X-A of the
Rules have provisions for Import or Manufacture of New Drugs for Clinical trials or Marketing.
Under Rule 122 DA, the permissions to conduct clinical trials for new drugs/investigational new
drugs are granted by the Licensing Authority as defined in Rule 21(b) i.e. Drugs Controller General
(India). The Schedule Y to the said Rule provides detailed requirements for the Informed Consent
to be obtained from each study subject as well as responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator and
Ethics Committee. Rule122 DA empowers the DCG(I) to suspend cancel the permission issued to
conduct the clinical trials. In the present case, since the ICMR had already suspended the trial, the
DCG(I) issued’ warning’ as an administrative measure to PATH on 3
rd July, 2012 that it should be
careful while conducting clinical trial so as to ensure that such discrepancies /violation are not
repeated in future. It was further directed to comply with the corrective action taken to ensure
strict compliance of Schedule Y and GCP in on-going study and proposed to be started in future
research studies.
2.7 In the meantime, the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 were amended by Gazette
Notification GSR 63(E) dated 1.2.2013, inter-alia providing for following activities by DCG(I), in
case of non-compliance of provisions of clinical trial:–
(a) Reject or discontinue the study;
(b) Suspend or cancel the clinical trial permission;
(c) Debar the Investigator(s), Sponsor including his representative to conduct any clinical
trial in future.
2.8 In light of the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee, the following actions have been
taken by the Ministry:
(i) As regard the use of logo of NHRM in the study, the matter is being enquired into
vide Annexure A.
(ii) The Ministry of External Affairs vide letter dated 8
th January 2014 has been requested
to ascertain the following facts related to the said studies through usual diplomatic
channels for enabling the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for taking further
necessary action in the matter.
(iii) Whether the similar studies were conducted by PATH in those countries?

5
(iv) If so, the strategy followed by PATH in those countries for conduct of the study, and
the outcome of the study.
(v) Whether the HPV vaccine has been introduced or not in the National Health
Programmes of these countries based on the study conducted by the PATH. A copy
of letter is enclosed at Annexure 8.
(vi) The Department of Legal Affairs vide note dated 5.1.2014 has been requested for
their considered opinion as to whether any further legal action against PATH is
possible in the present case. A copy of the note is enclosed at Annexure C.
(vii) The Ministry of Home Affairs vide letter dated 5
th January 2014 has been requested
to examine the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee and take appropriate
action. The Ministry has also been requested to furnish its response to the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare for taking further necessary action in the matter. A copy
of letter is enclosed at Annexure D.
(viii) The National Human Rights Commission, New Delhi vide letter dated 5
th January 2014
has been apprised of the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee for appropriate
action. The Commission has also been requested to send their comments/views to the
Ministry in this regard. A copy of letter is enclosed at Annexure E.
(ix) The Ministry of W omen and Child Development vide letter dated 8
th January, 2014 has
been requested to examine the recommendations of Parliamentary Standing Committee
and give its response for further necessary action. A copy of letter is enclosed at
Annexure F.
(x) The Permanent Mission of India to the UN in Geneva vide letter dated 8
th January,
2014 has been apprised of recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee. A copy of
letter is enclosed at Annexure G.
(xi) The Ministry of External Affairs vide letter dated 6 th January, 2014 has been requested
to examine the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee and take appropriate
action. The Ministry has also been requested to furnish their response. A copy of
letter is enclosed at Annexure H.
Observation/Recommendation
2.9 Not being satisfied with the action taken by the Government on its recommendations, the
Committee in its Forty eighth Report further recommended the following:
“The Committee observes that as a result of its intervention, the State Governments have
been advised by the Department not to carry out HPV vaccinations and a Committee has b een
appointed to investigate ethical issues raised in the matter. The Committee is not aware about the
date of setting up of the Committee. However, the absence of any specific time-line for submission
of Report of the Committee in the Action Taken Note given by the Department makes the
Committee some what apprehensive. Like so many Committees set up by the Government, findings
of this Committee, as and when received, may remain on paper only. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that every effort should be made to expedite the Report of this Committee so that the
real facts about the HPV vaccine trial are made known without any further delay and corrective
measures not only in the respect of this case but for all such ongoing/ proposed clinical trials of
drugs/vaccines are taken. The Committee also recommends that the Department should at least now
work in close coordination with other concerned departments/organizations to undertake a
comprehensive analysis of the process of granting permission to research studies having hazardous
effects on health and put in place a fool-proof system for pre-empting unethical research studies”.
(Para 1.7)

6
Reply of the Ministry
2.10 The Inquiry Committee was constituted on 15 th April, 2010. The Committee submitted their
report to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in February, 2011. Action has been taken on all
the recommendations of the Committee.
2.11 Various steps have already been taken to strengthen the regulatory framework for approval
as well as monitoring of Clinical Trials of New Drugs including Vaccines. Details are as under:
● 12 New Drug Advisory Committees (NDAC) consisting of experts from the
government medical colleges, institutes from all over the country were constituted in
March, 2011. Applications for approval of clinical trials excluding Investigational New
Drugs (INDs) and approval of new drugs are being evaluated by these Committees.
● All investigational New Drugs applications are evaluated by the IND Committees
chaired by Secretary, Department of Health Research and DG, ICMR.
● Drugs and Cosmetics Rules have been amended to make provisions for safeguarding
the rights, safety and well being of trials subjects and registration ethics Committee for
regulating the clinical trials in the country. The following provisions have been
incorporate in the said rules.
➢ Amendment vide Gazette Notification G .S.R. 53 (E) dated 30.01.2013 specifying
procedures to analyze the reports of Serious Adverse Events occurring during
clinical trials and procedures for payment of compensation in case of trial related
injury or death as per prescribed timelines.
➢ Amendment vide Gazette Notification G.S.R. I 63(E) dated 01.02.2013 specifying
various conditions for conduct of clinical trials, authority for conducting clinical
trial inspections and actions in case of noncompliance.
 ➢ Amendment vide Gazette Notification G .S.R. 72(E) dated 08.02.2013 specifying
requirements and guidelines for registration of Ethics Committees.
● Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2013 has been introduced in the Parliament
on 29 th August, 2013. The Bill contains a separate chapter on clinical trials containing
penal provisions, provisions for payment of compensation, Ethics Committees etc.
● An Expert Committee has been constituted to examine the reports of deaths in clinical
trials. The Committee has prepared a formula for determining the quantum of
compensation in case of clinical trial related deaths which is available in CDSCO
website.
● The Committee set up under the Chairmanship of Prof. S.S. Agarwal on clinical trial
and new drugs has submitted its report. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
has examined the recommendations and finalized the action to be taken on various
recommendations, the details of which have been posted on the CDSCO website.
● In compliance to the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s order dated 03.01.2013, a system of
supervision of clinical trial has been put in place by constituting an Apex Committee
under Chairmanship of Secretary, Health and Family Welfare and a Technical
Committee under Chairmanship of DGHS.
● The present procedure followed for review of Clinical trial applications is a three tier
review process. As per the process applications are evaluated by the New Drugs
Advisory Committees (NDACs)/lnvestigational New Drugs (IND) Committee. The

7
recommendations of these committees are finally reviewed by the Technical Committee
and then approved by the Apex Committee on the basis of recommendations of the
Technical Committee.
● Further, in compliance with the order of Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 26.07.2013,
consultations have been made with the Principal Health Secretaries of the States/ UTs,
NHRC, Civil Societies and other stakeholders who have submitted their suggestions
which are under consideration for further strengthening of regulations on clinical trials.
● DCG (I) through an administrative order dated 30.08.2013 has made it mandatory for
the sponsor or his representatives to furnish the details of the contract entered by the
Sponsor with Investigator/institutions with regard to financial support, fees,
honorarium, payments in kind etc., to be paid to the Investigator.
● In light of the order of Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 21.10.2013, it has been decided
that in all clinical trials, in addition to the requirement of obtaining ‘Mitten informed
consent, audio-visual recording of the informed consent process of each trial subject,
including the procedure of providing information to the subject and his/her
understanding on such consent is required to be done while adhering to the principles
of confidentiality. Such audio-visual recording and related documentation would be
preserved. All the Sponsors/Investigators/Institutes/Organizations and other
stakeholders involved in conduct of clinical trials in the country are required to adhere
to the above requirement of audio-visual recording of informed consent process of trial
subjects with effect from 30.11.2013.
Observation/Recommendation
2.12 W ith this background a clinical trial under the title ‘Post- licensure observational study of
Human Papilloma Virus Vaccination - Demonstration Project’ was undertaken by Programme for
Appropriate Technology in Health (PATH), an agency of American origin. The Indian Council of
Medical Research (ICMR), which is the highest body in the Country for medical research and
related matters lent its platform to PATH in an improper and unlawful manner. The State
Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat swayed by the involvement of ICMR followed suit.
(Para1.12)
Reply of the Ministry
2.13 It is submitted that the role of the ICMR was limited only to the extent of giving advice
on preparing the protocol and providing guidance on monitoring the same. ICMR did not lend its
platform to PATH in any improper and unlawful manner and it did not attempt to sway the decision
making process of the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat in any manner. Being a
scientific organization concerned with health problems of public health importance it scientifically
facilitated the process of operational research by providing guidance on design and protocol/
procedures pertaining to these vaccines which had the potential of preventing cervical cancer.
Benefit from human health perspective and costs would have been or will be to people and
Government of India and not to any individual in ICMR. It may be pointed out that no such
irregularities, have been pointed by the Inquiry Committee appointed by Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare. The recommendations of Parliamentary Standing Committee made in its 41
st and
48th reports to stop the ongoing studies and put in place safeguards about ethics, proper consent,
monitoring of serious adverse events, compensation etc have all been implemented by ICMR during
review process and by DCGI as a regulator when giving approvals. It is requested that
Parliamentary Standing Committee may kindly reconsider their interpretation.

8
II. NATURE OF PROJECT
Observation/Recommendation
2.14 Given the controversy surrounding the project, the Committee was keen to know from the
Government the exact nature of the project. The Committee noticed that there was fundamental
difference between the perceptions of Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI) and Department
of Health Research (DHR)/Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) on the actual nature of the
project. The DCGI was of the opinion that since human subjects, as part of the research, were
receiving invasive intervention like vaccines, the clinical trial rules must be enforced. Experts also
upheld these views and were very clear about it. However, PATH described the project as an
“observational study” “since it did not conform to the definition of clinical trial”. (Para 2.1)
2.15 The Committee found from the information furnished to it that ICMR representative on the
Project Advisory Committee not only opposed DCGI but also argued that the nature of the project
does not require them to follow the clinical trial rules, including reporting of serious adverse effects
within a specific time frame . (Para 2.2)
Reply of the Ministry
2.16 As per Schedule Y , Post Marketing Trials (Phase IV) are studies (other than routine
surveillance) performed after drug approval and related to the approved indication(s). These trials
go beyond the prior demonstration of the drug’s safety, efficacy and dose definition. These trials
may not be considered necessary at the time of new drug approval but may be required by the
Licensing Authority for optimizing the drug’s use. They may be of any type but should have valid
scientific objectives. Phase IV trials include additional drug-drug interaction(s), dose-response or
safety studies and trials designed to support use under the approved indication(s), e.g. mortality/
morbidity studies, epidemiological studies etc.
The objective of the PATH study was:
(i) To demonstrate suitable vaccine delivery strategy for HPV to 10-14 years old
adolescent girls.
(ii) To raise community awareness on HPV , cancer of the cervix and its prevention.
(iii) To gain experience in HPV vaccination and to build the evidence based of vaccine
delivery strategies for future introduction of HPV vaccines into Universal immunization
programs.
The primary outcome measures included:
1. Number and percent of eligible girls fully vaccinated, partially vaccinated or not
vaccinated at all according to the vaccine delivery strategy.
2. Number and percent of vaccinated girls experiencing serious adverse events, as
reported spontaneously through routine mechanisms of the UIP program;
3. Number and percent of vaccinated girls experiencing non-serious adverse events, as
reported spontaneously through routine mechanisms of the UIP program;
4. Timeliness of reporting serious adverse events to local, state and national authorities,
as per the usual UIP protocol; and
5. Timeliness of reporting non-serious adverse events to local, state and national
authorities, as per the usual UIP protocol.

9
Thus, the PATH study falls under the category of Post Marketing Trial (Phase IV) as per
Schedule Y .
Observation/Recommendation
2.17 The Committee in this regard took note of the expert opinion given in the Inquiry
Committee report which questioned the PATH description of the project and observed that since
“the demonstration project is a study of a pharmaceutical product carried out on humans and since
the primary objectives include the study of serious adverse effects, it is clear that clinical trial rules
and guidelines should apply”. (Para 2.3)
2.18 In fact, the Inquiry Committee in one of its findings very pointedly stated that the
investigators had variously labeled the research project carried out by them as “Observational
Study/Demonstrational Study,” etc. to establish that the study was not a clinical trial. But, since
the project had been carried out as research on human participants, it had to follow all the
guidelines and statutory requirements applicable for research on human participants. (Para 2.4)
Reply of the Ministry
2.19 The Inquiry Committee under the chairmanship of Prof SS Agarwal was of the opinion that
by whatever name it is called, the project proposal had been carried out as research on human
participants. As such, it had to follow all guidelines and statutory requirements applicable to
research on human participants.
III. ROLE OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH/ INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL
RESEARCH
Observation/Recommendation
2.20 The Committee enquired from the Secretary of Department of Health Research (DHR) and
DG, ICMR, as to whether the Department or CDSCO, before approving the project had really
reviewed its actual design. The Committee highlighted the observations of the experts of the Inquiry
Committee who have opined that the design of the project itself was faulty. For instance, in the
documents there was no column whatsoever for Serious Adverse Events (SAE) and no diary was
to be maintained as part of the protocol. (Para 3.6)
Reply of Ministry
2.21 The protocol submitted by PATH for the said study was approved by DCG (I) in
consultation with the ICMR. It is accepted that protocol was not perfect and method of recording
SAEs including maintaining diary should have clearly stated. As all experts including official(s) from
ICMR are equally responsible, this is a collective failure. It is assured that due care will be taken
in future including responsibility to one/more officials for approval and monitoring compliance.
Observation/Recommendation
2.22 Moreover, much before the trials started, many expected side effects including anaphylaxis
(severe allergic reaction), syncope, convulsions, asthma, central demyelinating diseases, acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis, diopathic Thrombopenia Purpura, etc. were known. And
astonishingly, as the records stated, while ICMR functionary was worried of bad publicity in case
of side effects, PATH did not provide for urgent expert medical attention in case of serious adverse
events whether known or unexpected. (Para 3.7)

10
Reply of the Ministry
2.23 One of the major deficiencies identified by the Inquiry Committee was total reliance on the
State AEFI program to measure four of the five primary outcomes of the study without an
independent verification. This has led to delay in reporting of SAE and deaths and their inadequate
investigation which precipitated the crisis in the execution of the study. The Committee had opined
that monitoring and management of Adverse Event (AE)/Serious Adverse Event (SAE) should have
been more vigorously pursued.
Observation/Recommendation
2.24 After going through the final report and interactions with the Secretaries of the Department
of Health and Family Welfare and the Department of Health Research/ICMR and DCGI, the
Committee felt that it needs clarification as to under what category, permission was given to PATH
to conduct such study on the Indian people and whether the programme was a clinical trial or
promotional activity. The Committee took note of the fact that the Enquiry Committee meeting held
on September 27, 2010, noted as under (Appendix 20.5):
“...Besides the factual information about the terms of reference the Committee was greatly
concerned with the aspect of commercial interests of manufacturers influencing the Government
policy on this expensive vaccine. The Committee observed that the study was initiated by PATH
on its own without any reference from the National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization
(NTAGI), the official body of the GOI on vaccines It is not clear whether the State expenses
were funded by PATH or came from their own resources. The monetary contributions of ICMR
are also not clear. The Committee therefore felt that it would be in the fitness of the inquiry
to document the sources and magnitude of funding study”. (Para 3.8)
Reply of the Ministry
2.25 Same as mentioned against Para 2.1
*
Observation/Recommendation
2.26 The Committee from its examination has found that DHR/ICMR have completely failed to
perform their mandated role and responsibility as the apex body for medical research in Country.
Rather, in their over-enthusiasm to act as a willing facilitator to the machinations of PATH they
have even transgressed into the domain of other bodies/agencies which deserves the strongest
condemnation and strictest action against them. The Committee fails to understand as to why
ICMR took so much interest and initiative in this project when the safety, efficacy and introduction
of vaccines in India is handled by National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization (NTAGI).
The submissions of the Secretary, DHR/DG, ICMR before the Committee about the commencement
of the project, facts of the case and the action taken have also failed to stand scrutiny during the
Committee’s examination of the matter. The Committee, therefore, reiterates the recommendation
made in their Forty-first Report that the matter of allowing trial of the vaccine as also approval
for its marketing in the Country be inquired into by a premier investigating agency and appropriate
action be taken there after by the Government in the matter .The Committee expect the
Government not to procrastinate in this matter any further. (Para 3.22)
Reply of the Ministry
2.27 Response against the observations to 
**Para 3.18 is reiterated. It is submitted that
deficiencies pointed out by the Inquiry Committee on which Parliamentary Standing Committee
* refer to para 2.16 of Chapter II
** refer to para 3.7 to 3.11 of Chapter III

11
has based its conclusions do not indicate willful negligence or these were fully anticipatable. In
hindsight, these deficiencies should be undertaken as a learning experience. The Inquiry
Committee recommended that lessons be incorporated both in the ongoing , proposed to be
started and future research studies in general and new vaccines in particular so that public trust
in the Vital National Immunization Programme is restored and enhanced. It is submitted that the
role of ICMR may be considered in positive light in view of its public health goals. Parliamentary
Standing Committee is assured that ICMR will ensure that it will conduct itself in a manner that
will not any doubts about its intention and will be within its mandate and role assigned by
Government of India.
IV. ROLE OF DRUG CONTROLLER GENERAL, INDIA (DCGI)
Observation/Recommendation
2.28 The Committee noted that as per Rule122-DA and Schedule Y of the Drugs and Cosmetics
Rules, 1945 made under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, no clinical trial on a drug can be
conducted except under, andaccordance with the permission in writing, of the Licensing Authority
i.e. DCGI. All vaccines are deemed to be drugs. Clinical trials of pharmaceutical products are
conducted on human subjects in the country to determine or verify safety and/or efficacy. Every
permission for conducting clinical trials also, inter alia, includes a condition that in event of trial
related injury or death, the sponsor will provide complete medical care as well as compensation.
Statement to this effect needs to be incorporated in the Informed Consent Form. The details of
compensation provided are to be intimated to the office of DCGI. (Para 4.1)
Reply of the Ministry
2.29 Earlier, there were no specific provisions under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules regarding
payment of compensation in case of injury or death occurring during clinical trials.
2.30 However, GCP guidelines required that subjects who suffer physical injury as a result of
their participation in clinical trial were entitled to financial or other assistance to compensate them
equitably for any temporary or permanent impairment or disability subject to confirmation from
Ethics Committee.
2.31 From 2011 till the amendment made on 30
th January, 2013, every clinical trial permission
included a condition that in the event of trial related injury or death, the sponsor will provide
complete medical care as well as compensation. Statement to this effect needs to be incorporated
in the Informed Consent Form. The details of compensation provided are to be intimated to the
office of DCGI.
2.32 The Drugs and Cosmetics Rules have since been amended incorporating specific provisions
in this regard which are as under:
● Amendment vide  Gazette Notification G .S.R. 53(E) dated 30.01.2013 specifying
procedures to analyze the reports of Serious Adverse Events occurring during clinical
trials and procedures for payment of compensation in case of trial related injury or
death as per prescribed timelines.
● Amendment vide Gazette Notification G.S.R. 63(E) dated 01.02.2013 specifying various
conditions for conduct of clinical trial, including reporting of SAE and requirement for
payment of compensation in case of trial related injury or death, authority for
conducting clinical trial inspections and actions in case of non compliance.

12
V. MARKETING APPROVAL TO HPV V ACCINES IN INDIA
Observation/Recommendation
2.33 Before approving any new drug (including new vaccines), under Drugs and Cosmetics
Rules, it is mandatory to conduct Phase III clinical trials in India to determine any ethnic
differences in the safety and efficacy profiles. As per records made available to the Committee the
following clinical trials, albeit, under various names, were conducted:
Gardasil (Merck): Clinical trials were conducted on 108 subjects (girls in the age group of
9-15 years). Several violations took place in the trial: (a) trials should have been conducted
in adults first before exposing children to known and unknown side effects, (b) in
adolescents and children the trials should have been conducted from “top to bottom” age
groups i.e. first in adolescents (13-15 years) followed by children (9-12 years). This was
not done. Vaccines were administered to children irrespective of age at the same time.
Cervarix (GSK): Clinical trials were conducted on 162 subjects (adults in the age group of
18-35 years). Yet permission was given to use the vaccine in children (10-14 years) in
violation of rules. (Para 5.1)
Reply of the Ministry
2.34 As already mentioned in 
*Para 1.4 above, the Phase III clinical trials were permitted to be
conducted in India as per the provision of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules.
2.35 The Inquiry Committee, in this regard, has also opined that not only the requirement of
assessing the safety and efficacy of the vaccine in adult prior to use in children has been fulfilled,
the data on adolescent girls has also been acquired. As such, there was no violation of any laid
down guidelines for use of New drugs/Vaccine in the pediatric age groups.
VI. INQUIRY COMMITTEE
(b) Conflict of Interest
Observation/Recommendation
2.36 The Committee sought information from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(MoHFW) as to whether members of the Inquiry Committee were asked to file Conflict of Interest
declarations. In response the Ministry replied: “No written Conflict of Interest declarations were
sought from the core members of the Inquiry Committee as well as experts. It was understood
that if there is any conflict, highly learned members will point it out.” (Para 6.4)
2.37 In order to verify the Ministry’s claim, the Committee pick adjust one member i.e.
Professor and HoD of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology (O&G) of All Indian Institute
of Medical Sciences (AIIMS).It was found that manufacturers of Gardasil, Merck was sponsoring
and funding a trial in the Department of O&G at AIIMS to determine if 2 doses of Gardasil can
be used safely and effectively instead of 3 doses. Documents received by the Committee in
connection with the examination of AIIMS also revealed that the individual in question availed the
hospitality of these very sponsors during the said individual’s visit to Seoul to attend a conference.
The FCRA application form was, therefore, serious conflict of interest of this member of the
Inquiry Committee. (Para 6.5)
* refer to Annexure K

13
Reply of the Ministry
2.38 The Ministry of Health and family Welfare had constituted this Enquiry committee under the
Chairmanship of Dr. S.S. Agarwal vide order no. V .25011/160/2010-HR dated 15 th April, 2010,
to enquire into alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies using HPV vaccine by PATH in
India.
2.39 While connection between one of members of Enquiry Committee having availed hospitality
earlier from the sponsors has been pointed out, Parliament Standing Committee is requested to
consider that this Enquiry Committee and the subcommittee appointed by it have objectively
analyzed the situation /events in detail and all the shortcomings about consent (procedures and actual
implementation); recording of adverse events; inappropriate/inadequate procedures for monitoring
and response to adverse events; PI and Advisory Committees not doing proper job to implement
the study; lack of insurance cover etc have all been brought out by this Enquiry Committee. These
have been endorsed by Parliament Standing Committee.
2.40 While the lapse on the part of Ministry in not specifically asking the question about such
possible conflict of interest directly and clearly is acceptable, it will not be fair to question the
integrity of all senior members of medical fraternity and have served the nation with distinction in
their career. Parliament Standing Committee is requested to reconsider its conclusion that entire
process is vitiated. In future, this clarification about conflict of interest/having availed hospitality
will be specifically asked.
Observation/Recommendation
2.41 The Committee also found that the Ministry appointed a senior official of ICMR (described
as Resource Person) to assist the inquiry Committee. The concerned individual was the main link
between ICMR and PATH, and had participated actively in all discussions, meetings and helped
PATH to carry out the project proactively in every respect right from the beginning in
October, 2006. As such he had a clear Conflict of interest and could not be relied upon to give
correct information and unbiased opinion. Indeed he should have been summoned as a witness to
answer questions and not as an official Resource Person attached to the Enquiry Committee.
(Para 6.6)
Reply of the Ministry
2.42 It is submitted that the official from ICMR was appointed as resource person to provide
the documents as he fully knew about records/happenings but was not associated with the
proceedings at any stage. Report does not exonerate ICMR/the concerned official from not doing
the job of giving proper advice in design, protocol, implementation and monitoring. To avoid any
such misgivings/impression, due care will be exercised in future.
(c) Adverse Events Reporting
Observation/Recommendation
2.43 The Committee examined the final Report of the Inquiry Committee constituted to enquire
into the alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies using HPV vaccines by PATH in India. In
its first meeting held on 21.4.2010, the Inquiry Committee sought details on the following core
issues: (Para 6.7)
1. When did PATH approach ICMR for trial runs?
2. With whose permission was MOU signed?

14
3. Did President of ICMR approve?
4. Whether it had approval of the Screening Committee?
5. Approval of DCGI.
6. Details of reimbursement provided so far by PATH to ICMR
7. Names of beneficiaries
8. Expenditure incurred by ICMR so far on all items including travel expenses.
2.44 However in its second meeting on 30
th April, 2010, no discussion took place on the above
crucial issues since the Inquiry Committee wished “to restrict itself to the terms of reference.”
(Para 6.8)
2.45 Inexplicably, however as the records placed before the Committee proved, this decision, did
not prevent the Inquiry Committee from going into and recommending actions on other matters far
beyond the terms of reference . (Para 6.9)
2.46 The Committee notes that once this matter was taken up by it, the Government appointed
an Inquiry Committee on 15
th April, 2010 to inquire into ‘alleged irregularities in the conduct of the
studies using HPV vaccines by PATH in India’. The Committee has noted the serious conflict of
interest of members of this Inquiry Committee with the subject matter. The Committee, therefore,
strongly deprecates the Government for appointing a committee to inquire into such a serious
matter in such a casual manner even without ascertaining as to whether any of the members of
the said Inquiry Committee were having any conflict of interest with the subject matter of inquiry.
(Para 6.10)
2.47 The Committee finds it very intriguing as to when the Inquiry Committee after having
sought details of some core issues in the very first meeting of the Committee on 21
st April, 2007
subsequently chose not to pursue them purportedly because ‘it wanted to restrict itself to its terms
of reference’. These core issues raised by the Inquiry Committee earlier, if pursued to their logical
end, would not only have provided the Inquiry Committee a lot more clarity in unravelling the truth
but also the country would have known the exact details as to what transpire red in this sordid
incident. (Para 6.11)
Reply of the Ministry
2.48 Parliament Standing Committee is requested to consider the fact that Inquiry Committee and
the Subcommittee appointed by it have objectively analyzed the situation/events in detail and all the
shortcomings about consent (procedures and actual implementation); recording of adverse events;
in appropriate/inadequate procedures for monitoring and response to adverse events; Pl and
Advisory Committees not doing proper job to implement the study: lack of insurance cover etc
have all been brought out by this Inquiry Committee. These have been endorsed by Parliament
Standing Committee. Even though it chose not to address these additional points subsequently, it
fulfilled its objectives in a comprehensive manner based on which reforms in review, approval and
monitoring process have been undertaken by Government of India pertaining to clinical research.
Observation/Recommendation
2.49 The Committee was informed that the basic aim of the study was to evaluate strategies for
introduction and delivery of the vaccines in the public sector. Strangely, four of the five primary
outcome majors proposed in the study related to evaluation and determination of safety of the
vaccines . (Para 6.18)

15
2.50 One of the experts has stated that there was lack of rigour in the design regarding reporting
and dealing with serious adverse events. He has pointed out absence of preparedness in the event
of any such occurrence that would put children at grave risk. The side effects mentioned by the
manufacturers themselves were revised several times and now include serious health issues. Since
there were contra-indications to the use of the vaccines, the reasons for not ascertaining contra-
indications before the girls were vaccinated is clearly an act of wilful negligence. The design of
the project neither took the possibility of Serious Adverse Event (SAE) seriously nor was there
any attention paid to the need for an independent monitoring agency. Consequently action on
investigations into the causes of deaths took an unacceptably long time. A number of discrepancies
and gaps in the investigations of the deaths have also been pointed out. There was no diary card
based reporting of adverse events for recording minor or major adverse events in the study
protocol in such a large study. This resulted in gross under reporting of the adverse events.
(Para 6.19)
2.51 Another expert, while analyzing deaths and Adverse Events Following Immunizations (AEFI)
has observed after reviewing all seven deaths (five deaths from AP in the Gardasil group and two
deaths in Gujarat from Cervarix group), that there was no common pattern to the deaths that
would suggest that these were caused by the vaccine. However, the reporting system as per
Government of India surveillance of vaccine preventable disease guidelines notification was not
done within time limit in two cases in AP and both the cases in Gujarat. There was no uniformity
in the reporting system of AEFI in both the States. The primary end point of the study was to
find out the number of girls having serious and no serious adverse events following vaccination
through routine UIP system. He has opined that in this regard first of all routine system of
reporting should have been verified in both States. (Para 6.20)
2.52 Another expert has stated that the reporting of non-serious AEs was grossly under reported and
hence the accuracy of SAEs is doubtful as well. It has been observed that delay in reporting and
investigations of deaths could have been due to sole dependence on routine UIP protocol. It was a
significant lapse in the protocol and execution of the study. While reporting on safety aspects in the
study, it has been pointed out tr at there was absence of preparedness to handle Serious Adverse Events
(SAE) like anaphylaxis, cardiac arrest, seizures, etc. occurring at the sites of vaccine administration.
Though such serious adverse events might be rare but it was advisable to be well prepared for such
an eventuality through adequate training of health workers. Assessment of the immune status of the
participants by the ANM, ASHA or the health workers was virtually nonexistent. These issues needed
to be addressed as prescribing information of the HPV vaccines specifically contra-ind1cates
administration in immune-compromised subjects (such as HIV/AIDS etc.). (Para 6.21)
2.53 The Committee, in the light of the observations made by experts, feels that the methodology
and implementation of the study at both the places was full of flaws. The Committee is of the view
that since the population under study was vulnerable, utmost caution should have been exercised
in the implementation of the study. The Committee also recommends that there should be an
independent monitoring mechanism in such a study involving human participants so that the
accurate recording of AEs and SAEs could be made. The findings of the experts clearly indicate
that the safety and rights of the children in this vaccination project were highly compromised and
violated. The Committee is also concerned over the fact that there was no insurance cover for the
children. The Committee strongly recommends that while allowing any such trial in future, all the
lapses pointed out by the experts should be addressed effectively. ICMR and DCGI should ensure
strict adherence to the guidelines, methodology and monitoring. (Para 6.22)
Reply of the Ministry
2.54 One of the major deficiencies identified by the inquiry committee was total reliance on the
State AEFI Programme to measure four of the five primary outcomes of the studies without an

16
independent verification. This has led to delay in reporting of SAE and deaths and their inadequate
Investigation which precipitated the crisis in the execution of the study. The committee had opined
that monitoring and management of AE/SAE should have been more vigorously pursued.
2.55 As already mentioned in 
*Para 4.6, the Inquiry Committee has observed that such
deficiencies do not appear to be wilfully or fully anticipatable. In hindsight these deficiencies should
be undertaken as a learning experience. The committee recommends that these lessons be
incorporated both in the ongoing, proposed to be started and future research studies in general and
new vaccines in particular that public trust in the vital national immunization programme is restored
and enhanced.
2.56 Ministry agrees with the observations of Parliament Standing Committee about safeguards,
consent taking monitoring of trials/intervention studies, compensation/insurance, blurring of
distinction between this study and UIP; use of NHRM machinery and making Ethical Committees
accountable. The Inquiry Committee had also made similar conclusions. MoHFW (Department of
Health Research – ICMR and Department of Health and family Welfare – DCGI and NHM) will
ensure that such lapses do not occur.
(e) Role of Ethics Committees
Observation/Recommendation
2.57 The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that both the Ethics Committees existed only
as a formality and they did not play the role they were designated for. This is a clear dereliction
of duty on the part of the Ethics Committees. The Committee apart from recommending suitable
action in the matter, strongly recommends that there should be a mechanism in place to take
appropriate action against such dereliction of duty on the part of the Ethics Committees. There
should be specific guidelines for Ethics Committees and the Ethic Committees should strictly follow
them. The functioning of Ethics Committees should be regularly monitored. (Para 6.24)
Action Taken
2.58 As already mentioned in 
*Para 4.6, the Inquiry Committee has observed that such
deficiencies do not appear to be willfully or fully anticipatable. In hindsight these deficiencies
should be undertaken as a learning experience. The Committee recommends that these lessons be
incorporated both in the ongoing, proposed to be started and future research studies in general and
new vaccines in particular so that public trust in the Vital National Immunization Programme is
restored and enhanced.
2.59 In the meantime, the rules have been amended and the registration of Ethics Committee has
been made mandatory. As per new regulations, the functioning of Ethical Committees will be closely
monitored and strict compliance to clearly defined procedures will be ensured.
Observation/Recommendation
2.60 Considering the above lapses and irregularities committed by PATH during the course of
conducting the trials on hapless tribal children in Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat, the Committee is
convinced that the authorities concerned did not exercise due diligence in scrutinizing the publicity
material of PATH. Blurring the distinction between the UIP and PATH project due to the involvement
of the State Governments in the project and ignoring the financial contribution of ICMR and the
State Governments are very serious issues. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
* please refer to para 3.18 to 3.22 of Chapter III
* please refer to para 3.18 to 3.22 of Chapter III

17
Ministry should investigate into the above acts of omissions and commissions and take necessary
action against those who are found responsible for breach of rules and regulations. (Para 6.29)
Reply of the Ministry
2.61 As mentioned in the response to *Para 4.6, the Inquiry Committee has concluded that such
deficiencies do not appear to be wilfully or fully anticipatable. In hindsight these is deficiencies
should be undertaken as a learning experience. The Committee recommends that these lessons be
incorporated both in the ongoing, proposed to be started and future research studies in general and
new vaccines in particular so that public trust in the vital national Ministry assures that such lapses
or acts of omission/commission do not occur in future.
(g) Action taken on the Inquiry Committee Report
Observation/Recommendation
2.62 W ith a view to find out the action taken by the Government on the findings of the Inquiry
Committee, the Committee again heard the Secretary, Department of Health Research/DG, ICMR
along with DCGI at its meeting held on 24
th May, 2013. The Secretary informed the Committee
that after the submission of Report by the Inquiry Committee, they were formally called to give
explanation in the year 2011.In addition, clarifications were also sought from them in between
which were formally answered to. The Committee in the said meeting desired to know whether
criminal inquiry, if any, has been initiated against PATH on account of the following irregularities
in the conduct of trial as pointed out by the Inquiry Committee: (Para 6.30)
(i) Irregularities in obtaining consent forms and actual implementation of the consent of the
consent process;
(ii) Lack of monitoring and preparedness to deal with serious adverse events;
(iii) Inclusion of vulnerable and tribal population groups;
(iv) Blurring of distinction between Universal Immunization Programme and PATH study;
(v) Absence of insurance coverage for the study participants; and
(vi) Inclusion of the statement in the consent form that “you will not be charged for your
daughter to receive the vaccine” that could be construed as covert inducement.
2.63 The Committee also sought to know as to whether any compensation was awarded to the
families of children or suppression of material information before administering vaccines.
(Para 6.31)
2.64 The Committee also took note of the Action Taken Note submitted by Department of Health
Research wherein it was informed that subsequent to findings of the Inquiry Committee taken:
(i) PATH was informed about suggestions made by the Committee;
(ii) Principal Investigators of other suspended studies on HPV vaccines were informed to
get their studies re-examined from respective Ethics Committees after addressing the
concerns raised by the inquiry Committee;
(iii) DCG (I) was informed of the suggestions of the Committee for necessary action; and
Suggestions were forwarded to the relevant authority for inclusion in the Draft bill on
Biomedical Research on Human Subjects. (Para 6.32)
* please refer to para 3.18 to 3.22 of Chapter III

18
Reply of the Ministry
2.65 The Inquiry Committee was constituted on 1 st April,  2010. The Committee submitted their
reports to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in February, 2011. Based on the discrepancies
outlined in the enquiry committee report and its observations/recommendations, a warning letter
was issued to M/s PATH, on 03.07.2012, to ensure that such discrepancies/violation are not
repeated in future. It was also directed to comply with the corrective action taken to ensure strict
compliance of Schedule Y and GCP in ongoing study and proposed to be started in future research
studies.
2.66 Further various steps have been taken to strengthen the regulatory framework for approval
as well as monitoring of Clinical Trials of New Drugs including Vaccines. Details have been
mentioned in 
*Para 1.7.
* refer to para 2.10 & 2.11 of Chapter II

19
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
III. ROLE OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH/INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL
RESEARCH
Observation/Recommendation
3.1 Thus as early as October-November, 2006, it was clear that the main objective of PATH
project was to generate evidence that would facilitate the introduction of HPV vaccine Gardasil into
government-funded immunization program in India. This appears to be a promotional activity for
the benefit of manufacturing company because at that time only one HPV vaccine, Gardasil had
been approved abroad, though not in India. Indeed “the key object of the project activities in India
is to gather information and help the government make a decision about the introduction of “HPV
vaccine”. The Country Director of PATH in India emphasized that “this needs to be our consistent
message throughout the project. “In the formal proposal submitted by PATH to the ICMR on
Project Proposals involving Foreign Collaboration/Assistance the applicant clearly stated under Para
9. Objectives of the Project: “......... .Introduction of HPV vaccines into Universal Immunization
Program.” The Committee found repeated mention of similar objectives at several places in various
documents submitted by Ministry. The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed by PATH
and ICMR on 20th February, 2007. At that time only Gardasil was marketed in some countries in
the world though not approved for use in India. The MoU stated that the purpose of the project
was:
(i) Increasing understanding of HPV vaccine ( i.e. Gardasil) introduction.
(ii) To help in decision-making related to the use of HPV ( i.e. Gardasil) vaccine in the
public and private sector. (Para 3.5)
Reply of the Ministry
3.2 It is a fact that main objective of Global Project of PATH was to generate evidence for
considering the introduction of HPV vaccines into public health programmes of these countries
including where cervical cancer was/is still important from public health point of view. Company
would have clearly benefited but this is linked to benefit to human health. All the facts mentioned
above by Parliamentary Standing Committee are matter of record. It is true that association of
ICMR in this study as partner creates doubts and raises the issues of conflict of interest of
appearing as promoter of introduction of introduction these vaccines, giving advice on ethics and
at the same, not being in a position to ensure monitoring. As the state systems showed some laxity
in the manner of authorization and taking proper consent and also monitoring serious adverse
effects, there is concern about the entire process. ICMR had associated with this project with the
objective of generating information that could have been potentially useful to programme if NTAGI
had required such information to consider introduction of any of such vaccines in the programme.
It is reiterated that ICMR had associated with post-marketing surveillance cum operational research
project purely for scientific purposes. Procedure followed for clinical trials were also followed in
this case, however, these were not found to be adequate at the end but these are collective failure
19

20
of a system (different Committees) to foresee that such things can happen and thus it is requested
that these may not be concluded as responsibility of one official or organizations such happenings
have raised doubt about the neutrality of important organizations like ICMR, Department of Health
Research will ensure that it keeps the observations of Parliament Standing Committee in view and
will not allow ICMR headquarters or any of its scientists to associate with such projects in future
unless specifically asked by Government for that purpose.
Further Recommendation
3.3 The Government’s admission that the association of ICMR in the Study as partner
creates doubt and raises the issue of conflict of interest of appearing as promoter of
introduction of these vaccines, giving advice of ethics and at the same time not being in
the position to ensure monitoring indicates that ICMR should have been more careful in
such trials. In future efforts should be made to ensure that ICMR or any of its scientists
do not associate with such projects without prior approval and permission of the
Department. The Committee desires to be informed of the actions taken to streamline the
system.
Observation/Recommendation
3.4 The Committee is unable to understand as to how ICMR could commit itself to support “the
use of the HPV vaccine” in an MOU signed in the year 2007 even before the vaccine was approved
for use in the country, which actually happened in 2008. The Committee also questions the decision
of ICMR to commit itself to promote the drug for inclusion in the Universal Immunization
Programme (UIP) even before any independent study about its utility and rationale of inclusion in
UIP was undertaken. (Para 3.10)
Reply of the Ministry
3.5 As stated in 
*para 3.5, this method of functioning even though done with the goal of
generating information for decision making by the programme, has raised doubts about the
neutrality of important organizations like ICMR, Department of Health Research will ensure that it
keeps the observations of Parliament Standing Committee in view and will not allow ICMR
headquarters or any of its scientists to associate with such projects in future unless specifically
asked by Government for that purpose.
Observation/Recommendation
3.6 The Committee feels that there was serious dereliction of duty by many of the Institutions
and individuals involved. The Committee observes that ICMR representatives, instead of ensuring
highest levels of ethical standards in research studies, apparently acted at the behest of the PATH
in promoting the interests of manufacturers of the HPV V accine. (Para 3.18)
Reply of the Ministry
3.7 As regards to the fixing responsibility, the Inquiry committee has recommended that it is
true that deaths have occurred in the recipients of the HPV Vaccine under the PATH study in
Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat, and it is also true that lot of negative vibe has been generated against
this project due to mishandling of the entire situation. But the committee has not been able to
identify a single event, individual or agency which can be held entirely accountable for it. However,
* refer to para 3.2 above

21
some deficiencies in the implementation of the project did occur which have been detailed in the
report. These deficiencies noted by the Committee should serve “ as a lesson for strengthening
clinical research in future rather than starting any punitive or disciplinary proceeding.
3.8 The deficiencies do not appear to be willful or fully anticipatable. In hindsight, these
deficiencies should fully be undertaken as a learning experience. The Committee recommends that
these lessons be incorporated both in the ongoing, proposed to be started and future research
studies in general and new vaccines in particular so that public trust in the vital national
immunization programme is restored and enhanced.
3.9 The Development of HPV vaccine has provided a new opportunity for the prevention of
cancer of cervix, which is an important health burden for the women of our country.
3.10 HPV vaccination is not to replace the cancer cervix screening programmes, but to
supplement it. However, since the vaccine is expensive an element of effectiveness and
determination of complete cost health immunization priorities should have been addressed in the
study. The fact that the vaccine was provided by the manufacturers free of cost does raise the
concern about the undeclared conflict of interest since the results of the study may be used to
influence the decision by the Government. Again, since there does not appear to be covert mal-
intention, no responsibility can be fixed on one However, any programme focusing on vaccination
also be targeting on public education for cancer cervix screening.
3.11 It is assured that due care will be taken in future in all procedural issues so that no doubt
about the neutrality of ICMR and its objectivity for working for public purpose only arises.
Observation/Recommendation
3.12 It was unwise on the part of ICMR to go in the PPP mode with PATH, as such an
involvement gives rise to grave Conflict of Interest. The Committee takes a serious view of the
role of ICMR in the entire episode and is constrained to observe that ICMR should have been more
responsible in the matter. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may review the
activities of ICMR functionaries involved in PATH project. (Para 3.19)
Reply of the Ministry
3.13 It is accepted that association of ICMR in this study as partner creates doubts and raises
the issues of conflict of interest of appearing as promoter of introduction of these vaccines, giving
advice on ethics and at the same not being in a position to ensure monitoring. As the state systems
showed some laxity in the manner of authorization and taking proper consent and also monitoring
serious adverse effects, there is concern about the entire process. ICMR had associated with this
project with the objective of generating information that could have been potentially useful to
programme if NTAGI had required such information to consider introduction of any of such
vaccines in the programme. It is reiterated that ICMR had associated with post-marketing
surveillance cum operational research project purely for scientific purposes. Procedures which were
followed for clinical trials were also followed in this case, however, these were not found to be
adequate at the end but these are collective failure of a system (different committees) to foresee
that such things can happen and thus it is requested that these may not be concluded as
responsibility of one official or organization. As such happenings have raised doubt about the
neutrality of important organizations like ICMR, Department of Health Research will ensure that it
keeps the observations of Parliament Standing Committee in view and will not allow ICMR
headquarters or any of its scientists to associate with such projects in future unless specifically
asked by Government for that purpose.

22
Further Recommendation (Paras 3.10, 3.18, 3.19)
3.14 The plea of the Government that being a scientific organization concerned with
health problems of public health importance it (ICMR) scientifically facilitated the process
of operational research by providing guidance on design and protocols/procedures pertaining
to these vaccines which had the potential of preventing cervical cancer is untenable as it
is the DCG(I) and NTAGI who are mandated to perform these tasks and ICMR is the apex
organization for medical research in India. The Committee has no doubt at all that but for
the involvement of ICMR name, no State Government would have permitted the trial
conducted by the foreign private entity.
IV. ROLE OF DRUG CONTROLLER GENERAL, INDIA (DCGI)
Observation/Recommendation
3.15 The so called Demonstration Project of PATH has the objectives as follows:
Primary Outcomes:
● Number and percentage of vaccinated girls.
● Number and percentage of vaccinated girls experiencing Serious Adverse Events
(SAEs)
● Number and percentage of vaccinated girls experiencing Non-serious Adverse Events.
● Timeliness of reporting SAEs to local, State and national authorities.
● Timeliness of reporting Non-SAEs to local, State and national authorities.
(Para 4.4)
3.16 Thus it is clear that PATH project had two well defined and specific objectives:
(a) The commercial objective of the project was to generate evidence, data and arguments
to support inclusion of HPV vaccines into India’s state-funded Universal Immunization
Program (UIP), and
(b) The scientific purpose was to collect data on serious and non serious adverse effects.
Given that similar projects were launched in Peru, Uganda and Vietnam, the entire
exercise would have collected side effect profiles of HPV vaccines in all the ethnic
groups that reside in developing countries. Such data would be invaluable to promote
the two branded, patented, single source HPV vaccines as safe all over the world.
(Para 4.5)
3.17 The Committee’s examination has proved that DCGI has also played a very questionable role in
the entire matter. Initially, it took a call that since human subjects, as part of the studies, were receiving
invasive intervention like immunization, clinical trial rooms must be enforced However, it remained as a
silent spectator thereafter, even when its own rules and regulations were being so fagrantly violated. The
approval’s of clinical trials, marketing approval and import licenses by DCGI appear to be irregular.
Therefore, the role of DCGI in this entire matter should also be inquired into . (Para 4.6)
Reply of the Ministry
3.18 As already mentioned in 
*Para 2.1, the PATH study falls under the category of Post
Marketing trial (Phase IV) as per Schedule Y .
* refer to para 2.16 of Chapter II

23
3.19 The Inquiry Committee has recommended that it is true that deaths have occurred in the
recipients of the HPV Vaccine under the PATH study in Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat, and it is also
true that lot of negative vibe has been generated against this project due to mal-handling of the
entire situation, but the committee has not been able to identify a single event, individual or agency
which can be held entirely accountable for it. However, some deficiencies in the implementation of
the project did occur which have been detailed in the report. These deficiencies noted by the
Committee should serve as a lesson for strengthening clinical research in future rather than starting
any punitive or disciplinary proceedings.
3.20 The deficiencies do not appear to be willfully or fully anticipatable. In hindsight, these
deficiencies should be viewed as a learning experience. The Committee recommends that these
lessons be incorporated both in the on-going, proposed to be started and future research studies
in general and new vaccines in particular so that public trust in the vital national immunization
programme restored and enhanced.
3.21 The Development of HPV vaccine has provided a new opportunity for the prevention of
cancer of cervix, which is an important health burden for the women of our country. HPV
vaccination is not to replace the cervix cancer screening programmes, but to supplement it.
However, since the vaccine is expensive, an element of cost effectiveness and determination of
complete health immunization priorities should have been addressed in the study. The fact that the
vaccine was provided by the manufacturers free of cost does raise the concern about the
undeclared conflict of interest since the results of the study may be used to influence the decision
by the government. Again since there does not appear to be covert mal- intention, no responsibility
can be fixed on one person. However, any programme focusing on vaccination should also be
targeting on public education for cancer Cervix screening.
3.22 Based on the discrepancies outlined in the Inquiry Committee report and its observations/
recommendations, a warning letter was issued to PATH, on 3 July, 2012, to ensure that such
discrepancies/violation are not repeated in future. It was also directed to comply with the corrective
action taken to ensure strict compliance of Schedule Y and GCP in ongoing study and proposed
to be started in future research studies.
Further Recommendation (Paras 4.4, 4.5, and 4.6)
3.23 The Committee had observed that DCGI has played a very questionable role in entire
matter by remaining a mute spectator to violations of its own rules and regulations and
recommended for enquiring into the role of DCGI. The Committee is disappointed to note
that no action in this regard has been taken. The Committee accordingly impresses upon
the Department to take all possible measures and adopt abundant safeguards to see that
such violations are not replicated in future.
VI. INQUIRY COMMITTEE
(d) Informed consent
Observation/Recommendation
3.24 The Inquiry Committee, while going through the above report, noticed the following
irregularities and discrepancies in the study. (Para 6.14)
(i) The warden/teachers/headmasters were not given written permission by the parents/
guardians to sign on behalf of their girls.

24
(ii) On many forms witness had not signed and of the forms which are signed, it is not
clear whether they are signed by full time government employees, as per rules.
(iii) Neither the photograph nor the photo ID card of parents/guardians/wardens is pasted
in consent form.
(iv) On many forms investigator has not signed.
(v) On some forms signature of parents/guardians is not matching with their names.
(vi) The date of vaccination is much earlier than the date of signature of parents/guardian
in the consent forms. Apparently they were obtained postfacto.
(vii) In some forms, the name is of the father but signature is of probably mother (lady’s
name).
3.25 Secretary, DHR and DG, ICMR while deposing before the Committee, reiterated that the
regulatory approvals given to the project were in proper order and due attention was paid to the
guidelines and formats for seeking consent. However, during the implementation of the project
certain irregularities too place. He admitted there were cases of discrepancies in A.P. He admitted
that many consent forms were filled up by the Principal on behalf of the students. He admitted
to gross violation in the recording of SAEs also. He informed the Committee that keeping all these
observations in view the DCGI, besides issuing immediate instructions to stop the study, had
sought explanations for irregularities committed during the study. (Para 6.15)
3.26 The Committee observes that obtaining informed consent from study subjects is a
fundamental requirement in the conduct of clinical trials to ensure that the human rights of the
study subjects are ensured .In case of minors it is mandatory that the consent be signed by
parents/guardians. For the uneducated subjects, the law requires an independent person to explain
and witness the consent process. The Committee is however, deeply shocked to find that in Andhra
Pradesh out of the 9543 forms, 1948 forms have thumb impressions while hostel wardens have
signed 2763 forms. In Gujarat, out of the 6217 forms 3944 have thumb impressions and 5454
were either signed or carried thumb impressions of guardians. The data also revealed that a very
large number of parents/guardians are illiterate and could not even write in their local languages viz.
Telugu or Gujarati. The Committee is further shocked to find from one of the reports that out of
100 consent forms for Andhra Pradesh project signatures of witnesses were missing in 69 forms.
In many forms there were no dates. One particular person had signed seven forms. In fact the
legality of Andhra Pradesh State Government directing headmasters in all private/Government/
ashram/schools to sign the consent form on behalf of parents/guardians is highly questionable. The
absence of photographs of parents/guardians/wardens on consent forms, the absence of signatures
of investigators; the signatures of parents/guardians not matching with their names; the date of
vaccination being much earlier than the date of signature of parents/guardian in the consent forms,
etc. all speak of grave irregularities. (Para 6.16)
Reply of the Ministry
3.27 Response as mentioned against 
*Paras 4.6 is reiterated.
Observation/Recommendation
3.28 The Committee, accordingly, concludes that most, if not all consent forms, were carelessly
filled-up and were incomplete and inaccurate. The full explanation, role, usefulness and pros and
cons of vaccination had not been properly communicated to the parents/guardians. The Committee
* please refer to para 3.18 to 3.22 of Chapter III

25
observes that there is a gross violation of the concept and legal requirement of consent which had
been substantiated by the experts. The Committee takes a serious view of the violations and
strongly recommends that on the basis of the above facts, PATH should be made accountable and
the Ministry should take appropriate action in the matter including taking legal action against it for
breach of various laws of the land and possible violations of laws of the Country of its origin.
(Para 6.17)
Reply of the Ministry
3.29 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare constituted a Committee under the chairmanship
of Dr. S.S. Agarwal, former Director, Advanced Centre for Training, Research, Education on
Cancer to enquire into the alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies on Human Papilloma Virus
(HPV) vaccine by PATH in India. The Committee in its report identified various deficiencies in the
planning and conduct of the study by PATH.
3.30 The Inquiry Committee was of the view that by whatever name it was called, the project
proposal had been carried out as research on human participants. As such, it had to follow all
guidelines and statutory requirements applicable on research and human participants. The Committee
further reported that the deaths were “most probably” unrelated to the vaccine under trial, as there
was no characteristic and uniform pattern of illness preceding the death, or temporal/spatial
clustering. The Committee also observed that in the absence of control group, it was not possible
to say whether there were excess deaths in the vaccinated group or not. Based on the data of
background deaths from routine mortality reporting system from the same area for the vaccination
period as collected by the Committee, it opined that overall death rate during the period of
vaccination was not significantly different, supporting the contention that reported deaths are
independent of the HPV vaccination. It further stated that internationally as on the 31
st January,
2010, 49 deaths were reported in the USA against approximately 28 million doses of Gardasil
vaccine distribution. Out of these, 28 deaths have been traced. According to CDC (Centre for
Disease Control, USA), there was no unusual pattern or clustering to the deaths that would suggest
that they were caused by the vaccine. It is further added that these two vaccines are included in
the National Immunization Programmes for prevention of cervical cancer in women in many
countries, like, USA, Canada, New Zealand, France, Germany, Sweden, Austr alia, Russia, UK,
Mexico, etc.
3.31 The Inquiry Committee in its report had, however, identified various deficiencies in the
planning and conduct of the study by PATH. The gist of the same is as under:
1. Consent forms and the actual implementation of the consent process.
2. Method of monitoring the adverse effects and the serious adverse effects and remedial
measures for such events
3. Inclusion of vulnerable tribal population groups.
4. Blurring of distinction between National Immunization Program and PATH study.
5. Insurance coverage for the study participants
6. Free supply of vaccine by the manufacturer and the statement in the consent forms
that “you will not be charged for your daughter to receive the vaccine” that could be
considered as covert inducement and indirect coercion.
3.32 The penal provisions regarding the import of drugs are provided under Section 13 of the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act while penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of drugs is provided under
Section 27 of the Act. There are no specific penalties for violation of the provisions relating to
clinical trial under the Act.

26
3.33 The Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 made under the said Act, under Part XA of the Rules
have provisions for Import or Manufacture of New Drugs for Clinical trials or Marketing. Under
Rule 122DA, the permissions to conduct clinical trials for new drugs/investigational new drugs are
granted by the Licensing Authority as defined in Rule 21(b) i.e. Drugs Controller General (India).
The Schedule Y to the said Rule provides detailed requirements for the Informed Consent to be
obtained from each study subject as well as responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator and Ethics
Committee. Rule 122DB empowers the DCG(I) to suspend or cancel the permission issued to
conduct the clinical trials. In the present case, since the ICMR had already suspended the trial, the
DCG(I) issued ‘warning’ as an administrative measure to PATH on 3
rd July, 2012 that it should be
careful while conducting clinical trial so as to ensure that such discrepancies/violations are not
repeated in future. It was further directed to comply with the corrective action taken to ensure
strict compliance of Schedule Y and GCP in ongoing study and proposed to be started in future
research studies.
3.34 In the meantime, the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 were amended by Gazette
Notification GSR 63(E) dated 1.2.2013, inter alia providing for following activities by DCG(I), in
case of non-compliance of provisions of clinical trial:–
(a) Reject or discontinue the study;
(b) Suspend or cancel the clinical trial permission;
(c) Debar the investigator(s), Sponsor including his representative to conduct any clinical
trial in future.
3.35 In light of the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee for legal action, the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare vide its note dated 6.1.2011 has requested Ministry of Law and Justice
for their considered opinion as to whether any further legal action is possible in the present case.
A copy of the note is enclosed at Annexure C.
Further Recommendation (Paras 6.14, 6.15, 6.16, 6.17)
3.36 The Committee may be apprised of the opinion of the Ministry of Law and Justice
as solicited by the Ministry and action taken thereon.
(f) Use of Official Machinery
Observation/Recommendation
3.37 The Committee has noted that the information/publicity material dissolved/distributed at trial
sites implied that the Government started a vaccination programme. Thus, the credibility of the
Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) was used to promote private, foreign interests. It has
been found that the funds meant for the NRHM were used, without authorization for monitoring
and transportation of the vaccines to the fields for use in the project. (Para 6.25)
3.38 The Committee observes that the wrongful use of the NRHM logo for a project
implemented by a private, foreign agency as well as the identification of this project with the UIP
has adversely affected and damaged the credibility of the programme as well as that of the NRHM.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that such practices of diverting public funds for advancing
interests of a private agency should never be allowed in future. The Committee strongly
recommends that strict action should be taken against those officials responsible for such lapses.
(Para 6.26)

27
Reply of the Ministry
3.39 Same as mentioned against *Para 1.2, the matter pertaining to the wrongful use of NRHM
logo by PATH is being enquired into.
Further Recommendation (Paras 6.25 and 6.26)
3.40 According to the laid down rules, regulations and procedures, the sponsor (PATH) is
responsible under Drugs and Cosmetics Rules because NRHM logo was displayed at the site(s)
of the trial. The Committee desires that the inquiry should be completed at the earliest. The
findings of the inquiry being done in this regard may also be shared with the Committee.
Observation/Recommendation
3.41 DCG (I) informed the Committee that subsequent to findings of the Inquiry Committee; the
following action was taken:
(i) Both the manufacturers of HPV vaccines have been asked to submit additional data for
4 years on PSURs (Periodic Safety Update Reports), every 6 months for first 2 years,
and annually during the subsequent 2 years, and to submit protocol for approval for
conducting post marketing surveillance study;
(ii) Proposal to amend the definition of “New Drug” under rule 22-E would be taken up
for consideration; and
(iii) In future the following steps would be ensured before approving a clinical trial by
DCG (I): (a) every clinical trial is to be registered at CMR’s clinical trial registry of
India; (b) every approval would include a condition for provision of complete medical
care in case of study related injury/death and the statement to this effect is to be
included in the informed consent; (C) DCG (I) should be informed about death/injury;
(d) Schedule ‘Y’ would be amended to expand the responsibilities of sponsors,
investigators and Ethics Committees; and (e) the consent forms are to be amended to
include details of address and occupations of subject giving socio-economic
background. (Para 6.33)
Reply of the Ministry
3.42 As regards to the amendment of the definition of New Drugs under Rule 122 E, it may be
mentioned that the amendment has been issued vide Gazette Notification vide G.S.R. No. 724 (E)
dated 07.11.2013 omitting the words “or its inclusion in Indian Pharmacopeia, whichever is earlier”
in Rule 122 E, in clause C, in the explanation, in item (ii) Thus, as per this amendment, even if
a drug including vaccine is listed in Indian Pharmacopeia, the New drug status shall be considered
as per Drugs and Cosmetics Rules.
Thus, any Vaccine will always be considered as a New Drug even if it is included in I.P.
3.43 The Informed Consent Forms has been amended to include the details of socio-economic
status of the trial participants. As indicated earlier, other measures have been taken to strengthen
the regulatory framework of clinical trials.
Observation/Recommendation
3.44 The Committee is amazed at the audacity of DCGI to merely repeat various steps which
it proposes to take as if they are new, additional measures. All these are already part of the written
* refer to para 2.2 to 2.8 of Chapter II

28
rules and are supposed to be followed by all sponsors. Except for slight amendment in the
Informed Consent Form, there is nothing new in the ATN submitted by DCG(I). (Para 6.34)
Reply of the Ministry
3.45 Same as mentioned in **Para 1.7
Observation/Recommendation
3.46 The Committee observes that the Department has nothing fresh to offer in the status note
as the same information was furnished by it in December, 2012 vide its updated note on Action
Taken after availability of Report of inquiry Committee. (Para 6.35)
Reply of the Ministry
3.47 Same as mentioned in (Para 1.7)
Observation/Recommendation
3.48 The Committee not being convinced with the action taken by the Department or DCGI feels
that the whole issue has been diluted and no accountability has been fixed on the erring Officials/
Departments for the gross violations committed in the conduct of Study. The Committee also feels
that a very casual approach has been taken by the Department in the matter and their replies lack
any concrete action to protect and safeguard the health of our people. (Para 6.36)
Reply of the Ministry
3.49 As mentioned in Para 4.6, the Inquiry Committee has observed that such deficiencies do
not appear to be wilful or fully anticipatable. In hindsight these deficiencies should be undertaken
as a learning experience. The committee recommends that these lessons be incorporated both in the
ongoing, proposed to be started and future research studies in general and new vaccines in
particular so that public trust in the vital national immunization programme is restored and
enhanced. Details of actions taken are at 
*Para 1.2 and **Para 1.7
Observation/Recommendation
3.50 The Committee also noticed lack of firm action on the part of DCGI, to avoid such
irregularities in future. One of the actions proposed by the DCGI to check any recurrence of such
gross violations was ‘proposal to amend the definition of New Drug during the next meeting’. The
same assurance was given by DCGI in December, 2012. The Committee, accordingly, observes that
response of the the Department and DCGI is very casual, bureaucratic and lacks any sense of
urgency. The Committee feels that DCGI is not very serious in bringing improvements in the
system. It, therefore, desires the Ministry to ensure compliance by DCGI. (Para 6.37)
Reply of the Ministry
3.51 As mentioned in 
***Para 6.33, the amendment has been issued vide Gazette Notification vide
G.S.R. No. 724 (E) dated 07.11.2013 omitting the words “or its inclusion in Indian Pharmacopeia,
whichever is earlier” in Rule 122 E, in clause C, in the explanation, in item (ii). Thus, as per this
amendment, even if a drug including vaccine is listed in Indian Pharmacopeia, the New drug status
* refer to para 2.2 to 2.8 of Chapter II
** refer to para 2.10 & 2.11 of Chapter II
*** refer to para 2.69 to 2.70 of Chapter II

29
shall be considered as per Drugs and Cosmetics Rules. Thus, any Vaccine will always be
considered as a New Drug even if it is included in I.P.
3.52 It is submitted that Inquiry Committee while examining the link between deaths and
vaccination had identified these lapses but had inferred that all procedures being followed at that
time were followed in this case as well and there was no deliberate act of omission/ commission.
As these lapses could not be foreseen by any of the committees which examined and advised on
the process/procedures, Parliament Standing Committee is requested to consider the conclusions of
Inquiry Committee which did not find any evidence of wilful negligence/ lapse and concluded that
these lapses could not be anticipated. As this is learning in hindsight to improve and strengthen our
systems, MOHFW has taken necessary steps and may be given opportunity to implement the new
improved procedures and guidelines.
Further Recommendation (Paras 6.33, 6.34, 6.35, 6.36, 6.37)
3.53 The Committee is not convinced with the rationale of the Ministry. The Ministry
seems to have conveniently ignored the fact that had the extant rules been followed
scrupulously, they would have taken care of the irregularities at the very outset. The
Committee would thus observe that the DCG(I) did not make appropriate interventions as
are necessary and failed to discharge the responsibilities as a regulator. The Committee
hopes that such instances are not repeated in future. The system should be made foolproof
and transparent.

30
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
II. NATURE OF PROJECT
Observation/Recommendation
4.1 The Committee finds the entire matter very intriguing and fishy. The choice of countries
and population groups; the monopolistic nature, at that point of time, of the product being pushed;
the unlimited market potential and opportunities in the universal immunization programmes of the
respective countries are all pointers to a well planned scheme to commercially exploit a situation.
Had PATH been successful in getting the HPV vaccine included in the universal immunization
programme of the concerned countries, this would have generated windfall profit for the
manufacturer(s) by way of automatic sale, year after year, without any promotional or marketing
expenses. It is well known that once introduced into the immunization programme it becomes
politically impossible to stop any vaccination. To achieve this end effortlessly without going through
the arduous and strictly regulated route of clinical trials, PATH resorted to an element of subterfuge
by calling the clinical trials as “Observational Studies” or “Demonstration Project” and various such
expressions. Thus, the interest, safety and well being of subjects were completely jeopardized by
PATH by using self-determined and self servicing nomenclature which is not only highly deplorable
but a serious breach of law of the land. The Committee is not aware about the strategy followed
by PATH in the remaining three countries viz. Uganda, Vietnam and Peru.
4.2 The Government should take up the matter with the Governments of these countries
through diplomatic channels to know the truth of the matter and take appropriate necessary action,
accordingly. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the responses of these countries in
the matter. (Para 2.5)
Reply of the Ministry
4.3 The Inquiry Committee identified various deficiencies in the planning and conduct of the
study by PATH. The gist of the same is as under:
● Consent forms and the actual implementation of the consent process.
● Method of monitoring the adverse effects and the serious adverse effects and remedial
measures for such events.
● Inclusion of vulnerable tribal population groups.
● Blurring of distinction between national Immunization Programme and PATH study.
● Insurance coverage for the study participants
● Free supply of vaccine by the manufacturer and the statement in the consent forms
that “you will not be charged for your daughter to receive the vaccine” that could be
considered as covert inducement and indirect coercion.
30

31
4.4 As per the reports published in the journal of Bull World Health Organ 2011; 89:821-830B,
from 2006-2010 PATH collaborated with the Government of India, Peru, Uganda and Vietnam to
gather evidence that would support decisions on whether and how to introduce HPV vaccine. From
the report, it appears that similar strategy was followed in other countries.
4.5 In the light of the recommendations of the Hon’ble Parliamentary Committee, the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare vide its letter dated 8 th January, 2014 has requested the Ministry of
External Affairs to ascertain the following facts related to the said studies through usual diplomatic
channels for taking further necessary action in the matter.
● Whether the similar studies were conducted by PATH in those countries
● If so, the strategy followed by PATH in those countries for conduct of the study, and
the outcome of the study.
● Whether the HPV vaccine has been introduced or not in the National health
programmes of these countries based on the study conducted by the PATH. A
copy of letter is enclosed at Annexure B.
Further Recommendation
4.6 The Committee desires to be informed of the replies received from Ministry of
External Affairs.
VI. Composition and terms of references
(d) Informed consent
Observation/Recommendation
4.7 Obtaining Informed Consent from study subjects is a core requirement in the conduct of
clinical trials and protection of human rights. In case of minors, the Consent has to be signed by
parents/guardians. In the case of uneducated signatories, an independent person has to explain and
witness the consent process. The Informed Consent document approved by various Ethics
Committees on PATH project included the sentence: “I have read the information in this consent
form (or it has been read to me). I consent to allow my daughter to receive three doses of HPV
vaccines.” In the case of Andhra Pradesh 9,543 forms were signed, 1,948 had thumb impressions
while hostel warden had signed 2,763 forms. In the case of Gujarat 6,217 forms were signed,
3,944 had thumb impressions and 545 were either signed or carried thumb impression of guardians.
The data shows that a very large number of parents/guardians were illiterate and could not even
sign in their local language i.e. Telugu or Gujarati . (Para 6.12)
4.8 One of the experts, while going into the question of informed consent in great detail, in two
reports, has pointed out glaring discrepancies. Out of 100 consent forms for AP Project taken for study,
it was found that signatures of witnesses were missing in 69 forms. In many forms there were no dates
while in others the signature of just one person appeared in seven forms. The legality of the Andhra
Pradesh State Government circular directing all Headmasters/Wardens in all private/Government/ashram
schools to sign the consent forms on behalf of parents/guardians was also questionable. (Para 6.13)
Reply of the Ministry
4.9 Response as mentioned against 
*Para 4.6 is reiterated. It is accepted that there were
deficiencies in the study, including the process of informed consent. Corrective measures have been
put in place by DCGI.
*refer to para 3.18 to 3.22 of chapter III.

32
Observation/Recommendation
4.10 No information is available on the total outlay on the project spent by PATH,ICMR, state
governments of Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat (immunization staff, cold chain system, equipment,
transportation etc.). According to the document submitted by PATH to ICMR/Health Ministry
Screening Committee, the total outlay by PATH for expenses in India was Rs. 29,76,000. However
Centre for Operations Research and Training (CORT), a subcontractor of PATH had quoted US$
83,889 (first year) and US$ 96,472 (second year), which is not included in the figure submitted
to ICMR/HMSC. (Para 6.28)
Reply of the Ministry
4.11 PATH has been asked to clarify as to why it has given different figures to ICMR/ HMSC
(Annexure J).
Further Recommendation
4.12 The Committee would like to be apprised of the response of PATH and the action
taken thereupon by the Government.
VII. PROGRAMME FOR APPROPRIATE TECHNOLOGY IN HEALTH (PATH)
Observation/Recommendation
4.13 The Committee during the course of its present examination sought information from the
Government about PATH in order to have a better understanding of its legal status and its locus
standi in carrying out various activities on the Indian soil including the project in question where
apparently several laws of India and possibly of its country of origin had been violated.
(Para 7.1)
4.14 The information furnished to the Committee reveals that PATH describes itself as an
“International non-profit, non-government organization based in the United States.” Legally, it is a
Public Benefit Corporation (PBC) registered (number 600588751 dated 28
th August, 1981) by the
Corporation, and Charities Division in the State of Washington. For all practical purposes its legal
status in US is equivalent to a Registered Society in the Indian context. It is certainly not a
commercial company and hence would not be subject to the jurisdiction of Company Law Board
or Registrar of Companies in India. Incidentally, Ford Foundation is also a PBC (Registration
number 768093 dated 15
th January, 1936). Under American laws organizations such as Trusts,
Fraternal Societies, Savings and Loan Associations, Municipal Utility Services etc. are all registered
as PBCs. (Para 7.2)
4.15 Under Indian rules, foreign non-commercial organizations such as PATH wanting to set up
an office in India are required to obtain (a)permission from the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA)
from “political angle” (annexure A) and (b) permission from Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) from
“security angle” (Annexure B). In the latter case, application needs to be forwarded through proper
channel such as Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for health-related activities Ministry of
Human Resources for education related activities, Ministry of Labour for trade union or workers
related activities etc. Once such an approval is accorded, then an office can be set up which
should naturally abide by all other laws of the land such as income tax, shop & establishment act,
municipal and other applicable laws, just to mention a few. (Para 7.3)
4.16 The Committee asked the Department to direct PATH to provide details of various
mandatory permissions required by foreign agencies, including charities, for and in connection with
opening office in India and the date of opening of its office in India. Unbelievably, the exact date

33
of opening the office is not even known to its functionaries in New Delhi. To begin with vide its
letter dated 5-3-2012, PATH claimed that “it has a Liaison Office status under Income Tax Rules.”
Since no such provision exists, after prolonged correspondence it settled for 19 th April, 1999 as the
date of opening office  based on the fact that its PAN card (number AAFCP2249G) is dated 19 th
April, 1999. The Committee was intrigued because PAN card is issued just for income tax purposes
and nothing else. Income Tax Department does not go about permitting foreign entities to open
offices in India. In any case PAN card is not a replacement for Ministry of External Affairs and
Ministry of Home Affairs approvals. Besides, the application for issuance of PAN card must have
been made much before 19
th April, 1999 there being no online system of obtaining PAN card
instantaneously. It can be safely assumed that the date of opening office has to be much earlier
than 19 th April, 1999. (Para 7.4)
4.17 P A TH also produced copy of a letter dated 16.3.1999 from PATH office in US to the Exchange
Control Department of the Reserve Bank of India along with reply dated 19.4.1999 received by PATH in
US on 29.4.1999. It merely stated that since PATH is “not engaged in any commercial, trading or industrial
activity,” it does not need “RBI permission from foreign exchange angle. However you may seek
necessary approval from the Government of India or other statutory/regulatory bodies as applicable.”
Apparently PATH paid no attention to RBI’s sane advice. Even before the letter reached PATH office in
the United States on 29.4.19991 it had already opened its office in India. (Para 7.5)
4.18 The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA) was replaced with Foreign Exchange
Management Act (FEMA) on 1.6.2000. PATH produced post-facto permission from the Reserve
Bank of India dated 25.5.2009 which clearly stated:
“RBI permission (is) granted from the foreign exchange angle ....and should not be
construed to convey the approval of any other statutory authority or Government under any
other laws/regulations.” Moreover, the Liaison Office is permitted to undertake “solely
liaison work for the head office” as mentioned below:
1. Representing in India the parent company/group companies
2. Promoting export, import from/to India.
3. Promoting technical/financial collaborations between parent/group companies and
companies in India.
4. Acting as a communication channel between the parent company and Indian
companies.
“The office in India will not render any consultancy or any other services directly/indirectly
with or without any consideration.” In addition “Permission granted by RBI is limited to and for
the purpose of the provisions of FEMA-2000 and shall not be construed in any way as regularizing,
condoning or in any manner validating any irregularities, contraventions and other lapses, if any,
under the provisions of any other law.” (Para 7.6)
4.19 It is cl ear that the back dated permission obtained after 10 years of having opened its office
in India was merely and exclusively from foreign exchange angle and not a substitute for approval
from MEA and MHA. (Para 7.7)
4.20 Finally and belatedly PATH produced a certificate from the Registrar of Companies (RoC)
dated 23.9.2009 stating that PATH, a company originally incorporated in US, had filed documents on
10.09.2009 notifying establishment of place of business in India w.e.f. 19.4.1999. The Certificate was
apparently issued in violation of its own rules that states that documents must be submitted within
30 days of the establishment of “place of Business.”In any case such a certificate cannot and does
not obviate the need to obtain baseline, mandatory permission from MEA and MHA. Moreover RoC
deals with commercial companies, not foreign trusts, foundations and charities. (Para 7.8)

34
4.21 P A TH also claimed that it had received “permission” from the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare to set up an office in India. The post-facto letter dated 27.4.2001 (two years after PATH
admits having opened the office in India) is not a permission at all but a vague, non-specific
statement to say that PATH was “engaged in health care related activities”. (Para 7.9)
4.22 According to the published Annual Report of PATH for the year 2008, it received funding
in “excess of US $ 1,000” from many governmental sources including the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, Government of India. However, in response to Rajya Sabha Question Number 952
on 3-8-2010, the Health Minister denied any Ministry funding to PA TH. (Para 7.10)
4.23 The Committee is concerned that if PATH can set up an office in India so easily without
getting the required mandatory approvals/permissions, then individuals and entities inimical to the
interest of the country can do the same. The Committee expresses its concern that paper and shell
companies can be easily registered in many jurisdictions and then set up a place of business in
India as “Liaison offices” with no questions being asked. It is surprising that security and
intelligence agencies did not raise an eyebrow on the way a foreign entity entered India virtually
incognito through the backdoor. The Committee desires that such incidents should not be allowed
in future. The Government should tighten the rules lest one day foreign citizens, with deep roots
in organizations/nations inimical to India, set up offices in the country to engage in antinational and/
or unlawful activities. (Para 7.11)
4.24 It is apparent the PATH has exploited with impunity the loopholes in our system as also the
absence of a nodal point or a single window for maintaining a data bank of foreign entities entering
the Country for setting up their offices. Given the multiplicity of agencies involved in processing
such requests there is a definite need for a nodal agency which would keep a tab on all such
existing and aspiring agencies from the point of view of having obtained all necessary clearances/
permissions before commencing their operations in India. The Committee strongly recommends that
Government set up one such umbrella agency which should be linked to all the agencies that are
involved in processing such requests. The Committee desires that within three months such an
agency should be put in place and start functioning. The proposed nodal agency should be a part
of MHA with a well established coordination mechanism with the MEA so that undeserving cases
are dealt forthwith through diplomatic channels. All Ministries/departments/agencies/State
Governments/other entities should be required to share details of all requests/proposals from foreign
entities for setting up offices in any form with this nodal agency. (Para 7.12)
Reply of the Ministry
4.25 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide its letter dated 6
th January, 2014 has
requested the Ministry of Home Affairs to examine the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee
and take appropriate action. The Ministry has also been requested to furnish its response to the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for taking further necessary action in the matter. A copy
of letter is enclosed at Annexure D.
Observation/Recommendation
4.26 Coming to the instant case, it is established that PATH by carrying out the clinical trials for
HPV vaccines in Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat under the pretext of observation/demonstration project
has violated all laws and regulations laid down for clinical trials by the Government. While doing so,
its sole aim has been to promote the commercial interests of HPV vaccine manufacturers who would
have reaped windfall profits had PATH been successful in getting the HPV vaccine included in the
UIP of the Country. This is a serious breach of trust by any entity as the project involved life and
safety of girl children and adolescents who were mostly unaware of the implications of vaccination.
The violation is also a serious breach of medical ethics. This act of PATH is a clear cut violation

35
of the human rights of these girl children and adolescents. It also deems it an established case of
child abuse. The Committee, therefore, recommends action by the Government against PATH. The
Committee also desires that the National Human Rights Commission and National Commission for
Protection of Children Rights may take up this matter from the point of view of the violation of
human rights and child abuse. The National Commission for Women should also suo motu take
cognizance of this case as all the poor and hapless subjects are females. (Para 7.13)
Reply of the Ministry
4.27 Details of action taken/being taken against PATH have been mentioned in the 
*Para 6.17.
4.28 As desired by the Hon’ble Committee, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide its
letter dated 6 th January, 2014 has apprised the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee to the
National Human Rights Commission, New Delhi for appropriate action. The Commission has also
been requested to send their comments/views to the Ministry in this regards. A copy of letter is
enclosed at Annexure E.
4.29 As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Ministry, vide its letter dated 8
th January,
2014 has also has been requested the Ministry of Women and Child Development to examine the
recommendations of Parliamentary Standing Committee and give its response for further necessary
action. A copy of letter is enclosed at Annexure F.
Observation/Recommendation
4.30 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should without wasting time report the violations
indulged in by PATH to international bodies like WHO and UNICEF so as to ensure that appropriate
remedial action is initiated by these agencies worldwide. (Para 7.14)
Reply of the Ministry
4.31 As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide
its letter dated 8
th January, 2014 has apprised the Permanent Mission of India to the UN in Geneva
accordingly. A copy of letter is enclosed at Annexure G .
Observation/Recommendation
4.32 The Committee also desires that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may take up the
matter through the Ministry of External Affairs with the US Government so as to ensure that
appropriate action is taken against PATH under the laws of its Country of origin in case of any
violations of laws there. (Para 7.15)
Reply of the Ministry
4.33 As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide
its letter dated 5
th January, 2014 has requested the Ministry of External Affairs to examine the
recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee and take appropriate action. The Ministry has also been
requested to furnish their response. A copy of letter is enclosed at Annexure-H.
Further Recommendation
4.34 The Committee feels that the magnitude of the issue has not been appropriately
addressed in the communications. The Committee, however, desires that the matter may be
pursued for early reply.
* refer to para 3.29 to 3.35 of Chapter III

36
36
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Government’s admission that the association of ICMR in the Study as partner
creates doubt and raises the issue of conflict of interest of appearing as promoter of
introduction of these vaccines, giving advice of ethics and at the same time not being in
the position to ensure monitoring indicates that ICMR should have been more careful in
such trials. In future efforts should be made to ensure that ICMR or any of its scientists
do not associate with such projects without prior approval and permission of the
Department. The Committee desires to be informed of the action taken to streamline the
system. (Para 3.3)
The plea of the Government that being a scientific organization concerned with
health problems of public health importance it (ICMR) scientifically facilitated the process
of operational research by providing guidance on design and protocols/procedures pertaining
to these vaccines which had the potential of preventing cervical cancer is untenable as it
is the DCG(I) and NTAGI who are mandated to perform these tasks and ICMR is the apex
organization for medical research in India. The Committee has no doubt at all that but for
the involvement of ICMR name, no State Government would have permitted the trial
conducted by the foreign private entity. (Para 3.14)
The Committee had observed that DCG(I) has played a very questionable role in the
entire matter by remaining a mute spectator to violations of its own rules and regulations
and recommended for enquiring into the role of DCG(I). The Committee is disappointed to
note that no action in this regard has been taken. The Committee accordingly impresses
upon the Department to take all possible measures and adopt abundant safeguards to see
that such violations are not replicated in future. (Para 3.23)
The Committee may be apprised of the opinion of the Ministry of Law and Justice
as solicited by the Ministry and action taken thereon. (Para 3.36)
According to the laid down rules, regulations and procedures, the sponsor (PATH) is
responsible under Drugs and Cosmetics Rules because NRHM logo was displayed at the site(s) of
the trial. The Committee desires that the Inquiry should be completed at the earliest. The findings
of the Inquiry being done in this regard may also be shared with the Committee. (Para 3.40)
The Committee is not convinced with the rationale of the Ministry. The Ministry seems
to have conveniently ignored the fact that had the extant rules been followed scrupulously, they
would have taken care of the irregularities at the very outset. The Committee would thus
observe that the DCG (I) did not make appropriate interventions as are necessary and failed
to discharge the responsibilities as a regulator. The Committee hopes that such instances are
not repeated in future. The system should be made foolproof and transparent. (Para 3.51)
The Committee desires to be informed of the replies received from Ministry of
External Affairs. (Para 4.6)
The Committee would like to be apprised of the response of PATH and the action
taken thereupon by the Government. (Para 4.12)
The Committee feels that the magnitude of the issue has not been appropriately
addressed in the communication. The Committee, however, desires that the matter may be
pursued for early reply. (Para 4.34)

37
MINUTES

38

39
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22 nd December, 2014 in Room No. ‘67’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Satish Chandra Misra — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween
3. Shri Jairam Ramesh
4. Chaudhary Munvvar Saleem
5. Dr. T.N. Seema
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Thangso Baite
7. Dr. Subhash Bhamre
8. Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
9. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
11. Dr. K. Kamaraj
12. Shri J.J.T. Natterjee
13. Shri Chirag Paswan
14. Shri M.K. Raghavan
15. Dr. Manoj Rajoriya
16. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde
17. Shrimati Rita Tarai
18. Shri Akshay Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them
of the agenda of the meeting i.e., to consider and adopt draft (i) draft 81
st Report on Action Taken
by Government on Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee’s Seventy-second
39

40
*** Relate to other matters.
Report on “Alleged Irregularities in the Conduct of Studies using Human Papilloma Virus (HPV)
Vaccine by PATH in India”; and (ii) * * *
II. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. Thereafter, the Committee took up the consideration and adoption of its 81
st Report.
*   *   *. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Jairam Ramesh and
Dr. T. N. Seema, Member, Rajya Sabha to present the 81
st Report in Rajya Sabha on the
23rd December and Dr. Manoj Rajoriya and in his absence Dr. Subhash Bhamre, Member, Lok
Sabha to lay the Report in Lok Sabha on the 23 rd December, 2014.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 10.45 A.M.

41
ANNEXURES

43
ANNEXURE-A
D.O. No. X-11026/242/11-BD
Hkkjr ljdkj
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k ea=ky;
fuekZ.k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110011
Government of India
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Nirman Bhavan, New Delhi-110011
9th January, 2014
R.K. JAIN, IAS
Additional Secretary & D.G.(CGHS)
Tel. (O) : 011-23062985
Telefax : 011-23062985
E-mail : asdgcghs-mohfw@nic.in
Dear Anuradha,
The office of Drugs Controller General (India) [DCG(I)] had  granted permission to
M/s PATH (Programme for Appropriate Technology in Health) for carrying out the Post licensure
observational study of HPV vaccination in Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh on 9th January, 2009 under
the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. This clinical trial was to be undertaken in 16,000 adolescent
girls of age 10-14 years each in  Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat with Immunization schedule of 0,1
and 6 months. This project was undertaken by PATH in collaboration with ICMR (Indian  Council
of Medical Research) and the State. Governments of Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh
2. The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing  Committee of the  Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare in  its 72
nd Report on alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies using Human
Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine by PATH in India has observed  that the wrongfu1 use  of NRHM
logo for a project implemented  by a private foreign agency as well as the identification of this
project with the  UIP has adversely affected and damaged the credibility of the NRHM programme.
A copy of the report is enclosed at Annexure A.
3. In view of the above, the NRHM Division may clarify as to whether the use of NRHM logo
in the project implementation by  PATH in Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh was allowed by the Division.
If so, the same may please be  communicated to this division for preparing the Action Taken Report
on the recommendations of the Committee.
With regards.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(R.K. Jain)
Shrimati Anuradha Gupta,
Additional Secretary & MD (NRHM),
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Nirman Bhavan,
New Delhi.

44
44
ANNEXURE-B
Hkkjr ljdkj
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k foHkkx
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k ea=ky;
fuekZ.k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110011
Government of India
Deaprtment of Health and Family Welfare
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Nirman Bhavan, New Delhi-110011
D.O. No. X.11026/242/11-BD
8th January, 2014
Keshav Desiraju
Secretary
Tel.: 25061865, Fax: 23061252
E-mail :secy.hfw@nic.in
k.desiraju@nic.in
Dear Smt. Singh,
PATH (Programme for Appropriate Technology in Health), an international NGO, Conducted
a post-license trail of Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine for prevention of cervical Cancer
during 2009-2010. The study was carried out in the districts of Khammam of Andhra Pradesh (AP)
and Vadodara of Gujarat in India. It was implemented in collaboration with the Indian Council of
Medical Research and State Governments of AP and Gujarat. Besides India, the project was also
carried out in Peru, Uganda and Vietnam as a global project. The project was funded by a grant
from Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and donation of HPV vaccine by manufacture, viz. GSK
and MSD. The basic aim of the study was to evaluate strategies for delivery of the vaccine and
its acceptance by the population. The information derived from the project was expected to be
useful to the national health authorities for inclusion of the HPV vaccine in the National
Programme.
Reports on the deaths of some girls who had received the HPV vaccine under the PATH
project was published in the local newspapers. The issue was also considered by the Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare which took a serious view
of the matter. In view of this, the Department of Health and Family Welfare constituted a
Committee under the chairmanship of Dr. S.S. Agarwal, former Director, Advanced Centre for
Training, Research, Education on Cancer to enquire into the alleged irregularities in the conduct of
studies on Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine by PATH in India. The Inquiry Committee in its
report identified various deficiencies in the planning and conduct of the study by PATH. A copy
of the report is enclosed at Annexure A.
Based on the discrepancies pointed out, the office of the Drugs Controller General of India
issued a warning to M/s PATH on 03 July, 2012, to ensure that such discrepancies/violations are
not repeated in future. It was also directed to ensure strict compliance of Schedule Y and GCP
Guidelines in ongoing study and in future research studies. The trial was also suspended.
The issue has been raised by the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee in
its 72
nd Report on alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies using Human Papilloma Virus
(HPV) vaccine by PATH in India. A copy of the report can also be seen at http://164.100.47.5/

45
newcomittee/reports/EnglishCommittees/Committee%20on%20Health%20and%20Family%20W elfare/
72.pdf. The Committee has made the following observations in respect of the study conducted in
different parts of the world:
“The interest, safety and well-being of subjects were completely jeopardized by PATH by
using self-determined and self-servicing nomenclature which is not only highly deplorable
but a serious breach of law of the land. The Committee is not aware about the strategy
followed by PATH in the remaining three countries viz. Uganda, Vietnam and Peru. The
Government should take up the matter with the Governments of these countries through
diplomatic channels to know the truth of the matter and take appropriate necessary action,
accordingly. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the responses of these
countries in the matter.”
Since we are required to make an appropriate response to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee I would be grateful if we could, through usual diplomatic channels, ascertain the
following facts related to the said studies.
1. Whether the similar study was conducted by PATH in those countries?
2. If so, the strategy followed by PATH in those countries for conduct of the study, and
the outcome of the study.
3. Whether the HPV vaccine has been introduced or not in the national health programmes
of these countries based on the study conducted by the PATH.
The information may be collected and communicated on priority for preparing the Action
Taken Report on the specific recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee.
Warm regards.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Keshav Desiraju)
Encls: As above
Ms. Sujatha Singh
Foreign Secretary
Ministry of External Affairs
Government of India
South Block, New Delhi.

46
No. X.11026/242/11-BD
Ministry of  Health and Family Welfare
Department of  Health and Family Welfare
Subject: 72 nd Report of  the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee of the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare on alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies using Human
Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine by PATH in India – reference to the Ministry of Law and Justice
for taking further action against PATH – regarding.
The office of Drugs Controller General (India) [DCG(I)] in consultation with ICMR (Indian
Council of Medical Research) had granted permission to M/s PATH (Programme for Appropriate
Technology in Health) for carrying out the Post licensure observational study of HPV vaccination
in Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh on 9
th January, 2009 under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
This clinical trial was to be undertaken in 16,000 adolescent girls of age 10-14 years each in
Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat with immunization schedule of 0, 1 and 6 months. This project was
undertaken by PATH in collaboration with ICMR (Indian Council of Medical Research) and the
State Governments of Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh. A copy of the permission letter granted to the
firm is placed at Annexure A.
The project was funded by a grant from Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and had a
donation of HPV vaccine by the manufacturers, viz. GSK and MSD to PATH. The basic aim of
the study was to evaluate strategies for delivery of the vaccine and its acceptance by the
population. The information derived from the project was expected to be useful to the National
Health Authorities for inclusion of the HPV vaccine in the National Progamme. Besides India, the
project was also carried out in Peru, Uganda and Vietnam as a global project.
Reports on the deaths of some girls who had received the HPV vaccine under the PATH
project were published in the local newspapers. It drew the attention of the human rights activists
and National Leaders. The issue was also considered by the Department-Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare and it took a serious view of the reports. The
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare constituted a Committee under the chairmanship of Dr. S.S.
Agarwal, former Director, Advanced Centre for Training, Research, Education on Cancer to enquire
into the alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies on Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine
by PATH in India. The inquiry Committee in its report identified various deficiencies in the planning
and conduct of the study by PATH. A copy of the report is enclosed at Annexure B.
The inquiry Committee was of the view that by whatever name it was called, the project
proposal had been carried out as research on human participants. As such, it had to follow all
guidelines and statutory requirements applicable on research and human participants. The
Committee further reported that the deaths were most probably unrelated to the vaccine under trial,
as there was no characteristic and uniform pattern of illness preceding the death, or temporal/
spatial clustering. The Committee also observed that in the absence of control group, it was not
possible to say whether thee were excess deaths in the vaccinated group or not. Based on the data
of background deaths from routine mortality reporting system from the same area for the
vaccination period as collected by the Committee, it opined that overall death rate during the period
46
ANNEXURE-C

47
of vaccination was not significantly different, supporting the contention that reported deaths are
independent of the HPV vaccination. It further stated that internationally as on the 31 st January,
2010, 49 deaths were reported in the USA against approximately 28 million doses of Gardasil
vaccine distribution. Out of these, 28 deaths have been traced. According to CDC (Center for
Disease Control, USA), there was no unusual pattern or clustering to the deaths that would suggest
that they were caused by the vaccine. It is further added that these two vaccines are included in
the National Immunization Programmes for prevention of cervical cancer in women in many
countries, like, USA, Canada, New Zealand, France Germany, Sweden, Australia, Russia, UK,
Mexico, etc.
The inquiry Committee in its report had, however, identified various deficiencies in the
planning and conduct of the study by PATH. The gist of the same is as under:
1. Consent forms and the actual implementation of the consent process.
2. Method of monitoring the adverse effects and the serious adverse effects and remedial
measures for such events.
3. Inclusion of vulnerable tribal population groups.
4. Blurring of distinction between National Immunization Programme and PATH study.
5. Insurance coverage for the study participants.
6. Free supply of vaccine by the manufacturer and the statement in the consent forms that
“you will not be charged for your daughter to receive the vaccine” that could be
considered as covert inducement and indirect coercion.
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare in its 72
nd Report on alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies using Human
Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine by PATH in India has raised concern in respect of obtaining
Informed Consent from study subjects, and has desired that the PATH should be made accountable
and the Ministry should take appropriate action in the matter including taking legal action against
it for breach of various laws of the land. A copy of the report is enclosed at Annexure C.
The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 is an Act to regulate the import, manufacture and
distribution and sale of drugs and cosmetics in the country. The penal provisions regarding the
import of drugs are provided under Section 13 of the Act while penalty for manufacture, sale, etc.,
of drugs is provided under Section 27 of the Act. There are no specific penalties for violation of
the provisions relating to clinical trial under the Act.
The Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 made under the said Act, under Part X-A of the
Rules have provisions for Import or Manufacture of New Drugs for Clinical trials or Marketing.
Under Rule 122DA, the permissions to conduct clinical trials for new drugs/investigational new
drugs are granted by the Licensing Authority as defined in Rule, 21(b) i.e. Drugs Controller General
(India). The Schedule Y to the said Rule provides detailed requirements for the informed Consent
to be obtained from each study subject as well as responsibilities of the sponsor, investigator and
Ethics Committee. Rule 122DB empowers the DCG(I) to suspend or cancel the permission issued
to conduct the clinical trials. In the present case, since the ICMR had already suspended the trial,
the DCG(I) issued ‘warning’ as an administrative measure to PATH on 3
rd July, 2012 that it should
be careful while conducting clinical trial so as to ensure that such discrepancies/violation are not
repeated in future. It was further directed to comply with the corrective action taken to ensure
strict compliance of Schedule Y and GCP in ongoing study and proposed to be started in future
research studies. A copy of the letter is enclosed at Annexure D.

48
In the meantime, the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 were amended by Gazette
Notification GSR 63(E) dated 1.2.2013, inter alia  providing for following activities by DCG(I), in
cause of non-compliance of provisions of clinical trial:–
(a) Reject or discontinue the study;
(b) Suspend or cancel the clinical trial permission;
(c) Debar the Investigator(s), Sponsor including his representative to conduct any clinical
trial in future.
In view of the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee for legal action,
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare considers it necessary to take the considered opinion of
the Ministry of Law and Justice as to whether any further legal action is possible in the present
case.
(Arun Kumar Panda)
Joint Secretary
06.1.2011
Secretary
Department of Legal Affairs,
Ministry of Law and Justice
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi.

49
49
ANNEXURE-D
Hkkjr ljdkj
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k ea=ky;
fuekZ.k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110011
Government of India
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Nirman Bhavan, New Delhi-110011
D.O. No. X-11026/242/11-BD
Dated 6th January, 2014
Arun Kumar Panda
Joint Secretary
Tele. : 23063155
Telefax : 23063156
E-mail : arunpanda84@gmail.com
Dear Mr. Vumlunmang,
PATH (Programme for Appropriate Technology Health), an international NGO, conducted a
post-license trial of Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine for prevention of cervical Cancer during
2009-2010. The study was carried out in the districts of Khammam of Andhra Pradesh  (AP) and
Vadodra of Gujarat in India. It was implemented in collaboration with the Indian Council of Medical
Research and State Governments of AP and Gujarat. Besides India,  the project was also carried out
in Peru, Uganda and Vietnam as a global project. The project was funded by a grant from Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation and donation of HPV vaccine by the manufacturers, viz. GSK and MSD.
The basic aim of the study was to evaluate strategies for delivery of the vaccine and its acceptance
by the population. The information derived  from the project was expected to be useful to the
National Health Authorities  for inclusion of the HPV vaccine in the National Programme.
Reports on the  death of some girls who had received the HPV vaccine under the PATH
project was published in the local newspapers. The issue was considered by the Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare and it took a serious view
of the matter. In view of this, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare constituted a Committee
under the chairmanship of  Dr. S.S. Agarwal, former Director, Advanced Centre for Training,
Research, Education on Cancer to enquire into the alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies
on Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine by PATH in India. The Inquiry Committee in its report
identified various deficiencies in the planning and conduct of the study by PATH. A copy of the
report is enclosed at Annexue A.
Based on  the discrepancies pointed out the office of the Drugs Controller General of India
issued a warning to M/s PATH on 03 July, 2012, to ensure that such discrepancies/violations are
not repeated in future. It was also directed to ensure strict compliance of Schedule Y and GCP
Guidelines in ongoing study and in future research studies. The trial was also suspended.
The issue has been raised by the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee in
its 72
nd Report on alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies using Human Papilloma Virus
(HPV)  vaccine by PATH in India. A specific concern has been raised that if PATH can set up an
office in India so easily without getting the required mandatory approvals/permissions, then
individuals and entities inimical to the interest of  the country can do the same. The Committee has
stated that it is surprising that security and intelligence agencies did not raise an eyebrow on the

50
way a foreign entity entered India virtually incognito through the backdoor. The Committee desires
that such incidents should not be allowed in future. The Government should tighten the rules least
one day foreign citizens, with deep roots in organizations/nations inimical to India, set up offices
in the country to engage in anti-national and/or unlawful activities. The Committee has strongly
recommended that there is a definite need for a nodal agency which would keep a tab on all such
existing and aspiring agencies from the point of view of having obtained all necessary clearances/
permissions before commencing their operations in India. The Government should set up one such
umbrella agency which should be linked to all the agencies that are involved in the processing of
such requests. A copy of the report is enclosed at Annexure B.
The Ministry of Home Affairs may, therefore, examine the recommendations of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee and take appropriate action. It may also furnish its response for
preparing the Action Taken Report on the specific recommendation.
This may kindly be treated on priority.
Regards,
Yours Sincerely
Sd/-
(Arun Kumar Panda)
Shri V . Vumlunmang
Joint Secretary (Foreigners)
Ministry of Home Affairs
North Block, New Delhi

51
51
ANNEXURE-E
Hkkjr ljdkj
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k ea=ky;
fuekZ.k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110011
Government of India
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Nirman Bhavan, New Delhi-110011
D.O. No. X-11026/242/11-BD
Dated 6th January, 2014
Arun Kumar Panda
Joint Secretary
Tele. : 23063155
Telefax : 23063156
E-mail : arunpanda84@gmail.com
Dear Madam,
The office of Drugs Controller General (India) [DCG(I)] in consultation with ICMR (Indian
Council of Medical Research) had granted permission to M/s PATH (Programme for Appropriate
Technology in Health) for carrying out the Post licensure observational study of HPV vaccination
in Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh on 9
th January, 2009 under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
This clinical trial was to be undertaken in 16,000 adolescent girls of age 10-14 years each in
Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat with immunization schedule of 0, 1 and 6 months. This project was
undertaken by PATH in collaboration with ICMR (Indian Council of Medical Research) and the
State Governments of Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh.
The project was funded by a grant from Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and had a
donation of HPV vaccine by the manufacturers, viz. GSK and MSD. The basic aim of the study
was to evaluate strategies for delivery of the vaccine and its acceptance by the population. The
information derived from the project was expected to be useful to the National Health Authorities
for inclusion of the HPV vaccine in the National Programme. Besides India, the project was also
carried out in Peru, Uganda and Vietnam as a global project.
Reports on the deaths of some girls who had received the HPV vaccine under the PATH
project were published in the local newspapers. The issue was also considered by the Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare and it took a serious view
of the reports. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare constituted a Committee under the
chairmanship of Dr. S.S. Agarwal, former Director, Advanced Center for Training, Research,
Education on Cancer to enquire into the alleged irregularities in the conduct of the studies on
Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine by PATH in India. The inquiry Committee in its report
identified various deficiencies in the planning and conduct of the study by PATH. A copy of the
report is enclosed Annexure A.
The inquiry Committee was of the view that by whatever name it is called, the project
proposal had been carried out as research on human participants. As such, it had to follow all
guidelines and statutory requirements applicable on research and human participants. The
Committee further reported that the deaths were most probably unrelated to the vaccine under trial,
as there was no characteristic and uniform pattern of illness preceding the death, or temporal/
spatial clustering. The Committee also observed that in the absence of control group, it was not
possible to say whether there were excess deaths in the vaccinated group or not. Based on the

52
data of background deaths from routine mortality reporting system from the same area for the
vaccination period as collected by the Committee, it opined that overall death rate during the period
of vaccination was not significantly different, supporting the contention that reported deaths are
independent of the HPV vaccination. It further stated that internationally as on January 31
st 2010,
49 deaths were reported in the US against approximately 28 million doses of Gardasil vaccine
distribution. Out of these, 28 deaths have been traced. According to CDC (Centre for Disease
Control, USA), there was no unusual pattern or clustering to the deaths that would suggest that
they were caused by the vaccine. It is further added that these two vaccines are included in the
National Immunization Programmes for prevention of cervical cancer in women in many countries,
like, USA, Canada, New Zealand, France Germany, Sweden, Australia, Russia, UK, Mexico, etc.
The inquiry Committee in its report had, however, identified various deficiencies in the
planning and conduct of the study by PATH. The gist of the same is as under:
1. Consent forms and the actual implementation of the consent process.
2. Method of monitoring the adverse effects and the serious adverse effects and remedial
measures for such events.
3. Inclusion of vulnerable tribal population groups.
4. Blurring of distinction between national Immunization Programme and PATH study.
5. Insurance coverage for the study participants.
6. Free supply of vaccine by the manufacturer and the statement in the consent forms that
“you will not be charged for your daughter to receive the vaccine” that could be
considered as covert inducement and indirect coercion.
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee of the Ministry of Health and Family
welfare in its 72
nd Report on alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies using Human Papilloma Virus
(HPV) vaccine by PATH in India has raised concern in respect of obtaining inform Consent from study
subjects, and has desired that the PA TH should be made accountable and the Ministry should take
appropriate action in the matter including taking legal action against it for breach of various laws of
the land. The Committee also desired that the National Human Rights Commission and National
Commission for Protection of Child Rights may take up the matter from the point of view of violation
of human rights and child abuse. A copy of the report is enclosed at Annexure B.
The National Human Rights Commission may, therefore, consider taking note of the
recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee for appropriate action. It may consider
sending its comments/views to the Ministry, if any, in this regard.
Regards,
Yours Sincerely
Sd/-
(Arun Kumar Panda)
Shrimati Parvinder Sohi Behuria
Secretary General
National Human Rights Commission
Manav Adhikar Bhavan, Block C
GPO Complex, INA, New Delhi-110023

53
53
ANNEXURE-F
Hkkjr ljdkj
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k foHkkx
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k ea=ky;
fuekZ.k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110011
Government of India
Deaprtment of Health and Family Welfare
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Nirman Bhavan, New Delhi-110011
D.O. No. X.11026/242/11-BD
8th January, 2014
Keshav Desiraju
Secretary
Tel.: 23061863, Fax: 23061252
E-mail :secy.hfw@nic.in
k.desiraju@nic.in
Dear Shri Jain,
PATH (Programme for Appropriate Technology in Health), an international NGO, conducted
a post-license trail of Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine for prevention of cervical Cancer
during 2009-2010. The study was carried out by the districts of Khammam of Andhra Pradesh
(AP) and Vadodara of Gujarat in India. It was implemented in collaboration with the Indian Council
of Medical Research and State Governments of AP and Gujarat. Besides India, the project was also
carried out in Peru, Uganda and Vietnam as a global project. The project was funded by a grant
from Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and donation of HPV vaccine by manufacture, viz. GSK
and MSD. The basic aim of the study was to evaluate strategies for delivery of the vaccine and
its acceptance by the population. The information derived from the project was expected to be
useful to the national health authorities for inclusion of the HPV vaccine in the National
Programme.
Reports on the deaths of some girls who had received the HPV vaccine under the PATH
project was published in the local newspapers. The issue was also considered by the Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare which took a serious view
of the matter. In view of this, the Department of Health and Family Welfare constituted a
Committee under the chairmanship of Dr. S.S. Agarwal, former Director, Advanced Centre for
Training, Research, Education on Cancer to enquire into the alleged irregularities in the conduct of
studies on Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine by PATH in India. The Inquiry Committee in its
report identified various deficiencies in the planning and conduct of the study by PATH. A copy
of the report is enclosed at Annexure A.
Based on the discrepancies pointed out, the office of the Drugs Controller General of India
issued a warning to M/s PATH on 03 July, 2012, to ensure that such discrepancies/violations are
not repeated in future. It was also directed to ensure strict compliance of Schedule Y and GCP
Guidelines in ongoing study and in future research studies. The trial was also suspended.
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare in its 72
nd Report on alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies using Human
Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine by PATH in India has raised concern in respect of obtaining

54
Informed Consent from study subjects, and has desired that the PATH should be made accountable
and the Ministry should take appropriate action in the matter including taking legal action against
it for breach of various laws of the land. The Committee raised concerns in respect of the
violations in the conduct of the clinical trial, causing harm to the life and safety of the girls who
were vaccinated. A copy of the report is enclosed at Annexure B.
The Committee has recommended in its report that the National Commission for Women
and National Commission for Protection of Child Rights may take up the matter from the point of
view of violation of human rights and child abuse. The Committee also desired that the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare should report the violations indulged in by PATH to international
bodies like UNICEF so as to ensure that appropriate remedial action is initiated by these agencies
worldwide.
The Ministry of Women and Child Development may, therefore, examine the
recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee and give its response for making
suitable reply for preparing the Action Taken Report on the specific recommendation.
Regards
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Keshav Desiraju)
Encls: As above.
Shri A.K. Jain
Secretary
Ministry of Women and Child Development
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi

55
55
ANNEXURE-G
Hkkjr ljdkj
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k foHkkx
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k ea=ky;
fuekZ.k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110011
Government of India
Deaprtment of Health and Family Welfare
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Nirman Bhavan, New Delhi-110011
D.O. No. X.11026/242/11-BD
8th January, 2014
Keshav Desiraju
Secretary
Tel.: 23061863, Fax: 23061252
E-mail :secy.hfw@nic.in
k.desiraju@nic.in
Dear Dilip,
PATH (Programme for Appropriate Technology in Health), an international NGO, conducted
a post-license trail of Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine for prevention of cervical Cancer
during 2009-2010. The study was carried out by the districts of Khammam of Andhra Pradesh
(AP) and Vadodara of Gujarat in India. It was implemented in collaboration with the Indian Council
of Medical Research and State Governments of AP and Gujarat. Besides India, the project was also
carried out in Peru, Uganda and Vietnam as a global project. The project was funded by a grant
from Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and donation of HPV vaccine by manufacture, viz. GSK
and MSD. The basic aim of the study was to evaluate strategies for delivery of the vaccine and
its acceptance by the population. The information derived from the project was expected to be
useful to the national health authorities for inclusion of the HPV vaccine in the National
Programme.
Reports on the deaths of some girls who had received the HPV vaccine under the PATH
project was published in the local newspapers. The issue was also considered by the Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare which took a serious view
of the matter. In view of this, the Department of Health and Family Welfare constituted a
Committee under the chairmanship of Dr. S.S. Agarwal, former Director, Advanced Centre for
Training, Research, Education on Cancer to enquire into the alleged irregularities in the conduct of
studies on Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine by PATH in India. The Inquiry Committee in its
report identified various deficiencies in the planning and conduct of the study by PATH. A copy
of the report is enclosed at Annexure A.
Based on the discrepancies pointed out, the office of the Drugs Controller General of India
issued a warning to M/s PATH on 03 July, 2012, to ensure that such discrepancies/violations are
not repeated in future. It was also directed to ensure strict compliance of Schedule Y and GCP
Guidelines in ongoing study and in future research studies. The trial was also suspended.
The issue has been raised by the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee in
its 72
nd Report on alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies using Human Papilloma Virus
(HPV) vaccine by PATH in India. The Committee in the report has raised concerns in respect of

56
the violations in the conduct of the clinical trial, causing harm to the life and safety of the girls,
who were vaccinated. A copy of the report in enclosed at Annexure B.
The Committee has recommended in its report that the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare should report the violations indulged in by PATH to international bodies like WHO and
UNICEF so as to ensure that appropriate remedial action is initiated by these agencies worldwide.
I am not sure what exactly is possible by way of reporting of violations to the WHO.
However, you may wish to be apprised of the facts.
Warm regards
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Keshav Desiraju)
Encls: As above
Shri Dilip Sinha
Permanent Mission of India
To the UN in Geneva
9 Rue du Calais
Geneva 1202

57
57
ANNEXURE-H
Hkkjr ljdkj
LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k ea=ky;
fuekZ.k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110011
Government of India
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Nirman Bhavan, New Delhi-110011
D.O. No. X-11026/242/11-BD
Dated 6th January, 2014
Arun Kumar Panda
Joint Secretary
Tele. : 23063155
Telefax : 23063156
E-mail : arunpanda84@gmail.com
Dear Shri Doraiswami,
PATH (Programme for Appropriate Technology Health), an international NGO, conducted a
post-license trial of Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine for prevention of cervical Cancer during
2009-2010. The study was carried out in the districts of Khammam of Andhra Pradesh  (AP) and
Vadodra of Gujarat in India. It was implemented in collaboration with the Indian Council of Medical
Research and State Governments of AP and Gujarat. Besides India,  the project was also carried out
in Peru, Uganda and Vietnam as a global project. The project was funded by a grant from Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation and donation of HPV vaccine by the manufacturers, viz. GSK and MSD.
The basic aim of the study was to evaluate strategies for delivery of the vaccine and its acceptance
by the population. The information derived  from the project was expected to be useful to the
National Health Authorities  for inclusion of the HPV vaccine in the National Programme.
Reports on the  deaths of some girls who had received the HPV vaccine under the PATH
project was published in the local newspapers. The issue was also considered by the Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare and it took a serious view
of the matter. In view of this, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare constituted a Committee
under the chairmanship of  Dr. S.S. Agarwal, former Director, Advanced Centre for Training,
Research, Education on Cancer to enquire into the alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies
on Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine by PATH in India. The Inquiry Committee in its report
identified various deficiencies in the planning and conduct of the study by PATH. A copy of the
report is enclosed at Annexue A.
Based on  the discrepancies pointed out, the office of the Drugs Controller General of India
issued a warning to M/s PATH on 03 July, 2012, to ensure that such discrepancies/violations are
not repeated in future. It was also directed to ensure strict compliance of Schedule Y and GCP
Guidelines in ongoing study and in future research studies. The trial was also suspended.
The issue has been raised by the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee in
its 72
nd Report on alleged irregularities in the conduct of studies using Human Papilloma Virus
(HPV) vaccine by PATH in India. The Committee in the report has raised concern in respect of
the violations in conduct of the clinical trial resulting in life and safety of the girls, who were
vaccinated. A copy of the report is enclosed at Annexure B.  The relevant extracts of the report
are as under:

58
“It is established that PATH by carrying out the clinical trials for HPV vaccines in Andhra
Pradesh and Gujarat under the pretext of observation/demonstration project has violated all
laws and regulations laid down for clinical trials by the Government. While doing so, its
sole aim has been to promote the commercial interests of HPV vaccine manufacturers who
would have reaped windfall profits had PATH been successful in getting the HPV vaccine
included in the UIP of the country. This is a serious breach of trust by any entity as the
project involved life and safety of girl children and adolescents who were mostly unaware
of the implications of vaccination. The violation is also a serious breach of medical ethics.
This act of PATH is a clear cut violation of the human rights of these girl children and
adolescents.”
“The Committee also desires that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may take up
the matter through the Ministry of External Affairs with the US Government so as to ensure
that the appropriate action is taken against PATH under the laws of its country of origin
in case of any violations of laws there.”
The Ministry of External Affairs may, therefore, examine the recommendations of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee and take appropriate action. It may also furnish its response for
preparing the Action Taken Report on the specific recommendation.
Regards,
Yours Sincerely
Sd/-
(Arun Kumar Panda)
Shri Vikram Kumar Doraiswami
Joint Secretary [Americas Division]
Ministry of External Affairs
South Block, New Delhi

59
59
ANNEXURE-I
No.HPV/Path/Committee (PSC)/14-NCD-III
Dated 10.1.2014
Office Memorandum
Pursuant to the observations of 72 nd Parliamentary Standing Committee Report on effects
of HPV Vaccine, Secretary (Department of Health Research) and DG, ICMR has constituted a
Committee comprising of following members to examine the global and national data to analyze
link, if any, between suicidal ideation and HPV Vaccine administration.
1. Dr. Savita Malhotra, PGIMER, Chandigarh (Chairperson)
2. Dr. Chandra Prabha, NIMHANS, Bangalore
3. Dr. Y .K. Gupta, AIIMS, Delhi
4. Dr. R.M. Pandey, AIIMS, Delhi
5. Dr. S. Khandelwal, AIIMS, Delhi
6. Dr. A.K. Dutta, Kalawati Saran Hospital, Delhi
7. Dr. C.Nath, CDRI, Lucknow
8. Dr. G.N. Singh, DCGI
9. Dr. Tanvir Kaur (ICMR) – Member Secretary
Committee may co-opt any other expert, it may consider necessary and may also examine
any material it may consider relevant.
Committee may submit its report by 28
th February, 2014.
Sd/-
(D.K. Shukia)
Scientist-F and Head (NCD)

ANNEXURE-J
ih-,-ch-,Dl@PABX : 26588980, 26588707, 26589336, 26589745,
26589873, 26589414
QSDl@P ABX : 011-26588662, 011-26589791, 011-26589258
No.HPV/Path/Committee (PSC)/14-NCD-RI
Dated: 13.1.2014
Shri Tarun Vij
Country Director,
Programme for Appropriate Technology in Health (PATH)
A-9, US Road, Kutab Institutional Area,
New Delhi – 110 067
Dear
Kindly refer to investigations of Parliamentary Standing Committee regarding the HPV
project carried out by PATH in the Khammam district of Andhra Pradesh and Vadodara, Gujarat.
The Parliamentary Standing Committee has noted that according to the details submitted by PATH
to ICMR/Health Ministry Screening Committee, the total oulay by PATH for expenses in India was
Rs.29,76,000. However Centre for Operations Research and Training (CORT), a sub-contractor of
PATH had quoted US$ 83,889 (first year) and US$ 96,472 (second year), which is not included
in the figure submitted to ICMR/HMSC.
You are requested to clarify hy there is a disparity between the figures submitted to ICMR/
Health Ministry and your records. This information may be sent at an earliest preferably within 4
weeks so that clarification may be provided to the Parliamentary Standing Committee.
This issues with the approval of Secretary (DHR) and DG, ICMR.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(D.K. Shukia)
Scientist-F and Head (NCD)
rkj@GRAM : foKkuh@SCIENTIFIC
Web-site : www .icmr.nic.in
E-mail : icmrhqds@sansad.nic.in
Hkkjrh; vk;qfoZKku vuqla/kku ifj”kn~
INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH
LokLF; vuqla/kku foHkkx ¼LokLF; ,oa ifjokj dY;k.k ea=ky;½
oh- jkefyaxLokeh Hkou] vUlkjh uxj] ubZ fnYyh&110 029
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH (MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
V .RAMALINGASWAMI BHAWAN, ANSARI NAGAR, NEW DELHI-110 029
60

61
Observation/Recommendation
Attention of the Secretary was drawn to DCGI guidelines wherein Phase III trials cannot
be conducted on children until a similar trial was conducted on adults. It was admitted by the
Secretary that the DCGI guidelines were not adhered to in the present case but this vaccine is
given before the sexual activity begins and then it protects against cancer. That was the reason for
allowing trials on girls of the age of 10-14 years. The Committee was assured that State
Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat would be asked to get the ongoing clinical trial
stopped immediately. (Para 1.4)
Reply of the Ministry
As per schedule Y to Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 3(2), the timing of paediatric studies in
the new drug development program depends on the medicinal product, the type of disease being
treated, safety considerations, and the efficacy and safety of available treatments. For a drug
expected to be used in children, evaluations should be made in the appropriate age group. When
clinical development is to include studies in children, it is usually appropriate to begin with older
children before extending the trial to younger children and then infants.
If the new drug is for diseases predominantly or exclusively affecting paediatric patients,
clinical trial data should be generated in the paediatric population except for initial safety and
tolerability data, which will usually be obtained in adults unless such initial safety studies in adults
would yield little useful information or expose them to inappropriate risk.
If the new drug is intended to treat serious or life-threatening diseases, occurring in both
adults and paediatric patients, for which there are currently no or limited therapeutic options,
paediatric population should be included in the clinical trials early, following assessment of initial
safety data and reasonable evidence of potential benefit. In circumstances where this is not
possible, lack of data should be justified in detail.
Before approval of HPV vaccine in India, two Phase III clinical trials were carried out in
India. 1) Clinical trial on 330 female subjects between 18-35 years of age for Cerverix vaccine
(M/s GSK) and 2) Clinical trial on 108 subjects aged 9-15 years with Gardasil (M/s MSD).
Both the HPV vaccines were already approved and marketed in many countries at the time
of granting permissions for the above two studies.
HPV vaccine prevents cervical cancer, when used in female subjects before the sexual
activity begins.
In view of above, the permission to conduct the Phase III clinical trial in the age group
of 9-15 years was granted as per the provisions of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules.
The Inquiry Committee, in this regard, has also opined that not only the requirement of
assessing the safety and efficacy of the vaccine in adult prior to use in children has been fulfilled,
the data on adolescent girls has also been acquired. As such, there was no violation of any laid
down guidelines for use of New drugs/Vaccine in the paediatric age groups.
ANNEXURE-K

62
62
LIST OF REPORTS PRESENTED EARLIER
Report Subject
No.
12
1. Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Health (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
2. Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare)
3. Demands for Grants 2004-05 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
4. Fourth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Department of Health on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Health.
5. Fifth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Department of Family Welfare
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Second Report of the
Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Family Welfare.
6. Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Third Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants
(2004-05) of the Department of AYUSH.
7. Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Health (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare).
8. Eighth Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare).
9. Ninth Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare).
10. Tenth Report on the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
11. Eleventh Report on the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
12. Twelfth Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2005
13. Thirteenth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Department of Family
Welfare on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eighth Report of the
Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Family Welfare.
14. Fourteenth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2005-06) of the Department of AYUSH.

63
12
15. Fifteenth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Department of Health on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on
Demands-for-Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Health.
16. Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of Health and Family Welfare (Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare).
17. Demands for Grants 2006-07 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare).
18. Eighteenth Report on the Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy Pharmacy Bill, 2005
19. Nineteenth Report on the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005
20. Twentieth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Department of Health and
Family Welfare on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth
Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2006-07) of the Department of
Health and Family Welfare.
21. Twenty-First Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH
on the Recommendations/observations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the
Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2006-07) of the Department of AYUSH.
22. Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of Health and Family Welfare (Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare)
23. Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare)
24. Twenty-fourth Report on JIPMER, Puducherry, Bill, 2007
25. Twentieth-fifth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Department of Health
and Family Welfare on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-
second Report of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2007-08) of the Department
of Health and Family Welfare.
26. Twenty-sixth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Department of AYUSH
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-third Report of the
Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2007-08) of the Department of AYUSH.
27. Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health and Family Welfare (Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare).
28. Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of AYUSH (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare).
29. Demands for Grants 2008-09 of Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare).
30. The Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007
31. The Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007
32. The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007

64
12
33. The Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
34. The functioning of the three Vaccine Producing PSUs, namely, the Central Research
Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the BCG
Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
35. Thirty-fifth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants
2008-09 of the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
36. Thirty-sixth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Twenty eighth report on Demands for Grants 2008-09
of the Department of AYUSH.
37. Thirty-seventh Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Twenty ninth report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of
the Department of Health Research.
38. Thirty-eighth Report on Major Issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs,
Namely the Central Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India
(PII), Coonoor, and the BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
39. Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
Thirty Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) pertaining to the Department of
Health and Family Welfare.
40. Department-reated Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
Fortieth Report on Demand for Grants 2010-11 of Department of AYUSH.
41. Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
Forty First Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 pertaining to Department of Health
Research.
42. Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
Forty Second Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 pertaining to Department of
AIDS Control.
43. Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Thirty-Eighth Report
on major issues concerning the three vaccine producing PSUs, namely, the Central
Research Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
44. The Transplantation of Human Organs (Amendment) Bill, 2009
45. Issues Relating to availability of Generic, Generic-branded and Branded Medicines, their
Formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy and Effectiveness.
46. The Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010
47. The Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry
(Amendment) Bill, 2010

65
12
48. Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Forty-First Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 (Demand No. 48) of the
Department of Health Research.
49. Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Forty-Second Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of the Department of AIDS
Control.
50. Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Fortieth Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 (Demand No. 47) of the Department
of AYUSH.
51. Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Thirty-Ninth Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11 (Demand No. 46) of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare.
52. Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its 43rd Report on
Action Taken by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its 38th Report on major
issues concerning the three Vaccine Producing PSUs, namely, the Central Research
Institute (CRI), Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Coonoor, and the BCG
Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL), Chennai.
53. The National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore Bill, 2010
54. Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare).
55. Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of AYUSH.
56. Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of Health Research.
57. Demand for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of AIDS Control
58. Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in
the Forty fifth Report on issues relating to availability of Generic, Generic-Branded and
Branded Medicines, their formulation and Therapeutic Efficacy and Effectiveness.
59. The Functioning of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO).
60. The National Commission for Human Resources For Health Bill, 2011
61. Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Fifty-Fifth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 47) of the
Department of AYUSH.
62. Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Fifty-Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 49) of the
Department of AIDS Control.
63. Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 48)
of the Department of Health Research (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare).

66
12
64. Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Fifty-Fourth report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 46) of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare.
65. The Proposal to Introduce the Bachelor of Science (Community Health) Course.
66. Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in
the Fifty Ninth Report on the functioning of Central Drugs Standards Control
Organisation (CDSCO).
67. Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health and
Family Welfare.
68. Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 48) of the Department of AYUSH (Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare).
69. Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 49) of the Department of Health Research
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare).
70. Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50) of the Department of AIDS Control
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare).
71. Functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS).
72. Alleged irregularities in the Conduct of Studies Using Human Papilloma Virus (HPV)
Vaccine by Path in India.
73. The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013
74. The Mental Health Care Bill, 2013
75. Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Sixty-Eighth Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 48) of the
Department of AYUSH
76. Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Seventieth Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50) of the
Department of AIDS Control
77. Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Sixty-Nineth Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 49) of the
Department of Health Research
78. Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Sixty-Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 47) of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
79. The Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2013
80. The Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2014

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.