PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 35
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25 NOVEMBER, 2009)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25 NOVEMBER, 2009)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25 NOVEMBER, 2009)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25 NOVEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2009/AGRAHAYANA, 1931 (SAKA)NOVEMBER, 2009/AGRAHAYANA, 1931 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELF ARE
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS 2008-09 (DEMAND NO. 46) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-c hfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS 2008-09 (DEMAND NO. 46) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25 TH NOVEMBER, 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25 TH NOVEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2009/AGRAHAYANA, 1931 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT P ART-A ...................................................................................................................... 1—62
CHAPTER I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government .................................................................................. 2—10
CHAPTER II R ecommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................. 1 1—37
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ...... 38—61
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................ 62
REPORT P ART-B ...................................................................................................................... 63—107
CHAPTER I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government .................................................................................. 64—70
CHAPTER II R ecommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................. 71—85
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ...... 86—106
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................ 107
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A G LANCE ............................................................ 108—121
5. M INUTES- (Part-A and Part-B Combined) ......................................................................... 123—128
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 12 9—239
Part-A .................................................................................................................... 131—219
Part-B .................................................................................................................... 221—239

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Balbir Punj
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
8. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
10. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss
LOK SABHA
11. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
12. Shri Ashok Argal
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
14. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
15. Dr. Chinta Mohan
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
18. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
19. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
20. Shri N. Kristappa
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
26. Shri M.K. Raghavan
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Shrimati Meena Singh
29. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh
31. Shri Ratan Singh

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do
hereby present this Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-seventh Report on Demands for Grants (Demand
No.46) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for
the year 2008-09.
2. The Twenty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
30th April, 2008. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report,
received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare were considered by the Committee at
its meeting held on the 26th October, 2009.
3. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
the 26th October, 2009.
AMAR SINGH
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
October 26 , 2009 Department-related Parliamentary
Kartika 4, 1931 (Saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare.

1
Part-A
(HEALTH SECTOR)
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Twenty-seventh Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 46)
of the Department of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2008-09.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 2.4, 2.7,
3.3, 4.4, 6.2, 6.6, 6.9, 7.3, 11.6, 11.7, 12.4, 12.5, 12.6, 12.7, 15.4, 17.9, 18.4, 18.5, 20.4,
20.5, 21.4, 21.5, 21.9, 22.5, 24.1, Total–25 (Chapter-I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies: 2.6, 2.8, 2.9, 2.13, 3.2, 3.4, 3.10, 3.11, 4.2, 4.5, 4.7, 4.8, 5.2, 5.3,
6.4, 6.5, 6.7, 6.8, 6.10, 7.4, 7.6, 8.5, 8.6, 9.2, 10.2, 12.2, 12.3, 12.9, 16.6, 16.7, 16.8,
16.10, 16.12, 17.3, 17.5, 17.7, 19.4, 19.6, 19.8, 22.3, 23.2, 24.2, Tota1–42 (Chapter-II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee: 2.3, 2.11, 2.12, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, 3.9, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14,
4.3, 6.11, 6.12, 6.13, 7.5, 9.3, 10.3, 11.8, 13.2, 14.3, 14.4, 16.5, 16.13, 17.6, 17.8, 21.6,
21.7, 22.2, Total–29 (Chapter-III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still
awaited: Nil,  Total–Nil  (Chapter-IV)

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.4 The Committee notes that the overall allocation for the health sector (outside NRHM) has
been on the higher side. Still, the Committee is constrained to note that the Department has failed
to project its budgetary requirements in an effective way for the simple reason that the utilization
of funds during the Tenth Plan is far from satisfactory which is evident from the fact that the
sanctioned BE for 2005-06 and 2006-07 was Rs.4253.84 crores and Rs.3564.95 crores,
respectively, which was reduced to Rs.4096.25 crores and Rs.3433.02 crores, respectively at the
RE stage. The actual expenditure figures of Rs.2907.96 crores and Rs.3377.34 crores were even
less than the budgeted allocations at the RE stage. The Committee notes that this trend has
continued during 2007-08 also. This goes to illustrate that the Department’s record in utilization of
the allocated funds is below par. The Committee would, therefore, recommend the Department to
first ensure optimum and judicious utilization of the funds allocated instead of highlighting the
reduced budgetary allocation. The Committee also recommends to the Department to take
substantive steps so that the stumbling blocks in the utilization of sanctioned funds for 2008-09
for a crucial sector like health, are removed.
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.
Recommendations/Observations
2.7 Committee observes that in spite of its raising concerns over this trend of under utilization
of funds year after year, there does not seem to be any noticeable improvement in this regard. Time
and again the Committee has been advocating for higher allocation of funds for this sector and this
time the Committee is happy to note that the approved outlay has seen a 32% hike over the last
year’s Revised Estimate. The Committee reiterates its concern and recommends to the Department
to play a more pro-active role in identifying the problems afflicting the utilization of funds in the
Health Sector and initiate remedial measures from the very beginning of the current financial year so
that the old story of revising estimates downwards and subsequent under utilization does not recur.
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.
III. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS)
Recommendations/Observations
3.3 The Committee, therefore, recommends that allocation of funds under Non-Plan be
enhanced adequately so that the services available to the CGHS beneficiaries are not affected.
2

3
Action Taken
The requirement of additional funds for Non-Plan expenditure by CGHS will be projected to the
Ministry of Finance for discussions in the Pre-Budget meeting to be taken by Secretary (Expenditure).
IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL AND V ARDHMAN MAHAVEER MEDICAL COLLEGE, NEW
DELHI
Recommendations/Observations
4.4 The Committee observes that procedures and rules are made to streamline, strengthen and
facilitate a process and not create hurdles and bottlenecks. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that effective coordination between the Department and the Hospital authorities is required in this
regard. If required, suitable steps for improvement in the procedural aspect may be initiated so as
to provide better health care delivery system.
Action Taken
In view of enhancement of powers of Additional D.G. and Medical Superintendent for
procurement of equipments to Rs.l.00 crore, the hospital is not finding difficulty in procurement
of equipments as most of the hospital equipments are below Rs.l.00 crore.
VI. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS)
Recommendations/Observations
6.2 The Committee was informed that the allocated funds would not be sufficient for
maintaining the infrastructure and patient care services of the Institute. The Committee feels that
the decrease in Non-Plan from Rs.3l0.00 crores in 2007-08 to Rs.290.00 crores is surely going
to affect the patient care services offered by the Institute. The Committee apprehends return of
the ‘user charges regime’ in AIIMS because consumables are the only negotiable component of the
Non-Plan budget as salary and bills have to be paid any way.
Action Taken
A letter has already been written to Director, AIIMS in the month of June, 2008 asking
them to workout their requirement additional funds, if any, which will be considered during
Supplementary demands.
Recommendations/Observations
6.6 The Committee would emphasize that procedural formalities for the centre should be
expedited so as to complete it by the targeted date.
Action Taken
The observation of the Committee has been noted.
Recommendations/Observations
6.9 The Committee expresses deep concern that in the premier institute of the country like
AIIMS so many posts are lying vacant. In the opinion of the Committee, this is definitely bound
to affect the quality of services rendered by the Institute. The Committee, therefore, recommends
immediate action to fill up the vacant posts.
Action Taken
All categories of vacant posts are in process of recruitment.

4
VII. POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH
Recommendations/Observations
7.3 The Committee is of the opinion that PGIMER is amongst India’s premier Institutes and its
developmental plans should not be affected in any way due to scarcity of funds. While
recommending that adequate funds should be made available to the PGIMER, Chandigarh to meet
its requirements for developmental works, the Committee also recommends judicious and optimum
utilization of the allocated funds.
Action Taken
The Recommendations of the Committee were/are being complied with strictly.
XI. PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY)
Recommendations/Observations
11.6 The Committee in its 22nd Report on the Demands for Grants (2007-08) presented on
3rd May, 2007 had expressed its apprehension that it would take at least another plan period before
the six AIIMS like Institutions would start functioning in the real sense. The Committee is
constrained to modify its assessment. From the details made available to the Committee,
construction work on the Six AIIMS like Institutions is expected to start by August-
September, 2008 and would be completed in 24 months. Thus, it is more than clear now that only
buildings would be ready by the end of Eleventh Plan. The real target of making available best
health care services to public through these institutions seems to be a distant dream even now. The
Committee finds that tendering process for procurement of medical equipments is at an initial stage.
Process for other allied infrastructure facilities and manpower – both highly qualified/technical as
well as non-technical is yet so start. With regard to up gradation of 13 Medical College Institutions,
the Committee can only hope that work would be completed within the targeted date of 20 months.
The Committee is, however, worried about the fate of upgradation of Grants Medical College and
JJ hospital, Mumbai due to a court case pending in Nagpur High Court in the matter. The
Committee is of the view that the Department should take up other linked activities like arranging
for the faculty and requisite infrastructure simultaneously so that no delay takes place in
operationalization of the Institutions once the construction activity is completed.
Action Taken
Noted. The civil construction work is likely to be completed by the end of 2010. However,
parallel activities for procurement of medical equipment, manpower planning and recruitment,
finalization of governance and management structure as also preparation of curriculum design have
been initiated in 2008. The effort will be to make the hospital functional by the end of 2010 and
Medical College operational by academic year 2011.
Recommendations/Observations
11.7 The Committee also recommends that funds as and when required should be made available
to the Department. The Committee would, however, like to point out that though funds have never
been a problem for this ambitious project of national importance, utilization thereof has been far
from satisfactory level. The Committee, accordingly, recommends setting up of a joint mechanism
of Centre and the concerned States so that greater coordination is achieved and effective
monitoring of the ongoing projects is done. The Committee also calls for greater emphasis on
adhering to the time lines so that the overall cost of the project is not escalated further.

5
Action Taken
All out efforts are being made to fully utilize the funds allocated for the Project. A
Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretaries of the concerned States is being set up to
monitor the progress of setting up of each of the six AIIMS-like institutions.
XII. IMPROVEMENT OF NURSING SERVICES
Recommendations/Observations
12.4 The Committee is not aware about the existence of any Monitoring Committee for such
projects. The Committee is of the view that such a mechanism will prove to be very useful,
especially in view of Rs.198.00 crores allocated for strengthening/upgradation of Nursing Services.
The Committee welcomes the enhancement in the assistance to be provided to Nursing
Institutions from Rs.10.00 lakhs to Rs.25.00 lakhs. Such a move was overdue. The Committee,
however, wonders whether any exercise has been initiated for identification of locations of all the
proposed Centres/Schools/Colleges so far. The Committee would appreciate if implementation of all
these projects is carried out in a time-bound manner. The Committee is not aware about any
assessment/review made recently about the (training both pre and in-service) programmes for
Nurses and also functioning of Training Institutions for Nurses. The Committee is of the view that
such an exercise is necessary for strengthening the Nursing Services which is a very crucial
component of health care.
Action Taken
Noted for compliance. The establishment of Monitoring and Evaluation Cell has been
proposed in the EFC Memo. Although no assessment has been made recently for pre and in-service
training and that of Training Institutions for Nurses but it is envisaged that the Monitoring and
Evaluation Cell when set up would take care of these aspects.
The enhanced grant of Rs.25.00 lakhs is meant for procurement of A.V. AIDS, laboratory
equipment, furniture, library, transport etc. and is need based and would be released to the nursing
institutions on the basis of proposals to be received from the states. Locations for establishing
Centres/Schools/Colleges have been identified. Details are at Annexure-XI.
Recommendations/Observations
12.5 The Committee is happy to note that the National Awards for Nurses, given as a mark of
highest recognition for the meritorious services of the nurses and nursing profession in the
Country, that continued up to 1989, have been revived and named as the National Florence
Nightingale Award from 2007 with the consent of the President of India. 17 Nursing personnel
have been awarded with this prestigious award during the year 2007.
Action Taken
The National Florence Nightingale Awards for the year 2008 have also been distributed by
the President of India to 26 meritorious nursing personnel in the award ceremony held on
12.5.2008 at Rashtrapati Bhavan.
Recommendations/Observations
12.6 The Committee recommends that a suitable mechanism should be evolved for maintaining
a live register of nurses so as to enable the Department for formulating appropriate policy
pertaining to nurses.

6
Action Taken
The Indian Nursing Council is already seized of the matter and will make efforts to devise
suitable mechanism to overcome the problem.
Recommendations/Observations
12.7 The Committee recommends that the Department should make all out efforts including
effective co-ordination and close monitoring so that all the proposals for strengthening of nursing
education are implemented properly and desired results are achieved for getting adequate number
of qualified and trained nursing personnel.
Action Taken
As regards effective coordination and monitoring of the project the Monitoring and
Evaluation Cell as explained in para 12.4 would take care of this aspect.
XV. NATIONAL URBAN HEALTH MISSION (NUHM)
Recommendations/Observations
15.4 The Committee observes that NUHM is one of the most ambitious Projects after National
Rural Health Mission (NRHM). Objectives of the Mission are laudable and are according to the
requirements of the present scenario. The Committee cautions the Department to take all necessary
steps so that the problems afflicting the implementation of NRHM like those related to ground level
healthcare functionaries, availability of doctors, paramedics and infrastructure do not recur and
interfere in the implementation of this parallel scheme meant for urban areas. For achieving the
targets proposed under mission, the Department should do proper homework and work out
modalities for their implementation. The Department should start coordinating with the States right
from the beginning of the project. The Committee would like to be apprised about the progress
made in this regard.
Action Taken
Based on the document on NUHM approved by Minister of Health and Family Welfare, a
draft EFC Memo for NUHM has been circulated to the concerned Ministries for seeking their view/
comments.
The EFC proposal envisages to achieve the objectives of NUHM by strengthening the
extents primary public health systems, rationalising the available manpower and resources, filling
the gaps in service delivery through private partnership through a regulatory frame work and also
through a communitised risk pooling/insurance mechanism with IT enablement, capacity building of
key stake holders and by making special provision for inclusion of the most vulnerable amongst
the poor.
All the State/UT Governments have been requested to start the work of GIS mapping of
the selected cities in TOP PRIORITY basis.
The teams of this Ministry has visited the States of Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Chandigarh UT, Haryana, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal,
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand. A presentation on proposed NUHM and the GIS mapping was arranged
and the discussion was also held on various issues pertaining to the NUHM. The officials of
Puducherry were requested to come at Chennai and the officials of A&N Islands were requested
to come at Kolkata to participate in the meeting.

7
The teams would visit other States/UT Governments soon.
XVII. NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME (NCCP)
Recommendations/Observations
17.9 The Committee recommends to the Department to give utmost priority to evaluation of the
National Cancer Control Programme by a premier agency having experience of work in such
Disease Control Programmes. Proper evaluation would help in identifying weak links and result in
effective implementation of various components of the programme.
Action Taken
This Ministry is inserting an advertisement through DA VP in leading dailies relating to
evaluation of the NCCP (Enquiry for Expression of Interest). This will attract more organizations
in evaluation of the scheme. Efforts will be taken to complete the exercise of the evaluation within
the stipulated time-frame.
XVIII. NATIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMME (NTCP)
Recommendations/Observations
18.4 The Committee was informed last year that the ‘in principle’ approval of the Planning
Commission for setting up of the National Regulatory Authority and Referral Labs for testing Tar
and Nicotine content in various tobacco products has been obtained. Process for seeking approval
of the competent authority had already begun at that time. The Committee, however, notes that no
progress seems to have been made in this regard thereafter. Keeping in view the prolonged process
of getting the approval of the competent authority, the Committee does not have much hope about
the same being obtained by June, 2008. The Department has to make concerted efforts so that
approval of the competent authority for setting up of the National Regulatory Authority, backbone
of the entire programme, is obtained at the earliest.
Action Taken
The Ministry has noted the recommendation for compliance and further necessary action.
Recommendations/Observations
18.5 More than one million people are dying due to consumption of tobacco in the country. The
Committee, therefore, strongly feels that the Ministry needs to bring up sustained Mass Media/IEC
campaign regarding the adverse and harmful effects of tobacco consumption immediately, as also
when NTCP is launched. Sufficient funds should be made available for the same.
Action Taken
The Ministry has noted the recommendation for compliance and further necessary action.
XX. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF DIABETES,
CARDIOV ASCULAR DISEASES STROKE (NPDCS)
Recommendations/Observations
20.4 The Committee is happy to note that the pilot phase of the programme has finally taken off
during 2007-08.

8
Action Taken
The budget allocation for 2008-09 is only for Rs.30 crores. In view of this provision the
new districts to be covered in 2008-09 will be 25. State NCD Cells are to be set up in 25 States
and 1 dedicated unit of Cardiovascular Disease/diabetes/stroke Prevention is proposed to be set up.
Recommendations/Observations
20.5 The Committee notes that out of an approved outlay of Rs.1660.50 crores for the Eleventh
Five Year Plan, only Rs.30.00 crores have been earmarked for 2008-09. This, when taken into
account along with last year’s utilization of Rs.4.42 crores, leaves behind a whooping amount of
Rs.1625.50 crores for the last three years of the plan. The Committee is given to understand that
a steering Committee has been established to review and expedite the Programme. A meeting of the
States participating in the pilot project was held on 17th October, 2007. Appreciating this initiative,
the Committee recommends to the Department to carry forward the programme vigorously during
the remaining period of the Plan so that the set targets are achieved with the optimum utilization
of funds available for the programme.
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted and all out efforts would be made
to comply with the same.
XXI. MEDICAL EDUCATION
Recommendations/Observations
21.4 The Committee is aware that keeping in view the shortage of doctors and existing medical
institutions not being adequate enough, MCI norms for opening of colleges/increase of seats need
to be reviewed. The Committee, however, feels that this exercise should be undertaken with
extreme caution so that objective of imparting quality medical education remains intact. Relaxing
norms by allowing private promoters to have land in two pieces within 10 Kms. of each other and
allowing corporate entities to setup medical colleges are initiatives which should be implemented
after examining all pros and cons. The Committee is of the opinion that in the exercise of relaxation
of existing norms, assessment of those experts having the experience of this field should be given
due weightage.
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee will be kept in view while finalizing the regulations of
MCI.
Recommendations/Observations
21.5 The Committee also takes note of the suggestion of the Department to MCI for relaxing
the age of retirement of staff of Private Medical Educational Institutes from 65 to 70 years, subject
to their physical ability, in order to fill-up the acute shortage of teaching staff in that sector.
Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare has also informed the Committee that a
Cabinet Note has been prepared for increasing the age of retirement to 65 years in Government
Medical Educational Institutes. Committee is also given to understand that PG degrees of USA, UK,
Australia, New Zealand and Canada have been recognized and for other countries like Germany and
France the matter is under consideration. The idea is that they can come and settle here or they
can come as visiting faculties. The Committee welcomes these steps.

9
Action Taken
Noted.
Recommendations/Observations
21.9 The Committee opines that if implemented, the recommendations of the Commission would
be a milestone in improving the standards and quality of medical education in India. The Committee
recommends that action may be initiated in this regard and Committee apprised accordingly.
Action Taken
Noted.
XXII. V ACANCIES IN CHS CADRE
Recommendations/Observations
22.5 The Committee views with serious concern the grave injustice done to the GDMO cadre
for no fault of theirs. Inspite of their being eligible for specialist post, continuance of such doctors
in GDMO cadre is indeed against all principles of natural justice. Non-implementation of Fifth Pay
Commission recommendation of SAG level positions in All India Service to be 17% of total cadre
has created another hurdle in their career progression. The Committee finds that Sixth Pay
Commission’s recommendations of filling up the additional posts to be created for fulfilling any gap,
by direct recruitment, will make the position of GDMOs very vulnerable. The Committee is of the
firm opinion that the Department should take up this issue immediately with the Ministry of
Finance. Every attempt should be made to remove the grave injustice done to the GDMO cadre
so that this sub-cadre of professionals gets due recognition and morale boost like others in All India
Services.
Action Taken
(i) In the new proposed CHS Rules, provision is being proposed for lateral entry of
General Duty Medical Officers with Post-graduate qualification in the Specialist
sub-cadre.
(ii) A proposal is under reference to COS for creating/upgrading 17% of total Senior Duty
posts in CHS for SAG level.
XXIV. MISCELLANEOUS
Recommendations/Observations
24.1 The Committee recommends the Department to take care of the eco-friendly part of the
whole exercise.
Action Taken
Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) envisages setting up of six AIIMS-like
institutions and upgradation of the existing 13 medical college institutions.
Insofar as setting up of AIIMS-like institutions is concerned, the designs prepared by the
Design-DPR Consultants were got evaluated by faculties of PGIMER/AIIMS for functional
efficiency. The Energy Research Institute (TERI) has appraised the project for incorporating green
building concepts and best practices at the design stage. This will ensure a functionally efficient,

10
eco-friendly building. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare proposes to take up Green Rates
for Integrated Habitat Assessment (GRIHA), as advised by the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy. Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) have also evaluated the designs for ECBC (Energy
Conservation Building Codes) compliance, to ensure that the energy saving measures have been
incorporated in the buildings.
W APCOS, Government of India Undertaking had conducted Environment Impact
Assessment (EIA) study for setting up of AIIMS-like institutions. Ministry of Environment and
Forests is examining the proposals for granting environmental clearance. The recommendations of
the MoEF to recycle water and use energy saving features have been taken into consideration by
the Design-DPR Consultants. All efforts are being made to ensure that the eco-system of the place
is not adversely impacted by the setting up of the new AIIMS-like institutions

11
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.6 The Committee would like to point out that expenditure reported upto 29th February, 2008
was only Rs.1608.59 crores and within a span of three weeks it has reached to Rs.2121.24 crores.
This clearly indicates that major utilization is taking place in the last quarter of the year.
Action Taken
While this Ministry shares the views of the Committee, efforts are being made to streamline
the pace of expenditure as per Cash Management Plan.
Recommendations/Observations
2.8 The Committee views with serious concern the under utilization of funds on account of
slow pace of expenditure on implementation of schemes like Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha
Yojna (PMSSY), Cancer, Mental Health, Capacity Building Project for Food and Drugs, non-
implementation of the recommendations of the Oversight Committee, New Initiatives, and also non-
finalizations of proposals relating to procurement of various equipments, non-filling up of vacant
posts, non-receipt of proposals from State Government/Implementing Agencies etc. The Committee
recommends the Department to keep the activities of these schemes/institutions under constant
monitoring so as to arrest this trend of under utilization.
Action Taken
The concern of the Committee is fully shared by the Ministry. Implementation of the
schemes mentioned is being accordingly monitored on a regular basis by Secretary (H&FW) and
in the context of the observations of the Committee will be examined for such action as considered
necessary to ensure proper utilization of funds.
Recommendations/Observations
2.9 The pendency level of Utilization Certificates has been engaging the attention of the
Committee for the last few years. According to latest figures as on 1st March, 2008, there were
as many as 1318 Utilization Certificates in respect of Health Sector amounting to Rs.677.61 crores
for the grants released upto 2005-06. On a specific query regarding any plans of the Department
to reach a justifiable level of pendency, the Committee is given to understand that a communication
was sent by the Chief Controller of Accounts (CCA) to all the States through Resident
Commissioners on this issue giving full details of pending UCs in respect of the Department of
Health and Family Welfare. The Committee is dismayed to note that in the name of efforts; only
a letter has been issued. The Committee feels that spirited efforts, which are apparently lacking,
need to be made on priority basis to clear the UCs which are pending for the last three decades
11

12
or so. The Committee also recommends to the Department to take up the case with concerned
State Governments at the highest level so as to assess whether the funds have been utilized
properly or not.
Action Taken
The Department is taking Monthly review of outstanding Utilisation Certificates besides
issuing periodical reminders at the appropriate level for early clearance. In this regard a DO was
issued by Secretary (H&FW) to all Principal Secretaries of the States for submission of pending
utilization certificates on priority basis. The fresh grants were not released during the year 2007-08
to the Grantees having outstanding utilization certificates against them. By such efforts, the 1024
Utilisation Certificates amounting to Rs.1176.04 crores were liquidated during the year 2007-08
in respect of Health Section. As on 1st May, 2008, 973 utilisation certificates amounting to
Rs.550.77 crores were outstanding in respect of Department of Health and Family Welfare for the
Grants released up to 2006-07.
Recommendations/Observations
2.13 The Committee’s attention has been drawn by high level of pendency of Audit paras
contained in CAG Report and Internal Audit on matters relating to the Department. The Committee
is surprised to note that there are 62 pending Audit paras dating back from CAG Report No. 2 of
1998 to the latest CAG Report No. 20 of 2007 on the Performance Audit of procurement of
medicines and medical equipment. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for such high
level of pendency. The very fact that such a large number of Audit paras remain to be reconciled
indicates that internal financial management of the Ministry is weak. The Committee would like to
be apprised about the corrective measures taken in the light of the pending Audit paras.
Action Taken
Fresh proposal will be submitted to take up the audit of all centrally sponsored programmes,
PSUs under the department and autonomous bodies. As regards P.G.I. Chandigarh, the audit was
conducted by the Internal Audit Party in the Financial Year 2007-08 but the audit of AIIMS could
not be conducted and postponed until further order during the month of July, 2007. It is further
stated that the Scheme Audit of National Vector Borne Disease Programme and Central Government
Health Scheme was also conducted in the Financial Year 2007-08. To undertake the audit of more
centrally sponsored health programmes and PSUs and autonomous bodies during the Financial
Year 2008-09 the planning of the same is included in the proposal.
The following steps have been taken for strengthening of Internal Audit Wing of this
Ministry:
1. Training on Internal Audit at INGAF: One Accounts Officer and two Assistant
Accounts Officer and one Senior Accountant have been nominated for the proposed
specialized training at INGAF.
2. IT and System Audit: The instructions regarding outsourcing the IT and system audit
through INGAF wherein a pool of trained manpower are to be developed to conduct
special audit are noted for implementation in this Ministry.
3. Diversity in Audit Techniques: Internal Audit Wing adopted diversity in audit techniques
such as physical inspection, performance evaluation, process review, risk analysis etc.
4. Follow-up of Audit Report: Instructions contained in audit manual is strictly followed
to follow-up the audit reports. The Internal Audit peruse the Inspection Report and

13
ensure the settlement of objection including in the reports, reminders are also issued
towards the settlement of outstanding objections.
5. Annual Review also submitted each year to higher authorities
III. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS)
Recommendations/Observations
3.2 The Committee notes that Plan allocation for 2008-09 is at an enhanced level when
compared with provision of Rs.40.00 crores made for 2007-08. As per the Outcome Budget (2008-09),
against a Plan allocation of Rs.40.00 crores for 2007-08 under CGHS; expenditure reported upto
29.02.08 is only Rs.19.08 crores. The Committee is, however, surprised to note that in response
to a specific query made by it, utilisation of Rs.32.16 crores was reported upto February, 2008.
The Committee is unhappy with the conflicting figures of utilization of Plan funds. Either the
information published in the Outcome Budget is incorrect or inaccurate status report has been
furnished to the Committee, that too on a specific query made by it. Both the positions compel
the Committee to conclude that there is a need for better management at the Department level. The
Committee apprehends that chances are there that major utilization under CGHS has taken place
during the last quarter of the year. If it is true, this indicates improper handling of the funds. The
trend of utilization of major chunk of funds during the last quarter is not a healthy sign. The
Committee would like to be apprised about utilization of Plan and Non-Plan funds (quarter-wise)
during 2007-08. In the light of last year’s experience of utilization of funds, the Committee
recommends that concerted efforts need to be made for optimum and judicious utilization of
enhanced allocation made for 2008-09.
Action Taken
V ariations between the two sets of figures for the expenditure upto 29.2.2008 is attributed
to the fact that the Departmental figures communicated comprise expenditure in the pipeline also
whereas those reported in the Outcome Budget were the figures actually booked by the Accounting
Wing.
(Rs. in crores)
Quarter Plan Non-Plan
First 3.82 86.57
Second 5.79 82.99
Third 6.10 86.01
Fourth 17.07 176.93
T
OTAL 32.78 432.50
As regards the optimum and judicious utilization of enhanced allocation made for 2008-09,
as desired by the Committee, efforts are being made to streamline the pace of expenditure as per
Cash Management Plan.
Recommendations/Observations
3.4 The computerization of CGHS dispensaries and offices in Delhi was taken up at an
expenditure of Rs.8.74 crores. The Committee was informed that as on 26.3.2008, 83 dispensaries

14
in Delhi have been fully computerized and the process of computerization of remaining 4
dispensaries was under way. The Committee would like to point out that computerization process
of CGHS dispensaries in Delhi could not be completed as scheduled. Originally targeted to be
completed by 2006-07, revised date of 17 August, 2007 could also not be adhered to. By the end
of financial year, 2007-08, 4 dispensaries in Delhi still remained to be computerized.
Computerization of CGHS dispensaries located in Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, Nagpur
and Pune to be taken up in 2007-08 as scheduled, is yet to start. The Committee can imagine the
status of third phase slated to be completed in 2008-09. The Committee, keeping in view the past
experience in respect of Delhi dispensaries, can only emphasize that all steps need to be taken to
complete the computerization of dispensaries outside Delhi at the earliest. Corrective measures
based on the problem areas noticed in the computerization of dispensaries in Delhi need to be taken.
Action Taken
STATUS OF COMPUTERIZATION PROJECT IN DELHI
As on date ‘83’ CGHS Dispensaries in Delhi are completely Operational on Computers.
At Noida, AD(EZ) applied for Broad Band connection from BSNL. Once the Broad Band
connection is provided, operations shall start.
At Ghaziabad and Vivek Vihar, Dispensaries are to be shifted to new premises.
At Shakurbasti, renovation of building is nearly complete and ready for starting operations
any time after that.
2 Mbps Internet connectivity provided at 80 locations with effect from 1/4/2008.
Recommendations/Observations
3.10 The Committee understands that third party administrators for processing of claims and
medical audit are also proposed to be introduced. The Committee has been given to understand that
as recommended by SIU, Department of Expenditure, vacancies arising in Group ‘D’ posts are to
be progressively outsourced.
Action Taken
Third Party Administrators (TPAs) have already been appointed to do the work of Medical
Audit of CGHS bills in Delhi, Mumbai, Pune and Bangalore.
The SIU in their report have recommended that the posts of Safaiwala and Chowkidar only
should be progressively outsourced. Other than these two categories posts no other post of Group
D in the CGHS has been recommended for outsourcing.
Recommendations/Observations
3.11 The Committee views with serious concern the growing number of vacancies in different
categories of posts in CGHS dispensaries. The Committee understands that all surplus posts
identified in cities outside Delhi have been abolished. It has also been informed that the staff
strength in the dispensaries is decided as per the workload. The very fact that at the present
juncture, no CGHS city can be stated to have full complement of the staff strength as per the SIU
norms establishes that the existing dispensaries are not functioning as envisaged. The Committee
also strongly feels that outsourcing /hiring of staff on contract-basis on a big scale is a remedy
worse than the disease. The concept of public private partnership cannot be applied across the

15
board specially in a set-up meant for providing health care. The Committee would like to have a
status note on the sanctioned posts and vacancies, category-wise and region-wise in CGHS
dispensaries.
Action Taken
As desired by the Committee, the sanctioned posts and vacancies, category-wise, in respect
of Group C and D posts in CGHS units are placed in Annexure-III.
IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL AND V ARDHMAN MAHAVEER MEDICAL COLLEGE, NEW
DELHI
Recommendations/Observations
4.2 The Committee, however, notes that upto 29.02.2008 expenditure of only Rs.53.77 crores
could be reported.
Action Taken
Allocation under PLAN during the Financial Year 2007-08 was raised from Rs.51.00 crore
(B.E.) to Rs.73.50 crore (R.E.). The expenditure of Rs.53.77 could be reported mainly due to
following reasons:
• Rs.19.00 crore was allotted (Under Major Head–4210 PLAN SJH), SJH only during the
month of August/September, 2007 in 1st Batch of Supplementary Grant. This resulted
in delay in starting the process of procurement of Machinery and Equipment.
Moreover, debits of Rs.3.00 crore (approx.) against LCs opened were still awaited.
Similarly, placement of funds under Major Works was delayed due to allotment funds
in 1st Batch of Supplementary grants instead of B.E. 2007-08.
• Rs.5.00 crore (Under Major Head–4210 PLAN VMMC) was unutilized upto
29th February, 2008 as sanction of placement of funds to HSCC was received in the
month of March, 2008 from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Leaving aside the
above, hospital expenditure was about 88% against the rest of the allocation under the
PLAN budget upto February, 2008. In this respect, it is further stated that against
allocated F. E. 2007-08 of Rs.73.72 crore, Rs.70.64 crore was utilized. The balance
of Rs.3.00 crore (approx.) could not be utilized due to non receipt of debits upto
31.03.2008 against LCs opened in the year 2007-08 for procurement of Machinery and
Equipment.
However, the break-up of expenditure for 2007-08 in each Major Head is given below.
(Amt. in crores)
Major Head B.E. 2007-08 R.E. 2007-08 F.E. 2007-08 Expr.
2210 (SJH) 30.00 37.00 37.22 37.09
2210 (VMMC) 1.00 2.50 2.50 2.49
4210 (SJH) 0.00 19.00 19.00 16.06
4210 (VMMC) 20.00 15.00 15.00 15.00
T
OTAL: 51.00 73.50 73.72 70.64

16
Recommendations/Observations
4.5 The Committee is happy to note that scheme of redevelopments of hospitals including
redevelopment of Safdarjung Hospital with the proposal to increase its bed strength from 1531 to
3000 has finally been included in the approved schemes for the Eleventh Plan. HSCC has submitted
a final report on ‘Redevelopment Plan of Safdarjung Hospital’ to the Department for consideration.
The Department has started work for engaging consultants for preparation of DPR for the detailed
redevelopment plan. The Committee would like to point out that ‘in-principle’ approval by the
Planning Commission has already taken considerable time. The Committee therefore, urges the
Department to make wholehearted efforts to expedite the procedural formalities at the earliest. The
redevelopment plan is required to be started without any further delay, keeping in view the ever-
increasing patient load on the Safdarjung Hospital. The Committee recommends that scarcity of
funds and lack of coordination should not come in the way of its timely completion and the
Department should make every conceivable effort in this regard.
Action Taken
Planning Commission has already conveyed ‘in principle’ approval to the project which has
been included in the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The feasibility report including the issues pertaining
to public private partnership in the proposed redevelopment of the Hospital has already been
prepared with an estimated expenditure of Rs.4150 crores including recurring cost to be completed
within a period of 6 years. The Ministry has also initiated action to appoint a Transaction Advisor
to select a suitable Design Consultant for working out the detailed drawing and plans for the
redevelopment of the Safdarjung Hospital. The draft EFC Memo is under finalization. The same has
been considered by the Integrated Finance Division of the Ministry and has been circulated to
MOF, Planning commission, M/o Urban Development, Government of NCT of Delhi and others for
their comments. Once comments from these bodies are received, Secretary (Expenditure) will be
requested to convene meeting of the EFC.
Recommendations/Observations
4.7 The Committee expresses its serious concern on the slow progress made with regard to
setting up of Renal Transplantation Unit. Status of the project for IVF unit is more discouraging as
‘in-principle’ approval is yet to come. The Committee can only emphasize that the Renal
Transplantation Unit should be made functional by the year end by closely monitoring the progress
of the same. Procedural formalities with regard to IVF unit also need to be completed at the earliest.
Action Taken
The progress in setting up the Renal Transplantation unit and for IVF unit is in full swing.
Some of the Machinery and Equipments have already been procured and rest is likely to be
procured within 2-3 months. However, it is to be mentioned here that to start Renal Transplant
Unit, the hospital needs licence from Government. In this regard, an inspection has been carried
out on 16.07.2008 on the available infrastructural facilities as well as and Specialists. The
inspection Committee has pointed out that the post of functional Nephrologist i.e. D.M. in
Nephrology is a must for the functioning of the Unit which is not presently available. Necessary
action would be taken to fulfill this requirement for starting the Unit.
Recommendations/Observations
4.8 The Committee’s attention has been drawn by a large number of vacancies in different
categories of posts in Safdarjung Hospital. Out of the total sanctioned staff strength of 4781, there

17
were 1054 vacant posts in different categories as on July, 2007. The Committee has been given
to understand that workload of the Hospital has progressively increased manifold in the past few
years. The doctor-patient ratio has inversely grown, there is an acute need of more doctors per
patient and related infrastructure including sub-staff. In such a scenario, with the redevelopment
project of Safdarjung Hospital likely to take off at the earliest, additional staff strength of all the
categories would be required. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department in co-
ordination with hospital authorities should chalk out an action-plan for acquiring the required
manpower.
Action Taken
Action has already been initiated for the revival/creation/filling up of the vacant posts in SJH
and VMMC. Recently, 214 posts of Sr. Residents and 120 posts of Jr. Residents in various
departments of SJH and VMCC has already been created with approval of MOF.
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI
Recommendations/Observations
5.2 The Committee is constrained to note that inspite of an assurance that each Central Institute
will have a separate monitoring Committee, given by the Secretary, H&FW before the Committee
last year, no action seems to have been taken. The Committee, therefore, reiterates that a proper
monitoring mechanism needs to be put in place so as to arrest this trend of sub-optimal utilization
of the funds.
Action Taken
It may be clarified that during 2007-08 the actual expenditure upto 29.02.2008
was Rs.64.38 crores and not Rs.56.60 crore as reported by the Committee against RE of
Rs.71.95 crore. A Project Monitoring Committee has also been constituted to oversee utilization of
funds along with other things for PGIMER.
Recommendations/Observations
5.3 The Committee has been observing that a number of projects – big and small, envisaged
for strengthening and augmenting the existing services in the premier Hospital, continue to remain
in the implementation status with very little progress being made. The Committee has been
constrained to point out that the year 2007-08 was also no exception. Funds allocated remained
under-utilised with the following three major projects running behind schedule:—
• Strengthening of Accidents and Emergency Department and setting up of Trauma Care
Centre
• Setting up of PGIMER at Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital
• Upgradation of School of Nursing into College of Nursing
All these projects were to be completed in 2007-08 only. The Committee notes that
academic session for PG Courses in Medicine, Paediatrics and Anesthesia is to begin in 2008-09.
While welcoming the starting of PGIMER at Dr. RML Hospital, the Committee would appreciate
if the PGI becomes fully operational running all the courses with the required infrastructure and
regular staff in place. The Committee apprehends that there is little chance of Trauma Care Centre
becoming operational in 2008-09 with appointment of 178 additional staff yet to be made and
process of purchase of equipment and consumable going on. The Committee also finds that not

18
much progress seems to have been made in the upgradation of School of Nursing into College of
Nursing. The target remains the same in 2008-09 also as in the previous year.
Action Taken
The status report of the major three projects as mentioned above is given under:
(i) Strengthening of Accidents and Emergency Department and setting up of Trauma
Centre – It may be informed that the aforesaid scheme has since been executed during
2007-08 itself and the Trauma Care Centre has been inaugurated by the Chief Minister
of Delhi in the presence of Hon’ble Health Minister and other dignitaries on 19.3.08.
The Trauma Care Centre has since started functioning. The recruitment of most of the
staff has since been done on regular/contract basis, as per the statement enclosed at
Annexure-V. The proposal for creation of 418 additional staffs for the Trauma Centre
is under process.
(ii) Setting up of PGIMER at Dr. RML Hospital – The Committee has noted that the
academic session for PG Courses in Medicine, Paediatrics and Anesthesia is to begin
in 2008-09. It may be informed that the aforesaid PG Courses, including the above
disciplines, have since been started w.e.f. June this year, as per number of seats and
their allocation/affiliation given at Annexure-VI. The committee has also commented
that it would appreciate if the PGIMER becomes fully operational running all the
courses with the required infrastructure and regular staff in place. It may be noted that
efforts are being made to ensure that the new building, infrastructural facilities along
with required specialists/staffs in PGIMER are made fully functional and put in place
on priority.
(iii) Upgradation of School of Nursing into College of Nursing – The Upgradation of
School of Nursing to College of Nursing in the hospital is an approved plan activity
of Eleventh Five Year Plan. It has been decided by the Ministry/DGHS to start B. Sc.
Degree Course in Nursing in place of existing Diploma in General Nursing and
Midwifery being provided by the School of Nursing, with 50 annual intake capacity in
Central Government Hospitals including Dr. RML Hospital from the current Academic
Session 2008-09. The hospital has already approached the GGSIP University
for affiliation of B.Sc. Degree Course in Nursing from the current academic
session 2008-09. The “In-Principle” approval of the Indian Nursing Council (INC) has
also been received on 27.04.2008 to upgrade the School of Nursing to College of
Nursing from the academic year 2008-09 with 50 students intake. The ongoing
construction/renovation of building for the College of Nursing started by the HSCC in
March, 2008 is likely to be completed by October, 2008. The hospital is planning to
take admission from this Academic Session (2008-09) for B.Sc. Hons (Nursing).
VI. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS)
Recommendations/Observations
6.4 The Committee is constrained to observe that enhanced outlay for the Eleventh Plan period
does not seem to have any visible impact. Plan provision of Rs.200.00 crores for 2007-08 not only
remains at the same level as in the previous Plan period but has also been brought down to
Rs.160.00 crores at the RE stage with actual expenditure reported up to 29.02.2008 being only
Rs.198.00 crores. The Committee is not able to comprehend the reasons for under-utilization of
funds duly allocated for specific purposes. Failure on the part of a premier institute like AIIMS to
utilize the funds as targeted indicates that problem areas continue to persist both in the co-
ordination between the administrative Ministry and the Institute and its functioning.

19
Action Taken
The Institute has received grant of Rs.160.00 crores under Plan for the year 2007-08 and
the same have been fully utilized.
Minister of Health and Family Welfare, as President of the Institute, has taken a meeting
with all the Head of Departments of All India Institute of Medical Sciences on 17.03.2008 and there
is no lack of co-ordination between the Ministry and the Institute.
Recommendations/Observations
6.5 The Committee hopes that position would improve now.
Action Taken
The Ministry is committed to extend all the cooperation and help to the Institute for
improving its quality of patient care services, research and education.
Recommendations/Observations
6.7 The Committee also takes note of major new initiatives for which plans were under
preparation during 2007-08 as listed below:—
➢ Construction of new PC Block
➢ Advance facilities for Paediatrics (Medical) and (Surgery)
➢ Advance facilities for Geriatrics
➢ Facility for Family Medicine and Public Health
Action Taken
• Construction of new PC Block – A proposal for construction of new PC and Teaching
Block had been perceived to augment the existing space and infrastructure requirement
for the planned expansion of UG/PG seats at AIIMS. The proposal for consideration
of the EFC has been prepared by AIIMS and submitted to the Ministry in August, 2007
for an estimated cost of Rs.95.29 crores. The Ministry examined the proposals and
asked AIIMS to revise the cost estimate with rescheduling the date of completion. The
proposal is yet to be revived in the Ministry. Upon receipt of approval of the EFC
proposal and approval of the master plan of AIIMS, which is being taken up in parallel,
the project shall be taken up for execution.
• Advance facilities for Pediatrics (Medical) and (Surgery) – The proposal had been
conceived as part of Mother and Child Centre wherein it was planned to integrate the
facilities of the Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Pediatrics and Pediatrics
Surgery with the total bed strength of 500 beds. Initially, the proposal was prepared
at an estimated cost (as on August, 2007) of Rs.317.40 crores. The proposal has been
modified as per advice of the Ministry. The modified proposal is yet to be submitted
by AIIMS. Now the project cost has been revised to Rs.285.78 crores and the project
schedule is to be completed by March, 2011. Subject to approval from the CCEA and
revision of Master Plan of AIIMS, project shall be taken up as schedule.
• Advances facilities for Geriatrics and Facility for Family Medicine and Public Health –
The master plan of AIIMS is under revision whereas it is planned to expand the area
by relocating the existing two storied houses in the main Ansari Nagar Campus. The said
work has been entrusted to CPWD who had indicated that the master plan shall be got

20
prepared by October year. In the said master plan it is conceived to establish super
specialty health care center comprising of Advance facility for geriatrics and of Centre
and Family Medicine and Public Health. In the scheduled plan activities in the Eleventh
five year plan the centers and facilities included are, the already ones which have higher
priority with respect to functionalities. The said two projects as above are stated to be
taken up in the next five-year plan. However the concept planning and the type of design
required for the Master plan of the said two centers shall be included in the current year
itself Plan of the said two centres shall be included in the current year itself.
Recommendations/Observations
6.8 The Committee finds that another set of new projects has been listed to be taken during
2008-09. The Committee strongly feels that new initiatives should be taken up with priority being
fixed for the most needed ones. The Committee would appreciate if these initiatives do not continue
to be on paper during 2008-09. The Committee recommends that funds provided for the AIIMS
in the Eleventh Plan show both optimum and judicious utilization as per the action plan with
additional provision as and when required. The Committee is of the view that an effective
monitoring mechanism to be effected by all concerned both at the institute and the Ministry level
needs to be in place for the purpose at the earliest.
Action Taken
The Institute has informed that they have constituted a Committee consisting of different
Heads from different discipline and they are of the opinion that an effective monitoring mechanism
is effected in the AIIMS.
Recommendations/Observations
6.10 The Committee strongly feels that position is bound to aggravate further specially in view
of increasing number of doctors and nurses leaving the Institute in the recent years. The rate of
exodus of doctors and nurses from the Institute is a cause of serious concern. The Department
needs to devise a strategy immediately to arrest this trend. The Committee would like to be
informed of the remedial steps taken in this regard.
Action Taken
There is no exodus of faculty from AIIMS. The trend seen over the last ten years shows
that about 7-8 doctors leave AIIMS every year. The trend may be seen in the background of
coming up of new corporate hospitals in and around Delhi during this period. The faculty members
who had left the institute during the last ten years have either taken voluntary retirement or
resigned from the service of the Institute “ON THEIR PERSONAL GROUNDS”.
It is stated that during the year 2008, only one faculty member has taken voluntary
retirement from the service of the Institute so far. However, in order to stem this tendency,
numbers of facilities/allowances are being extended to the faculty members of the Institute, which
are not available for faculty members working in other institutions. A copy of the details of such
facilities/allowances is at 
Annexure-VII.
VII. POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH
Recommendations/Observations
7.4 The Committee takes a serious note of the following projects originally scheduled to be
completed during the Tenth Plan, which are not seeing the light of day and are continuing in the
Eleventh Plan also with their scheduled dates of completion being revised once again:—

21
ANNEXURE-A OF REPORT
The Committee is of the view that there is some inherent problem in the implementation of
projects, namely, the Advanced Cardiac Centre, Setting up of additional 66KV sub-stations and
Advanced Trauma Centre. The Committee in its earlier Report had critically reviewed
implementation of these projects but it appears that no concrete steps have been taken so far. The
projects continue to remain behind schedule with the final expenditure going beyond the sanctioned
cost. The Committee would like to be informed about the remedial measures taken by the Institute
in this regard.
Action Taken
The detailed status alongwith the reasons for delay in respect of Advanced Cardiac Centre,
66KVA Sub Stat ion and Advanced Trauma Centre is as under:—
I. ADV ANCED CARDIAC CENTRE
Brief History – The work was originally approved in 41st SEC held on 22.12.97 and
Expenditure Sanction was obtained vide EFC meeting held on 28.04.2000 for an amount of
Rs.2072.00 lakh. The approval of DNIT and Technical Sanction of the estimate was
obtained in Eleventh PIC held on 01.08.2001 vide agenda item no. 6. Because of the
inadequate provision in the original scope of work and changes/ additions in the scope, the
1st and the 2nd revised cost sanctions were necessitated.
The sanction for 1st Revised cost estimate was obtained by the SFC meeting held on
13.07.2005 and ratified by GB vide no. E3/2005/5985 dated 11.08.2005 for an amount of
Rs.2964.00 lakh and for 2nd Revised cost estimate vide letter no. V .17020/34.2006-ME.II
dated 04.09.06 for and amount of Rs.610.00 lakh.
Reasons for Delay
1. Cost enhanced due to increase in the plinth area from 2,60,000 sq. ft. to 2,85,000 sq.ft.
2. Inadequate provision in the original scope of work i.e. in civil Works, Fire Fighting
and Fire Alarm, Electrical works, air Conditioning etc.
3. Initially, air conditioning was proposed only in main Operation Theatres, Cath labs,
Emergency and ICU’s. Now it has been extended to all the patient care areas, surgical/
Medical OPD, EMGE may, Blood Bank, Admn. block, Private rooms, wards, labs and
diagnostic areas, OPD, Faculty offices etc.
4. EFC approval was given in April, 2000 for Rs.2072.00 lakh first revised amount was
approved on 11.8.2005 and second revised cost was approved on 04.9.2006 which
was necessitated because of in adequate provision initially and changes/addition in
scope. This resulted in the delay in execution.
Present Status – The building shall be completed by August, 2008 as per scope of 2nd
revised cost estimate.
II. 66 KV SUB STATION
Brief History – The Chandigarh administration has been asking to take one point supply for
all electrical load required for existing as well as various new buildings/centre coming in the
institute.
The work was administratively approved amounting to Rs.609.00 lakh in the 47th SEC
committed dated 17.11.2005. This work was awarded to BBMB as a Deposit Work.

22
Reasons for delay
1. The BBMB invited the open tenders through press and the tender opening date had to
be extended 3 times because of the poor response and finally when the tenders were
received the rates of lowest bidder was much higher then the estimated cost.
2. The BBMB referred the matter to PGI, to give revised approval based on the tender
cost. Accordingly the case was taken up for revised administrative approval to various
bodies of the institute such as Standing Estate Committee, Standing Finance
Committee, Governing Body and finally EFC and planning commission sanctioned the
revised cost estimate of Rs.1174.00 crore on 13th March, 2007.
3. Thereafter the BBMB was allowed to take up the execution of this work.
Present status – The work is likely to be completed at site in July, 2008.
III. ADV ANCED TRAUMA CENTER
Brief History - This is Ninth Plan project amounting to Rs.10.00 crore sanctioned in
April, 2000. This work could not start at site due change in scope of work i.e. addition/
deletion of O.T. Block and other various administrative reasons. Revised administrative
approval was obtained on 21st February, 2006 amounting to Rs.1745.00 lakh and
immediately thereafter, the work was awarded to CPWD as a Deposit Work. The actual
construction started at site in August, 2007.
Reason for delay
(a) Changes in the scope of work.
(b) Initially this work was given to CPWD as a deposit work later on this work was put
to tender by Engineering wing of the Institute.
(c) Revised administrative approval was obtained on the 21st February, 2006.
(d) This work was again given to CPWD as a deposit work since the Engineering wing
was occupied with other major construction activities in the campus.
Present status – This work is likely to be completed in December, 2008.
Recommendations/Observations
7.6 The Committee observes that vacancies in a premier medical educational institute like
PGIMER, Chandigarh will affect the quality of medical professionals passing out from there. The
Committee urges the Institute to take all conceivable measures so as to fill up the vacant posts at
the earliest. The Committee also impresses upon the Institute to augment the staff strength by
providing better perks/salary and incentives along with conducive working environment for them.
Action Taken
The category-wise reply in respect of staff is as under:—
Faculty Posts:–Faculty posts includes Professor, Additional Professor, Associate Professor
and Assistant Professors. 65 posts of faculty were filled up during December, 2007/
January, 2008. Further, it is informed that 15 posts of Professor and 63 posts of Assistant
Professor are being notified (including vacancies arise during the period on account of new
creation retirement/resignation etc.). The process for the recruitment will be completed
within next six months.

23
Senior/Junior Residents:–The posts of Senior and Junior Residents are tenure posts and
filled up twice a year by open advertisement. Presently 106 posts of Senior Residents have
been notified and shall be filled up by June, 2008.
Non Faculty Posts:–There are 485 vacant posts but due to ban imposed by the Government
of India, clearance of Screening Committee of Ministry has been sought. 62 posts of non
faculty have been referred to the Government of India for clearance of Screening
Committee. As and when the clearance will be received from Ministry, the vacancies will
be notified accordingly.
Nursing:–99 posts of Nursing staff was advertised and the recruitment is under process
which is likely to be completed within next 2-3 months. Moreover, it is also added that the
vacancies of nursing staff is arising due to high attrition rate i.e. generally 8-10 nurses are
leaving the job every month for lucrative job opportunities abroad on the one pretext or the
other.
Paramedical Staff:–The Departmental Promotion Committee for the promotional posts are
under process. After finishing the process of DPC, the net available vacancies at the feeder
cadre will be notified for direct recruitment.
Teaching (Lecturer/Tutor Technician etc.):–All the 14 posts have been notified, applications
received and likely to be filled up shortly.
VIII. NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND
MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG
Recommendations/Observations
8.5 The Committee is happy to note that considerable progress has been made in
operationalization of NEIGRIHMS during 2007-08. The Committee is, however, perturbed to note
that no improvement could be made so far as manpower required for the Institute is concerned.
Like 2006-07, position remained unchanged during 2007-08 also.
Action Taken
Efforts to improve the faculty position during the year 2007-08 continued. The Institute has
conducted interviews since April, 2008 for 42 faculty positions. 40 appeared for interview of which
28 were selected, appointment letters issued to 22 candidates and 9 have joined. Incentives like
Assessment Promotion Scheme, Children’s Education Allowance and reservation of 2 MBBS seats
from the Central Pool for the children of NEIGRIHMS faculty, fully furnished quarters have already
been extended. The total faculty position has also improved. A total of 36 faculty posts have been
filled up. Similarly, 745 supporting staff have also been appointed during the period.
Recommendations/Observations
8.6 The Committee would like to point out that efforts made by the Department for getting the
teaching/specialists faculty posted/deputed from Armed Forces Medical Services have not been
successful due to shortage of senior faculty in the AFMS cadre also. The Committee would again
emphasize that it does not have much faith in the collaboration measures reported to be made with
Institutions like NIMHANS and Dr. Cherian’s Frontier Lifeline. The Committee is not aware how
far the efforts for clinching similar agreements with CMC-Vellore, CMC-Ludhiana, Amrita Institute
of Medical Sciences, Kochi, AIIMS and PGIMER would prove to be successful. The Committee
fails to comprehend how the Departments of Neurology, Neuro-Surgery and Cardiology could be
made operational at the Institute located at Shillong by hiring the services of faculty of NIMHANS

24
located at the other comer of the country. Same would be the position with the proposed tie-up
with other Institutes. The Committee would also like to point out that the Department must be fully
aware about the shortage of faculty at these premier Institutes also. The Committee strongly feels
that such stop-gap arrangements, even if made, cannot make the Institute fully functional. Target
of making 500 bedded hospital and teaching Institute at Shillong is thus likely to remain on paper
only for considerable time. The Committee reiterates that the Department has to make all
conceivable efforts for having permanent faculty at the Institute. Special incentives and extra
facilities have to be worked out for attracting the required manpower to the Institute. Collaboration
with leading Institutes/public-private partnership can be feasible for limited number of posts and
period only. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the present status of phase-I of
filling up of 725 posts and phase-II of filling up of 794 posts.
Action Taken
The Undergraduate Medical College with 50 seats intake has already been started from
18.9.2008 and the full 500-bedded hospital is expected to be made functional by the year end. The
out patient load of the hospital has increased fourfold in the past five months and the bed
occupancy risen to about 75%.
With the inception of the Medical College and implementation of the Sixth Central Pay
Commission recommendations, a better response to the Institute’s efforts at recruitment of
permanent faculty is expected.
The collaborations proposed with various Institutions could not be taken up in view of
difficulties in operationalising the arrangements worked out between NIMHANS and Dr. Cherian’s
Foundation. At the moment, none of the collaborations are being further explored. The Institute is
redoubling its efforts to recruit permanent faculty, especially in view of the factors elaborated
above.
IX. CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, RANCHI
Recommendations/Observations
9.2 The Committee notes that against a provision of Rs.10.00 crores in 2007-08 only an amount
of Rs.3.86 crores could be spent upto 29.02.2008. The Committee is constrained to observe
that position has been the same during the entire Tenth Plan period. Out of total provision of
Rs.62.20 crores, utilization of only Rs.30.17 crores could be reported by the end of the Plan
period.
Action Taken
The actual plan expenditure during the financial year 2007-08 was Rs.9.79 crore
(Rs.6.79 crore in Revenue and Rs.3.00 crore under Capital) against the Budget Estimate 2007-08
of Rs.10.00 crore (Rs.7.00 crores in Revenue and Rs.3.00 crore in Capital).
The total expenditure during the Tenth Plan period was Rs.42.17 crore (Rs.31.74 crore in
Revenue and Rs.10.44 in Capital) against the total allocation of Rs. 63.90 crores (Rs.31.42 crores
in Revenue and Rs.32.49 crore in Capital).
The Institute had utilized the allocation made under Plan–Revenue budget. The Capital
Budget which was routed through the Ministry of Urban Development could not be utilized despite
requirement of various capital constructions including renovations of old wards and facilities. In
order to overcome this problem, during 2007-08, the Capital allocation was provided directly to the
Institute and therefore, the fund was utilized fully.

25
X. V ALLABH BHAI PATEL CHEST INSTITUTE, DELHI
Recommendations/Observations
10.2 The Committee is not aware about the details of developmental projects–both ongoing and
proposed, to be taken up during the Eleventh Plan period. The Committee would like to be
informed of the activities along with the developmental plans of the Institute for which the funds
have been proposed for the Eleventh Plan.
Action Taken
The details of developmental projects – both ongoing and proposed, to be taken up during
the Eleventh Plan period is at Annexure-VIII.
XII. IMPROVEMENT OF NURSING SERVICES
Recommendations/Observations
12.2 However, the Committee is surprised to observe unsatisfactory level of achievement under
the quantifiable deliverables/physical outputs set for 2007-08. The first target set was training of
8000 nursing personnel through 48 identified Nursing Institutions. By the end of the year, no
progress seems to have been made from the details made available to the Committee. Proposal for
conducting 78 courses for training of 2340 nurses was under process. Training of additional 1600
nurses depended upon proposals to be received from the Institutions. The Committee has been
informed that out of 30 institutions, funds could be released for strengthening of 23 institutions.
Status of these institutions is, however, not-known. The Committee would also like to point out
that projects like upgradation of RAK College of Nursing into Centre of Excellence, upgradation of
School of Nursing into College of Nursing at Dr. R.M.L. Hospital, Safdarjung Hospital and Lady
Harding Medical College and establishing a College of Nursing in JIPMER, Puducherry have been
there for the last few years with no evidence of progress being made. Only exception is College
of Nursing at Lady Harding Medical College reported to have started functioning in 2007. The
Committee hopes that required manpower and infrastructure has been made available there.
Action Taken
In fact the conducting of training courses depends on the number of nurses who are
deputed for undergoing training. In view of the exigency of their work in the hospitals, it becomes
difficult sometimes for the authorities to relieve the required number of nurses for undergoing
training. However, efforts will be made to pursue with the hospital authorities to depute the
maximum number of nurses for joining the training programmes in the identified Nursing
Institutions. As regard strengthening of Institutions, funds have been released to 34 Institutions.
Apart from L.H.M.C. the College of Nursing at JIPMER, Puducherry has been established and
started functioning since 2006. It is proposed to start the College of Nursing at Dr. R.M.L. Hospital
and Safdarjung Hospital for B.Sc. (Nursing) course from the current year.
Recommendations/Observations
12.3 The Committee is not very hopeful as upgradation of School of Nursing at Dr. R.M.L.
Hospital has also been listed as one of the targets to be achieved during 2008-09. The Committee
would like to reiterate that all these projects need to be closely monitored so as to ensure their
completion with in the time schedule without any cost escalation in the original estimate. The
Department should not be a mere spectator, it should devise some mechanism for proper utilization
of the funds and its repeated contention that the utilization/grants of funds depends upon receipt

26
of SOE/UCs is not acceptable to the Committee. The Department has to play a more proactive role
in co-ordination with the hospital/college authorities. The problem areas, wherever noticed, need to
be removed at the earliest.
Action Taken
The Dr. R.M.L. Hospital has already initiated action for obtaining recognition from Indian
Nursing Council and getting affiliation from the University. It is hopeful that the colleges start
functioning from the year 2008.
The Department will make all out efforts to have better coordination with the hospital/
college authorities for maximum utilization of grant.
Recommendations/Observations
12.9 While appreciating the initiatives, the Committee would like to point out that out of total
nursing strength of 3015 in Central Government Hospitals in Delhi, only 795 nursing personnel have
been provided with accommodation. If such unsatisfactory conditions are in Delhi, the Committee
can well imagine the conditions in State Government Hospitals. The Committee strongly feels that
residential facilities for Nurses need to be augmented at the earliest. The Committee recommends
to the Department to formulate a comprehensive policy to stop exodus of nurses as also to offer
more incentives so as to make the profession more attractive for arresting this trend.
Action Taken
In order to augment the residential facilities for Nurses, action is being initiated to obtain
proposals from the Central Government Hospitals including State Government of Delhi for taking
necessary action. In addition it is proposed to take up the matter with Ministry of Urban
Development in this regard.
On the basis of representation of cause of nurses, VI Pay Commission has taken special
care of nurses to provide them incentives. A proposal has also been moved for increase in the age
of retirement from 60 to 65 years in respect of Nursing Teaching Faculty. These steps are in the
direction to make the nursing profession more attractive.
XVI. NA TIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME (NACP)
Recommendations/Observations
16.6 The Committee is dismayed to note that progress made under several components of the
programme is abysmal and the trend has been continuing irrespective of the issue being raised again
and again. The Committee has been viewing with serious concern the trend of targets remaining
under-achieved in the past few years. Last year, the Committee was given to understand that non-
procurement of blood bank equipment seriously hampered the modernization of District Level Blood
Banks. Non-availability of STD specialists and specialized STD services were held responsible for
target set for STD clinics. The Committee has been given to understand that instead of the
previous emphasis on opening of STD facilities, now targets are being set for the number of STD
cases treated. The Committee would, however, like to point out that readjustments of targets will
not result in having the required STD specialists and services. The Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendation of formulating a comprehensive plan for the training of doctors in handling AIDS
cases. The Committee recommends to the Department to inform it about the major problem areas
in the implementation of National AIDS Control Programme and the corrective measures taken/
proposed by the Department to overcome the same.

27
Action Taken
(i) It is submitted that the physical targets for 39 district level blood banks and one
plasma fractionation unit are the project targets for NACP — III (2007-12) and not
the physical targets for 2007-08.
Out of 39 blood banks, 5 blood banks were to be taken up in 2007-08. This target
has been achieved during 2007-08. Another 4 blood banks will be taken up in 2008-09. The
remaining blood banks are at various stages of construction which is the responsibility of
the respective State Governments. These blood banks will be taken up once the civil
construction is completed and manpower deployed as these are mandatory requirements for
obtaining a license.
Regarding the establishment of one plasma fractionation centre, it is submitted that one
Plasma Fractionation Centre will be set up during Phase III of NACP (2007-12). This will
be a production unit with capacity to process 1.5 lakh liters of plasma annually to prepare
plasma components like Albumin, Gammaglobulin, Thrombin and Anti Haemophilic Factor
etc. The establishment of such a centre requires in depth work on design, construction,
procurement of equipment manpower deployment etc. The EFC cleared the proposal at its
meeting held in March, 2008 for a total outlay of Rs.250.00 crore. As advised by the
Department of Expenditure, the Cost Benefit Analysis of the proposal is being worked out.
On completion of this analysis, matter will be processed to obtain CCEA approval for the
proposal. The process of civil works etc. will be initiated during 2008-09.
The target of 40 blood component separation units could not be achieved in the
year 2007-08 because of delay in procurement of equipment, this was completed only in
March, 2008. Delivery of Cell Counter has been completed for all 40 centres and the
dispatch of the remaining equipments i.e. Refrigerated Centrifuge, -40
0 and -80 0 C Deep
Freezers Platelet Agitator and Laminar Flow Bench will be completed in the month of
June, 2008. These units will be made functional in July, 2008.
(ii) In NACP-III, special efforts have been made to strengthen STD clinics by improving
the infrastructure as well as by training general duty medical officers in Syndromic
STD case Management. In order to ensure optimal utilization of the STD Clinics,
targets have been set for treating STI episodes not only in the designated STI clinics,
but also at sub district health facilities. As 80% of STD patients go to private doctors,
mapping of private doctors having large client load has been taken up in 100 districts.
These doctors will be trained and monitored.
(iii) Regarding the establishment of sentinel surveillance sites, the target of 196 sites has
been kept for the project period of NACP III. The sentinel sites are selected based on
the epidemiological situation. Recently in April, 2008, an international consultation was
organized by WHO to review the existing HIV surveillance systems in the country.
Further expansion will be taken up based on their recommendations.
(iv) The District units have been established in the 31 A&B category districts of Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu by nominating a senior medical
officer to coordinate programme activities and monitor implementation. The district
units will be expanded to other States. Operational Guidelines have been prepared to
ensure that the district units are integrated with the district health society.
Medical officers and other health personnel are trained in designated centres before
starting an integrated counseling and testing centre (ICTC) and an anti-retroviral therapy
(ART) centre.

28
Recommendations/Observations
16.7 The Committee would recommend to the Department to continue its consultations with the
states that have either suspended or banned the programme and achieve consensus in implementing
the scheme.
Action Taken
The AEP is a key intervention to build life skills and help adolescents cope with negative
peer pressure, develop positive behavior, improve sexual health and to reduce vulnerability or risk
of HIV infections. Ministry of Human Resource Development scaled up the Adolescence Education
Programme (AEP) in collaboration with NACO as a classroom based co-curricular activity and also
allocated 16 hours for the same. As on 31st March, 2007, 1,14,345 schools were covered out of
1,44,409 Secondary schools in the country and around 2.88 Lakh teachers trained under this
programme.
Under the programme, nodal teachers are trained for AEP instruction for 16 hours per
academic year for students in class IX and XI. These sessions include growing up, adolescence,
STIs/RTIs and HIV/AIDS, life skills for HIV prevention. Question boxes and activity sessions are
also carried out to clarify doubts and dispel myths and misconceptions. Recent activities
undertaken-In response to some concerns expressed on the AEP instruction materials, in
consultation with MHRD, a National Level Toolkit Review Committee comprising of academicians,
educationists, child psychologists, mental health experts, communication experts, representatives
from non-Governmental organizations, National Council of Education Research and Training
(NCERT) and Central Board of secondary Education was constituted to review the education
material. The revised material is under review and will be made available by end June. It is
proposed to send this prototype toolkit to the State Education Department, to hold consultations
with key stakeholders such as parents, teachers, principals, NGOs, faith based organizations,
educationists and child psychologists at regional and State levels to finalize the modules. The
material will also be placed on NACO website and comments invited. It is expected that this
process will be completed by November 2008 and the AEP programme taken up from December
onwards. The states where the programme has been suspended have already been requested to
achieve a consensus by constituting such committees.
Recommendations/Observations
16.8 The Committee appreciates these priorities of the Department and recommends to the
Department to inform it about the specific steps taken by it for achievement of the same.
Action Taken
Under the Blood Safety component of the National AIDS Control Programme, four new
initiatives have been undertaken viz. (a) Establishment of four Metro Blood Banks as Centres of
Excellence in Transfusion Medicine; (b) Establishment of one Plasma Fractionation Centre;
(c) Establishment of National Blood Transfusion Authority and (d) Formulation of a Law to regulate
blood collection and distribution. All these activities require highly skilled technical expertise and
centre specific civil construction. International assistance has been sought from GTZ (Government
of Germany) and WHO. While the activities are being started this year, it will take 3 years or more
to operationalise these initiatives.
The status of implementation of these new initiatives is as follows:
(a) Establishment of Metro Blood Banks –  The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)
in its meeting dated 4th March, 2008 approved the proposal for establishment of four Metro

29
Blood Banks. A Note for the Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs (CCEA) has been
prepared. The CCEA approval is expected to be received by early July, 2008. The process
of identifying a consultant to develop architectural drawings and bid document for selection
of agencies to take up construction is being initiated.
(b) Establishment of one Plasma Fractionation Centre – The Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) in its meeting dated 26th March 2008 approved the proposal for
establishment of one Plasma Fractionation Centre in the country subject to developing a cost
benefit analysis. This is under preparation by a lead consultant. The CCEA Note is expected
to be submitted for approval by mid July.
(c) and (d) Establishment of National Blood Transfusion Authority –  To streamline
Blood Transfusion Services in the country, a National Blood Transfusion Authority is
proposed to be established as an independent body under the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare. Accordingly, a draft Blood Transfusion Act has been prepared by the National
AIDS Control Organisation. The final draft is ready for submitting to the Ministry of Law,
Department of Legal Affairs for examination and approval.
Under the Blood Safety component of the National AIDS Control Programme, four new
initiatives have been undertaken viz. (a) Establishment of four Metro Blood Banks as Centres of
Excellence in Transfusion Medicine; (b) Establishment of one Plasma Fractionation Centre;
(c) Establishment of National Blood Transfusion Authority and (d) Formulation of a Law to regulate
blood collection and distribution. All these activities require highly skilled technical expertise and
centre specific civil construction. International assistance has been sought from GTZ (Government
of Germany) and WHO. While the activities are being started this year, it will take 3 years or more
to operationalise these initiatives.
Recommendations/Observations
16.10 The Committee is happy to note that though delayed, the Department has taken the desired
step towards starting the second line of treatment to lessen the sufferings of drug resistant patients.
The Committee would like to recommend to the Department to put in place an effective mechanism
so that no patient in need of second line ART is deprived of it.
Action Taken
Second line Drugs have been rolled out at two centres on a pilot basis. Scale up of the
second line drugs will be based on the experience gained at these centres. The second-line drugs
are proposed to be initiated only at the 10 Regional Centres of Excellence being developed by
NACO. This is being done to have a regulatory mechanism to monitor the patients on second-line
for 100% adherence as there is no third-line ARV . The steps involved in the roll out includes
training of health-care providers, making available facilities for viral load testing and a monitoring
mechanism as explained above.
Recommendations/Observations
16.12 The Committee is not fully inclined to agree with the contention of the Ministry. Some of
the corrective measures in centralized procurement as mentioned below clearly indicate that besides
deficiencies at the state level, implementation at the Central level was also not upto the mark:—
➢ Procurement responsibility shifted from Procurement Support Agencies to the United
Nations Office for Project Services for Bank supported operations.
➢ Creation of Financial Management Group at the Health Ministry.

30
➢ Development of detailed guidelines and operational manuals for procurement of
NGOs and Public-Private Partnerships.
➢ Introduction of evaluation of NGO performance by Committee having one external
evaluator.
➢ Termination of contracts of about 25% NGOs.
➢ Pre-award validation/certification of WHO GMP made mandatory in all cases.
Action Taken
Following is our submission regarding the observations made above:
➢ The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has established an Empowered Procurement
Wing (EPW) to professionalize the procurement of health sector goods and services
under guidance of an internationally selected consultancy firm (Crown Agents). Till
such time the procurement and supply management capacities of the EPW, are
developed, all International Competitive Bidding/Limited international Bidding and
National Competitive Bids, estimated to cost more than US$l00,000 for goods and
works under National AIDS Control Organization (NACO) and State Implementation
Societies (SIS) are to be carried out by a qualified procurement agency selected on
basis of Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) or through a UN agency. In view
of the foregoing, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have entered into an agreement
with UNOPS to act as procurement agency for central health sector projects including
NACP III.
➢ The Financial Management Group was formed at the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare for better monitoring and control of the available resources and ensure that
funds released to the implementing agencies are optimally utilized.
➢ With the aim of improving, strengthening and standardizing the quality of interventions,
NACO developed detailed technical guidelines on procurement of NGOs/CBOs and
Public Private Partnerships. The guidelines outline key procedures in standards to be
maintained, financial procedures, procurement stock and inventory, budgeting,
reporting, legal and statutory matters. In addition, guidelines on programme
management have also developed and SACS and NGOs trained/oriented on how to
implement them.
The operational guidelines provide for stringent procedures of selection consisting of
Calling for expression of interest are given out on national/regional newspapers,
screening of applications through desk reviews, conducting field appraisals by the JAT
(independent committee consisting of experts from technical and financial background
and members from Government Organisations) and short listing by TAC (Technical
advisory committee) for final selections.
➢ Regarding discontinuation of 25% of NGO’s, the facts of the case are that at the start
of NACP Phase-III, all 952 NGO’s implementing Targeted Interventions were
evaluated. The evaluation done by a team consisting of an external expert
recommended the termination of 163 NGO’s amounting to 17% of the total on various
grounds ranging from coverage of non focus groups; financial and programme
mismanagement inadequacies.
➢ Pre-award validation/certification of WHO GMP made mandatory in all cases Schedule
M (Revised) of Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules has been made mandatory for all
pharmaceutical manufacturers in India and is therefore applicable for goods procured

31
through National Competitive Bidding (NCB). Since the Schedule M (Revised) of Drugs
and Cosmetics Act and Rules has not been accepted by the development partners as
equivalent to WHO GMP, a Certificate of Pharmaceutical Products (COPP) i.e., Good
Manufacturing Practices (GMP) as per WHO scheme has been stipulated as an
essential requirement in all procurement of pharmaceuticals products being made by
UNOPS under International Competitive Bidding (ICB).
XVII. NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME (NCCP)
Recommendations/Observations
17.3 Against a Tenth Plan allocation of Rs.333.00 crores, enhanced provision of Rs.2871.92 crores
including a provision of Rs.471.92 crores for Tobacco Control has been made for the Eleventh
Plan. While welcoming this initiative of the Government, the Committee is constrained to point out
that level of utilization has to keep pace with the enhanced provision. The Committee has been
persistently highlighting the need for better management and co-ordination of all concerned.
However, the position remains unchanged. Against the Tenth Plan allocation of Rs.333.00 crores,
utilization reported at the end of the year was only Rs.252.95 crores. The Committee finds that
year 2007-08, which is the first year of the Eleventh Plan failed to bring any improvement. Plan
allocation of Rs.140.00 crores for 2007-08 for the NCCP was reduced to Rs.70.00 crores at the
RE stage. The expenditure reported upto 29.02.2008 is only Rs.40.31 crores. Similarly, Plan
provision of Rs.40.00 crores for Tobacco Control had to be brought down to Rs.29.00 crores with
utilization of only Rs.7.63 crores by 29.02.2008.
Action Taken
As per the existing guidelines, only one time assistance can be provided to the Institute
irrespective of the cost of the equipment. As per the present condition, Rs.3.00 crore is the
maximum amount that can be provided to the institute for Development of Oncology Wing. Since
the inception of the scheme, most of the institutions had claimed the grant-in-aid, the scheme had
come to a saturated point and this Ministry is receiving very less number of proposals seeking
grant-in-aid under the scheme.
Finalization of the EFC for the Eleventh Five Year Plan is under process and is likely to
be completed shortly.
Recommendations/Observations
17.5 The Committee takes a serious view of total lack of initiative on the part of the Department
so far as implementation of National Cancer Control Programme is concerned. The Committee
strongly feels that its following observations made in the 25th Report have failed to make any
impact on the Department:—
“The Committee is not satisfied with the citing of a number of procedural formalities
as the major factor for undue delay in the release of funds by the Department. It is for
the Department to take a pro-active role by pursuing with State Governments for sending
viable proposals. As admitted by the Department, the proposal for upgradation of nine
existing RCCs into Centre of Excellence was considered only during the last quarter of the
year and five institutions were approved for funding. However, due to non-availability of
required funds, only four institutions could be funded. What is more disturbing is that the
entire allocation of Rs.8.70 crore earmarked for N-E Region remained unutilised for want
of complete proposals. Keeping in view the experience of 2006-07, the Committee
recommends to the Department to put in place an effective monitoring mechanism for
implementation of Cancer Control Programme.”

32
It is a sorry state of affairs that at the end of the year, a large number of proposals
received for different components were at a ripe stage but due to paucity of time and some
technical deficiency found in the proposals, the same could not be materialized. It is high time that
an effective monitoring mechanism in co-ordination with all the implementing agencies is put in
place without any further delay.
Action Taken
Ministry of Finance provided an amount of Rs.25.00 crores to be equally distributed among
the 5 selected RCCs for “upgradation of the existing RCCs into centre of excellence” during the
year 2006-07. However, due to non-availability of required funds, only four institutions (three in
full and one partially) could be funded. During the year 2007-08 an amount of Rs.4.00 crore was
provided to RCC Trivendrum being the balance amount as Rs.l.00 crore was released during
2006-07 and Rs.5.00 crore was released to Dr. B.B. Cancer Institute, Guwahati as the Fifth
Institution.
Status of NE State:
➢ An amount of Rs.5.00 crore was released to Dr. B.B. Cancer Institute, Guwahati for
making the Institute as Centre of Excellence during the year 2007-08.
➢ Rs.22.00 lakhs under District Cancer Control Programme to RCC Guwahati covering
district of Barpeta, Nalbari and Darang during the year 2007-08.
➢ Cancer Hospital, Tripura has been recognized as 27th RCC in the State of Tripura and
an amount of Rs.5.00 crore is likely to be released to the institute.
For settlement of the pending utilization and also timely utilization of grant-in-aid, this
Ministry interacts with the representatives of the RCC, involved Regional Director (Health and FW)
in inspection and monitoring the Institute and also called meeting with the representative of the
State Governments including In-charge of concerned hospitals.
Recommendations/Observations
17.7 The Committee recommends to the Department to take up its case more vigorously and
with sound reasoning with the State Government of West Bengal for early handing over of the
piece of land for early construction of the campus of CNCI, Kolkata.
Action Taken
The matter has already been taken by Hon’ble HFM with the Hon’ble Chief Minister of West
Bengal for early handing over of the land to enable this Ministry to start the survey /construction
activities for the development of second campus of CNCI.
Recently, CNCI, Kolkata had a meeting with HIDCO (land providing agency of West
Bengal). HIDCO has agreed to hand over the possession of 05 acres of land for taking permissive
possession for carrying out pre-construction activities like soil testing, pilling work, construction
of boundary wall etc.
XIX. NA TIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME (NMHP)
Recommendations/Observations
19.4 The Committee is constrained to note that in spite of approved outlay being drastically
reduced to nearly half for the National Mental Health Programme, the expenditure reported upto

33
29th February, 2008 is a meagre 14.13 crores. A proposal for releasing funds to the extent of
Rs.22.165 crores (including Rs.4.71 crores for NE) was stated to be under consideration. The
Committee takes a serious view of the continuing trend of poor utilization of funds earmarked for
the programme.
Action Taken
According to the Tenth Plan Scheme of the National Mental Health Programme, all the
proposals for extending District Mental Health Programme, Upgradation of Psychiatric Wings of
Government Medical Colleges/General Hospitals and Modernisation of Government Mental Hospitals
are to be submitted by the State Government concerned to the Central Government for
consideration. These proposals are first examined by a Working Group and the recommendations
of the Working Group are placed before the Steering Committee under the chairmanship of
Secretary (Health and FW) for approval. Besides, approval of IFD is also obtained in the matter.
The proposals not recommended by the Working Group are got corrected by the State
Governments/Institutions. Non-receipt of adequate number of complete proposals in time from the
State Governments leads to lesser release of grant-in-aid and consequently under utilization of
Budget allocation of the National Mental Health Programme.
For effective and efficient implementation of the programme, periodical interactions with the
State Governments have been held. A review meeting on NMHP with the State Health Secretaries/
Directors of Health Services/Nodal Officers was held in February, 2007. A meeting was also held
with the Health Secretaries of States in July, 2007 in which implementation of NMHP was, inter
alia, discussed. Regional Meetings were held during August-September, 2007 with the State Nodal
Officers for NMHP to review progress of implementation of the Programme. Review meetings on
the implementation of NMHP were also held on 3rd March and 25th March, 2008. All the
representatives of State Governments were requested to submit proposals for assistance under
various components of the Programme and to submit financial year-wise Utilisation Certificates
along with Audited Statements
In order to overcome these problems, it has been envisaged in the EFC Proposal on NMHP
for implementation during the Eleventh  Five Year Plan, to decentralize the programme and also to
integrate it with National Rural Health Mission. Grants under different schemes to a particular State
would be released through the State Health Society along with the schemes and guidelines for
NMHP. S tate Nodal Of ficer representing the programme in the State Health Society would get the
grants released for various districts and institutions. At the district level, the Programme Officer
would represent the programme in the District Health Society and facilitate operationalisation of
DMHP.
A proposal for releasing funds to the extent of Rs.22.165 crore through the State Health
Societies was under consideration but this could not materialize, as the I.F.D./competent authority
did not approve the proposal, pending the approval of the EFC Proposal on NMHP for
implementation during the Eleventh  Five Year Plan.
Recommendations/Observations
19.6 Committee is dismayed at the fact that the expansion of the National Mental Health
programme envisaged for the Eleventh Plan is yet to be approved. The Committee recommends to
the Department to present its case strongly and effectively so as to get necessary approval without
further delay. Further, the Department can not simply shy away from its responsibility by stating
that progress of the events in these scheme depends on the active cooperation of the State
Governments and other stake holders. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to
approach and have regular interactions with the State Governments concerned and identify the

34
problem areas which need to be addressed. The Department should be proactive so as to motivate
the State Governments to participate in the programme actively and furnish proposals with all
requisite information to enable release and utilization of the funds optimally. The Committee would
like to be informed of the remedial measures taken by the Department in this regard.
Action Taken
The EFC Proposal on NMHP for implementation during the Eleventh Five Year Plan has
been circulated among the appraisal agencies i.e.  Department of Expenditure and Planning
Commission. The proposal will be taken up for approval of the Expenditure finance Committee
soon.
For effective and efficient implementation of the programme, periodical interactions with the
State Governments have been held. A review meeting on NMHP with the State Health Secretaries/
Directors of Health Services/Nodal Officers was held in February, 2007. A meeting was also held
with the Health Secretaries of States in July, 2007 in which implementation of NMHP was, inter
alia, discussed. Regional Meetings were held during August-September, 2007 with the State Nodal
Officers for NMHP to review progress of implementation of the Programme. Review meetings on
the implementation of NMHP were also held on 3rd March and 25th March, 2008. All the
representatives of State Governments were requested to submit proposals for assistance under
various components of the Programme and to submit financial year-wise Utilisation Certificates
along with Audited Statements.
It has been envisaged in the EFC Proposal on NMHP for implementation during the Eleventh
Five Year Plan, to decentralize the programme and also to integrate it with National Rural Health
Mission. Grants under different schemes to a particular State would be released through the State
Health Society along with the schemes and guidelines for NMHP for effective implementation of
the programme. State Nodal Officer representing the programme in the State Health Society would
get the grants released for various districts and institutions. At the district level, the Programme
Officer would represent the programme in the District Health Society and facilitate operationalisation
of DMHP.
Recommendations/Observations
19.8 The Committee would like to point out that majority of districts in the country continue to
remain outside the purview of District Mental Health Programme. Only 100 districts have been
covered so far, with another 125 new districts proposed to be brought under the programme during
2008-09.
The Committee would like to emphasize that all the districts need to be covered at the
earliest. All efforts need to be made in this direction.
Action Taken
It has been envisaged in the EFC Proposal on NMHP for implementation during the Eleventh
Five Year Plan, to extend the District Mental Health Programme to all the Districts of the Country
in a phased manner.
XXII. V ACANCIES IN CHS CADRE
Recommendations/Observations
22.3 Now that the Sixth Pay Commission has submitted its recommendations, the Committee
would recommend to the Department to expedite the implementation of the Javed Chaudhary

35
Committee recommendations. The Committee would like to be informed of the progress made in
this regard.
Action Taken
The present status of the implementation of the recommendations of Javed Chaudhary
Committee is at Annexure-XIII.
XXIII. NEW SCHEMES
Recommendations/Observations
23.2 The Committee is dismayed to note that every year the Department announces new
schemes/programmes, many of which are without finalizing the modalities and proper ground work,
thereby resulting in under or no utilization of funds. The Committee recommends to the Department
to enhance its efforts to complete all necessary formalities and launch the programmes at the
earliest so that funds do not get blocked in such schemes.
Action Taken
Most of the Schemes were introduced during 2007-08 It being the first year for
implementation, there was slow progress in appraisal/approval of the schemes which slowed down
the pace of expenditure. The implementation process has gradually gained momentum and the
progress in this regard for certain schemes is given as follows:—
• Pilot project on Prevention and Control of Human Rabies.
• Leptospirosis Control Programme.
The two projects, initially envisaged for five years have been revised in consultation with
Integrated Finance Division and approval of the competent authority has now been obtained to
carry out the projects on pilot basis for two years only.
Project on Prevention and Control of Human Rabies is being carried out on pilot basis in
four cities, namely Delhi, Ahmedabad, Bangalore and Pune, whereas Leptospirosis Control
Programme is to be carried out on pilot basis in three States.
The strategy for implementation of the respective pilot projects has been firmed up and the
action plans have also been drawn for the current year. Nodal Officers in pilot cities/States have
been identified and Core Groups have also been constituted for implementation of the projects.
Draft MoU are under progress. Terms of Reference for appointment of Consultants and Data Entry
Operators under the projects have been formulated. Proforma for collection of base line data and
also for surveillance of respective diseases have been finalized and circulated to the concerned
cities/States. Steps are being taken to strengthen the laboratories and for preparation of IEC
material.
• National Organ Transplant Programme – The National Organ Transplant Programme is
at an advanced stage of formulation. The programme is to be proceeded by
amendments in the THOA Acts and Rules. The amended rules have been notified. The
Cabinet note for amending the THOA is under circulation to concerned Ministries.
• Oral Health – While the Ministry has been in the process of preparing an EFC proposal
for the programme, the Ministry of Finance issued instructions in June, 2008 to the
effect that no new scheme/programme should be launched in the current financial year
even if Budget provision has been made for the same unless it has been mentioned in

36
the Finance Minister’s Budget Speech for 2008-09. As this programme was not
mentioned in the Finance Minister’s Budget Speech, further action in the matter was
held in abeyance.
Nevertheless, in the meeting of Senior Officers under the chairmanship of Secretary
(H&FW) held on 19th August, 2008, it was decided to merge this programme with
National Rural Health Mission. Ministry is in the process of examining the proposal
from this angle, to finalise those parts of the Scheme that can be merged with NRHM.
• National Programme for Health Care for Elderly – The EFC for National Programme
for Health Care for Elderly has been submitted to IFD.
• National Centre for Disease Control – Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in view
of emerging and re-emerging of infectious diseases and rapid response thereto,
proposed to transform National Institute of Communicable Diseases into National
Centre for Disease Control (NCDC). During discussions with Planning Commission on
the EFC note for the proposal, it was suggested that an Independent appraisal of the
Institution should be undertaken and DPR should be prepared. Accordingly, appraisal
of the institute has been conducted by IIT, Delhi. Further, Consultant for Bid Process
Management has been selected for preparing the concept paper for NCDC. The
process for selection of agency to prepare DPR is likely to be initiated shortly. Once
the DPR is prepared, revised EFC memo with the anticipated expenditure will be
submitted.
• National Programme on Sports Injury – The EFC for the Sports Injury Centre at
Safdarjung Hospital has been approved. Work is held up on account of litigation
involving the State and Centre.
• National Advisory Board of Standards – National Advisory Board for Standards has
already started functioning.
XXIV. MISCELLANEOUS
Recommendations/Observations
24.2 The Committee recommends the Department to work out modalities for establishing
specialized kidney centers immediately and in the mean time approach the Planning Commission for
funds with a proposal to improve dialysis facility in the country. In view of increasing gap in
demand and supply, at least the well known Institutes across India should be provided with the
dialysis machines during the current financial year. The Committee would like to be informed about
the steps taken by the Department in this regard.
Action Taken
There is shortage of Dialysis facilities in the country. Health is state subject and it is for
state Government concerned to provide the health care facilities to the general public. There is
shortage of qualified doctors to run the dialysis machines. There are very few centres which are
providing D.M. (Nephrology) super specialty courses and there are about 500 such specialities in
the country. Curriculum for training of physicians for dialysis is being finalised in collaboration with
IGNOU with a view to start short term training programmes to bridge the gap. Efforts are being
made to initiate the standalone dialysis in the CGHS Delhi. In this regard, some proposals are under
consideration and expert opinion has been taken. Till such time, CGHS patients are reimbursed the
money spent by beneficiaries on Dialysis in the private sector. Similarly other organised sector and

37
Government employees who are covered under similar insurance schemes namely CS (MA) and
ESI are provided the reimbursement.
Central Government institutions e.g. AIIMS, PGI, JIPMER, RML Hospital and Safdarjung
Hospital are already having Dialysis facilities and further upgradation is done from time to time.
There is decentralised decision making in the Health Care Delivery System under National Rural
Health System and State Governments can require equipments themselves.
National Organ Transplant Programme is being finalised and likely to be initiated soon.

38
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.3 The Committee observes that Oversight Committee has been granted only Rs.100.00 crores
against last year’s approved outlay of Rs.600 crores, which, however, could not be utilized. In the
light of the recent Supreme Court’s judgment and the Government’s propensity towards
implementing it from this year itself, the Committee opines that the funds would not be sufficient.
Similarly against proposal of Rs.453.00 crores, only Rs.329.00 crores have been provided
to CGHS; against projected requirement of Rs.87.88 crores, Safdarjung Hospital has received
Rs.50.00 crores; Dr. RML Hospital has been allocated Rs.59.20 crores against projected
Plan requirement of Rs.72.11 crores and Rs.68.95 crores against Non-Plan requirement of
Rs.71.88 crores; AIIMS has been granted Rs.452.00 crores in Grant-in-Aids against projected
requirement of Rs.753.00 crores and against the projected total requirement of JIPMER for
Rs.150.80 crores, it has received only Rs. 98.00 crores. The Committee observes that under
provisioning in many of the Institutes is likely to adversely affect the completion of construction
and developmental activities undertaken by them and in the process the Institutions.
Action Taken
An allocation of Rs.150 crores as proposed by the Ministry had been approved by the
Planning Commission for Oversight Committee for 2008-09. However, at the time of finalizing the
scheme-wise outlays the matter was still sub-judice , as such this allocation was reduced to Rs.100
crores and the balance of Rs.50 crores shown against MIS scheme under NRHM where there was
inadequate resource allocation. This reduction was made in consultation with Planning Commission
with the understanding that in the event of the 27% reservation being operationalized, the amount
will be re-appropriated for this purpose trom out of the budget available. If necessary, additional
allocations will also be sought for the purpose as this activity was not envisaged at the time of
formulation of the Five Year Plan.
In respect of hospitals like Dr. RML, Safdarjung and other medical institutions, Planning
Commission had classified the schemes under broad heads and indicated the overall allocation
against these heads. Thereafter, the Ministry taking into account the trend in expenditure and the
utilization levels as on 31st January, 2008 finalized the scheme-wise allocations. The broad heads
of classification amongst others include strengthening of hospitals and dispensaries and
redevelopment of hospitals/institutions. The details of the proposed outlays and that finally allocated
scheme-wise under these broad heads are given in the tables below:
(Rs. in crores)
Sl. No. Name of the Scheme Proposed Outlay Approved Outlay
12 3 4
Strengthening of Hospitals and Dispensaries : 219.91 150.00
38

39
12 3 4
1 Central Government Health Scheme 80.00 50.00
2 Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi 16.00 12.00
3 All India Institute of Physical Medicine 3.10 3.00
and Rehabilitation, Mumbai
4 Dr. R.M.L. Hospital, New Delhi 95.91 70.00
5 Others (Institution for Human Behaviour 24.90 15.00
and Allied Sciences, AIISH, Mysore)
(Rs. in crores)
Sl. No. Name of the Scheme Proposed Outlay Approved Outlay
Redevelopment of Hospitals/Institutions 1013.32 550.00
1 All India Institute of Medical Science 250.00 162.00
and its Allied Department, New Delhi
2 P.G.I.M.E.R, Chandigarh 150.00 50.00
3 J.I.P.M.E.R, Pondicherry 174.60 98.00
4 Lady Harding Medical College and 100.00 45.00
Shrimati S.K. Hospital, New Delhi
5 Kalawati Saran Children Hospital, New Delhi 15.00 15.00
6 RIMS, Imphal, Manipur 110.00 65.00
7 LGBRIMH, T ejpur, Assam 56.00 31. 00
8 RIPANS, Aizwal, Mizoram 14.35 14.00
9 Safdarjung Hospital and College, 143.37 70.00
New Delhi.
It will be seen from the above, in view of the overall approved outlays under these two
heads having been drastically reduced, the allocations in respect of hospitals like RML and
Safdarjung and other institutions like AIIMS, JIPMER etc. have been allocated lesser amounts than
what had been proposed. A mid-year exercise will be done to assess the requirement of funds
required by these institutions based on the activities planned and supplementary sought from
Ministry of Finance.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee was given to understand that the overall approved outlays under two
heads- strengthening of hospitals and dispensaries and redevelopment of hospitals/
institutions have been drastically reduced vis-a-vis the proposed outlay. Hospitals like RML
and Safdarjung and other institutions like AIIMS, JIPMER etc. have been allocated lesser
amounts than what had been proposed. The Committee is constrained to observe that time
and again it has been pointing out to the Department to place its case before the Planning
Commission for funds allocation in an effective way, yet it appears that once again the

40
Department has not been able to present its case convincingly. The Committee is of the
view that lesser approved outlay often stems from past trends of sub-optimum utilization of
funds and the issues incidental thereto. The Committee would, therefore, recommend to the
Department to have a right approach in this regard by making a correct assessment of
requirements of funds for the different activities and place the same effectively before the
Planning Commission. The Committee would also like to impress upon the Department to
take effective measures so as to ensure optimum and judicious utilization of allocated
funds.
Recommendations/Observations
2.11 The Committee welcomes the proposal of the Department to introduce a provision in the
Sanction itself regarding audit of all centrally sponsored programmes, PSUs under the Department
and autonomous bodies which are receiving Grant-in-Aid. The Committee recommends to the
Department to expedite the same and intimate the progress made in this regard.
Action Taken
A D.O. letter dated 19th March, 2008 from Chief Controller of Accounts level sent to Joint
Secretaries of Department with request to incorporate the condition in all Grants in aid sanctions/
releases that “The accounts of the grantee institution/organisation shall be open to inspection by the
sanctioning authority and audit both by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India under the
provisions of CAG (DPC) Act, 1971 and Internal Audit by Principal Accounts Office of the
Ministry, whenever the institution or organisation is called upon to do so”. The progress made in
this regard will be intimated on receipt of reply from the Department.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee observes that action regarding audit of all centrally sponsored
programmes, PSUs under the Department and autonomous bodies receiving Grants-in-Aid
has been initiated by the Department. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
latest position in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations
2.12 Besides the names of Bodies/Programmes which would be covered during 2008-09, the
Committee would like to be informed about the centrally sponsored health programmes, PSUs and
autonomous bodies which were audited during 2007-08 along with the adverse audit findings and
the action taken by the Department thereon.
Action Taken
The names of bodies/Institutions/Societies/Programmes/Grantee Institutions which were
covered during 2008-09 is at Annexure-I.
As far as audit during 2007-08 of the centrally sponsored health programmes and
autonomous body is concerned, the list of units alongwith the copy of adverse audit findings
(paras) is at Annexure-II.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that out of the five units where adverse audit findings were
made during 2007-08, compliance in case of only one has been received. The remaining four

41
units have some serious audit paras against them. The Committee would appreciate if the
matter is taken up with these units urgently so that the irregularities reported are
reconciled and a sense of financial accountability prevails. Status Note in this regard may
be furnished to the Committee.
III. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS)
Recommendations/Observations
3.5 The Committee would like to point out that situation is some what different. Problems are
being faced both by the CGHS functionaries and beneficiaries. Technicians, Junior staff manning
counters in dispensaries and attending doctors need to be fully trained. Practical problems like
internet and electricity failure have to be tackled by having an alternative arrangement. These initial
teething problems should not be allowed to be prolonged. At present, beneficiaries which include
senior citizens also are being made to wait for hours at the dispensaries. Their ordeal starts right
from the registration counter and continues upto delivery of medicines. The Committee would
appreciate if all the measures including training, smooth running of computers with full
connectivity, backup for power failure are taken at the earliest and also closely monitored.
Action Taken
The Speed of Internet has improved w.e.f. 1st April 2008. After discussing with MTNL
Internet speed has been enhanced to 2mbps at dispensaries with effect from 1.4.2008.
NIC has also strengthened the Computer servers to improve better connectivity. The
support of Data Entry Operators at Dispensaries is continuing. MTNL has identified Nodal officers
specifically to address the internet related complaints of CGHS dispensaries. NIC has also
earmarked eight Supervisors to take care of software related problems at dispensaries. The project
is closely monitored by Additional Directors, CGHS, Director, CGHS, Sr. Technical Director, NIC
and Senior Officers of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. In addition regular meetings are held
with officials of MTNL.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee had called for taking measures which includes training of the staff,
connectivity of the computer systems and their backup for power failure. However, the
Department has concentrated on the aspect of internet related issues, viz., enhancing its
speed and software related problems. The issue of training of staff and the power backup
seems to have been ignored at this juncture. The Committee would like to emphasize that
though internet efficiency is a vital aspect of the computerization programme, yet it has to
be seen in totality. The issue of proper training of the staff and the power backup are also
crucial for the success of the computerization exercise. The Committee, therefore, expects
the Department to chalk out a proper strategy in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations
3.6 The Committee has been emphasizing for long for introduction of two shift system in
CGHS. The Committee does not appreciate the contention of the Ministry that a large number of
private hospitals and diagnostic centres have been empanelled under the CGHS and in case of
emergency, beneficiaries can go there for treatment and claim re-imbursement later. The Committee
would like to draw the attention of the Ministry once again to the fact that idea behind having two
shifts in CGGS dispensaries is the inconvenience being faced by the CGHS beneficiaries, majority
of them office goers in going to the dispensaries in the morning hours. The Committee is disturbed

42
by the element of helplessness shown by the Ministry in their candid admission of staff side
vehemently opposing the move. In this era where the service providers like banks etc. are opting
for flexible timings to give their customers maximum possible services, at least the Ministry could
have come forward with a positive and proactive approach. The Committee would reiterate its
recommendation made last year for starting two shifts in a few dispensaries as a test case. One
must not forget that CGHS is a service oriented scheme, supposedly providing health care mainly
to our serving employees and pensioners. It is the responsibility of the Ministry to make the CGHS
employees understand and not to be pressurized by them.
Action Taken
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare intends to take the matter before the Committee
of Secretaries.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee observes that its recommendation regarding starting of two shifts
system in CGHS dispensaries has ultimately resulted in a positive response from the
Department. The Committee would appreciate if the matter is placed before the Committee
of Secretaries at the earliest.
Recommendations/Observations
3.7 The Committee recommends that construction of dispensary in Dwarka where land is
already available should start at the earliest. All procedural formalities should be expedited and
completion of project strictly monitored.
Action Taken
In view of the increase in the number of CGHS beneficiaries (serving/retired) and their
dependants in the sub city of Dwarka, the competent authority accorded approval for relocation
of CGHS dispensary in Dwarka in lieu  of closure of Moti Nagar dispensary, where the daily
average attendance is low. The beneficiaries now attached to Moti Nagar dispensary will be
adjusted in nearby dispensaries.
DDA has been requested for handing over the possession of three allotted plots of land in
Dwarka at Sectors 6, 8 and 12, which has been followed by reminders. Reply from DDA is still
awaited.
Presently no suitable accommodation is available for housing CGHS Dispensary in Dwarka.
However, efforts are continuing for locating suitable accommodation in Dwarka for the opening of
a dispensary at Dwarka.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee was given to understand that land for CGHS dispensary was available
in Dwarka. The Department has in its recent update had admitted that it had been allotted
three plots of land in Dwarka at Sectors 6, 8 and 12. The problem cited here is that the
construction work of a dispensary could not be started for want of a formal possession of
the plots being given by the DDA to the Department. The Committee has been apprised that
reminders have been sent to the DDA and their reply is still awaited. The Committee is
unhappy to note that in the name of expediting formalities only reminders have been sent.
The Committee fails to understand the reasons for undue delay on the part of DDA in

43
providing possession of the plots in Dwarka when the same had already been allotted. It is
high time that  the Department takes up the matter at the highest level in DDA in the
interest of a large number of CGHS beneficiaries residing in Dwarka. The Committee would
also like to point out that even after possession of land, it will take considerable time in
the opening of CGHS dispensaries in Dwarka. Concerted efforts are, therefore, required to
be made for getting suitable accommodation till then so as to get at least one Dispensary
operational there.
Recommendations/Observations
3.8 The Committee is surprised to note that even after two years, suitable accommodation for
housing the dispensary in Sector 82, Noida and Gurgaon could not be managed. Secretary (Health)
Government of Haryana is now being requested to allot a building for CGHS Dispensary in
Gurgaon. Proposal for housing the CGHS Dispensary in Community Centre, Sector 82, Noida on
rent-basis is under consideration. The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry should pursue the
two proposals in hand so that large number of CGHS beneficiaries residing in these two areas do
not continue to remain deprived of health care any more.
Action Taken
Status of CGHS dispensary at NOIDA
Efforts have been made for housing the dispensary after “In Principle Approval” obtained
for opening extension counter of NOIDA Sector 37 at Greater NOIDA. Efforts have been made
by requesting Chairman (CEO) Greater NOIDA for allotment of suitable accommodation. Recently
Chairman, Greater NOIDA Industrial Development Authority, District Gautam Budh Nagar (U.P.), in
his communication has expressed willingness to provide accommodation at a monthly rental of
Rs.91,473/-. As the rent demanded is considered to be too high for the extension counter, the
Ministry is exploring the possibility of acquiring land for the dispensary.
Status of CGHS dispensary at Gurgaon
Efforts have been made for housing the dispensary after “In Principle Approval” obtained
for opening of a CGHS dispensary at Sector 56 Gurgaon in March 2006. In March, 2007 an
advertisement was released in leading News Paper for hiring accommodation for the dispensary
to which there is no response. Letter was written to the Secretary, Government of Haryana on
1.4.2008 for allotment of a building for CGHS Dispensary. However till date no allotment has been
made.
As soon as accommodation for opening of a dispensary is made available in Sector 82,
NOIDA and Sector 56, Gurgaon, necessary steps will be taken to make them functional.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is constrained to note that the Department has adopted a lacklustre
approach in the matter. It has been close to three years since the in-principle approval for
opening the new CGHS dispensaries in Sector 82 Noida and Gurgaon was given by the
Planning Commission and in the name of action, only a request to Chairman (CEO) Greater
NOIDA for allotment of suitable accommodation has been made, which however has not
materialized due to high rent cost. Similarly, in case of Gurgaon Dispensary, after a gap of
one year since in-principle approval, an advertisement was issued in March, 2007, which
however didn’t attract any response. Further, it took one more year to write to the
Secretary, Government of Haryana for allotment of CGHS Dispensary. No efforts seem to

44
have been taken since then. The Committee is unhappy with this kind of lackadaisical
approach of the Department. If this is the state of affairs at present, the Committee can
well imagine that it may take even a decade to start the two dispensaries. The Committee
would, therefore, recommend to the Department to make every conceivable effort so that
the two dispensaries are made functional at the earliest and the large number of
beneficiaries residing in these areas get proper CGHS facilities.
Recommendations/Observations
3.9 The Committee recommends to the Department to take the issue on priority with the Ministry
of Finance to complete all the procedural formalities so that necessary posts are created and
subsequently filled up. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the cadre strength created
as a result of implementation of SIU report and the efforts taken so far to fill up the vacant posts.
Action Taken
The SIU study was done in all the 20 CGHS covered cities at that relevant time. SIU study
report has been implemented in 19 CGHS covered cities except Delhi which is under process in
consultation with Finance Division in the Ministry. The department is taking up the issue of
creation of posts in all 20 CGHS covered cities.
The cadre strength after implementation of SIU in 19 CGHS covered cities are as under:
Cadre Strength as per SIU in 19
CGHS covered cities
Medical Officer 564
Pharmacists 503
LDC 252
Staff Nurse 157
Group D 783
Chowkidar 128
Safaiwala 158
Lab Technician 65
Lab Assistant 48
Lab Attendant 48
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that SIU study report has been implemented in 19 CGHS
covered cities except Delhi which is under process in consultation with the Finance Division
in the Ministry. The Committee has also been informed that issue of creation of posts in
all the 20 CGHS covered cities is being taken up by the Department. The Committee
expresses its deep concern on undue delay taking place in such a vital area. No progress
seems to have been made since the presentation of 27th Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department. The Committee is also not aware about
the time frame for implementation of SIU Study Report in Delhi. The Committee reiterates
that the entire process of creation of posts in all the 20 CGHS covered cities should be
completed in a time-bound manner with monitoring at all levels.

45
Recommendations/Observations
3.12 The Committee recommends that all out efforts be made for reduction in the consultation
fees to 2% for procurement of drugs/medicines for CGHS as assured by the Ministry and the
Committee be informed accordingly.
Action Taken
Reference to the specific query of the Committee, the matter was taken up with HSCC vide
letter No.F.No.27-15/05-06/CGHS/MSD dated 06-10-05 to reduce the consultancy fee of 4.5% to
2%. The present contract is valid upto November, 2008.
CGHS Delhi has moved a proposal to explore the possibilities of direct procurement of
proprietary/branded medicines as per the rates approved by MSO through rate contract system. If
the proposal is approved by the competent authority, there will be saving on the consultancy fee
being paid to HSCC.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee hopes that the proposal for direct procurement of proprietary/
branded medicines as per the rates approved by MSO through rate contract system has been
approved by the competent authority leading to savings on heavy consultancy fees being
paid to HSCC.
Recommendations/Observations
3.13 The Committee is happy to note that these ad hoc  arrangements would continue until
further orders. The Committee would, however, like to emphasize that empanelment of these
hospitals should be made on permanent basis, specially in view of cancer patients undergoing
prolonged and costly treatment. The Ministry has to play a proactive role in such matters.
Action Taken
The ad hoc arrangement is further notified to continue till December 31st, 2008 or
empanelment of Cancer Hospitals, whichever is earlier. The cancer hospitals in Delhi are not part
of the empanelled hospitals because the rates that emerged out of tendering process was not
acceptable to them. CGHS has constituted a committee headed by the Additional Director General
of Health Services. As cancer treatment involves a complex procedure of surgical intervention and/
or chemotherapy and/or Radiotherapy, the committee has already initiated action for fixation of
various packages and its rates for treatment of cancer patients under CGHS which may be
acceptable to all stake holders. After the exercise is completed, the rates could be offered to the
hospitals and those hospitals which accept the rates would be empanelled under CGHS.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee expresses its strong reservation on the continuance of ad hoc
arrangements with regard to empanelment of cancer hospitals for CGHS beneficiaries. The
Committee is not aware about the progress made by the CGHS Committee with regard to
fixation of various packages/rates for treatment of cancer patients. The Committee can well
imagine the plight of cancer patients till a final decision is arrived at, which would
ultimately depend on the willingness of hospitals for accepting the rates offered leading to
their empanelment. It seems that CGHS beneficiaries, specially the cancer patients, would
continue to suffer. There is an urgent need for review of empanelment procedure so that
a situation does not arise where patients needing extensive medical care continue to be
deprived of the same.

46
Recommendations/Observations
3.14 The Committee notes that under the revised exercise, rates in respect of Bangalore, Chennai,
Hyderabad, Jaipur, Kolkata, Lucknow, Mumbai, Nagpur and Pune have been issued. The Committee
hopes that rates for the remaining cities would be issued at the earliest. The Committee would like
to be apprised about the level of difference in the rates for major hospitals/diagnostic centres in
the metro cities.
Action Taken
The revision of rates for all other CGHS cities have been completed and duly notified.
A comparative chart showing CGHS rates for four Metropolitan cities is at Annexure-IV .
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee has been provided with the revised rates for various investigation
and treatment procedures under CGHS in the four metro cities. The Committee is surprised
to note substantial variation in the approved rates for many investigation/treatment
procedures. In many cases there has been a variation of 50%. Further, there are several
cases where the rates vary upto two to three times in the metro cities which the Committee
is not able to reconcile itself with. If such is the level of variance in rates in different
metro cities, the Committee can well imagine about the difference in CGHS rates prevalent
in other cities. The Committee places on record its deep concern in this regard. Either there
is some inherent problem in the procedure or there may be some mismanagement. The
Committee would like to be apprised in detail about the procedure along with criteria for
approval of CGHS rates for the various cities.
IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL AND V ARDHMAN MAHAVEER MEDICAL COLLEGE,
NEW DELHI
Recommendations/Observations
4.3 The Committee apprehends that the present allocation of funds to the Hospital might
adversely affect its services and in the process, the large number of patients. While cautioning the
Hospital to utilize its allocated funds judiciously and optimally, the Committee recommends that it
should be granted adequate funds to meet its functional requirements.
Action Taken
As regards current Financial Year 2008-09, projected requirement was Rs.144.08 crore
while Rs.50.00 crore (SJH) and Rs.20.00 crore (VMMC) has been allocated.
Major Head 2210 PLAN – SJH Rs. 50.38 crore Rs. 30.300 crore
Major Head 2210 PLAN – VMMC Rs. 5.50 crore NIL
Major Head 4210 PLAN – SJH Rs. 88.20 crore* Rs. 20.00 crore
Major Head 4210 PLAN – VMMC      – Rs. 20.00 crore
T
OTAL: Rs. 144.08 crore Rs. 70.00 crore
(*Initially Rs.31.20 crore was projected for 2008-09 B.E. but later on revised to Rs.88.20 crore
vide letter No. AC (B)/R.E. and B.E. 2008-09 dated 26.10.07).

47
• Thus there is a shortage of Rs.21.80 crore under Sub Head–Salary and Rs.3.36 crore
under Sub Head–Supplies and Material. Therefore, we will be able to make payment
of Salary only for six months. Shortage of funds under the Sub Head Supplies and
Material will result in non procurement of Medicines and Disposables which will
adversely affect the patient care.
• Under Major Head 4210-SJH, Rs.88.20 crore was projected but only Rs.20.00 crore
has been provided. This will result in non-procurement of Machinery and Equipment
which are essential for upgradation of various departments and affect the various
Major Works/Maintenance undertaken by this Hospital and CPWD.
• In addition to the above Rs.9.30 crore was projected under Major Head 4216
(Residential) for construction of staff quarters but this has also not been provided.
Keeping in view the above, the requisite funds may kindly be provided at the earliest
so that the development work/upgradation of this Hospital is not hampered.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee in its Report had recommended to the Department to provide adequate
funds to the Safdarjung Hospital to meet its functional requirements. The Committee is
anguished to note that in the name of the Action Taken in this regard, the Department
appears to have just forwarded the status given by the Hospital administration. The
Department has not come up with any assurance or plan of action in this regard. The
Committee notes that inadequate provision is likely to result in non procurement of
Medicines and Disposables thereby adversely affecting the patient care and the various Major
Works/Maintenance undertaken by this Hospital and CPWD and the construction of staff
quarters would also be put on hold. The Committee therefore recommends that urgent steps
be taken to provide additional funds to the Hospital, which caters to the needs of the poorer
sections of the people, not only from Delhi but also from the adjoining and far off areas.
VI. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS)
Recommendations/Observations
6.11 The Committee is deeply concerned about the matter as the Institute is one of the best
training grounds for the doctors and that too at highly subsidized rates involving precious tax
payers’ money. The Committee is of the view that this brain drain is on two counts – higher
studies and lucrative assignments. At the same time, the Committee is also of the opinion that some
policy or enactment should be made so that tendency of leaving the Institute by doctors/nurses can
be minimized. This could be in the form of a monetary bond or post qualification compulsory
service. The Committee strongly feels that urgent steps are required to be taken so as to ensure
an ideal working environment for our young talented doctors along with all the incentives
comparable to those enjoyed by private sector doctors to the extent possible. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard which should not be only AIIMS specific but
should also cover all the Government medical institutions.
Action Taken
Presently, there is no proposal to consider an enactment of Law requiring trained medical
professional to leave the country only after serving for a requisite number of years in the country.
Presently, there is no proposal to consider an enactment of Law requiring trained medical
professional to leave the country only after serving for a requisite number of years in the country.

48
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
Nobody can deny the fact that our country is facing shortage of medical
professionals. Not only this, precious public money is being used to pay for the subsidized
education in the Government institutions, some of which are renowned ones. The
Committee, therefore, strongly feels that some policy guidelines are  urgently required to be
framed so that trend of our doctors and nurses leaving the country is checked. The
Department can not shy away from its responsibility to frame such a policy which is
required in public interest.
Recommendations/Observations
6.12 The Committee is given to understand that the Valiathan Committee had submitted its report
on the functioning of AIIMS more than a year ago. The Committee is surprised to note that only
follow up action taken so far is a meeting held under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Health and
Family Welfare) with Director, AIIMS on the 1st March, 2008. The Committee was informed that
the matter was now under Government’s consideration. The Committee is not happy with the
undue delay in the implementation of Valiathan Committee recommendations. Any further delay
would simply negate the very purpose of setting up such a Committee, that too at the directive
of the Prime Minister. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department to expedite the
implementation of the V aliathan Committee Report.
Action Taken
V aliathan Committee has made a number of recommendations for overall development of
AIIMS with reference to its aims and objectives and improvement in its functioning. The report
is under active consideration of the Government.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that it has been about two years since the Valiathan
Committee submitted its report on the functioning of AIIMS. In a meeting held on the
14th November, 2008, the representatives of the Department inter alia  stated that action on
some of its recommendations had taken place. It was also stated that the recommendations
pertain to some short-term and some long-term goals. Action in case of short-term goals
would take place within 5-6 months and in other cases it would take a longer period. While
recommending speedy action on the recommendations of the Valiathan Committee, the
Committee would like to have a status note in the matter especially about the
recommendations which have been implemented and the time-frame within which the
remaining would be implemented.
Recommendations/Observations
6.13 The Committee can only hope that the Burns Unit, duly approved, will be made operational
by the targeted date.
Action Taken
As per recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee, a proposal for setting up Burns
Unit in the JPNA Trauma Centre, AIIMS was placed before the Standing Finance Committee of the
Institute in its meeting to be held on 07.05.2008. The proposal has approved. Now, the minutes
of the SFC will be placed before the IB/GB for approval.

49
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee has been pursuing the matter of setting up of a Burns Unit in
AIIMS. The Committee notes that the proposal for setting up a Burns Unit in the JPNA
Trauma Centre, AIIMS has been approved by the Standing Finance Committee of the
Institute on the 7th May, 2008. The Committee finds that the minutes of the Standing
Finance Committee have now to be approved by the Institute Body/Governing Body. The
Committee once again emphasizes that this matter needs to be pursued vigorously by both
the Department and the Institute authorities so that the proposed Burns Unit starts
functioning at the earliest. Present pace of progress has to be expedited in a time-bound
manner otherwise the proposal will continue to remain on paper for years.
VII. POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH
Recommendations/Observations
7.5 The Committee feels that with an allocation of only Rs.50.00 crores, majority of the
projects would remain on paper only. Past experience of even allocated funds, inspite of being
much below the projected requirement, remaining under-utilized does not indicate any noticeable
improvement in 2008-09 also. The Committee strongly feels that setting targets and time-frame just
for the sake of formality is not the proper strategy. Not only does it result, in escalation of project
costs but it will also affect the overall development plans of the Institute. The Committee would
like to be informed of the initiatives taken by the Institute for timely completion of these projects.
Action Taken
For the financial year 2008-09, the Institute has submitted a demand of Rs.153.80 crores
for the new projects which are yet to be approved and other ongoing works against which the
Ministry has allocated only Rs.50.00  crores.
New projects
Multi level Parking Phase-I/Phase-II – Phase-I of the Multi level parking has been completed
and the building has been put into use in May, 2007. For Multi Level Parking Phase-II, the funds
were deposited with CPWD in March, 2008, after obtaining approval from competent authority.
11 KVA Sub-station for Advanced Eye Centre and Advanced Cardiac Centre
The work of l1 KV A Sub-Station for Advanced Eye Centre has been completed and
commissioned where as the work of 11 KVA Sub-Station for Advanced Cardiac Centre shall be
completed by the end of June, 2008.
New Projects
The approval of Eleventh Plan is awaited. However, certain works the sanction of which
were received have been taken up and the progress is as follows:—
10 bedded ICU for Pulmonary Medicine – Completed and inaugurated on June 7, 2008.
New Animal House – The revised sanctioned were received on January 8, 2008 and the
amount has been deposited with Chandigarh Housing Board. The work is likely to be
completed by December, 2008.

50
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee had sought information on the initiatives taken by the Institute for
the timely completion of the new projects, especially in the light of under-utilization of
allocated funds in the past and the subsequent delay in the ongoing projects. The Action
Taken Note submitted by the Department in this regard is a mere statement of the present
status of the ongoing projects. The Committee is constrained to observe that there is no
mention of the initiatives, if any, being taken by the Department for timely completion of
the ongoing and new projects. In the absence of any concrete steps, the Committee
apprehends no improvement in the scheme of things. The Committee would again
emphasize on the fact that the Department needs to devise a proper strategy urgently to
back the targets set for the Institute.
IX. CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, RANCHI
Recommendations/Observations
9.3 The Committee is disturbed by the continuance of such a position that too in a premier
Institute of the country, inspite of availability of funds. The Committee has been informed that an
Expenditure Finance Committee proposal for re-development of the Institute during the Eleventh
Plan is under consideration which includes additional manpower requirement, construction of OPD,
Neurology Block, Casualty and Service Blocks, Hostels and residential quarters as well as
procurement of equipments. The Committee finds that the High Court of Jharkhand is monitoring
the development of the Institute on the pattern of NIMHANS. The very fact that the High Court
is monitoring the development programme of the Institute confirms that all is not well with its
functioning. The Committee would like to be informed about the progress made w. r.t. the proposed
re-development plan and the circumstances leading to the monitoring of the development of the
Institute by the Jharkhand High Court.
Action Taken
In order to address the deficiencies existing, the Institute has submitted an EFC proposal
for Rs.142.86 crores, which includes requirement of faculties, capital construction works and
machinery and equipments. EFC Proposal also includes the Institute’s requirements of Oversight
Committee for the implementation of 27% reservation to the OBC candidates in the various
PG courses. The total allocation for the Institute during the Eleventh Five Year Plan period is
Rs.l00.00 crore only. The EFC Proposal has been circulated among the appraisal agencies i.e.
Department of Expenditure and Planning Commission. On receipt of appraisal reports, the meeting
of Expenditure Finance Committee will be convened.
The High Court of Jharkhand is monitoring the development of the Institute and the last
date of hearing was on 5.5.2008.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is anguished to note that the Department has not supplied the
requisite information sought in respect of the Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi. The
Department has not furnished any update regarding the progress made w.r.t. the proposed
re-development plan of the Institute. It has only stated the previous position that the EFC
proposal has been circulated and is under consideration. From this, the Committee can only
infer that there has not been any progress on this front since quite some time and no
sincere efforts seem to have been taken by the Department to expedite the same. The
Committee is also not happy with the Department for not sharing the circumstances leading

51
to the monitoring of the development of the Institute by the Jharkhand High Court despite
being asked to do so specifically. The Committee would like to be furnished the requisite
information without further delay.
X. V ALLABHBHAI PATEL CHEST INSTITUTE, DELHI
Recommendations/Observations
10.3 The Committee observes that the reply seeking for the details of the short-term training
courses/workshops in respiratory diseases for faculty members and medical practitioners conducted
by the Institute during 2007-08 is not very specific. The Committee would like to be informed of
the same along with proposed workshops, courses etc. in 2008-09.
Action Taken
The details of the short-term training courses/workshops in respiratory diseases conducted
during the 2007-08 is at Annexure-IX.
The proposed workshops, courses, etc. in 2008-09 are at Annexure-X.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is anguished to note that despite its observation regarding the details
of the short-term training courses/workshops in respiratory diseases for faculty members
and medical practitioners conducted by the Institute during 2007-08 not being specific, the
Department has not provided the same again. In Annexure-IX th e contents of Annexure-
X, which is about the details w.r.t. workshops, courses etc. in 2008-09, have been
reproduced. The Committee views this with serious concern. Such an approach is neither
acceptable nor expected from the Department. The Committee, therefore, directs the
Department to be careful in future and provide the requisite information at the earliest.
XI. PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY)
Recommendations/Observations
11.8 The Committee, during the oral evidence of the Secretary had taken a serious view of the
delay in implementation of the project. The Committee, therefore, desires the Department to apprise
it of the progress made in implementation of the project, after every two months.
Action Taken
MoHFW will apprise the Committee of the progress made in the implementation of the
project, after every two months. In-house Consultants and other concerned agencies have been
instructed to furnish a monthly progress report to the MoHFW.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee, during the presentation by the Secretary before it, in connection
with the Demands-for-Grants of the Ministry, had conveyed to him its deep concern over the
delay in the PMSSY Project. Subsequently, the Committee had directed the Department to
furnish a status report regarding the implementation of the Project after every two months,
which was agreed to by the Secretary. In spite of a categorical assurance by the Department
that such a report would invariably be furnished, till date no such report has been furnished
to the Committee. Non- compliance of an assurance given to a Parliamentary Committee is

52
a serious matter. The Committee cautions the Department in this regard and expects that
it would be kept informed of the progress made in the implementation of the project, as
desired.
XII. UPGRADATION OF DIS TRICT HOSPITALS
Recommendations/Observations
13.2 The Committee welcomes the initiative of the Department for upgradation of the District
Hospitals. While recommending priority to the remote and rural area hospitals and those States
where MMR and IMR are high and where maternity facilities are not up to the mark, the
Committee would recommend formulating a mechanism so as to facilitate early selection, granting
and overseeing proper utilization of funds. The Committee would also emphasize that all efforts
should be made to fully utilize the approved outlay of Rs.1500.00 crores for the Eleventh Plan. For
this, targets need to be set and all hurdles in implementation need to be removed. The Committee
has in the past witnessed that funds could not be utilized optimally and many schemes could not
achieve desired success for want of proposals, submission of utilization certificates from State
Governments etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to expedite
scrutiny of the proposals received from the State Governments from the beginning of financial year
2008-09 itself.
Action Taken
This activity alongwith the allocation has been merged with Mission Flexible Pool (NRHM)
as upgradation of District Hospital is already one of the components under that Scheme.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is constrained to observe that the Action Taken Note furnished by
the Department is silent on the basic issues raised by the Committee. Though merging the
activity with Mission Flexible Pool (NRHM), as an administrative decision, may be aimed at
tackling the problems affiicting the scheme, the Department has not categorically stated
about any action w.r.t. Committee’s recommendations regarding giving priority to the
remote and rural area hospitals and those States where MMR and IMR are high and where
maternity facilities are not up to the mark in formulating a mechanism so as to facilitate
early selection, granting and overseeing proper utilization of funds and expediting scrutiny
of the proposals received from the State Governments from the beginning of financial year
2008-09 itself. The Committee would appreciate if the Department takes some pro-active
steps keeping in view its specific recommendations on a very crucial issue of public health.
XIV. RASHTRIYA AROGYA NIDHI
Recommendations/Observations
14.3 The Committee observes that even after more than a decade of setting up of the Fund with
50% of the contribution made by the State/UT to be provided by Central Government, there are
still several States/UTs which have not set up the State Illness Assistance Fund. Every State/UTs
should have such a fund. The Committee would appreciate if this matter is taken up at the highest
level in all such States/UTs.
Action Taken
Almost all the States have established this RAN Scheme. This Ministry is regularly
reminding the States of Uttar Pradesh, Assam, Orissa, Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and

53
Nagaland for setting up of State Illness Fund. Recently, Secretary, Health and Family Welfare, has
again reminded the States/UTs through D.O. letters addressed to all Chief Secretary/Resident
Commissioners on 14th November, 2007. Further, the Department is thinking of D.O. letters to the
States/UTs Chief Ministers/Health Ministers for expediting the work of setting up of State Illness
Fund.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that the Department has approached the State Governments of
U.P., Assam, Orissa, Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Nagaland for setting up
of State Illness Assistance Fund. The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need
for having such a fund in these States. The Committee once again urges upon the
Department to take up this vital matter of public interest with the concerned State
Governments at the highest level.
Recommendations/Observations
14.4 The Committee feels that in order to facilitate easy access to quality health care to the poor
and down trodden strata of our society, the limit of Rs. 50,000 under immediate financial assistance
fund, per case, for which funds are placed at the disposal of Medical Superintendents of above
hospitals, need to be enhanced realistically for treatment of dreaded diseases like AIDS, Cancer etc.
Some of the major states like U.P., Assam, Karnataka, Kerala and Jammu and Kashmir do not have
such a fund. With only a very few major hospitals located in metros having extended facility under
the fund, people of such States/UTs are being deprived of medical care for no fault of theirs. From
the details of funds released to States/UTs during 2005-08, it is very clear that such states are
having negligible funds at their disposal. The Committee wonders about the adequacy of such State
Funds. The Committee is of the view that with the increasing rate of inflation and also increasing
number of patients suffering from major diseases, an assessment of the Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi
should be made at the earliest. Necessary changes may be made thereafter. The facility of financial
assistance should be extended to more hospitals so as to cover the geographical limits of the
country. The Committee also recommends to the Department to give wide publicity to the scheme
specially in the hospital campuses to generate awareness so that the same can be utilized by the
needy and poor patients.
Action Taken
Regarding providing of immediate financial assistance to the extent of Rs.50,000/- per case
to critically ill, poor patients, living below the poverty line and undergoing treatment, the Medical
Superintendent of Government Hospitals/Institutes have been provided with a revolving fund of
Rs.10 to 20 lakhs. The proposal of financial assistance has been increased to less than or
equal to Rs.1 lakh per case and the proposal has been accepted by Managing Committee of RAN/
HFM.
Regarding the North East States, the NEIGRIHMS, Shillong and Regional Institute of
Medical Sciences Hospital (RIMS), Imphal has requested that the RAN Scheme may also be
extended to this Institute on the lines of AIIMS, PGI, Chandigarh, JIPMER., Puducherry etc.. The
proposal has been accepted by the Managing Committee of RAN.
Regarding the facility of financial assistance extended to more super specialty hospitals/
Institutes, in State/UTs level, the Ministry will write to State/UTs Governments to set up revolving
funds from the State Illness Funds.

54
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee welcomes the Department’s move regarding increase in financial
assistance to less than or equal to Rs.1 lakh per case and extension of the facility to the
NEIGRIHMS, Shillong and Regional Institute of Medical Sciences Hospital (RIMS), Imphal.
The Committee would appreciate if steps are taken for a realistic increase in the revolving
fund to cater to the demands of poor patients and some concrete action is taken for
extension of the scheme to other hospitals. The Committee would also like to point out that
the Department’s reply is silent on the issue of giving wide publicity to the scheme
especially in the hospital campuses to generate awareness so that the same can be utilized
by the needy and poor patients. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken
by the Department in this regard. The Committee would also appreciate if an assessment
of the Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi is made at the earliest. The Committee strongly feels that
such an exercise would result in identification of problem areas and necessary remedial
steps.
XVI. NA TIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME (NACP)
Recommendations/Observations
16.5 The Committee is constrained to note that against a Plan provision of Rs.815.00 crores
which was increased to Rs.953.89 crores at the RE stage during 2007-08 for NACP, expenditure
reported upto 13th March, 2008 was only Rs.767.34 crores. The Committee observes that optimum
utilization has not been achieved in any of the components of NACO. The Committee notes that
the Department has not been able to achieve optimum utilization of funds during 2006-07 also. The
Committee was given to understand that procedural delays in the procurement of equipment and
non-utilization of funds placed at the disposal of other Ministries like Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment and Information and Broadcasting were the main factors for under-utilization of
allocated funds during 2006-07. The Committee is afraid that similar reasons would be given
for 2007-08 also. It seems that weekly monitoring meetings at NACO level and quarterly
monitoring meetings with the State SACs followed by visits of teams of officers to the States to
ascertain the progress of work and level of expenditure have failed to make any noticeable
improvement. In view of enhanced allocation of Rs.1100.00 crores made for 2008-09, the
Committee recommends to the Department to take immediate corrective measures and make every
conceivable effort so as to ensure optimum and judicious utilization of funds.
Action Taken
The National AIDS Control Programme has utilized more than 96% of the allocated
funds since 2005-06. In the year 2005-06, the expenditure was Rs.532.7 crore against an RE of
Rs.533.5 crore (99.85%). Subsequently in the year 2006-07, the utilization came down to 96.7%
due to the non-utilization of funds at the disposal of MOSJE, I&B as well as the delays in
procurement process for a few items.
The amount allocated for 2007-08 was Rs.815.00 crores. In October, 2007 a request for
an enhanced allocation of Rs.977.8 crore was made. This additional amount was for
accommodating the Global Fund grants of Rs.139.00 crore under Round-VI. Despite constant
reminders, the revised allocation of Rs.954.00 crore was made only in the month of February-
March, 2008 which gave us little time to take up the implementation of some activities. However,
despite this constraint, NACO was able to incur an expenditure of Rs.926.21 crore against a FE
of Rs.943.34 crore accounting to 98.18 per cent. During the current financial year Rs.1100.00
crore has been allocated. Steps are being taken to ensure full utilization.

55
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is given to understand that steps are being taken to ensure full
utilization of funds during 2008-09. Y et no specific steps have been stated. In the opinion
of the Committee merely stating that steps are being taken to ensure full utilization
without specifying the steps being taken/to be taken is not adequate. The Committee,
therefore, would like to be apprised of the concrete steps being taken/contemplated to be
taken to obviate the possibility of under-utilization of funds sanctioned by Parliament.
Recommendations/Observations
16.13 From the information available with the Committee, it notes that services of as many as 177
NGOs have been discontinued. Besides that 48 Community Care Centres being run by NGOs have
been discontinued after on site evaluation. The Committee is dismayed at the fact that an alarming
percentage of NGOs were blacklisted and had to be removed. The Committee is not inclined to
admit that the whole problem was at the district level of officials. The Committee opines that either
this is a case of poor monitoring mechanism at the Department level or there is more to the matter
than what is visible. The Committee would like to have a Status Note on the performance of
NGOs, unspent balances available with the blacklisted NGOs and action taken for the recovery of
the same. Details of all similar cases/discrepancies related to NACO and the action taken by the
Department/CBI in that regard may also be furnished to the Committee.
Action Taken
The World Bank had conducted a Detailed Implementation Review (DIR) in 2006-07 for the
period 1999-2006 for the bank funded health sector projects, including the National AIDS Control
Programme Phase II. The bank had raised issues related to the selection of NGOs in Maharashtra,
Karnataka, Orissa and Chhattisgarh, inadequate monitoring and possibility of bribery and instances
where equipment for blood banks and diagnostic kits were not as per laid down guidelines. Many
of the allegations were anecdotal based on ‘confidential information’. The DIR report did not have
evidence or relevant material on individual persons who could be held responsible for malafide
reasons. The shortcomings noticed were systemic in nature. NACO took a detailed review and
senior officers visited the States. As there appeared to be some evidence of corruption by the then
Project Directors of Chhattisgarh and Karnataka, the matter has been referred to the CBI.
Many of the shortcomings mentioned in the DIR had already been addressed in NACP Phase
III and revised guidelines prepared in consultation with national experts, World Bank and other
donors. It is agreed that there were shortcomings in procurement in so far as the World Bank
procedures were concerned and action was initiated in consultation with World Bank officials.
These steps were taken to strengthen existing systems to ensure transparency and equity and
minimize potential areas of fraud and corruption. These activities were started well before the DIR
report.
Development of detailed guidelines and operational manuals for procurement of
NGOs and Public Private Partnerships: With the aim of improving, strengthening and
standardizing the quality of interventions, NACO developed detailed technical guidelines on
procurement of NGOs/CBOs and Public Private Partnerships. The guidelines outline key procedures
in standards to be maintained, financial procedures, procurement of stock and inventory, budgeting,
reporting, legal and statutory matters. In addition, guidelines on programme management for various
vulnerable groups, drug procurement, STI and ICTC linkages have also been developed. With
regard to procurement of NGOs for running TIs, SACS/NACO follow stringent procedures in
advertising for, short-listing, selecting and contracting NGOs. Call for EOIs are given out on

56
national/regional newspapers, applications are screened in desk reviews, field appraisals by the Joint
Appraisal Team (JAT), short listing by Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) with participation of
committees consisting of experts from donor agencies and the Government.
Introduction of evaluation of NGO performance by Committee having external
evaluator: During the launch phase of NACP-III, 958 were evaluated in April-June 2007 and 176
were discontinued.
301 TIs were terminated before the evaluation by different SACS/DACS due to various
reasons like poor-performance, inadequate focus on core target population, irregularities in financial
management etc.
By April, 2008, 742 targeted interventions were evaluated by an evaluation team consisting
of one representative from SACS, one external evaluator and one financial expert – such teams
were formed in each State and the process of evaluation lasted over one month and 21 TIs were
discontinued. The teams were trained by NACO and the evaluation tool was approved and
developed with support from the World Bank. The external evaluators were mainly development
consultants with in depth experience and knowledge of targeted interventions and HIV prevention
strategies. The external evaluators and SACS representatives provided detailed recommendation-
based reports to NACO highlighting the strengths and weaknesses of TIs in terms of organisational
capacity, human resources, programme delivery and financial systems. All TIs have also undergone
a voucher audit. The process is likely to be completed by July end.
Termination of contracts of about 25% NGOs
(i) 
Targetted Interventions -  With the conduction of evaluation and assessment of 952 TIs, the
quality of interventions was gauged by means of a standardised evaluation tool. 25% of the
evaluated TIs were found to be lacking in programme and financial management areas and were
discontinued as a result. The 952 TIs underwent the World Bank mandated “Annual Evaluation” in
order to ascertain which TIs could be continued under NACP III. The main reasons for
discontinuation was poor performance of the TIs under the evaluation criteria, Out of 952 TIs, 789
TIs passed the evaluation in 2007. During the process of evaluation, the NACO TI team assisted
the SACS in ‘reconfiguring’ TIs which would be continued - by ensuring that ‘non-core composite
TIs’ did not continue (covering both core and non-core populations, since this is against NACP III
guidelines), and by ensuring that any core populations covered under these non-core composites
were reallocated to other core TIs, or that they continued with a core target population focus.
(ii) 
Community Care Centres -  The Community Care Centres (CCC) were set up in phase I and
II as hospices to take care of the terminally ill patients and for the treatment of opportunistic
infections. Under Phase III, the role of the CCCs has been revised. These are now linked to the
Anti-retroviral therapy (ART) centres for adherence counselling and in patient care in the first week
of starting ART. CCCs will provide treatment of opportunistic infections, home based care and
follow up of patients who do not report back to the ART centre on due date. Funding to the CCCs
has been enhanced to enable them to meet the new responsibilities. In the year 2006-07, NACO
organised the first Appraisal for all existing CCC, which was conducted by ORG-Neilson. In the
Appraisal Report, 101 were found functional. Grading system was designed under the Appraisal in
an objective manner based on various parameters like physical infrastructure, systems, human
resources, services and monitoring. As per this assessment, 40 CCC were graded as ‘Very Good’
(A Grade), 56 CCC were performing ‘Average’ (B category) and 5 CCC were graded as ‘Poor’
(C category). All ‘A’ category CCCs are being continued support under NACP-III and for ‘C’
category CCCs support has been withdrawn. The ‘B’ categories CCC were informed of the existing
lacunae in their functioning to facilitate improvement in performance. They were continued support
only for recurring costs as per the sanction of NACP II, and were asked to reapply and compete

57
for being reselected. The selection was done as per the revised guidelines for CCC under NACP III
and initiated by open advertisement. Apart from the ORG Appraisal, NACO also conducted an
independent assessment of those NGOs which were not reported under the first Appraisal and
28 CCC which were categorised as Bl. As a result of both these appraisals, currently 78 CCC
(40+38) are functional as of Feb. 2008. No financial support was extended for C category CCCs that
were poor performing and closed. It is aimed to establish 350 CCCs during NACP Phase III.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee places on record its anguish that the Department has not shared with
it the requisite information categorically asked for in respect of unspent balances available
with the blacklisted NGOs and the action taken for recovery of the same, details of all
similar cases/discrepancies related to NACO and the action taken by the Department/CBI
in that regard. This coupled with contradictory figures regarding the NGOs under paras
16.13 and 16.12 clearly shows the perfunctory and careless approach of the Department
towards the Committee. The Committee takes this seriously and advises the Department to
be careful in future. Accordingly, the Committee would like to be provided with the
requisite information without further delay.
XVII. NA TIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME (NCCP)
Recommendations/Observations
17.6 The Comm ittee observes that achievement of these targets will depend to a large extent on
the finalization of EFC for the Eleventh Plan which proposes substantial increase in the grant-in-
aid. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that efforts may be made to obtain the EFC approval
at the earliest. It has also been proposed to enter into new phase of Public Private Partnership
which also required enhanced grant-in-aid. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
details of this new component. As commented in the previous para, the Committee once again
enjoins upon the Department to enhance its efforts from the beginning of this financial year and
take suitable corrective measures including strict monitoring so that the approved outlay for NCCP
is properly and optimally utilized.
Action Taken
All out efforts are being made to prepare the EFC for the Eleventh Five Year Plan. This
also includes the new concept namely “Public Private Partnership”.
In addition the Regional Director (H&FW) are also involved in monitoring/inspection of the
institute which will also help in taking corrective measures including monitoring of the grant-in-aid
released under NCCP.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is once again unhappy to note that the requisite information
regarding the details of the new component — Public Private Partnership has not been
furnished. The Committee, accordingly, would like to be provided with complete details
regarding this new component.
Recommendations/Observations
17.8 Committee feels that some corrective measures need to be taken by the Department for
submission of UCs by the State Governments under NCCP. Department being a nodal agency,

58
should make all efforts so that funds allocated are in no way allowed to go unutilized for want of
proposals and submission of UCs. As far as non-submission of utilization certificates is concerned,
the Committee feels that there could be possibilities of diversion of the funds. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department has to ensure timely submission of UCs. The Committee
would appreciate if a Status Note on pending UCs (State/NGO-wise) is submitted to it.
Action Taken
As per the provisions of GFR fresh grant to any organization/NGO can be released only
on settlement of the UC for the previous grant-in-aid. In addition this Ministry is also insisting for
submission of all documents e.g. vouchers, assets registers etc. Utilization Certificate from most
of the States/NGOs/Institutions has been received. The defaulting institutions are being reminded
time and again to submit the same.
For settlement of pending utilization certificate this Division is periodically reminding the
concerned Institutions/State Government. In addition review meetings are also taken with
representatives of the Regional Cancer Centres as well as the State Government. In addition, the
Regional Directors (H&FW) are also involved in carrying out inspection as well as monitoring of
the Institutes.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department regarding submission
of UCs by the State Governments. However, the Committee is constrained to note that a
Status Note on pending UCs (State/NGO-wise), as asked for by the Committee has not been
furnished by the Department. The Committee would appreciate if the same is furnished to
it.
XXI. MEDICAL EDUCATION
Recommendations/Observations
21.6 On being asked as to whether any mechanism was in place to check this, the Secretary,
Department of Health and Family Welfare stated that at present there is no mechanism to prevent
Indian students from going abroad to study. The Committee is of the view that the Department
needs to devise an effective mechanism, which could include legislation, so that Indian medical
students can be prevented from going to such places whose educational system does not match
with ours. The Committee would like to be informed about the steps taken by the Department in
this regard.
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee will be kept in view, while finalizing any mechanism to
prevent Indian students from going abroad to study.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee observes that the issue at hand is too urgent to be allowed to linger on,
as it concerns the quality and standards of medical education and any compromise in the matter
has the potential to put the lives of the people in peril. Therefore, mere assurance of keeping in
view the observations of the Committee at the time of finalizing any mechanism does not suffice.
In view of the gravity of the issue, the Committee would recommend to the Department to deal
with it with a sense of promptitude and bring some sort of policy or legislation urgently.

59
Recommendations/Observations
21.7 The Committee is anguished to note that the fate of so many students of the remaining
18 medical colleges, who have already appeared in their final examination, remains undecided. The
Committee is of the view that the students should not suffer due to such technicalities and
bureaucratic hurdles. A decision without any further delay may be taken in the matter. A Status
Note on such colleges may also be submitted to the Committee.
Action Taken
There are 27 medical colleges where the first batch of MBBS students has appeared for
final examination but are yet to be recognized. Out of these 27 medical colleges, Medical Council
of India (MCI) has sent its recommendations to the Central Government for recognition of MBBS
degree in respect of the 9 medical colleges. The status of remaining 18 medical colleges is at
Annexure-XII.
As per Section 11(2) of IMC Act, 1956, any university or medical institution in India which
grants a medical qualification not included in the First Schedule may apply to Central Government
to have such qualification recognized, and the Central Government, after consulting the Council,
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First Schedule so as to include such
qualification therein, and any such Notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the
last column of the First Schedule against such medical qualification declaring that it shall be a
recognized medical qualification only when granted after a specified date.
The Council before recommending recognition of the degree conducts inspection of the
medical college/institution at the time of examination for the purpose of recommending to the
Central Government recognition of medical qualification granted by the university or medical
institution. The MCI verifies through inspection availability of staff, equipment, accommodation,
training infrastructure and other facilities as is required under the provisions of IMC Act, 1956 and
regulations made thereunder.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
Last year, Committee’s attention had been drawn to a very disturbing situation
whereunder as many as 27 medical colleges continued to function in the country whose first
batch of MBBS students had appeared for final examination but they were yet to be
recognized. The Committee had impressed upon the Department to resolve this matter
involving the fate of our students without any further delay. The Committee is deeply
disturbed to note that the position remains unchanged. No action seems to have been taken
in the case of 9 medical colleges where recommendations of MCI have reached the
Department. With respect to remaining 18 medical colleges, recommendations of MCI are
still awaited. The Committee is well aware of the statutory provisions regarding grant of
recognition to a medical college. The Committee views with serious concern this state of
affairs, that too in the critical area of medical education. The Committee is of the firm
opinion that this entire matter along with the existing procedure of recognition of medical
colleges needs to be reviewed by all concerned. The Department has to take a pro-active
role being the nodal authority for medical education in the country.
XXII. V ACANCIES IN CHS CADRE
Recommendations/Observations
22.2 The Committee is constrained to observe that the Department was able to achieve little
progress in filling up the vacant posts during the last one year. As informed to this Committee the

60
joining rate of the GDMOs is very less. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department
to enhance its efforts in the right direction by identifying the problem areas and devising a strategy
to counter such problems in all sub-cadre posts at the earliest. The Committee would like to be
informed about the steps taken by it to fill up vacancies in the different sub-cadres.
Action Taken
In the General Duty Medical Officers sub-cadre of CHS, recently 179 posts have been
abolished in various CGHS units. On the basis of this the vacancy position upto NFSG level and
SAG level of General Duty Medical Officers in and outside Delhi is as follows:
Upto NFSG (in Delhi) - 209
Upto NFSG (Outside Delhi) - 238
SAG - 134
T
OTAL - 581
Posts abolished - 179
T
OTAL vacancy 402
Against these 402 vacancies, recruitment action has been taken against NFSG posts and the
SAG posts will be filled as soon as stay of the Supreme Court is vacated. In order to reduce the
vacancy position in CGHS dispensaries, a proposal has been submitted for the consideration of the
Cabinet for appointment of retired GDMOs on contractual basis for a period of two years on a
remuneration of Rs.25,000/-.
The vacancy position in the Non-Teaching, Teaching and Public Health sub-cadre is as
below:
Name of sub-cadre Sanctioned Filled V acancies
post as in February
2008
Non-Teaching 776 588 188
Teaching 778 568 210
Public Health 79 53 26
(a) In the Non-Teaching sub-cadre, out of the 188 vacant posts, requisition for posts of
Specialists Grade II was sent to UPSC for recruitment action during the year 2006-07. Out of 64
recommended candidates, 45 have joined, from the remaining 19 candidates some have requested
for extension in joining time and in some other cases offer of appointment have been cancelled.
For the remaining vacant posts, fresh requisition has been sent and the posts are yet to be
advertised. In the Super specialities, in most of the cases, UPSC have informed that no suitable
officers are found and recruitment process has proved to be infructous. Thus they have asked this
Ministry to send requisition afresh for making another attempt. In these specialities Dr. Ram
Manohar Lohia Hospital and Safdarjung Hospital have been asked to fill these posts on contract
basis.
(b) As regards vacancies in Teaching and Public Health sub-cadre, Since the comprehensive
proposal for review of CHS Rules are yet to be notified, requisitions in few specialities could not

61
be sent to UPSC in Non-clinical specialities and hence the posts were lying vacant. Recruitment
action was already on in other specialities and various names have already been recommended by
UPSC after the period under report. Requisitions of the remaining vacant posts have already been
sent to UPSC for advertisement/recruitment.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee takes note of the fact that in the General Duty Medical Officers sub-
cadre of CHS recently 179 posts have been abolished in various CGHS units. The Committee
welcomes the Department’s initiative to get a clearance from the Cabinet for appointment
of retired GDMOs on contractual basis for a period of two years on a remuneration of
Rs.25,000/-. But the Committee cautions the Department that if agreed to by the Cabinet
this should only be a stop gap arrangement and there should be no laxity on its part to
make all out efforts for having the vacancies filled up on a full time basis, at the earliest.
The Committee is dismayed to note the contradictory figures of vacancies in the Non-
Teaching, Teaching and Public Health sub-cadre supplied to it at the time of Demands for
Grants and in the present Action Taken Note of the Department. The Committee cautions
the Department to be careful in future in presenting facts and figures to it.

62
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
–NIL–
62

63
Part-B
(NRHM)
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Twenty-seventh Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 46)
of the Department of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2007-08.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 3.1, 5.4,
5.5, 6.3, 7.3, 7.5, 7.9, 9.11, 9.12 Total–9 (Chapter-I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies: 2.7, 2.8, 3.2, 3.5, 3.10, 3.15, 4.2, 4.3, 4.5, 4.6, 4.9, 5.6, 5.9,
6.1, 6.2, 9.5 and 9.6 Total–17 (Chapter-II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee: 2.5, 2.6, 3.6, 3.7, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 3.16.1, 3.16.2,
4.7, 4.10, 4.11, 4.16, 4.17, 5.7, 5.8, 6.5, 7.4, 7.7, 8.2, 9.13, 9.15 and 9.17 Total–23
(Chapter-III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still
awaited: Nil,  Total–Nil  (Chapter-IV)
63

64
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
III. INFRASTRUCTURE STRENGTHENING
Recommendations/Observations
3.1 NRHM aims at strengthening of Primary Health Infrastructure and improving effective
service delivery across the country. Sub-centres, Primary Healthcare Centres and Community
Health Centres are the three pillars on which rural infrastructure is built. As on March, 2007, there
are 1,45,272 Sub-Centres, 22,370 PHCs and 4045 CHCs in the country. There is a shortfall of
20,855 Sub-Centres, 6491 PHCs and 2525 CHCs in the country based on the 2001 population
norms. The Committee has been constantly drawing the attention of the Department to the uneven
spread of these centres across the country with prominent gaps in the High Focus States. The
Committee finds that there is no marked improvement in this regard.
The Committee has been expressing its serious concern on the continuance of lack of rural
health infrastructure, especially in the High Focus States where the need is the most. On being
asked to identify the problem areas, the Committee has been informed that health infrastructure and
allocation of health workers under NRHM is planned on the population, work load and distance
norms. Shortages on the basis of 2001 population are quantified as the difference between the
required number of facilities/providers as per the norms and those that are functioning or in
position. This method of determining norms and shortage does not take into account the varying
epidemiological, geographical and socio-demographic patterns across the different States/
communities and between rural and urban areas within States. The actual availability of different
types of providers or the extent of private/voluntary sector involvement in healthcare delivery at
the community level is also not taken into account. The Committee notes that against the backdrop
of these very visible deficiencies, norms for setting up of the Sub-Centres and PHCs have been
modified by the Steering Committee of the Planning Commission. These norms to be adopted
during the Eleventh Plan have been duly approved by the Planning Commission also. The
Committee has been given to understand that population-centric norms are replaced with flexible
norms comprising habitation-based needs, community based needs and disease-pattern based needs.
Action Taken
The core objective of the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) is to strengthen primary
healthcare infrastructure for effective service delivery especially in the rural areas. Acknowledging
the limitation of a population centric norm, NRHM has provided for construction of health facilities
based on caseload, distance and other criterions. Construction of Sub-Centres, PHC, CHC etc. have
been taken up from NRHM funds as well as Finance Commission funds released to States. The
suggestion of the Planning Commission has also been taken cognizance of by the Ministry.
V. NATIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
5.4 The Committee appreciates the successful implementation of RNTCP Phase-I and ongoing
Phase-II. Several initiatives/interventions taken at different levels and variety of implementing
64

65
agencies have contributed to the increasing population coverage and 85% cure rate. However, India
still contributes 20% of TB cases reported in the world. Out of 8.8 million cases per annum, 1.8
million cases are from India alone. New complex offshoots of TB also keep on emerging, the most
visible being worsening HIV epidemic increasing the number of TB cases. The Committee notes
that HIV is the most potent risk factor for progression of TB infection to disease form HIV-TB
patients detected in 2005 were 12,062, 13,614 in 2006 and 18,559 in 2007. The Committee is
aware that increase in number of co-infected (HIV–TB) patients being detected over the last three
years is a result of innovative and coordinated measures taken by the Department. But the other
dimension of this trend is increasing complexities involved in the treatment of such cases. The
Committee hopes that the National Framework formulated by RNTCP and NACP for joint TB/HIV
collaborative activities will lead to better and effective control of this emerging problem area.
Action Taken
With increasing number of HIV infected TB patients being routinely detected by the
cross-referral mechanisms between RNTCP and NACP, the programmes have prioritized providing
access to HIV care to the co-infected patients.
The Central TB Division, in collaboration with NACO, has successfully piloted a mechanism
for decentralized delivery of CPT to HIV infected TB patients through RNTCP and referral of all
such cases to nearest NACP ART Centre, where these patients would be promptly provided
monthly supplies of ART. These interventions have been included in the National framework for
joint TB/HIV collaborative activities and would be implemented in the country in a phased manner.
Recommendations/Observations
5.5 The Committee observes that the other major challenge to TB control in the country is
increasing number of MDR-TB cases. The Committee is aware that such cases are bound to
increase the magnitude and severity of TB epidemic and pose a major threat to TB control. The
Committee in its earlier Report has pointed out that 7% defaulters in a year is quite a significant
number of cases remaining untreated or half-treated. With a single TB patient infecting 10-15
persons in a year, rate of infection is bound to increase. The Committee would like to point out
that formulation of guidelines for management of MDR-TB cases and publication thereof will not
prove to be sufficient. The Committee had given a simple suggestion for identifying the defaulter
TB patients from the records being maintained at centres/hospitals with the help of NGOs/Social
Workers and Private Practitioners. Intention of the Committee was to identify such cases at the
first default stage itself. The Committee finds that under a new initiative a total of 50 MDR-TB
patients were to be registered for treatment in Gujarat and Maharashtra during 2007-08 and to be
doubled every year subsequently and ultimately in the entire country. While welcoming this
initiative, the Committee would also like to point out that cost of MDR-TB treatment is 300 times
more than non-MDR TB. The Committee can only say that preventive measures will be both cost-
effective and helpful for the patients. The Committee is of the firm opinion that through effective
IEC activities and alertness of health workers, regular intake of medicines can be easily monitored.
The Committee, therefore, suggests that in monitoring of TB patients the most vital aspect should
not be ignored at any cost.
Action Taken
The Ministry agrees with the observation of the Committee that measures to prevent the
development of MDR-TB will be both cost-effective and helpful for the patients. In consonance
with this spirit, the key focus of the programme is to make sure that the patients complete their
treatment as per schedule and on default the retrieval actions are taken immediately. Thus emphasis

66
of the programme is to implement quality DOTS to achieve highest cure rates and prevent MDR
TB.
The programme is laying lot of stress on ensuring provision of anti-TB drugs under the
direct observation. This aspect is covered during the modular training as well as reinforced during
supervisory visits and also during internal evaluations.
The RNTCP views management of MDR TB as a ‘standard of care’ issue and has identified
the following challenges and is addressing them on a priority basis:
• Minimizing default from treatment.
• Ensuring accurate categorization of previously treated patients as Category-II.
• Ensuring reliable DOT throughout treatment.
• Improve re-treatment success through intensified support, supervision, and monitoring
of DOT in category II patients through involvement of NGOs, PPs and Community
V olunteers.
• Improving Public-Private Mix (PPM) activities and uptake of DOTS by private sector
and medical colleges.
The Ministry agrees with the views of the Committee and focuses its highest priority to
reduce the default among TB patients through constant monitoring, involvement of NGOs, other
sectors and creating awareness through IEC activities.
VI. NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME (NLEP)
Recommendations/Observations
6.3 The Committee is apprehensive that an enhanced allocation during 2008-09 may also face
similar outcomes. The Committee feels that though the plan of action under the programme is well
prepared, monitoring the timely and proper utilization of funds needs to be taken on a more serious
note. Mere advisories to State Implementing Agencies will not serve the purpose. It, therefore,
recommends that the Department take up the issue with the State Programme Officers especially
of Bihar and Jharkhand in an emphatic manner during its quarterly review meetings.
Action Taken
As per the Statements of Expenditure (SOE) received from the 30 States/UTs for the year
2007-08, it is observed that the unspent balance available with the States as on 31st March, 2008
has been reduced remarkably. These 30 States/UTs have an unspent balance of approximately
Rs.4.00 crores, out of which the Bihar contributes to Rs.84.30 lakhs and Karnataka Rs.68.30 lakhs.
The Central Leprosy Division will take up the issue of inadequate fund utilization during 2007-08
by these States.
VII. NA TIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS
Recommendations/Observations
7.3 The Committee has been given to understand that following new initiatives are proposed to
be taken with the enhanced provision of Rs. 250.00 crores in 2008-09:-
1. Construction of dedicated Eye Wings and Eye OTs in District Hospitals in North-
Eastern States, Bihar, Jharkhand, J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and few other
States where dedicated Operation Theaters are not available as per demand.

67
2. Appointment of the following Manpower:
1. Ophthalmic Surgeons In New Districts in District Hospitals.
2. Ophthalmic Assistants
3. Ophthalmic Assistants In PHCs/Vision Centers, where they are not available.
4. Eye Donation Counsellors In Eye Banks under Government Sector and NGO Sector
3. Grant-in-aid to NGOs for management of Eye diseases other than Cataract like Diabetic
Retinopathy, Glaucoma Management, Laser Techniques, Corneal Transplantation,
Vitreo-retinal Surgery, Treatment of childhood blindness etc. of Rs.750 per case for
Cataract/IOL Implantation Surgery and Rs.1000 per case of other major Eye Diseases
as described above.
4. Development of Mobile Ophthalmic Units in NE States, Hilly States and difficult
terrains for diagnosis and medical management of eye diseases.
5. Involvement of Private Practitioners in Sub District, Blocks and Village Level.
6. Maintenance of Ophthalmic Equipments supplied to Regional Institutes of
Ophthalmology, Medical Colleges, District/Sub-District Hospitals, PHCs/Vision Centres.
The Committee endorses the new initiatives that the Department has proposed for initiating
during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan under NPCB. The Committee feels that such measures with
focused attention on NE States and also in the States of Bihar, Jharkhand, J&K, Himachal Pradesh
and Uttarakhand would surely go a long way in paving way for accessible eye-care for the people
in those regions where presently there is dearth of proper eye-care facilities.
Action Taken
Matter of Record.
Recommendations/Observations
7.5 As per the existing scheme under the Programme, the NGOs perform cataract operations
directly under the supervision of Respective District Blindness Control Societies, which function
under the State Blindness Control Society at the State level. To a query regarding the monitoring
of the working of 881 NGO hospitals with eye-care facilities spread over in different parts of the
country, the Committee has been informed that working of NGO hospitals with eye care facilities
participating under NPCB are being monitored by the respective District Blindness Control Societies
directly. However, during State level meetings organized under the programme, NGOs’ hospitals are
also invited and the work done by them is reviewed. In addition, general guidelines for pre-
operative, operative and post-operative precautions for eye surgery have been circulated to all
States from time to time and last time these were circulated in the year 2007-08 to avoid eye
mishaps.
The Committee has been taking note of instances of malfunctioning of Eye Camps reported
in the Media from across the different States. The Committee feels that monitoring of Eye Camps
is being exclusively done by the District Blindness Control Societies. Department’s role starts as
and when reports regarding malfunctioning of Eye Camps held in States are brought to the notice
of the Ministry. Corrective measures are accordingly taken by the Ministry. The Committee,
however, feels that the Department needs to be more pro-active in such cases. One corrective
measure which can be initiated by the Department without any special efforts involved is to review

68
the performance of such Eye Camps in the State level meetings, with required follow-up action
taken on the reported incidents of malfunctioning of Eye Camps. The Committee is also of the
view that follow-up treatment after Eye Camps should be made mandatory and strictly enforced.
District hospital authorities also need to be involved in the conducting of such Eye Camps by
introduction of compulsory pre-checks in Eye Camps before start of Eye surgery and other
treatment. The Committee would like to add here that the Department should also devise some
method of surprise inspection of eye camps organized by the NGOs to facilitate cataract
operations. This, the Committee feels would ensure stricter compliance by all the concerned entities
and help reduce eye mishaps. The Committee notes that the process for independent evaluation of
NPCB including evaluation of work being done by NGOs has been initiated. The Committee would
appreciate if this exercise is expedited so that corrective measures are taken.
Action Taken
The National Programme for Control of Blindness (NPCB) has been circulating guidelines
on “Pre-operative, Operative and Post-Operative precautions for Eye Surgery” to States for further
dissemination to all State level hospitals, Medical Colleges, Regional Institutes of Ophthalmology and
NGO hospitals from time to time to avoid eye mishaps. As a follow up action, State Governments
are being directed separately to ensure that these guidelines are strictly followed in all eye care
facilities and Eye Screening Camps in their States. It has also been proposed to make it mandatory
for the State Governments to obtain an undertaking regarding strict compliance of the guidelines
from the organizers before granting permission to them for conducting Eye Screening Camps.
Now, Eye Screening Camps are allowed but the Eye operations in the camps have been banned
by Government of India due to high rate of mishaps in such camps w.e.f. 1997.
Recommendations/Observations
7.9 The Committee’s attention has also been drawn to the findings of a survey on Rapid
Assessment of TRACHOMA cases done in the district of Haryana, Gujarat, U.P., Uttarakhand,
Punjab and Rajasthan. Findings of this survey were that against the popular perception of there
being no transmission of trachoma cases in India, all districts showed active cases.
The Committee notes with disappointment that the target to bring prevalence of blindness to
0.8% by 2007 has not been reached. The Department has informed that as per the report of Rapid
Survey on Avoidable Blindness (2007), the prevalence of blindness has come down to 1% and that
Cataract remains the single largest cause of blindness, low vision and one eye blindness in India. The
Committee also infers from the above study that the prevalence of blindness due to Trachoma also
continues to be there. It is a well known fact that blindness is a bane of nature. The Committee
believes that most of the people in smaller towns and rural areas are not aware of the symptoms
of the above ailments, and the methods to manage eye care, hence their eye-care service seeking
behavior pattern do not change. The Committee exhorts the Department to take all possible necessary
steps to devise IEC activities in local media and television channels so that awareness among the
people is increased. The Committee believes a lot of cases of blindness can be checked by such a
measure and would in the long run help to achieve the targeted goals under the programme.
Action Taken
On the basis of findings of the Survey on Rapid Assessment of TRACHOMA about
presence of Trachoma cases in some pockets of some States in the country, IEC activities for
public awareness about Trachoma have been intensified through electronic media such as Radio,
Television, print and press media etc. The guidelines in this regard have also been issued to States
including NE States. Spots on TV and Radio have been produced in regional languages also.

69
IX. REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROGRAMME (JANANI SURAKSHA YOJANA)
Recommendations/Observations
9.11 The Committee notes that the number of JSY beneficiaries, which was only 5.73 lakhs during
2005-06, has gone up to 28.12 lakhs in 2006-07 and further to 39.48 lakhs in 2007-08 upto 31.12.07.
This increasing number of beneficiaries can be considered a very positive sign, however, the
Committee is of the firm opinion that strict monitoring at the ground level is required. Every effort
has to be made to ensure that the benefits of this Noble Scheme reach the targeted beneficiaries.
Under the Mission Flexipool during 2007-08, 17% of allocated funds were used for
upgradation of CHCs to IPHS followed by 15% towards procurement of ASHA Drug Kit. Among
EAG S tates, Rajasthan, U.P. and M.P. and among non-EAG S tates, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Andhra
Pradesh, Kerala and Gujarat are reported to be performing well during 2007-08. The Committee
however notes that 25% of Rs.793 crores utilized under Mission Flexipool were used for other
activities under NRHM. The Committee would like to have an idea about the details of such activities.
Action Taken
The total utilisation under Mission Flexible Pool during 2007-08 upto 31.3.2008 has
been Rs.1612.03 crores as compared to Rs.793 crores up 31.12.2007 as shown in the Outcome
Budget 2008-09. The expenditure on other activities up to 31.3.08 has been as under:
Sl. No. Name of activity expenditure in lakhs
1. Untied funds to CHCs 557.29
2. Maintenance Grant to sub centres 2093.11
3. Maintenance grant to CHCs 831.90
4. Constitution and orientation of Community leaders of 1 157.20
VHSCs, SHCs, PHCs, CHCs etc.
5. State Health System Resource Centres 813.79
6. Strengthening of Nursing/ANM trg. Institutions 788.86
7. Mainstreaming of Ayush 516.94
8. Funds for Community Monitoring 10.00
9. Streamlining during procurement and Logistics 3646.52
10. Additional ANM for the sub centres 6071.91
11. IEC-NRHM 3058.03
12. Additional staff Nurses 2002.99
13. Upgradation of PHCs to IPHS 1636.03
14. Procurement of drugs 2310.77
15. Health Insurance 1335.66
16. Other Misc. activities 21071.06
T
OTAL: 47902.06

70
The actual expenditure on other activities was, therefore, Rs.479.02 crores, i.e., 30% of the
total expenditure of Rs.1612.03 crore during 2007-08.
Recommendations/Observations
9.12 The Committee, while welcoming this Scheme with an objective of reducing Maternal and
Neo-Natal Mortality by promoting institutional delivery, would like to draw the attention towards
some emerging problem areas being noticed in its implementation. Under the present set up, ASHA
is a worker who has been entrusted with a very large number of responsibilities with her role in
JSY being very crucial.
Reports are being received from various sources that there is a lot more to the
compensation received from under the programme than is visible to the naked eye. There are
instances when institutional deliveries are being falsely reported and the entire compensation
package is being misused.
Action Taken
The State/UT Governments have been advised to institute a two-tier monitoring system to
monitor the process of implementation of the scheme in the States and UTs as well as
disbursement of cash and record keeping of financial transactions. This has been done with a view
to reduce possibilities of situation as has been mentioned in the report. Further, with a view to
eliminate any chances of loopholes in the payment system, the State Governments have been
advised to ensure the distribution of cash assistance to the beneficiaries and ASHAs through
cheques, preferable by account payee ones. Further, guidelines on grievance redressal mechanism
have also been sent to the States/UT Governments for necessary action.
In addition, Joint Review Missions (JRM) comprising representatives of this Ministry and
the Development Partners, undertake visits to 5 or 6 States twice a year. In each State, the JRMs
make detail study of the functioning of the various interventions under NRHM, including JSY by
inspecting facilities ranging from Sub-Centres to District hospitals, in 2 to 3 districts.
Observations of the Committee have been noted and will be brought to the notice of the
States/UT Governments for further tightening of the disbursement system.

71
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION (NRHM)
Recommendations/Observations
2.7 Pendency status of Utilization Certificates in respect of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare is given below:
Annexure-B of Report
The pendency level of Utilization Certificates has been engaging the attention of the
Committee for the last few years. According to latest figures as on 1.02.2008, there were as many
as 1458 Utilization Certificates in respect of Health Sector amounting to Rs.2575.02 crores for the
grants released upto 2005-06. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for pendency of UCs
continuing for such a long period. As per records made available to the Committee, States like
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, M.P., Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, U.P. have the maximum number
of pending UCs. On a specific query regarding any plans of the Department to reach a justifiable
level of pendency, the Committee is given to understand that a communication was sent by the
Chief Controller of Accounts (CCA) to all the States through Resident Commissioners on this issue
giving full details of pending UCs in respect of the Department of Health and Family Welfare. The
Committee is dismayed to note that in the name of efforts, only a letter has been issued. The
Committee feels that spirited efforts, which are apparently lacking, need to be made on priority
basis to clear the UCs which are pending for the last three decades or so. The Committee also
recommends to the Department to take up the case with concerned State Governments at the
highest level so as to assess whether the funds have been utilized properly or not.
Action Taken
The pendency level of Utilization Certificates has come down to 1278 amounting to
Rs.2012.71 crores as on 1st May, 2008. During the year 2007-08, 499 Utilisation Certificates
amounting to Rs.1401.75 crores were liquidated. The year-wise details are at Annexure-III. The
Department is taking monthly review of outstanding Utilisation Certificates at the level of Health
Secretary besides issuing periodical reminders at the appropriate level for early clearance. In this
regard a DO was issued by Secretary (H&FW) to all Principal Secretaries of the States for
submission of pending Utilization Certificates on priority basis. Fresh grants were not released
during the year 2007-08 to the Grantees having outstanding Utilization Certificates against them.
Recommendations/Observations
2.8 The Department had informed that based on the recommendations of the Committee
regarding submission of utilization certificates within 12 months, as required by the General
Financial Rules, as amended in 2005, the Secretary (HFW) vide D.O. dated 26th May, 2007 had
taken up the matter with the Secretary (Exp.). The Department of Expenditure vide its I.D. No.8/
4/E.II(A)/2005 dated 6th June, 2007 had expressed its inability to accommodate the former’s
71

72
request and that the PMO vide Para No. 6(b) of the Minutes of the 3rd Meeting to Review
the National Rural Health Mission held under the Chairpersonship of the Prime Minister on
5th June, 2007, circulated vide PMO I.D. No.520/61/C/4/2005-ES.II (V ol.II) dated 21.6.2007, had
decided that ‘the issue relating to special dispensation for funds utilization raised with the
Department of Expenditure would be taken up by PMO for examination and appropriate resolution’.
The Committee would like the Department to provide it with the latest status on the matter
at the earliest.
Action Taken
Subsequent to minutes of 3rd meeting to review the NRHM, held under the chairmanship
of Hon’ble Prime Minister on 5th June, 2007, Ministry vide Secretary (HFW)’s DO dated
27th July, 2007 had provided a self-contained note alongwith the measures taken for improving the
financial management under NRHM to Secretary (Expenditure). Ministry had also forwarded a copy
of the same to the PMO vide Director (NRHM-Finance) DO dated 27th July, 2007. Subsequently,
Department of Expenditure vide Additional Secretary (Expenditure)’s DO dated 24th August, 2007
had asked for information regarding releases and unspent balances under various programmes.
These details were provided to the Department of Expenditure vide Additional Secretary and
Mission Director’s DO dated 28 August, 2007. MoHFW again took up the matter for relaxation of
Rule 209 (6) (iii) of GFR 2005 vide AS&MD’s DO dated 21st November, 2007. Department of
Expenditure vide their DO Note dated 20th December, 2007 (copy at Annexure-IV) made a
conditional relaxation of the Rule 209 (6) (iii) of GFR whereby the relaxation was granted only for
2007-08 (till 31.12.2007). As a result of this relaxation, during the last financial year 2007-08, the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been able to release Rs.3149.97 crores against the
Budget Allocation of Rs.3155 crores under Mission Flexible Pool. During the current financial year
(2008-09), Ministry has been able to release Rs.836.71 crores against the BE of Rs.2285 crore
under Mission Flexible Pool. This has been possible by taking into account the unspent balances
as on 01104/2008 out of the releases made to the State Health Societies till 31st March, 2007.
III. INFRASTRUCTURE STRENGTHENING
Recommendations/Observations
3.2 The Committee welcomes the modification in the criteria for assessing the requirement of
health infrastructure in the country. In a vast country like ours, rigid norms based on population
only made uniformly applicable were perhaps not proving to be justified and not based on ground
realities. The Committee is also of the view that change in the norms for health infrastructure
proposed by the Planning Commission was called for. The Committee is, however, not aware
whether any preparatory exercise has been initiated for conducting surveys as per the revised
norms. The Committee is afraid that if this issue is allowed to linger on for long, the very objective
of NRHM of bridging gaps in the health care will continue to be a distant dream. The Committee,
accordingly, impresses upon the Department to initiate action at the earliest.
Action Taken
The National Programme Coordination Committee (NPCC), set up under NRHM, takes note
of the need based projection for construction of facilities as proposed by the States in their State
Programme Implementation Plans (PIPs) while evaluating their Plans. Approvals are based on the
extant and future capacity for manpower augmentation in the States so that the expansion does not
remain a brick and mortar exercise. Emphasis is on consolidation and optimal utilisation of existing
facilities and also alternative strategies like Mobile Medical Units, partnership with the non-

73
governmental sector to expand reach. In the approvals of NPCC in the year 2008-09, an amount
of Rs.80 crores to U.P., Rs.3 crores to Uttarakhand, Rs.7.5 crores to Jharkhand, have been
allocated for construction of new Sub-Centres. An amount of Rs.30 crores has been allocated for
construction of PHCs in Bihar, Rs.l4 crores in Jharkhand and Rs.18.25 crores for CHCs in
Jharkhand as few illustrative examples of the commitment of the Mission towards facility
expansion. Since the key human resource constraints will take some time to redress, the expansion
necessarily has to be a phased one.
Recommendations/Observations
3.5 NRHM proposes to upgrade all CHCs to IPHS standards by 2010 in a phased manner and
all States/UTs are required to complete the IPHS facility survey of the existing CHCs as a first step
towards the upgradation to IPHS level. The Department has presented before the Committee that
reports of IPHS Facility Survey for 2453 CHCs has been completed in 31 States/UTs while that
which are physically received is 957, while upgradation work has started in 1161 CHCs and
completed in 441 CHCs.
The Committee is happy to note that the situation in this regard has improved over the past
year’s figures but at the same time its attention is also drawn to the number of facility survey
reports received from the following states:—
States CHCs Facility surveys conducted
Uttar Pradesh 386 169
Madhya Pradesh 270 96
West Bengal 346 211
Maharashtra 407 145
Andhra Pradesh 167 117
Karnataka 254 54
Tamil Nadu 236 20
Haryana 86 31
Himachal Pradesh 71 15
Goa 5 0
The Committee is dismayed to note that facility surveys in States like Karnataka, Tamil Nadu,
Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra have not been treated with the earnest it deserves. Except for West
Bengal and Andhra Pradesh, not even one state mentioned above has been able to reach the 50% mark
in furnishing the facility survey reports. What is more disturbing is the fact that not one report has
been received from Goa. Though the Department has given that the states are doing extremely well
in the progress in work, the Committee is constrained to note that the data cited above do not
support the above stand. It urges the Department to impress upon the State Governments the need
to focus their attention on submitting the survey reports on time and thereby meet the timelines for
their upgradation by 2010, the realization of which would otherwise remain a far cry.
Action Taken
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra have been urged in the NPCC meetings to expedite
the process of Facility Survey and they have started taking corrective measures. As on date, IPHS

74
facility survey for 2569 CHCs has been completed in 31 States/UTs while upgradation work has
started in 1493 CHCs and completed in 483 CHCs. Upgradation of PHCs/CHCs have been taken
up in Karnataka, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and M.P. as well.
Recommendations/Observations
3.10 The Committee has been given to understand that an ANM has been entrusted with the
following responsibilities:—
• To assist in births at homes in rural areas,
• To locate pregnant women and take them for Ante Natal Check-ups and at least three
Post Natal Check-ups, to refer complicated pregnancy cases,
• To immunize the pregnant women and oversee the administration of folic acid pills etc.
• To immunize the new born and oversee the checkup and timely immunisation of the
infant,
• after the introduction of the NRHM, in some of the states she has also undergone
three weeks of training in contraception methods/techniques such as insertion of IUDs,
administration of oral contraceptive pills, counseling etc.
From the above information, the Committee understands that the ANM plays a very crucial
role in the rural areas because of her skill and training in safe deliveries and therefore her
contribution to the RCH programme is very vital. Her presence is even more important in those
states that have very high MMR and IMR. This presence of ANMs in Sub-Centres is essential
where proper access to institutional healthcare is not available.
Action Taken
Acknowledging the need to strengthen the Sub-Centre and the criticality of the ANM as
improved health indicator, NRHM has provision for a second ANM in the Sub-Centres. As on date,
more than 97% of the Sub-centres are functional in the States/UTs with at least one ANM (141178
SC out of 145272 SCs) and 22471 SCs have 2nd ANMs also. Sub-Centre construction is an
important Mission activity that has been taken on a large scale through the State PIPs. Efforts to
improve presence of ANMs at Sub-Centres have also been attempted by directing States to cancel
deputation of ANMs away from Sub-Centres.
RURAL HEALTH FUNCTIONARIES
Recommendations/Observations
3.15 ANMs/MPWs(M)/LHVs are the key functionaries of Sub-Centres and PHCs. Their presence
is essential for the smooth functioning of these centres. The Committee has been observing year
after year the existence of gaps between the required and existing strength in all the States. As on
March, 2007, 14,180 posts of ANMs, 29653 posts of MPWs(M) and 2497 LHVs are lying vacant
in various States. The Committee is unhappy to observe that there seems to be no noticeable
improvement. Details about some of the High Focus States as on March, 2007 are self-revealing:—
State No. of Sub-Centres Vacant posts Vacant posts
functioning ANM MPW(M)
12 3 4
Bihar 8909 1653 895

75
12 3 4
Jharkhand 3958 1177 1153
Karnataka 8143 1512 1247
M.P. 8834 1393 610
Maharashtra 10453 2655 4356
Punjab 2858 667 1483
U.P. 20521 1756 3348
Orissa 5927 353 1519
Tamil Nadu 8683 – 3278
West Bengal 10356 456 4482
The Committee observes that the recommendations of Task Force like local preference,
contractual appointments for filling short-term gaps, convergence with AYUSH for overcoming the
constraints of shortage of health manpower programme do not seem to have made much impact.
The Committee finds that the appraisal of Common Review Mission conducted in November, 2007
has highlighted the shortage of manpower at all levels in Sub-Centres/PHCs/CHCs in Andhra
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, J&K, M.P., Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura,
U.P. and West Bengal. The Committee is of the view that it is high time that this critical appraisal
is followed by an action plan for making available the required manpower in these States. The
Department has to play a pro-active role without any further delay. One must not forget that the
very objective of NRHM of strengthening of primary health infrastructure rests on the availability
of key health functionaries at the right places.
Action Taken
Improving availability of critical manpower at health care institutions in the rural areas is one
of the key thrust areas under NRHM. The States/UTs were advised to recruit human resources based
on local criteria as per mandate of NRHM. Under NRHM, State/UT Governments are being funded
for contractual appointment of trained health personnel like doctors, ANM, S taff Nurse and other
Para-Medics etc. through their PIPs. States have taken several steps for ensuring availability of skilled
health personnel and we expect to move further in the right direction. As regards recruitment of
skilled health personnel, a total of 2282 Specialists, 6271 doctors, 12908 Staff Nurses and 4380 other
category para-medical staff had been added under NRHM on contract basis, upto December, 2007.
Since availability of human resources is a constraint, the process will take some time.
IV. NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAMME (NVBDCP)
Recommendations/Observations
4.2 The plan provision in 2008-09 for NVBDCP is Rs.472.25 crores which is on an enhanced
level when compared with the provision of Rs.399.50 crore for 2007-08. The break-up of
allocation as per BE is as below:
(Rs. in crores)
Disease 2007-08 2008-09
12 3
Malaria 306.90 351.68

76
12 3
Filaria 30.00 40.32
Kala-azar 20.86 29.51
Japanese Encephalitis 0.82 3.93
Dengue and Chikungunya 2.50 14.59
TOTAL: 361.08 440.03
The Committee notes that like in the previous years, funds provided in 2007-08 remained
under-utilised. Expenditure reported upto 29.02.08 is Rs.283.74 crore. Secretary, while deposing
before the Committee, had mentioned that by 31.03.2008, expenditure figures stood at
Rs.385.38 crore, indicating 96.46% utilisation of allocated funds of Rs.399.50 crore. The
Committee is constrained to point out that instead of there being an improvement; position has
worsened in 2007-08. An amount of Rs.102.00 crore being spent in the last month of the financial
year calls for serious introspection. The Committee has been repeatedly impressing upon the
Department for initiating corrective measures in this regard. Reasons like delay in procurement
process, submission of SOE/UCs by States/UTs and non-recruitment of required staff seem to have
persisted in 2007-08 also.
Action Taken
During 2007-08, the expenditure has improved to 97%. The good progress of increased
expenditure is due to continuous monitoring of monthly expenditure for adjustment of cost of
commodities supplied to the States as well as submission of SOEs/UCs by the States to facilitate the
cash release for which the SOEs/UCs are pre-requisite. The States have also been reminded for filling
up of vacant posts specially the critical component like Malaria Technical Supervisor (MTS) and Lab
Technician (LT) under the assistance of GFATM Project. The filling up of contractual MPWs has also
been emphasized. Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland have filled their MTS and LTs whereas
Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura have initiated the process of recruitment.
During 2006-07, the total expenditure was Rs.318.17 crore out of which the expenditure
upto December, 2006 was Rs.228.46 crore whereas during 2007-08, the total expenditure was
Rs.386.36 crore but the expenditure upto December, 2007 was Rs.262.42 crore (increase of
Rs.33.96 crore). The RE., R.E. and expenditure during last three years is given below:
(Rs. in crores)
Year B.E. R.E. T otal Expenditure
Expenditure % against BE
2005-06 348.45 264.22 260.43 74.74
2006-07 371.58 381.56 318.17 85.63
2007-08 399.50 399.53 386.36 96.71
2008-09 472.25
• The expenditure has increased during the year 2007-08.
• Total expenditure incurred during last quarter (January to March, 2008) was
Rs.122.96 crore out of which the releases for cash assistance to the States was
Rs.29.59 crore and the balance amount is the adjustment from Non-Plan to Plan on
account of supplies of commodity made to the States.

77
• Every effort is being made to gear up the States for intensification of prevention and
control activities against vector borne diseases and timely submission of SOEs/UCs.
Monthly monitoring of SOEs is being done and States are impressed upon for its
timely submission.
States have been reminded to fill up the required staff and the States have initiated the filling
up of the project staff in high malaria endemic areas.
MALARIA
Recommendations/Observations
4.3 Committee’s attention has also been drawn by the following anticipated constraints/problem
areas pointed out by the Department in the context of Action Plan for 2008-09 for Malaria control.
– Filling up of vacant posts of Health Workers.
– Timely release of funds by States.
– Submission of UCs by States to GoI.
– Timely procurement of bed nets and insecticide for treatment.
The Committee strongly feels that mere chalking out an elaborate Action Plan and allocation
of funds for control of a major disease does not seem to make any sense if year after year same
constraints seem to persist. The Committee once again tries to impress upon the Department to
take immediate steps for removal of bottlenecks in the successful implementation of Malaria Control
Programme. The Committee would like to mention that under the National Vector Borne Disease
Control Programme, the major component is Malaria Control having the maximum allocation of
Rs.351.68 crore out of a provision of Rs.440.03 crores for the entire programme in 2008-09.
Therefore, it is in the fitness of things that concerted efforts are also made for optimum and
judicious utilisation of allocated funds.
Action Taken
The action plan has been discussed in detail with States and the Districts have been
prioritized for focused intervention towards control of malaria. The implementation activities,
judicious use of allocated funds and timely submission of SOEs/UCs have also been discussed in
meetings held under NRHM.
The high malaria endemic areas have been identified and GIS mapping for most of them
has been done for focused intervention for optimum and judicious utilization of resources.
Recommendations/Observations
4.5 The incidence of Pf-Malaria cases against the number of malaria cases detected in some of
the NE States and Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Oriss a and West Bengal for the year 2007 is given below.
States 2007 (upto May)
Malaria cases Pf cases
12 3
Andhra Pradesh 7794 4853
Assam 43192 28526

78
12 3
Manipur 337 114
Meghalaya 6494 5478
Mizoram 1274 918
Tripura 4127 3466
Orissa 99302 86125
West Bengal 24332 6386
T
OTAL: Cases Across
The Country (2007) 328474 163703
The Committee is alarmed by the trend of Pf cases reported from these States. Committee’s
attention has also been drawn to the quantum jump in number of malaria deaths reported in
the country. In 2006, 1639 deaths were reported against 963 deaths occurring in 2005. By
November, 2007, this figure has already reached 807. The Committee has every reason to
apprehend that actual figures of deaths may be higher than what is officially recorded. Reason
being there is no mechanism at present to independently verify the field level figures for any State.
Action Taken
The Epidemiological data up to December, 2007 has been received and updated.
State/Country Cases reported during 2007
Year Malaria Pf cases Pf% Deaths
cases
Andhra Pradesh 2007 27406 16059 58.6 2
Assam 2007 93555 64399 68.9 152
Manipur 2007 1194 400 33.5 4
Meghalaya 2007 33979 28199 82.9 237
Mizoram 2007 6563 4157 63.34 75
Tripura 2007 17933 15326 85.46 40
Orissa 2007 365593 317116 86.74 214
West Bengal 2007 86132 21846 25.26 100
Country T
OTAL: 2007 1476562 725502 49.13 1173
The overall Pf % in the country has been around 50% since last decade, however, in some
States percentage of Pf cases has increased which is now a focus area for action and such areas
have been identified and GIS mapping has been done for focused intervention.
Under the programme, each reported malaria death case is investigated and only those cases
are finally recorded as malaria death cases whose blood smear is prepared and found positive for
a sexual stage of P .falciparum parasite.

79
Recommendations/Observations
4.6 The Committee has been persistently drawing the attention of the Department to the urgent
need for implementation of all malaria control measures in Malaria endemic States of NE Region,
Orissa and West Bengal. The Committee is well aware that NE States together contribute 4% of
the country’s population, 12% of malaria cases, 18% of Pf cases and 54% of malaria deaths
reported in the country during 2006. Figures must have remained unchanged in 2007 also. Another
cause of concern is increasing trend of resistance to conventional anti-malarial drug Chloroquine
noticed in NE States. The Committee notes that Global Fund supported Intensified Malaria Control
Project in NE States being implemented since July, 2005 with a contribution of US $ 30 million
for the first two years of the project also seems to have failed to have the desired impact.
Action Taken
It is submitted that during the year 2007, though the NE States together constitute 4% of
country’s population only, 13% of malaria cases, 16.66% of Pf cases and 45.52% of malaria deaths
have been reported therefrom.
The approved Budget for Years I and II for Phase-I (July, 2005 to June, 2007)
was US $ 30 million. However, based on the expenditure, the Global Fund has obligated only
US $ 13.4 million during the Phase-I of the project. During March, 2007 the performance of Global
Fund supported intensified Malaria Control Project was rated as B1 by the Country Coordinating
Mechanism. Thereafter the project was approved for Phase-II funding by the Global Fund. The
accelerated implementation has resulted into further grant of US $ 50.12 million for Phase-II. In
Phase-II, technical manpower, like 150 malaria technical supervisors and 100 LTs, have been
allotted to these States for deploying in high malaria endemic areas. Considering the high incidence
of P .jalciparum malaria and chloroquine resistance in the various parts of the country including
project States like NE States, Jharkhand and Orissa, the policy decision has been taken to treat all
Pf cases with Artesunate + Sulpha pyremethamine (ACT) in 110 districts, chloroquine resistant foci
and surrounding cluster blocks of these focis which include 60 districts of NE States, 12 districts
of Jharkhand and 13 districts of Orissa.
KALA-AZAR
Recommendations/Observations
4.9 The Committee has been observing increasing trend of Kala-azar cases. In 2006, 39178
cases and 187 deaths were reported with 162 deaths occurring in Bihar alone. Position seems to
have worsened further in 2007. Upto November, 2007, already 35,638 cases with 158 deaths have
been reported. State-wise figures upto May, 2007 indicate that out of 79 deaths reported till then,
64 deaths have occurred in Bihar. While the Committee would not dispute the Department’s stand
that intensive surveillance has led to reporting of increased number of cases, the fact remains that
treatment compliance of Kala-azar cases detected is far from satisfactory in view of alarming rate
of deaths being reported. Number of initiatives for Kala-azar elimination undertaken seem to have
made no impact with ground reality continuing to be as discouraging as before. The Committee
understands that 200 villages of 9 districts reporting large number of Kala-azar cases have been
selected for focused interventions.
The Committee strongly feels that effective surveillance, timely treatment and compliance of
treatment regimens in all PRCs can perhaps lead to better reports in 2008. The Committee is of the
view that only if intensive monitoring at all levels is carried out, the goal of elimination of Kala-azar
by 2010 can be made achievable. Situation so far has not been very encouraging. All the quantifiable
objectives listed in the Action Plan for 2008-09 need to be closely monitored on monthly basis.

80
Action Taken
Case search was intensified and 44001 cases were detected and treated in 2007. Adequate
stock of anti-kala-azar drugs is available at the peripheral level. 96% of targeted population under
Kala-azar in 2007 was covered with DDT. The monitoring has been strengthened and in addition
the initiatives taken in 2007, the Kala-Azar regional and State coordinators have been placed for
strict supervision and monitoring. Central teams are visiting to the high endemic districts especially
during spraying so that the activities are geared up and quality and coverage are improved. Besides,
the situation is reviewed by GoI at highest level.
V . NATIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
5.6 The Committee is disappointed to note that in spite of repeated cautioning by it regarding
the issue of unspent balances being carried forward to the next year there has been no
improvement in the situation. Despite various measures like training of Accountants, adherence to
financial norms through inspection of records and visits undertaken by the Department, the
expenditure figures in respect of many of the States reveal that huge amounts have been lying
unutilized. The Committee had in its 22nd Report emphasized the need for streamlining the
utilisation pattern of States/UTs. However, the situation has seen little change over the past year.
From the information provided by the Department to a specific query regarding allocation and
utilization of funds for the year 2007-08 a very gloomy picture is revealed. Many States as
indicated below do not have the capacity to make optimum utilisation:
Annexure-VI of Report
The Committee is apprehensive that the trend of under utilisation during this year must have
worsened even more. The Committee has been time and again emphasizing that availability of
unspent balances and under-utilisation of funds is tantamount to persisting flaws in implementing
the Programme. The Committee, at the risk of being repetitive, would impress upon the Department
that it should discuss the problems with the programme directors and evaluate as to why the
programme does not take off at the required tempo and what possible steps could be taken to bring
about better implementation of the programme.
Action Taken
The Ministry is convinced about the need to have certain minimum balances in the States
at the end of the financial year. Efforts have also been made to reduce the closing balances as this
adversely affects fresh releases. Therefore, the most appropriate time to see the closing balance
is 31st March of ending financial year. As shown in the Table below, unspent balances as on
31st March for the country as a whole are showing a definite downtrend for the last 4 years. The
unspent balance of Rs.15.91 crores at national level for 2008-09 calculated for each district is
about Rs.2.52 lakhs per district which is the bare minimum amount which is required to be
available with districts at the beginning of next financial year till such time regular funds are
released for the financial year. Even for the States under reference, the closing balances for the
last 4 years are showing a downtrend except for the State of Madhya Pradesh. Even for the State
of Madhya Pradesh the unspent amount per district works out to be mere Rs.5.09 lakhs which is
just sufficient enough to meet expenses till the time regular funds are made available considering
the population of State. The Table given below clearly demonstrates that through the consistent
efforts of the programme division, the closing balance as on 31st March has been brought down
to levels sufficient enough to sustain activities in next financial year till regular funds are made

81
available. Further at the time of release of funds for next financial year, these unspent balances are
adjusted for release of first instalment.
(Rs. in crores)
Name of the Closing balance
State
2005 2006 2007 2008
(Audited) (Audited) (Audited) (Unaudited)
Bihar 3.68 3.44 3.06 2.05
Gujarat 0.25 0.22 1.14 0.72
Jharkhand 2.2 0.86 1.91 1.94
Karnataka 0.96 0.33 1.52 1.50
Madhya Pradesh 1.17 1.23 1.23 2.29
Tamil Nadu 2.38 1.38 1.11 1.48
Uttar Pradesh 4.03 3.53 2.75 0.24
All India 32.73 19.57 23.89 15.91
Recommendations/Observations
5.9 Committee’s attention has also been drawn by Studies like Social Assessment Study,
Institutional Assessment Study in respect of TB Control measures undertaken so far. The Committee
would like to point out that TB infection is no more confined to the poor and marginalized sections
of the society. Growing number of patients now belong to middle class and also affluent population.
There is an urgent need for making an analysis of basic factors behind this emerging situation which
can ultimately reach to alarming proportions. The Committee hopes that with the availability of both
funds and manpower, the Department will take up such an exercise at the earliest.
Action Taken
Survey undertaken by TB Research Centre, Chennai (TRC) has shown that the prevalence
of TB is around 4 times higher amongst the lower socio-economic strata as compared to the
higher. However, TB being an airborne infection, can affect individuals from any of the socio-
economic groups. Studies indicate that some of the other key predisposing factors, besides
overcrowding and malnutrition, include smoking, diabetes, HIV co-infection etc. which cut across
all the socio-economic groups. The most effective way to achieve TB control is to cut the
transmission of infection by early diagnosis and prompt treatment of all TB patients. The
programme is hence focusing on providing quality assured diagnostic and treatment services which
are easily accessible to all the sections of the community. The programme has plans to repeat the
social assessment study during the current phase of RNTCP project wherein some of these factors
would be evaluated.
VI. NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME (NLEP)
Recommendations/Observations
6.1 National Leprosy Eradication Programme was launched with the objective of eliminating
Leprosy i.e. achieving prevalence rate of <1case/10,000 population in the country. National level

82
elimination of Leprosy has been achieved since 31 December, 2005 when the prevalence rate
came down to 0.95 or less than 1/10,000 population. 0.83 lakh cases were on record as on
1st April, 2007 giving a Prevalence rate (PR) of 0.72 per 10,000 population. 31 States/UTs have
achieved the level of elimination i.e. PR less than 1/10,000 population. 80% of districts and 75%
of blocks across the country have also achieved elimination. Four States, namely Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and West Bengal having PR between 1 and 2 per 10,000 population with
Chhattisgarh having more than 2 per 10,000 population are yet to achieve elimination status.
Action Taken
Matter of Record.
Recommendations/Observations
6.2 The budget allocation was Rs.40.00 crores in 2007-08. As the States had unspent balances
with them, the BE 2007-08 was reduced to Rs.27.12 crores at RE stage. Expenditure reported upto
29.02.08 is only Rs.21.57 crore. Allocation of Rs.45.00 crore has been made for 2008-09. The
increased provision is meant for incentives to be given to leprosy affected persons undergoing re-
constructive surgery and institutions performing re-constructive surgery and performance based
incentive to ASHA in S tates with high leprosy burden such as Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh and West Bengal.
The Committee, in its 22nd Report, had voiced its serious concern for under-utilisation of
allocated funds in 2006-07 due to unspent balances in majority of the States. The Committee takes
note of detailed analysis of actual expenditure pattern in 2006-07 carried out by the Department.
The Committee is surprised to observe that even this detailed analysis indicates provisional figures
of 77.59% of utilisation of allocated funds by the States. The Committee’s concern is further
deepened by the fact that the two major States Bihar and Jharkhand could utilize only 33.9% and
30% of the allocated funds during the year 2006-07. Creation of confusion due to merger of the
leprosy society with the State Health Society under NRHM has been cited as the main reason for
this position. The Committee has been given to understand that a number of measures like review
of programme performance and expenditure pattern in the quarterly review meetings of district
Leprosy Officers, streamlining of procurement procedure and monitoring at the central level were
initiated during 2007-08. The Committee also notes that more focus was given on implementation
of Action Plan during annual meeting and quarterly review meetings of State Programme Officers.
Not only this the States were also instructed to prepare a month-wise Action Plan of IEC and
Training from July, 2007 onwards and submitting the monthly implementation reports of these
activities. The Committee is, however, constrained to observe that these elaborate measures initiated
by the Department failed to make any visible impact as the ground realities continue to remain
unchanged. Drastic reduction of allocated funds had to be made at RE stage in 2007-08 with even
that provision remaining under-utilised upto 29.02.08.
Action Taken
During 2007-08, the budget allocation was reduced from Rs.40.00 crores to Rs.27.12 crores
at RE stage. Reduction in RE stage was carried out due to huge unspent funds from previous year
lying with State Health Societies. This was to the tune of Rs.14.27 crores. Majority of unspent
balance was lying with the States of Bihar (Rs.213.79 lakhs), Jharkhand (Rs.62.89 lakhs), Madhya
Pradesh (Rs.118.60 lakhs), Uttar Pradesh (Rs.169.52 lakhs) and West Bengal (Rs.90.10 lakhs).
Expenditure under the programme during 2007-08 was Rs.25.01 crores. During 2007-08,
more focus was given on implementation of Action Plan during NLEP annual meetings and quarterly

83
review meetings conducted in various States. States were further instructed to prepare month-wise
Action Plan of IEC and Training during 2007-08 and submit monthly report of these activities. It
was due to these efforts that the pace of expenditure was increased by the States and the
Programme could utilize an amount of Rs.25.01 crores i.e. 92% of the RE.
Unspent funds lying with the States have also decreased to Rs.6.73 crores during 2007-08
as compared to Rs.14.27 crores during 2006-07.
IX. REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
9.5 The Committee, however, notes that under RCH Flexible Pool expenditure reported upto
29th February, 2008 was only Rs.1643.62 crore. Similarly, under the Mission Flexible Pool,
utilisation status as on 29th February, 2008 as reported in the Outcome Budget was Rs.2505.05
crore. Spending of major portion of the allocated funds during the last quarter clearly indicates that
both the major programmes continue to have some inherent problem areas. The assessment of the
Committee is confirmed by the performance of High Focus States during 2007-08 as indicated
below:
(Rs. in crores)
Sl. State Opening Balance Fund releases by Utilisation
No. as on 1.4.07 December, 2007 by December, 2007
High Focus States
1 Bihar 1 12.63 0.00 87.40
2 Chhattisgarh 10.12 35.76 19.39
3 Himachal Pradesh 8.02 4.21 4.48
4 J&K 7.34 3.75 7.29
5 Jharkhand 43.78 22.15 11.76
6 Madhya Pradesh 46.04 230.65 196.83
7 Orissa 42.16 103.73 62.86
8 Rajasthan 49.73 1 16.44 103.77
9 Uttar Pradesh 212.39 129.75 119.70
10 Uttarakhand 9.86 6.68 8.73
T
OTAL : 542.12 653.12 622.24
Action Taken
Out of the total outlay of Rs.1928.60 crores under RCH Flexible Pool, the expenditure upto
29.2.2008 is stated as Rs.1643.62 crores which was 85%. Only Rs.284.98 crore (Rs.1928.60 crore–
Rs.1643.62 crore), i.e., only 15% remained to be spent during the last month of the financial year
2007-08. However, the total expenditure is shown as Rs.1842.6 crore. This means that an
expenditure of Rs.198.44 crore (Rs.1842.06 crore – Rs.1643.62 crore), i.e., only 10% of the total
outlay of Rs.1928.60 crore was made during the last month, i.e., March, 2008.

84
Similarly, under the Mission Flexible Pool, out of the total outlay of Rs.3155.32 crores, the
expenditure upto 29.2.2008 is stated as Rs.2505.05 crores which was 80%. Only Rs.650.27 crore
(Rs.3155.32 crore–Rs.2505.05 crore), i.e., only 21% remained to be spent during the last month
of the financial year 2007-08. However, the total expenditure was Rs.3151.63 crore. This means
that an expenditure of Rs.646.58 crore (Rs.3151.63 crore–Rs.2505.05 crore), i.e., only 20% of the
total outlay of Rs.3155.32 crore was made during the last month, i.e., March, 2008.
It appears from the above that the actual pace of utilization under the RCH Flexible Pool,
i.e., only 10% during the last month of the last quarter of 2007-08 was appropriate. However, there
was some variation under the Mission Flexible Pool which is owing to the fact that funds for
various activities are released from State to district level and from districts to various implementing
agencies all over the year. However, the reporting of expenditure on most of the items takes place
during the last quarter of the year as a result higher expenditure gets reflected during the last
quarter and the last month of the year, though it pertains to the earlier quarters. Therefore, owing
to the long channel of reporting process, higher expenditure gets reflected during the last quarter/
month ofthe financial year.
Recommendations/Observations
9.6 Under RCH Flexipool, major allocation (57%) is meant for Maternal Health followed by
infrastructure share of 12% and 13% for family planning measures. As per the Financial Monitoring
Report for the first three quarters of 2007-08, Rajasthan, Orissa, M.P., are the States performing
well so far as utilization of allocated funds is concerned. However, the position is different in
respect of the most crucial States like Bihar registering only 25% of utilisation, Jharkhand 30% and
Chhattisgarh 34%. Non-EAG States have been able to achieve utilization of more than 85% of their
allocated funds with Goa (9%) and Tamil Nadu (18%) being the low performing States. Reports
are satisfactory with regard to NE States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Mizoram and Sikkim.
The Committee would like to point out that in view of increased demands from the States
for various activities under RCH Flexipool, allocation was enhanced to Rs.1928.58 crores at the
RE Stage from Rs.1725.00 crore provided in BE 2007-08. Availability of opening balance of
Rs.542.12 crore at the beginning of the year with additional increase at the RE Stage clearly
indicates that there is no shortage of funds. It seems that either the States do not have the capacity
to take the maximum benefit of different components of the programme or rigid procedural
formalities for release of funds are coming in the way. The Committee has been given to
understand that with regard to Mission Flexible Pool allocation of Rs.2285.00 crore in 2008-09 falls
short of the requirements envisaged under different components. Additional funds under the Mission
Flexible Pool will be provided during the course of the year.
Action Taken
For Bihar, funds under RCH Flexible Pool could not be released up to December 2008
owing to the unspent balance of Rs.112.63 crore already available as on 1.4.2007. It may be
mentioned that Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Tamil Nadu and Goa were the low performing states
in utilisation of funds during 2007-08. It is agreed that there is no shortage of funds in the light
of the pace of utilization by some of the States. It is felt that some delay occurs in transmission
of funds from States to the districts and lower level owing to the non-availability of electronic
transfer facility. Secondly, the reporting of expenditure from the block/district levels to the State
and central level is also sometimes delayed owing to lengthy reporting track as a result of which
short reporting of utilization also occurs. These practical difficulties are being identified and sorted
out by the frequent trainings and workshops being organised by the financial management experts
of the Central Financial Management Group (FMG) in association with the State FMGs and the

85
pioneer institutes like NIHFW, RRCs and the SHSRCs. As regards the budget allocation of
Rs.2285 crores under the Mission Flexible Pool, the same is considered as short in comparison
with the requirements presented in the State Programme Implementation Plans for 2008-09.
However, the position would be reviewed at the RE stage on the basis of the trend of utilisation
of funds during the first 5-6 months of the current financial year.

86
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.5 Committee’s attention is drawn to the quantum of allocation that was made during 2007-08
under the Family Welfare/NRHM programmes and the utilization thereof. While an amount of
Rs.10,890 crores was allocated last year, the Department could utilize Rs.8800.88 crores only until
29th February, 2008. The funds utilization position under different heads against the approved
Outlay for the year 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 is given below:—
Annexure-A of Report.
The Committee is not satisfied with the present utilization status as indicated above. The
fact remains that about Rs.1900 crores, were still left to be spent in the later half of the last
quarter of the financial year 2007-08. During 2006-07 also, the funds amounting to Rs.1500 crores
could not be utilised.
Action Taken
The Scheme-wse utilization status as on 31st March, 2008 is at Annexure-I.
It can be seen from the Annexure that against the RE of Rs.10668.61 crore, the expenditure
is Rs.10310.16 crore which is 96.64% of the RE. The balance of Rs.358.45 crore is mainly on
account of short releases for NE Region due to low absorptive capacity.
Similarly, during 2006-07, against the BE of Rs.9000.00 crore, the RE was Rs.7951.08 crore
and the expenditure was Rs.7486.62 crore which is 94.16% of the RE. Thus against RE, the
remaining balance was Rs.464.46 crore, again due to insufficient absorption in NE Region.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee has been drawing the attention of the Department to the uneven
pace of utilisation of funds allocated under NRHM. Year 2007-08 was also no exception. As
on the 29th February, 2008, utilisation figures stood at Rs. 8800.88 crore which reached to
Rs.10,310.16 crore by the 31st March, 2008, clearly indicating release of Rs.1509.28 crore
during the last month of the financial year. The Department has not come up with any
clarification on this pertinent issue. The Committee is also not happy with the attempt
made by the Department in projecting a satisfactory utilization status of allocated funds by
drawing a comparison between RE allocation and utilization thereof. The fact remains that
inspite of increased allocation at the beginning of the year, the same had to be brought
down at the Revised Estimate Stage. Crucial programmes like Routine Immunisation, Pulse
Polio Immunisation, Intergrated Disease Survelliance Project showing this trend is a cause
of serious concern for the Committee.
The Committee is not prepared to accept the argument put forth by the Department
that balance remaining at the end of the year is mainly due to curtailed releases owing to
86

87
low absorptive capacity in the NE region. The Committee is constrained to observe that the
Department, instead of devising means to break through the obstacles to ensure proper
utilization of funds in the region, seems to pose a picture of resignation in the matter. The
Committee is of the firm belief that under the above circumstances, major health care
interventions in the NE region would not be reaching the targetted beneficiaries, thereby
depriving them of the health care initiatives. The Committee strongly feels that the
Department, being the apex nodal body in the country for health care initiatives, has to
strive harder so as to ensure their reach to the NE region in the real sense. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to take up this issue with the Chief
Secretaries of all the NE states as well as the Department of Development of NE Region.
Recommendations/Observations
2.6 A perusal of the funds allocation/utilization table referred to above reveals that there have
been instances of persistent under utilization of funds as well as steady decrease in allocation of
funds during the years 2006-07. 2007-08 and 2008-09 in case of various schemes like Grants to
States Training Institutions. Free Distribution of Contraceptives. Routine Immunization, Area
Projects, NGOs. Public Private Partnership and Integrated Diseases Surveillance Project. The
Committee is unable to understand this trend of steady decrease in funds allocation/utilization.
Whether it was due to the States’ incapacity to make optimum utilization or due to complicated
procedural formalities involved in release of the central assistance is unclear. The Committee.
therefore. recommends that the Department should get an analytical study conducted to find out
the factors leading to steady decrease in allocation of funds as well as the under utilization thereof
year after year. The Committee would like to be informed of the findings of the above study as
well the remedial measures proposed to be taken for optimum utilization of funds for the schemes
referred to above.
Action Taken
The utilisation status of the Schemes mentioned in the Para over the years 2006-07,
2007-08 and 2008-09 (BE) is at Annexure-II.
It can be seen from the Annexure that the utilization of funds under Integrated Diseases
Surveillance Project (IDSP) was low due to delay of submission of Project Implementation Plans
(PIPs) and MoUs by “Phase-Ill States”, less procurement of general lab equipment as the number
of labs was reduced, and non-release of grants to NIC for networking for want of UCs and SOEs.
Moreover, low utilisation under Area Projects is on account of non-achievement of stipulated
benchmarks under the Scheme. Under these schemes, according to available information, lower
expenditure was not due to procedural formalities.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is disappointed to note that the Department has chosen to remain
silent on the reasons of steadily decreasing allocation of funds to such an important
healthcare programme like the Routine Immunisation Programme. The Committee is also
not convinced by the justification given by the Department with regard to Integrated
Diseases Surveillance Project. The Department has also, not indicated in its reply as to what
extent the number of labs was reduced resulting in less expenditure on the procurement of
equipments. Similarly, it is also not clear as to what is the exact number of units that were
planned to be linked by the NIC network. The Department has informed the Committee
that funds for networking could not be released to NIC since UCs and SOEs could not be
timely obtained from it. The Committee is aware that National Informatics Centre (NIC) is
a Government setup. Therefore, it wonders as to what could be the reasons for which there

88
were delays in submission of UCs and SOEs by the latter. The Committee, under the
circumstances, can only conclude that the Department’s attempts in the matter have been
lackadaisical, and as a result of which, achieving targeted landmarks in fully
operationalising critical initiatives like that of the IDSP have been put on the back foot.
The Committee observes that the Department should actively pursue the project of making
IDSP fully operational and should be extra vigilant towards achieving the targets set for
such critical health initiatives.
III. INFRASTRUCTURE STRENGTHENING
Recommendations/Observations
3.6 The Committee would also take this opportunity to bring to the notice of the Department
the issue of submission of Integrated District Health Action Plans (IDHAP) by the States. Of the
617 districts in the country, the Department has informed that 523 have already submitted their
IDHAPs. However, Bihar, Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh have failed to take due cognizance
of this vital parameter.
States Districts IDHAP submitted
Bihar 38 2
Himachal Pradesh 12 2
Punjab 20 3
Haryana 20 9
The Committee understands that preparation of IDHAP by the districts had begun more than
a year before. Reasons for these States falling behind are not known to the Committee. The
Committee would like to emphasize that Integrated District Health Action Plans are the very basis
for improving the availability of health care facilities in a district. Failure of a State to draw such
Action Plans leaves very little hope of providing basic health care facilities to people residing in
such districts. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department to vigorously pursue this
issue with concerned State Authorities.
Action Taken
As on date, States/UTs have reported that 541 Districts have already finalised Integrated
District Health Action Plans (IDHAP). As per mandate of Implementation Framework of NRHM,
all IDHAP would be finalised by the end of 2008 and we are moving ahead to accomplish the same.
Punjab has already finalised its IDHAP. In Bihar the process is under litigation and Haryana is
expediting the same.
States District Earlier Latest Progress
Report on of IDHAP
IDHAP
Himachal Pradesh 12 2 3
Punjab 20 3 20
Haryana 20 9 11
Bihar 38 2 Process under
litigation

89
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is happy to note that Punjab has been able to furnish all 20
Integrated District Health Action Plans (IDHAPs). However, its concern stands unabated for
the progress reported from the State of Himachal Pradesh and Bihar. It fails to understand
the reasons as to why the matter of formulation and submission of IDHAPs would go into
litigation. Under such a dismal scenario, the situation in a State like Bihar, where the need
for basic health facilities is urgent, could only worsen if timely action on the part of both
Central and State Government is not taken. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the
Department to take up this matter at the highest level in the State. The Committee also
recommends that the slow progress made by Haryana in respect of IDHAP may also be
monitored by the Department.
Recommendations/Observations
3.7 The Committee notes that out of 1,45,272 Sub-Centres functioning in the country, only
72.830 Sub-Centres are having their own buildings. NRHM provides for Civil construction
upto 33% in Special Focus States and 25% in other States. The Committee observes that as on
March, 2007. 5989 buildings of Sub-Centres were under construction. The Committee hopes that
construction, york of such Sub-Centres must have been completed. Committee’s attention has also
been drawn by 66.382 Sub-Centres whose buildings were required to be constructed with 12247
buildings to be constructed in U.P., followed by A.P. (8301) and West Bengal (7120). The
Committee hopes that these States must have availed of financial assistance for construction of SC
buildings. The Committee would appreciate if regular monitoring of such SCs is undertaken.
Action Taken
Matter of Record.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is disappointed with the Department’s reply to the Committee’s
bservation regarding pending civil construction work for 66,382 Sub-Centers (SCs). The
ommittee had also impressed upon the Department to undertake regular monitoring of uch
SCs. However, the Department, instead of informing the Committee of the progress ade so
far, and the monitoring mechanisms, if any, put in place, has chosen to take note of he
issue as a “matter of record”. Taking a serious note of the approach of the Department,
the Committee would appreciate if the Department furnishes the details of the progress
made in the civil construction work of the Sub-Centres in all the states and also indicate
the monitoring mechanism in place for the purpose. The data so furnished should also
contain details of the funds released to the states, the date of commencement of work, a
list of the number of units that were proposed to be built and those that have completed
construction, till date.
ASHA
Recommendations/Observations
3.12 Capacity building of ASHA is critical in enhancing her effectiveness as a link between the
community and the health facility. The initial orientation training is for a period of 23 days spread
in 5 rounds over a period of 12 months and followed by periodic re-training for about 2 days once
every alternate month, apart from the on-the-job training she would be getting. Training modules
for this purpose have been developed based on a thematic approach and States have also

90
constituted district and block training teams for this purpose. The Department has informed the
Committee, during its discussion on demand for grants, that selection of 5,87,512 ASHA has been
completed, 4,90,000 ASHA have completed their first round training and 2,18,339 ASHA have been
provided with drug kits.
The Committee is happy to note the progress made by the Department on the ASHA
initiative under NRHM. It is also happy to note that 86.41 % ASHA have been trained in their first
module post induction training till 12th March, 2008. The Committee observes that ASHAs have to
undergo three more rounds of training. So far, only 27% ASHAs have undergone 2nd round of
training. The Committee is of the view that every effort needs to be made to ensure that second
round of training of all the ASHAs is completed at the earliest.
The Committee has its apprehensions regarding the effectivity of ASHA as a multipurpose
social health activist, as envisaged under the NRHM. The Committee observes that job
responsibilities of ASHA are manifold as indicated below:—
– Awareness generation - Health, RCH, HIV/AIDS.
– Advising newly married couples for their special needs.
– Guiding pregnant women for availing of institutional facilities for Anti-Natal, Natal and
Post-Natal needs.
– Counselling on nutrition, pregnancy, breast-feeding, immunization and family planning.
– Establishing  link with PHCs, private providers and others for service requirement of
beneficiaries.
– Mobilizing parents for child survival interventions.
– Promoting basic sanitization.
– Provision of non-clinical spacing contraceptives.
– Surveillance of communicable diseases.
Action Taken
Training under various modules is at different stages in the States. The second module
training is complete in Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Uttarakhand. In Orissa and Uttar
Pradesh 2nd, 3rd and 4th modules have been combined and the training is on. It will be complete
by September, 2008 in Orissa. In Bihar also 2nd, 3rd and 4th modules are being combined and
training is to commence soon as training of Trainers is complete.
State facilitators have been deputed in Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Uttarakhand and
NE States to facilitate the training programme.
ASHAs are performing various tasks. National Health System Resource Centre (NHSRC) is
reviewing the ‘job responsib ilities’ and “Role clarity of ASHA”.
Recommendations/Observations
3.13 ASHA is also the primary provider for National Health Programme. She is the Depot Holder
for health commodities like Vitamin A. Impregnated bed nets. ORS etc. She is also supposed to
handle treatment of minor ailments. Another major task assigned to ASHA is to provide escort
services for women seeking delivery services at institutions, requiring emergency care and MTP
services, women and men for clinical contraception services and VCTC. The Committee has been

91
given to understand that States have also taken up the training of ASHAs on diagnosis of malaria
cases. For being eligible for ASHA. a woman has to be 25 to 35 years of age, married, resident
of the village, acceptable to the village and community and proficient in reading and writing. The
Committee fails to understand as to how a single woman, who is a simple villager, can take care
of one thousand population by performing such wide-ranging tasks. Situation becomes more
complex and well away from ground realities when one finds that only remuneration payable to
ASHA is for providing Escort Services. Instances of Escort Services may not be very frequent
some times. The Committee strongly feels that ASHA is supposed to play a very challenging role.
Action Taken
ASHA is already performing wide ranging tasks for which incentives are being given. The
list of remuneration and activities is at Annexure-V.
Recommendations/Observations
3.14 The Committee is of the view that with the passage of time, the number of responsibilities
of ASHA will itself become a challenge for her to cope up with. This will not only reflect in the
quality of her work and performance but ultimately fail in fulfilling the very objectives with which
the initiative was initially conceptualized. As the initiative is still in the early stages, the Committee
suggests that the Department should review the responsibilities entrusted to the ASHA. Committee’s
attention has been drawn by the findings of Common Review Mission which conducted appraisal
of NRHM in November, 2007, 16 months after NRHM got final Cabinet approval in July, 2006.
Appraisal was based on one-two districts in AP, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, M.P., Gujarat,
J&K, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, U.P. and West Bengal. The Committee notes that
performance assessment of ASHA has led to mixed findings in different States. Non-payment
against activities/conflicts regarding compensation money, and lack of role clarity between ASHAs
and AWWs are two major problem areas identified. The Committee apprehends that situation may
worsen with more complexities arising in future. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that role
of ASHA needs to be reassessed and reformulated.
Action Taken
We agree with the observations. Accordingly, NHSRC has agreed to review the
responsibilities of ASHA, AWW and ANM.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes with a sense of relief that the Department has at last come to
concur with the observations of the Committee regarding its apprehensions on the role clarity
and feasibility of discharging the duties assigned to ASHA. The Committee would like to state
here that these apprehensions were voiced by it in earlier reports so that the objective with
which the concept of ASHA was initiated under the NRHM doesn’t get diluted. The
Department has stated in its Action Taken Note that National Health System Resource Centre
(NHSRC) is reviewing the ‘job r esponsibilities’ and “Role clarity of ASHA” as well as that of
AWW and ANM. The Committee observes that the Department has not specified any
timeframe, within which NHSRC would be completing its review. In the meantime, these
Social Health Activists would continue discharging their duties originally mandated with the
likelihood of new ones adding to their responsibilities. The NHSRC has to complete its review
in a time bound manner so that such an important health initiative does not become
redundant. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department to ensure the timely
submission of the Report by NHSRC, followed by expeditious implementation of the same.

92
MOBILE MEDICAL UNITS (MMUs)
Recommendations/Observations
3.16.1 During 2006-07, though the target set was for providing MMUs to all 600 districts in the
country, only 318 districts could be provided with such units. As a result, operationalisation of
those 318 MMUs sanctioned in 2006-07, was set as the target to be achieved during 2007-08 under
the scheme. However, as informed by the Department, only 319 districts have been funded for
MMUs and operationalisation of only 198 MMVs could be achieved. The Committee had pointed
out to the Department last year that the names of bigger States like Bihar, Jharkhand, M.P,
Maharashtra, U.P. did not register among those that had disbursed funds for providing MMUs in
the States. The Committee had also pointed out that these 318 districts are distributed among 18
States only. The Department, in its action taken note, had replied that these states had incorporated
and provided funds for MMUs in their Programme Implementation Plan (PIP-2007-08) under
NRHM. It seems that incorporation and provision of funds for MMUs in the Programme
Implementation Plan (2007-08) of Bihar, Maharashtra and U.P. has not been followed by
procurement of MMUs in these States. The Committee notes that MMUs were to be operationalised
in 400 districts by March, 2008. However, as per the latest figures there is no increase in the
number of 198 functional MMUs.
Against such a backdrop, chances of improvement do not seem to be possible in the near
future. The Committee understands that many States are having their own set-up of ambulances
which seem to be functioning well. There are also States where NGOs are involved for this
service. The Committee feels that based on the findings of Common Review Mission in respect of
some States, steps may be taken for strengthening the facility of MMUs.
Action Taken
The operationalisation of the MMV has increased to 200 districts of the country. The States
of Bihar, Maharashtra and U.P. have been urged in the meeting to expedite the procurement of
MMUs and the States in the NPCC meeting have reported progress in the procurement process.
Besides MMUs, arrangements for emergency ambulance services are also being made in States on
a very large scale. It is likely to improve access to health services even in remote areas.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee observes with constraint that no significant progress has been made
in the operationalisation of Mobile Medical Units (MMUs). As per the latest status furnished
by the Department, only 200 districts in the country are having this facility. Committee’s
apprehensions about states like Bihar, Maharashtra and U.P. failing to procure MMUs
inspite of provision of funds therefor continue to persist as confirmed in the response of
the Department. Notwithstanding availability of emergency ambulance services on a very
large scale in some states, the Committee would like to emphasize that effective steps need
to be taken for strengthening the facility of MMUs in the entire country. This task can be
accomplished if follow-up action on the constraints highlighted in this regard in the
1st Common Review Mission (November, 2007) and second Common Review Mission
(November, 2008) is taken by the Department in co-ordination with concerned States.
Recommendations/Observations
3.16.2 The Committee had the opportunity to apprise itself about the key findings of the appraisal
conducted by the Common Review Mission in November, 2007. The study is based on team visits
made to one or two districts in Andhra Pradesh., Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, M.P., Gujarat,

93
J&K, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, U.P. and West Bengal. The Committee finds that assessment
of NRHM on 24 parameters has been made through this appraisal. The Committee takes note of
the constraints being faced by these States in the implementation of NRHM and the
recommendations on the areas that need strengthening and course correction. While appreciating
this initiative, the Committee is of the view that such an appraisal needs to be followed by intensive
interaction with all the implementing agencies in the States at the earliest. Otherwise the very
purpose of undertaking such an exercise will be defeated. The Committee also strongly feels that
such Common Review Missions should be conducted in all the States, with one region being taken
at a time. It would also be a good idea if two-three performing and non-performing districts in
a State are taken together for making a comparative analysis. Incorporation of surprise visits will
make the assessment more realistic.
Action Taken
The 1st Common Review Mission (CRM) was held in the month of November, 2007 as part
of the Mission Steering Group’s mandate of review and concurrent evaluation. The CRM had
identified areas of achievement and constraint and made recommendations for corrective action.
The Report was also shared with all States/UTs and corrective actions were reported by States
during the NPCC meetings. The 2nd CRM of NRHM has been scheduled in the month of
November, 2008 for 13 States. It would be visiting these States for assessing the improvements
and constraints of NRHM at various levels.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee hopes that the Second Common Review Mission of NRHM of 13
States scheduled for November, 2008 must have been reviewed and corrective steps initiated
by the concerned States. The Committee is, however, not aware as to whether its suggestion
for including both performing and non-performing districts in the States selected for CRM
has been implemented. If not, the Committee would emphasize that in the absence of such
a framework, the very purpose of the Review would remain incomplete.
NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL  PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
4.7 The Committee notes that increased supervision and monitoring is one of the main strategies
adopted for effective control of malaria. The latest figures made available to the Committee reveal
continuance of shortage of surveillance and supervisory staff in NE States. In the biggest State of
NE Region, Assam against sanctioned posts of 694 Health Supervisor (Male) only 570 were in
position, against 343 Health Supervisors (Female), there were 316 and only 1647 MPW (M) against
sanctioned posts of 3080. What is more disturbing is that while Tripura failed to furnish the data,
Meghalaya and Nagaland have provided incomplete information. The primary role of MPW (M) and
MPW (F) is door to door surveillance and detection of communicable diseases and it’s reporting.
The fact that these functionaries play a vital role in disease detection and surveillance cannot be
ignored. By not appointing these functionaries, the States leave a big gap at the field-level disease
surveillance, detection and treatment. This vital issue needs to be pursued at the highest level in
the concerned States. The other strategy adopted is use of Rapid Diagnostic Kits by ASHAs. The
Committee does not have high expectation from this initiative as firstly, required numbers of ASHAs
have to be in place in malaria endemic States and even if they are there, they would be over-
burdened with the various tasks already assigned to them. The Committee fails to comprehend the
continuance of such a discouraging situation inspite of special dispensation for NE States. The
Committee can only reiterate that there is need for drastic measures and extensive monitoring under
the supervision of State Nodal Officers.

94
Action Taken
The extensive monitoring and supervision by the State Nodal Officers through the visits are
being done. The States are continuously being reminded to take remedial measures, fill up the
vacant positions and appoint the contractual technical manpower provided under the GFATM
project. Assam has recruited 461 lab technicians under NRHM whereas Arunachal Pradesh,
Mizoram and Nagaland have filled their allotted technical manpower like MTS and LTs under
GFATM. Other States have also initiated the recruitment process. Further, 5057 contractual MPWs
(male) have been sanctioned to 14 high malaria endemic States under NVBDCP during 2007-08 out
ohvhich Nagaland has recruited 100 MPWs as per allotment, and other States like Tripura, Manipur,
Arunachal Pradesh and Assam have initiated the process of recruitment. States have geared up and
actions have been initiated by them to fill up the vacancies.
The monitoring has also been strengthened by the State level officers as well as through
NRHM. The NRHM review meeting held at Imphal, Manipur on 13.05.08 under the Chairmanship
of Hon’b1e HFM has reflected that various processes for malaria control have been intensified
with. the involvement of district level administration.
ASHA is being involved in the community based Malaria control activities in the high malaria
transmission areas by training them in the RDT use and administration of anti-malarials.
Considering the workload of the ASHA, initially 61 Districts of 11 States have been identified for
involvement of ASHAs.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
Apprehensions of the Committee with regard to shortage of surveillance and
supervisory staff in Malaria-endemic N-E States continue to persist. Out of 5057 contractual
MPWs (male) sanctioned in all the 14 high malaria-endemic States under  NVBDCP during
2007-08, with the exception of Nagaland, remaining N-E States like Tripura, Manipur,
Arunachal Pradesh and Assam have only initiated the process of recruitment. No mention
being made about other health functionaries like Health Supervisor (Male) and (Female) by
the Department is self- revealing. The Committee has been persistently drawing the
attention of the Department towards the problem of sanctioned posts of Health workers
remaining vacant. But it seems no viable solution has emerged so far . Involving ASHAs in
malaria-control activities can only be considered a stop-gap arrangement, that too not viable
due to their being already over-burdened with manifold tasks. The Committee can only
reiterate that the matter of filling up of sanctioned posts of Health workers in malaria-
endemic N-E States needs to the taken up at the highest level by the Department.
JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS
Recommendations/Observations
4.10 Japanese Encephalitis (JE) is a viral disease with a tendency of seasonal outbreaks. JE has
been reported repeatedly from 15 States out of which, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Karnataka,
Kerala, Maharashtra, Manipur, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have been reporting
repeated outbreaks. There is no specific anti viral drug for JE and cases are managed
symptomatically. Efforts have been directed to provide technical support and strengthen capabilities
of States through training to tackle this disease. A vaccination programme for children between 1
and 15 years of age under the Universal Immunization Programme, using single dose live attenuated
SA-14-14-2 vaccine has been launched in 2006. In 2006, 11 districts in 4 States were covered
which was expanded to 28 districts in 10 States during 2007. A total of 93.08 lakh children were
vaccinated against the target of 105.31 lakh children achieving 88.39% coverage. As per the Annual

95
Report, 2007-08, the vaccination campaign has so far been completed in Assam (89%), Haryana
(86%), West Bengal (61 %) and in 7 districts of Uttar Pradesh (99.7%).
The Committee is dismayed to note that despite various methods adopted by the Department
over the past year, to contain the disease, the number of cases reported to be suffering from JE/
AES has shown an increase over the previous year figures. The fact is even more disturbing that
though the Department claims to have completed 99.97% immunization in the past year in 7 worst
affected districts in Uttar Pradesh, the situation there has worsened with 2675 cases and 577
deaths in 2007 (till December) over the 2006 figures of 2320 cases and 528 deaths. The Committee
fails to comprehend as to why inspite of a number of preventive measures taken by the Central
Government in co-ordination with the State Government of Uttar Pradesh, the JE/AES related cases
and deaths continue to be high in the State. The Committee apprehends that the actual figures
would increase the tally much further. The Committee would like to take the opportunity to State
that though the data for Assam has not been made available by the Department, going by the fact
sheet of 2006, it is apprehensive that the situation in Assam would also show a similar trend as
that of U.P.
Action Taken
About 88% was covered during 2007 in 27 districts. 4022 cases and 963 deaths were
reported.
Infection with JE virus may be asymptomatic or may cause febrile illness, meningitis,
myelitis or encephalitis. Encephalitis is the most commonly recognized presentation of JE and is
clinically indistinguishable from other causes of acute encephalitis syndrome (AES) which may
include meningococcal meningitis, TB meningo encephalitis, viral encephalitis, JE, Cerebrospinal
meningitis and even cerebral malaria, hence since 2006 Dte. of NVBDCP issued guidelines to report
JE under AES. The CSF/sera samples collected for AES cases are subjected to serological testing
and for the past three years, JE positivity has fallen from 39% in 2005 to 14.2% and 13% in 2006
and 2007 respectively. Though 51 Sentinel sites with manpower and equipment for serological
testing have been identified in 12 JE endemic States by Dte. NVBDCP, all the samples are not
tested due to constraints in laboratory testing. Secondly, in Eastern Uttar Pradesh, apart from JE
other viruses like enterovirus (EV76&89 strains) are circulating in the community which was
established by NIV, Pune during 2006 as out of 306 CSF and 179 sera samples, only 36% and
18% JE positivity was reported from these samples. In addition, 21.56% (EV76&89 strains) and
1.96% Coxsackie ‘B’ was detected in 6 CSF samples. It is pertinent to note that vaccination is
given against JE only.
Recommendations/Observations
4.11 The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department to the fact that the
year 2006 had reported a visible impact of preventive measures initiated by registering a declining
trend when compared with 2005 figures. Quantum jump in the first three quarter of 2007 calls for
a serious review with special focus on Assam and U.P. the two main endemic States. The
Committee would impress upon the Department that analysis of epidemiological and entomological
data for epidemic outbreak prediction and timely remedial measures is required to be carried out
on an urgent basis.
The Committee feels that perhaps the precautionary methods adopted by the Department
have not percolated properly to the affected population because of which the disease has once
again registered an increase. The Committee adds that lax monitoring of the disease by the Central
as well as the State Governments could aggravate the situation further unless it is dealt with a
sense of urgency. It suggests the Department to undertake on-the-spot review of the situation as

96
to the possible causes for upsurge in the reported cases. The Committee urges the Department to
step up the ongoing mc activities in the endemic States so that the desired objective is reached
soon.
Action Taken
The JE situation in Eastern UP is reviewed at regular intervals by Additional DG and
Director, NICD. The last meeting was held on 12.05.08. Apart from above, Dte. of NVBDCP set
up JE sub-office and Vector Borne Disease Control unit (VBDCU) in Gorakhpur in February and
April, 2007 respectively. The main task assigned to the sub-office of VBDCU is to closely monitor
JE situation by making field visits, collecting entomological/epidemiological data, analyzing and
interpreting the same in consultation with Dte. of NVBDCP and sharing it with district authorities
for immediate remedial measures. During 2007, two multidisciplinary Central Teams were deputed
to Gorakhpur and Saharanpur districts (30.7.07 to 6.8.07) and 25-31 October respectively.
Recommendations of both these teams were discussed with concerned State/district officials for
immediate corrective measures. The States are also supported by providing funds for various JE
components. JE kits are also supplied to all JE endemic States by Dte. NVBDCP. During 2008, all
the States were sent advisories for preparing Action Plan on Prevention and Control of AES/JE on
5.02.08. It was followed by sending a check list indicating month wise activities on 25.02.08. On
19.03.08 a one day workshop was organized at BRD Medical College, Gorakhpur on
clinical manifestations and case management. Experts from NVBDCP helped the States/district
authorities to draw up a field oriented Action Plan in a meeting held under the Chairpersonship of
Principal Secretary (Health) and F.W., Government of Uttar Pradesh on 20.03.08. A central multi
disciplinary team of 6 experts also visited the State and BRD, Medical College, Gorakhpur w.e.f.
13-15 May, 2008 for making an on the spot assessment on the requirement of manpower, civil
works and equipment for establishing AES treatment unit as desired by HFM, Government of India.
Dte. NVBDCP organized 2 days workshop cum training at Lucknow on surveillance and
case management on 30-31 July, 2008 which was attended by 40 participants including 35 officials
from 11 endemic districts and 5 State officials.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee observes that a number of measures have been initiated by the
Department in co-ordination with the State authorities with regard to control of Japanese
Encephalitis (JE) in eastern U.P., the most endemic area. The Committee also takes note
of two problem areas - one of constraints in lab-testing and prevalence of other viruses,
apart from JE with vaccination being available only against JE. The Committee fails to
understand why, inspite of adequate funds being provided under the Programme, proper
sample testing facilities have been lacking. The Committee would like to State here that
lack of proper serological testing facilities would result in improper detection of infected
cases and could aggravate the situation further. The Committee suggests that mobile labs
for conducting the required test may be introduced so as to supplement the existing
facilities and to overcome the constraints faced in lab testing. The Committee would
appreciate if such an initiative is implemented at the earliest by the Directorate of NVBDCP
after due consultation with the State and district authorities in the JE infested Areas in
Assam and U.P.
The Committee would like to point out that problem of other viruses, apart from JE
in eastern UP was deteted by NIV , Pune in 2006. By now, strategy for tackling these viruses
including vaccination should have been in place and being implemented. The Committee,
therefore, impresses upon the Department to take the required action on an urgent basis.

97
CHIKUNGUNYA
Recommendations/Observations
4.16 State-wise analysis of suspected Chikungunya cases and number of confirmed cases during
2006 and 2007 reveals a very disturbing trend about the spread of this disease. In 2006, maximum
number of confirmed cases were reported from Maharashtra (804) followed by Karnataka (298)
and Gujarat (225). In contrast, Kerala reported the highest number of confirmed cases of 909 while
there are 347 confirmed cases occurring in West Bengal in 2007 up till November. Another cause
of serious concern is overall increase in total number of confirmed Chikungunya cases from 2001
in 2006 to 1876 in 2007 (upto November).
Recommendations/Observations
4.17 Incidence of Chikungunya cases in the country during 2006 and 2007 has led the
Committee to the conclusion that various initiatives taken by the Department have so far failed to
yield any desired results. The Committee strongly feels that with the enhanced allocation of
Rs.14.59 crore in 2008-09 for Dengue and Chikungunya, effective measures are required to be
undertaken in the affected States. Mere circulation of detailed guidelines and advisories for
prevention and control of these diseases to all affected States would not serve any purpose. What
is required is to identify the affected districts and go for regular fever surveillance in such endemic
areas to detect an unusual trend. The Committee is of the view that if this analysis of ground
reality is followed by IEC activities and strengthening of apex Referral Institutions for diagnosis and
treatment, number of Dengue/Chikungunya cases would show a declining trend. The Committee
apprehends that unless adequate remedial measures are taken, sporadic outburst of these diseases
would continue to be reported from different States every year.
Action Taken
During 2007,59535 cases for Chikungunya were reported. Total 7850 samples tested out of
which 1826 was confirmed for Chikungunya virus.
During 2006-07, Rs.21.60 crores was released as emergency package to the affected States
for items like Fogging Machines, Pyrethrum Extract, Temephos and Insecticide-treated bed nets
and IEC activity. Subsequently in 2007-08, Rs.8.75 crores was released as emergency package to
the affected States for items like Pyrethrum Extract, Temephos and IEC activities including social
mobilization of the community.
During 2006, Chikungunya disease appeared in the country after acquiescence of almost
three decades. The community did not have immunity against this disease and 1390322 suspected
cases of Chikungunya were reported by 16 States/UTs respectively. Only 15961 samples (1.15%
of suspected cases) were tested, of which 2001 were confirmed for Chikungunya virus (12.5%
of the samples tested).
In 2007, due to the intensification of implementation of the strategic action plan for
prevention and control of Dengue and Chikungunya in the country including community based
vector control and intensification of focused IEC activities, the number of suspected cases were
only 59535 i.e. 95.72% less than 2006 from 14 States. Besides, in 2007 Government of India had
established 110 Sentinel Surveillance hospitals in the affected States for proactive surveillance and
diagnosis. In addition, 13 Apex Referral Laboratories were also identified and linked with these 110
Sentinel Surveillance Hospitals for providing advanced diagnostic facility and back up support.
Therefore, due to better facility in 2007 more samples could be tested and confirmed, total 7850
samples tested (13.2% of suspected cases) and 1826 confirmed for Chikungunya virus (23.3% of
the samples tested).

98
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department in intensifying multi
pronged approaches to contain the incidence of Dengue and Chikungunya cases. The
Committee feels that results of such measures would surely reflect in the numbers of cases
detected for the year 2008. The Committee would like to be apprised about the IEC
interventions undertaken in this regard.
Committee’s attention is, however, drawn to the number of samples tested against
the suspected cases. The Committee notes that out of 59,535 suspected cases in 2007 only
13.2% were tested and of these 13.2% cases (7,850 samples tested), 23.3% of the samples
turned out to be confirmed cases. The Committee feels that 13.2% samples tested is a
fairly low number compared to the suspected cases figures and given the fact that more
than 23% turned out to be confirmed cases of the 7,850 tested samples, the figures could
be much more if the number of samples tested were increased.
The Committee apprehends that in such a situation, there are chances of there being
a large number of confirmed yet undetected cases. The Committee, therefore, suggests that
the Department should concentrate its efforts towards strengthening the testing lab
facilities so that maximum number of samples are tested.
V. NATIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
5.7 The Department has informed the Committee that over 2400 NGOs, 17,000 Private
practitioners, and 120 corporate houses have been involved in the provision of RNTCP services in
the Programme during 2007-08 under various components of the Programme. The Committee, in
its earlier report, had suggested that a forum can be evolved where participating NGOs/PPs get the
opportunity to share their experiences with similar workers from other States. At the same time,
the Committee would also recommend that the evaluation of the work being done by NGOs/PPs
be made under the Routine Programme Evaluations carried out by the States (2 districts per
quarter) and the Centre (2 districts per month) in order to review the progress made under the
mc initiatives and suggest proper utilisation of the funds allocated under the scheme. In reply to
the above recommendation, the Department had stated that in all the Central Evaluations conducted
in two districts per quarter, a representative from CTD goes to review the PPM activities both at
the district and State level. Similarly, the State evaluations also carry out the PPM review with
respect to utilization of funds and activities undertaken by the NGOs.
The Committee would like the Department to furnish details of the evaluation reports as
stated above with respect to utilization of funds and activities undertaken by the NGOs. The
Committee would also like to suggest here some measures for increasing advocacy, communication
and social mobilization. It recommends that the Department should sit with the Private Print and
Media sector and should work out modalities as to how they can be involved in the IEC activities
for the programme.
Action Taken
Under the Revised National TB Control Programme (RNTCP), involvement of NGOs has
been decentralized to the District level and MOUs are signed with the District TB Societies. Funds
to NGOs are released by the concerned District TB Society in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the MOUs. Many NGOs also participate without any financial assistance. Evaluation
of performance of NGOs/PPs is an integral part of Routine Programme Evaluations carried out by
the States and the Centre. Few examples of different schemes being implemented by the NGOs in

99
the districts and reviewed during internal evaluation of the districts are placed at Annexure-VI. In
addition, an independent evaluation of selected NGOs will be conducted and the report is likely to
be available by the third quarter of current year.
There was a Consultation on NGO/PP guidelines on 29-31st Jananuary, 2008 wherein 60-
70 NGO/Private practitioners were invited from all over the country to share their experiences in
Public private partnership in RNTCP implementation. The successful models as well as constraints
were discussed in detail and recommendations were made to increase the scope and scale of
current NGO/PP Guidelines.
ACSM strategy in RNTCP II focuses on strengthening advocacy and social mobilization
activities. Strong advocacy is required with the professional bodies, medical colleges for
popularizing DOTS and rational use of second line drugs.
Programme has plans to address this through electronic and print media, and also working
closely with the professional bodies with the support and collaboration of media agency.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is happy to note that the Department had acted on its suggestion
for evolving a national forum where participating NGOs/PPs  share their experiences of
providing services under RNTCP. The Committee hopes that 60-70 NGOs/PPs participating
in the conference held on 29-31st January, 2008 must have given some concrete
suggestions for successful implementation of RNTCP. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the report on an independent evaluation of selected NGOs conducted by the
Department.
The Department has also informed that in order to strengthen advocacy and social
mobilization activities under the programme, it is closely working with professional bodies
with the support and collaboration of media agency. The Committee would like to be
apprised in detail about its plan under the proposed initiative and the outcome of such
enterprise.
Recommendations/Observations
5.8 Reacting to a query on the status of research by the Tuberculosis Research Centre, Chennai
that is currently involved in the designing stage of a new TB drug the Department has informed
that Johnson & Johnson pharmaceuticals approached Tuberculosis Research Centre, Chennai (TRC)
with the protocol for the multi-centric trial for a Phase II, placebo-controlled, double blind,
randomized trial to evaluate the anti-bacterial activity, safety and tolerability of TMC 207 in subjects
with sputum smear positive pulmonary infection with multi-drug resistant Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (MDR-TB). After extensive discussions with senior researchers at TRC followed by
the members of 35th Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) of TRC in November, 2007 as well as
by a Sub-Committee constituted by the SAC, the protocol now is ready to be presented to the
Institutional Ethics Committee (1EC) TRC in the month of March, 2008. In the meantime, the Drug
Controller of GoI has given clearance for the trial. It is likely to start in the month of May, 2008.
The Committee is happy to note that the pharma company Johnson & Johnson has
undertaken the responsibility for developing a drug for treatment of patients with Multi-Drug
Resistant TB. The Committee has been given to understand that the cost of treatment of MDR-
TB patients is very high. The Committee feels that the issue of cost effectiveness of the drug needs
to be examined simply because patients in India are generally poor and lack means to afford the
drugs. Under the circumstances, the affordability of the drug could be construed as a blessing for
the poor and downtrodden.

100
Action Taken
The Programme Division is conscious of the aspect of affordability of the drug for the
patients as well as by the government. Before any new Drug is adopted by the programme, it will
have to meet the criteria of not only safety and efficacy but also of cost, affordability and evidence
based acceptability of the drug under programmatic conditions. Further, adoption of any new drug
in the programme will be based upon recommendations/ consensus arising out of consultative
process involving all stakeholders.
In view of the rolling of management of MDR-TB cases, the programme plans to lay a lot
of emphasis on preventive aspects.
The programme emphasizes on the prevention of MDR-TB through sustained high quality
DOTS implementation by all health care providers in the public and private sector.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates the Department’s concerns and efforts on the prevention
of MDR- TB through the administration of high quality DOTS and the Programme Division’s
concerns regarding the availability of effective affordable drugs. However, the Committee
feels that perhaps the Department has missed the import of the Committee’s comment
seeking further information on the status regarding the trials of the affordable drug for
treatment of patients with Multi-Drug Resistant TB, developed by the pharma company
Johnson & Johnson. The Committee would like to be apprised of the recent developments
in the matter in detail-and the preliminary findings of the trial reports, if any, of the drug.
VI. NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
6.5 Another initiative proposed by the Department is provision of an amount of Rs.5000/- for
reconstructive surgery to leprosy disabled persons from BPL families. 19 medical colleges/hospitals
in Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh, U.P and New Delhi have been
identified therefor. The Committee has been informed that reconstructive surgeries are being
conducted for medical rehabilitation of such leprosy affected persons in four Central Institutions
located at Chengalpattu, Agra, Raipur (Chhattisgarh) and Aska (Orissa). The Committee has been
given to understand that efforts are being made to start services for medical rehabilitation in seven
Medical Colleges and nine Physical Medicine Rehabilitation Institutions spread across the country.
The Committee notes that few NGOs have also been given recognition for conducting
reconstructive surgeries.
The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Department to provide reconstruction
treatment to leprosy disabled persons. The Committee would appreciate if modalities for
implementing this new scheme are finalized at the earliest. The Committee would appreciate if this
scheme takes off at the earliest. The Committee would, however, emphasize that strict monitoring
should be ensured so that really needy persons are benefited. Adequate publicity also needs to be
given. All the stake-holders, both implementing agencies and targeted beneficiaries, need to be made
aware of this new initiative proposed under the programme.
Action Taken
The new initiative of providing incentive of Rs.5000/- for Reconstructive Surgery (RCS) to
leprosy disabled persons from BPL families and to 20 institutions for conducting RCS has been
proposed in the EFC for continuation of NLEP in the 11th plan period. The EFC has already been

101
approved by Secretary, MoH and FW and the matter has been processed for obtaining suitable date
from EFC for presentation of the programme.
Adequate publicity is being given to this scheme and it will be ensured that needy persons
are benefited by the new initiatives.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee observes that the proposal for providing incentive of Rs. 5000/- for
Reconstructive Surgery to leprosy disabled persons from BPL families and to 20 institutions
for conducting RCS is yet to be approved by EFC, though more than half of the Eleventh
Plan period is over. Such an undue delay, that too on a proposal already going on a pilot
basis in four Central institutions, is uncalled for. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the
Department to expedite the completion of all the procedural formalities.
VII. NA TIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS
Recommendations/Observations
7.4 The Committee, is, however, surprised to find that implementation of new initiatives
depends on the approval of EFC Memo by the Ministry of Finance and CCEA. Till then, the funds
allocated for 2008-09 will continue to be utilized as per the existing scheme approved for the Tenth
Plan. The Committee is not happy with this State of affairs. Second year of Eleventh Plan has
already started and by the time approval of the competent authority is finally received, the year
2008-09 would be nearing its end. The Committee would like to point out that some of the new
initiatives like construction of dedicated Eye Wings/Eye OTs in District Hospitals, appointment of
manpower, development of mobile Ophthalmic Units in NE States will have to undergo a number
of procedural formalities before their actually taking off. The Committee accordingly recommends
that concerted efforts need to be made for getting the formal approval at the earliest. The
Committee would appreciate if simultaneously preparatory activities are also started.
Action Taken
The EFC Memo for Eleventh Five Year Plan for NPCB is under active consideration in
consultation with the Integrated Finance Division, MoH and FW and Planning Commission. In view
of certain observations of Planning Commission, the proposal has been revised and submitted to
the Integrated Finance Division, MoH and FW for seeking a suitable date from Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for consideration of the proposal.
Simultaneously, preparatory activities for implementation of new initiatives like requirement
of manpower, construction of dedicated Eye Wings/Eye OT in District Hospitals and development
of Mobile Ophthalmic Units have been started on provisional basis in consultation with the
concerned States.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
Last year, while welcoming new initatives under the National Programme for Control
of Blindness for the Eleventh Plan with focused attention on NE States and also in Bihar,
Jharkhand, J&K, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, the Committee had voiced its
apprehensions about undue delay in their actual initiation. More than one year has passed
since then and third year of the Eleventh Plan period is also reaching its end. However, the
EFC Memo for the proposed projects remains under active consideration in consultation with
the Integrated Finance Division. The Committee has been drawing the attention of the

102
Department to the trend of undue delay in getting the formal approval for the proposed
projects from all the authorities. However, no serious introspection on such a vital aspect
seems to have been done by the Department. As a result, funds continue to get allocated
for proposed projects year after year with their status remaining unchanged and funds
remaining unutilized. Preparatory activities for implementation of new proposals on
provisional basis may also prove to be counter-productive at the end simply because there
is always a possibility of the proposed projects undergoing drastic changes. The Committee,
therefore, once again emphasizes that the Department has to evolve a mechanism
whereunder all procedural formalities for a proposed project are expeditiously completed and
the project takes off in the real sense.
Recommendations/Observations
7.7 The Department has informed that in order to encourage eye donation among masses, IEC
activities are being intensified under the programme. The major focus towards this direction is
organization of National Eye Donation Fortnight from 25th August to 7th September every year.
During the fortnight, intensified publicity through all available media is given to step up eye
donation campaign and persuade people to donate eyes after death. The focus of the fortnight has
been shifted from “Pledging of Eyes” to “Actual Collection of Eyes” by launching “Hospital
Retrievable Programme” in major hospitals with various specialties, teaching hospitals attached to
medical colleges and large multi-specialty hospitals in Government and Non-Government Sector,
Army, Railways, ESI and Industrial Establishments of the country. In addition to this, the message
for eye donation is being propagated through various print and electronic media.
The Committee is not convinced that the IEC activities are being carried out as intensely
as is stated by the Department. The Committee has been given to understand that out of the total
allocated budget under National Programme for Control of Blindness, around 7% has been spent
on IEC, which according to the Committee, is quite a sizable amount. The Committee strongly feels
that public awareness about the noble cause of eye donation for blind persons continues to be very
low. The Committee is of the view that a review of IEC activities on this aspect needs to be made
in consultation with all the stakeholders, specially reputed Eye Hospitals/NGOs doing commendable
work in this area and also both government and private advertising agencies. The Committee would
also like to emphasize that the functioning of Eye Banks in the country requires to be reviewed
in view of reported lack of logistic support for timely collection of eyes by the Eye Banks. Steps
also need to be taken for increasing the number of Eye Banks in the country.
Action Taken
An independent evaluation of IEC activities under NPCB has already been initiated with the
following objective:—-
1. To assess the level of awareness created by the Govt. of India IEC materials/activities
among target population.
2. To assess the media habits and effectiveness of media tools used among the different
target groups.
3. To recommend cost effective IEC strategies for future, based on this assessment
including media tools – both conventional and non-conventional.
As regards observation of the Committee on review of functioning of Eye Banks, it is stated
that review of Eye Banks is a part of overall Comprehensive Evaluation NPCB, which is under
process.

103
Further, in order to increase number of Eye Banks in the country to encourage eye donation,
it has been proposed to strengthen 50 Eye Banks during Eleventh Five Year Plan with enhanced
assistance from Rs.l0 lakh to Rs.15 lakh as non-recurring grant to Eye Banks in Government/
voluntary organisations. In addition, recurring assistance of Rs.l000 has been proposed to be
enhanced to Rs.1500 per pair of eyes to Eye Banks towards honorarium to Eye Bank staff,
consumables including preservation material and media, transportation/POL and contingencies. It has
also been proposed to appoint 150 Eye Donation Counselors in Eye Banks in Govt. and NGO Sector.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department for monitoring and
evaluation of IEC activities, the functioning of the Eye Banks in the country and other
initiatives to boost eye donations. However, the Department has not mentioned clearly the
time lines of initiation or the conclusion of the evaluation studies for IEC activities and also
the comprehensive evaluation of NPCB on review of Eye Banks. The Committee would like
to be informed about the outcomes of the evaluation studies at the earliest and furnish the
relevant reports for its perusal.
VIII. NA TIONAL IODINE DEFICIENCY DISORDERS PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
8.2 The Committee observes that out of a Plan allocation of Rs.15 crores in 2006-07,
expenditure reported is only Rs.11.79 crores while against an allocation of Rs.25 crores during
2007-08, expenditure reported upto 28.02.2007 is Rs.13.13 crores only. During 2008-09, the
allocation has been further enhanced to Rs.32 crores. The target achievement figures for 2007-08
are given below:—
Processes Tar gets for 2007-08 Achievement
upto 28.2.2008
Production and 50 Lakh MT 26.54 lakh MT
Distribution of (upto October, 2007).
Iodated Salt
Establishment of To be established in 5 States  viz.
State IDD Control Jharkhand, Bihar, West Bengal, Nil
Cells Pondicherry, Madhya Pradesh
Establishment of To be established in 6 States  viz.
State IDD Monitoring Jharkhand, Bihar, West Bengal,
lab Pondicherry, Madhya Pradesh, nil
Uttar Pradesh
Analysis of Salt Samples
for 40 Districts, 500 20,000 samples nil
samples per district
The Committee notes with dismay that not even one of the targets set under the Programme
could be achieved during the past year, by the time line given. Moreover, unti1l 28.2.2008, only
Rs.13.13 crores of the funds released, could be spent. The Committee considers such a trend
highly unsatisfactory. The Committee remarking on the under-utilisation of funds during 2006-07,
had expressed its apprehension on proper utilisation of funds allocated under the Programme for

104
2007-08 in its 22nd Report. The Committee was given to understand that a provision of Rs.4.30
crores has been made for States and UTs to meet the expenditure on the following components
for the same year.
1. Establishment of an IDD Control Cell
2. Establishment of an IDD Monitoring Lab
3. DD Surveys/resurveys of districts
4. Health Education and Publicity
To the utter dismay of the Committee, the States could not set up even one IDD Control
Cell or IDD Monitoring Lab. Not only that, of the 20,000 salt samples the Department had planned
to analyse from 40 districts at the rate of 500 samples per district, not even one sample had been
analyzed. The Committee takes a serious view of this.
The Committee’s attention has also been drawn by enhanced allocation of Rs.32 crores in
2008-09. The Committee would like to emphasize once again that all conceivable efforts may be
made so as to ensure optimum and judicious utilization of allocated funds.
Action Taken
For the year 2006-07, expenditure under National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control
Programme (NIDDCP) was Rs.13.86 crores from the allocated amount of Rs.15 crores. This is
an expenditure of 92.4%. The shortfall was due to non-filling up of posts of IDD cell and IDD
Monitoring laboratories by the States/UTs.
For the year 2007-08, the expenditure was Rs.20.04 crores against the allocation of Rs.25
crores, which is about 80.2%. The shortfall is due to Non-filling up of vacant posts under IDD
cell and IDD lab at the State/UT level as well as a delay in procurement of Salt Testing Kits. The
IEC component, a major strategy of NIDDCP, has full utilization of funds.
In terms of physical achievements, the production & distribution of Iodated salt was 41.76
MT upto January, 2008 and most likely the target of 50 lakh MT would be achieved. There are
already 31 State IDD Control cells present. From the 5 States that have been mentioned namely
Jharkhand, Bihar, West Bengal, Puducherry and M.P, the IDD cells are present in Bihar, West
Bengal and M.P. For Establishment of State IDD Monitoring laboratories, a laboratory has been
established in Uttar Pradesh.
The target of 20,000 salt samples @ 500 samples per district from 40 districts could not
be undertaken due to non-availability of programme vehicle by administration.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee finds the Status Report on the achievement level of physical targets
set under the National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme for 2007-08 very
discouraging. Out of 6 States, i.e. Jharkhand, Bihar, West Bengal, Puducherry, Madhya
Pradesh and U.P. targeted for setting up State IDD Control Cells, Jharkhand, UP and
Puducherry have failed to do so. Similarly, only U.P. could set up IDD Monitoring lab although
all the aforesaid 6 States were targeted to do so. What is more disturbing is that the target
of analysis of 20,000 salt samples @ 500 samples per district from 40 districts could not be
undertaken due to non-availability of programme vechicle by administration. The Committee
refuses to accept such flimsy justifications. The Committee would like to point out that proper
planning means achievement of targeted goals within the prescribed time-schedule. Problems
like non-availability of programme vehicle could have been easily handled. The Committee,

105
therefore, would like to impress upon the Department once again to make all conceivable
efforts in active co-ordination with State authorities for timely achievement of goals.
IX. JANANI SURAKSHA YOJANA
Recommendations/Observations
9.13 The Committee feels that monitoring mechanism for such Schemes needs to be very
effective so that no grey areas are there to be misused by unscrupulous persons. The Committee
would like to have a Status Note on the procedure of verification of claims and release of
compensation package. The Committee also strongly feels that community participation is
encouraged so as to keep a watchful eye on the activities of implementing agencies under the
Scheme. The Committee would also appreciate if an assessment is made about the impact of JSY
on the lowering of Maternal Mortality Rate in the crucial States.
Action Taken
The Ministry fully shares the views of the Committee to have a fool-proof Monitoring
mechanism to avoid misuse of funds. A Status Note on the lines desired by the Committee will be
prepared as early as possible after obtaining specific inputs from the States.
The Department, in collaboration with UNICEF, UNFPA and GTZ, has commissioned
surveys regarding the implementation of the scheme in eight States. The reports, however, do not
give any specific information regarding impact of the scheme on the lowering of Maternal Mortality
Rate. The Department is in the process of finalizing modalities for concurrent evaluation of the
scheme in six major States. During the course of survey, an assessment about the impact of the
scheme on the reduction of Maternal Mortality will be made.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department also shares a similar
view point with the Committee regarding putting a fool-proof monitoring mechanism in
place so that misuse of funds intended for the beneficiaries under the programme are
avoided. The Committee observes that nearly a year has passed since the Department has
stated in its ATN regarding preparing a S tatus Note on the pr ocedure of verification of
claims and release of compensation package under Janani Suraksha Yojana as desired by
the Committee. The Committee hopes that the Department must have obtained specific
inputs from the States for the Status Note. The Committee would like the Department to
furnish the said Status Note for its perusal and also to be apprised about the follow-up
action, if any, taken so far.
The Committee would also like to point out that the Department must have finalized
the modalities for concurrent evaluation of the scheme in six major States regarding the
impact of the scheme on the lowering of Maternal Mortality Rate. However, the Department
has not given any timelines for commencing or concluding the assessment. It, therefore,
urges upon the Department to draw the plan of action for making the assessment within
a specified timeline and apprise the Committee about its findings.
ROUTINE IMMUNISATION PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
9.15 The Committee has been observing that State specific problems especially in the low
performing States continue to persist. Shortage of Health Workers, lack of awareness and laxity
in monitoring and supervision of the programme are some of the problems being noticed in such

106
States. Reported coverage of different vaccines under the Routine Immunization Programme
confirms Committee’s apprehensions that in some of the States like Arunachal Pradesh.. Bihar.
Jharkhand, Manipur, position is very unsatisfactory. The Committee would like to point out that the
steps taken for strengthening the Routine Immunization Programme like recruitment of health
workers, regular reviews at all levels and catch up rounds in poor performing States do not seem
to have yielded the desired results. The Committee can only say that catch-up rounds in poor
performing States with the districts identified beforehand is the most important step for effective
reduction in the number of un-immunized and partially immunized children. Entire focus of the
Implementing agencies should be on this alone.
Action Taken
The catch-up rounds/special immunization weeks have been observed in the low performing
States viz. EAG and NE States. As per the observations of the Committee, the poor performing
districts will be identified from the District Level Household Survey III (DLHS-III), which is under
process and the report is awaited soon. The States will be asked to focus on these districts and
conduct catch-up rounds in these select districts.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee hopes that by this time the District Level Household Survey III (DLHS-
III) must have been completed and the Report received. The Committee would like the
Department to furnish a copy of the Survey Report for its perusal as also the progress made
on the proposed course of action in the EAG and NE States indicated in the Action Taken Note.
Recommendations/Observations
9.17 Committee understands that the three pioneer Institutes namely Central Research Institute
(CRI), Kasauli in Himachal Pradesh, Pasteur Institute of India (PII), Koonoor, Tamil Nadu and the
BCG Vaccine Laboratory (BCGVL) in Chennai, Tamil Nadu have been directed to stop vaccine
production. The Committee strongly feels that these vaccine production units should not be
converted to only testing laboratories. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare should withdraw the order without delay.
Action Taken
The three Institutes were inspected and due to non-compliance of Schedule M requirements,
the Drugs Controller General of India suspended their licenses w.e.f. 15th January, 2008. The
Ministry constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Drugs Controller General of India to
(i) assess feasibility of reviving these units by making them Schedule M compliant: (ii) if found
feasible and viable, what would be the time frame and the costs involved in the revival; and
(iii) if the revival is not found feasible/viable, alternate use of the existing facilities.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
In the light of shortage of vaccines in the country, the Committee observes that the
reply of the Ministry that the units are not schedule M compliant is unacceptable. It also
notes that since there have been no reckonable reports of adverse impact of the vaccines
produced by the units over the years, though they have not been schedule M compliant
during the said period, the Committee feels that suspension of vaccine producing license
and putting the existing facilities to alternative uses would not be a viable move. Therefore,
the Committee reiterates its earlier stand and recommends that the suspension of the
license of these units be revoked and the units be allowed to produce vaccines.

107
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
–NIL–
107

108
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
Part A
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee was given to understand that the overall approved outlays under two
heads – strengthening of hospitals and dispensaries and redevelopment of hospitals/
institutions have been drastically reduced vis-a-vis the proposed outlay. Hospitals like RML
and Safdarjung and other institutions like AIIMS, JIPMER etc. have been allocated lesser
amounts than what had been proposed. The Committee is constrained to observe that time
and again it has been pointing out to the Department to place its case before the Planning
Commission for funds allocation in an effective way, yet it appears that once again the
Department has not been able to present its case convincingly. The Committee is of the
view that lesser approved outlay often stems from past trends of sub-optimum utilization of
funds and the issues incidental thereto. The Committee would, therefore, recommend to the
Department to have a right approach in this regard by making a correct assessment of
requirements of funds for the different activities and place the same effectively before the
Planning Commission. The Committee would also like to impress upon the Department to
take effective measures so as to ensure optimum and judicious utilization of allocated
funds. (Para 2.3)
The Committee observes that action regarding audit of all centrally sponsored
programmes, PSUs under the Department and autonomous bodies receiving Grants-in-Aid
has been initiated by the Department. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
latest position in this regard. (Para 2.11)
The Committee notes that out of the five units where adverse audit findings were
made during 2007-08, compliance in case of only one has been received. The remaining four
units have some serious audit paras against them. The Committee would appreciate if the
matter is taken up with these units urgently so that the irregularities reported are
reconciled and a sense of financial accountability prevails. Status Note in this regard may
be furnished to the Committee. (Para 2.12)
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS)
The Committee had called for taking measures which includes training of the staff,
connectivity of the computer systems and their backup for power failure. However, the
Department has concentrated on the aspect of internet related issues, viz., enhancing its
speed and software related problems. The issue of training of staff and the power backup
seems to have been ignored at this juncture. The Committee would like to emphasize that
though internet efficiency is a vital aspect of the computerization programme, yet it has to
be seen in totality. The issue of proper training of the staff and the power backup are also
crucial for the success of the computerization exercise. The Committee, therefore, expects
the Department to chalk out a proper strategy in this regard. (Para 3.5)
The Committee observes that its recommendation regarding starting of two shifts
system in CGHS dispensaries has ultimately resulted in a positive response from the
108

109
Department. The Committee would appreciate if the matter is placed before the Committee
of Secretaries at the earliest. (Para 3.6)
The Committee was given to understand that land for CGHS dispensary was available
in Dwarka. The Department has in its recent update had admitted that it had been allotted
three plots of land in Dwarka at Sectors 6, 8 and 12. The problem cited here is that the
construction work of a dispensary could not be started for want of a formal possession of
the plots being given by the DDA to the Department. The Committee has been apprised that
reminders have been sent to the DDA and their reply is still awaited. The Committee is
unhappy to note that in the name of expediting formalities only reminders have been sent.
The Committee fails to understand the reasons for undue delay on the part of DDA in
providing possession of the plots in Dwarka when the same had already been allotted. It is
high time that the Department takes up the matter at the highest level in DDA in the
interest of a large number of CGHS beneficiaries residing in Dwarka. The Committee would
also like to point out that even after possession of land, it will take considerable time in
the opening of CGHS dispensaries in Dwarka. Concerted efforts are, therefore, required to
be made for getting suitable accommodation till then so as to get at least one Dispensary
operational there. (Para 3.7)
The Committee is constrained to note that the Department has adopted a lacklustre
approach in the matter. It has been close to three years since the in-principle approval for
opening the new CGHS dispensaries in Sector 82 Noida and Gurgaon was given by the
Planning Commission and in the name of action, only a request to Chairman (CEO) Greater
NOIDA for allotment of suitable accommodation has been made, which however has not
materialized due to high rent cost. Similarly, in case of Gurgaon Dispensary, after a gap of
one year since in-principle approval, an advertisement was issued in March 2007, which
however didn’t attract any response. Further, it took one more year to write to the
Secretary, Government of Haryana for allotment of CGHS Dispensary. No efforts seem to
have been taken since then. The Committee is unhappy with this kind of lackadaisical
approach of the Department. If this is the state of affairs at present, the Committee can
well imagine that it may take even a decade to start the two dispensaries. The Committee
would, therefore, recommend to the Department to make every conceivable effort so that
the two dispensaries are made functional at the earliest and the large number of
beneficiaries residing in these areas get proper CGHS facilities. (Para 3.8)
The Committee notes that SIU study report has been implemented in 19 CGHS
covered cities except Delhi which is under process in consultation with the Finance Division
in the Ministry. The Committee has also been informed that issue of creation of posts in
all the 20 CGHS covered cities is being taken up by the Department. The Committee
expresses its deep concern on undue delay taking place in such a vital area. No progress
seems to have been made since the presentation of 27th Report of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department. The Committee is also not aware about
the time frame for implementation of SIU Study Report in Delhi. The Committee reiterates
that the entire process of creation of posts in all the 20 CGHS covered cities should be
completed in a time-bound manner with monitoring at all levels. (Para 3.9)
The Committee hopes that the proposal for direct procurement of proprietary/
branded medicines as per the rates approved by MSO through rate contract system has been
approved by the competent authority leading to savings on heavy consultancy fees being
paid to HSCC. (Para 3.12)
The Committee expresses its strong reservation on the continuance of adhoc
arrangements with regard to empanelment of cancer hospitals for CGHS beneficiaries. The

110
Committee is not aware about the progress made by the CGHS Committee with regard to
fixation of various packages/rates for treatment of cancer patients. The Committee can well
imagine the plight of cancer patients till a final decision is arrived at, which would
ultimately depend on the willingness of hospitals for accepting the rates offered leading to
their empanelment. It seems that CGHS beneficiaries, specially the cancer patients, would
continue to suffer. There is an urgent need for review of empanelment procedure so that
a situation does not arise where patients needing extensive medical care continue to be
deprived of the same. (Para 3.13)
The Committee has been provided with the revised rates for various investigation
and treatment procedures under CGHS in the four metro cities. The Committee is surprised
to note substantial variation in the approved rates for many investigation/treatment
procedures. In many cases there has been a variation of 50%. Further, there are several
cases where the rates vary upto two to three times in the metro cities which the Committee
is not able to reconcile itself with. If such is the level of variance in rates in different
metro cities, the Committee can well imagine about the difference in CGHS rates prevalent
in other cities. The Committee places on record its deep concern in this regard. Either there
is some inherent problem in the procedure or there may be some mismanagement. The
Committee would like to be apprised in detail about the procedure along with criteria for
approval of CGHS rates for the various cities. (Para 3.14)
SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL AND V ARDHMAN MAHAVEER MEDICAL COLLEGE, NEW DELHI
The Committee in its Report had recommended to the Department to provide
adequate funds to the Safdarjung Hospital to meet its functional requirements. The
Committee is anguished to note that in the name of the Action Taken in this regard, the
Department appears to have just forwarded the status given by the Hospital administration.
The Department has not come up with any assurance or plan of action in this regard. The
Committee notes that inadequate provision is likely to result in non procurement of
Medicines and Disposables thereby adversely affecting the patient care and the various
Major Works/Maintenance undertaken by this Hospital & CPWD and the construction of
staff quarters would also be put on hold. The Committee therefore recommends that urgent
steps be taken to provide additional funds to the Hospital, which caters to the needs of the
poorer sections of the people, not only from Delhi but also from the adjoining and far off
areas. (Para 4.3)
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS)
Nobody can deny the fact that our country is facing shortage of medical
professionals. Not only this, precious public money is being used to pay for the subsidized
education in the Government institutions, some of which are renowned ones. The
Committee, therefore, strongly feels that some policy guidelines are urgently required to be
framed so that trend of our doctors and nurses leaving the country is checked. The
Department can not shy away from its responsibility to frame such a policy which is
required in public interest. (Para 6.11)
The Committee notes that it has been about two years since the Valiathan
Committee submitted its report on the functioning of AIIMS. In a meeting held on the 14th
November, 2008, the representatives of the Department inter alia  stated that action on some
of its recommendations had taken place. It was also stated that the recommendations
pertain to some short-term and some long-term goals. Action in case of short-term goals
would take place within 5-6 months and in other cases it would take a longer period. While

111
recommending speedy action on the recommendations of the Valiathan Committee, the
Committee would like to have a status note in the matter especially about the
recommendations which have been implemented and the time-frame within which the
remaining would be implemented. (Para 6.12)
The Committee has been pursuing the matter of setting up of a Burns Unit in
AIIMS. The Committee notes that the proposal for setting up a Burns Unit in the JPNA
Trauma Centre, AIIMS has been approved by the Standing Finance Committee of the
Institute on the 7th May, 2008. The Committee finds that the minutes of the Standing
Finance Committee have now to be approved by the Institute Body/Governing Body. The
Committee once again emphasizes that this matter needs to be pursued vigorously by both
the Department and the Institute authorities so that the proposed Burns Unit starts
functioning at the earliest. Present pace of progress has to be expedited in a time-bound
manner otherwise the proposal will continue to remain on paper for years. (Para 6.13)
POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH (PGIMER),
CHANDIGARH
The Committee had sought information on the initiatives taken by the Institute for
the timely completion of the new projects, especially in the light of under-utilization of
allocated funds in the past and the subsequent delay in the ongoing projects. The Action
Taken Note submitted by the Department in this regard is a mere statement of the present
status of the ongoing projects. The Committee is constrained to observe that there is no
mention of the initiatives, if any, being taken by the Department for timely completion of
the ongoing and new projects. In the absence of any concrete steps, the Committee
apprehends no improvement in the scheme of things. The Committee would again
emphasize on the fact that the Department needs to devise a proper strategy urgently to
back the targets set for the Institute. (Para 7.5)
CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, RANCHI
The Committee is anguished to note that the Department has not supplied the
requisite information sought in respect of the Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi. The
Department has not furnished any update regarding the progress made w.r.t. the proposed
re-development plan of the Institute. It has only stated the previous position that the EFC
proposal has been circulated and is under consideration. From this, the Committee can only
infer that there has not been any progress on this front since quite some time and no
sincere efforts seem to have been taken by the Department to expedite the same. The
Committee is also not happy with the Department for not sharing the circumstances leading
to the monitoring of the development of the Institute by the Jharkhand High Court despite
being asked to do so specifically. The Committee would like to be furnished the requisite
information without further delay. (Para 9.3)
V ALLABHBHAI PATEL CHEST INSTITUTE, DELHI
The Committee is anguished to note that despite its observation regarding the details
of the short-term training courses/workshops in respiratory diseases for faculty members
and medical practitioners conducted by the Institute during 2007-08 not being specific, the
Department has not provided the same again. In Annexure-IX th e contents of Annexure-
X, which is about the details w.r.t.  workshops, courses etc. in 2008-09, have been
reproduced. The Committee views this with serious concern. Such an approach is neither
acceptable nor expected from the Department. The Committee, therefore, directs the

112
Department to be careful in future and provide the requisite information at the
earliest. (Para 10.3)
PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY)
The Committee, during the presentation by the Secretary before it, in connection
with the Demands-for-Grants of the Ministry, had conveyed to him its deep concern over the
delay in the PMSSY Project. Subsequently, the Committee had directed the Department to
furnish a status report regarding the implementation of the Project after every two months,
which was agreed to by the Secretary. In spite of a categorical assurance by the Department
that such a report would invariably be furnished, till date no such report has been furnished
to the Committee. Non-compliance of an assurance given to a Parliamentary Committee is
a serious matter. The Committee cautions the Department in this regard and expects that
it would be kept informed of the progress made in the implementation of the project, as
desired. (Para 11.8)
UPGRADATION OF DIST RICT HOSPITALS
The Committee is constrained to observe that the Action Taken Note furnished by
the Department is silent on the basic issues raised by the Committee. Though merging the
activity with Mission Flexible Pool (NRHM), as an administrative decision, may be aimed at
tackling the problems afflicting the scheme, the Department has not categorically stated
about any action w.r.t.  Committee’s recommendations regarding giving priority to the
remote and rural area hospitals and those States where MMR and IMR are high and where
maternity facilities are not up to the mark formulating a mechanism so as to facilitate
early selection, granting and overseeing proper utilization of funds and expediting scrutiny
of the proposals received from the State Governments from the beginning of financial year
2008-09 itself. The Committee would appreciate if the Department takes some pro-active
steps keeping in view its specific recommendations on a very crucial issue of public health.
(Para 13.2)
RASHTRIYA AROGYA NIDHI
The Committee notes that the Department has approached the State Governments of
U.P., Assam, Orissa, Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Nagaland for setting up
of State Illness Assistance Fund. The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need
for having such a fund in these States. The Committee once again urges upon the
Department to take up this vital matter of public interest with the concerned State
Governments at the highest level. (Para 14.3)
The Committee welcomes the Department’s move regarding increase in financial
assistance to less than or equal to Rs.l lakh per case and extension of the facility to the
NEIGRIHMS, Shillong and Regional Institute of Medical Sciences Hospital (RIMS), Imphal.
The Committee would appreciate if steps are taken for a realistic increase in the revolving
fund to cater to the demands of poor patients and some concrete action is taken for
extension of the scheme to other hospitals. The Committee would also like to point out that
the Department’s reply is silent on the issue of giving wide publicity to the scheme
especially in the hospital campuses to generate awareness so that the same can be utilized
by the needy and poor patients. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken
by the Department in this regard. The Committee would also appreciate if an assessment
of the Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi is made at the earliest. The Committee strongly feels that
such an exercise would result in identification of problem areas and necessary remedial
steps. (Para 14.4)

113
NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME (NACP)
The Committee is given to understand that steps are being taken to ensure full
utilization of funds during 2008-09. Y et no specific steps have been stated. In the opinion
of the Committee merely stating that steps are being taken to ensure full utilization
without specifying the steps being taken/to be taken is not adequate. The Committee,
therefore, would like to be apprised of the concrete steps being taken/contemplated to be
taken to obviate the possibility of under-utilization of funds sanctioned by Parliament.
(Para 16.5)
The Committee places on record its anguish that the Department has not shared with
it the requisite information categorically asked for in respect of unspent balances available
with the blacklisted NGOs and the action taken for recovery of the same, details of all
similar cases/discrepancies related to NACO and the action taken by the Department/CBI
in that regard. This coupled with contradictory figures regarding the NGOs under paras
16.13 and 16.12 clearly shows the perfunctory and careless approach of the Department
towards the Committee. The Committee takes this seriously and advises the Department to
be careful in future. Accordingly, the Committee would like to be provided with the
requisite information without further delay. (Para 16.13)
NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME (NCCP)
The Committee is once again unhappy to note that the requisite information
regarding the details of the new component – Public Private Partnership has not been
furnished. The Committee, accordingly, would like to be provided with complete details
regarding this new component. (Para 17.6)
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department regarding submission
of UCs by the State Governments. However, the Committee is constrained to note that a
Status Note on pending UCs (State/NGO-wise), as asked for by the Committee has not been
furnished by the Department. The Committee would appreciate if the same is furnished to
it. (Para 17.8)
MEDICAL EDUCATION
The Committee observes that the issue at hand is too urgent to be allowed to linger
on, as it concerns the quality and standards of medical education and any compromise in
the matter has the potential to put the lives of the people in peril. Therefore, mere
assurance of keeping in view the observations of the Committee at the time of finalizing
any mechanism does not suffice. In view of the gravity of the issue, the Committee would
recommend to the Department to deal with it with a sense of promptitude and bring some
sort of policy or legislation urgently. (Para 21.6)
Last year, Committee’s attention had been drawn to a very disturbing situation
whereunder as many as 27 medical colleges continued to function in the country whose first
batch of MBBS students had appeared for final examination but they were yet to be
recognized. The Committee had impressed upon the Department to resolve this matter
involving the fate of our students without any further delay. The Committee is deeply
disturbed to note that the position remains unchanged. No action seems to have been taken
in the case of 9 medical colleges where recommendations of MCI have reached the
Department. With respect to remaining 18 medical colleges, recommendations of MCI are
still awaited. The Committee is well aware of the statutory provisions regarding grant of
recognition to a medical college. The Committee views with serious concern this state of

114
affairs, that too in the critical area of medical education. The Committee is of the firm
opinion that this entire matter along with the existing procedure of recognition of medical
colleges needs to be reviewed by all concerned. The Department has to take a pro-active
role being the nodal authority for medical education in the country. (Para 21.7)
V ACANCIES IN CBS CADRE
The Committee takes note of the fact that in the General Duty Medical Officers
sub-cadre of CHS recently 179 posts have been abolished in various CGHS units. The
Committee welcomes the Department’s initiative to get a clearance from the Cabinet for
appointment of retired GDMOs on contractual basis for a period of two years on a
remuneration of Rs. 25,000/-. But the Committee cautions the Department that if agreed
to by the Cabinet this should only be a stop gap arrangement and there should be no laxity
on its part to make all out efforts for having the vacancies filled up on a full time basis,
at the earliest. The Committee is dismayed to note the contradictory figures of vacancies
in the Non-Teaching, Teaching and Public Health sub-cadre supplied to it at the time of
Demands for Grants and in the present Action Taken Note of the Department. The
Committee cautions the Department to be careful in future in presenting facts and figures
to it. (Para 22.2)

115
Part-B
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee has been drawing the attention of the Department to the uneven
pace of utilisation of funds allocated under NRHM. Year 2007-08 was also no exception. As
on the 29th February, 2008, utilisation figures stood at Rs. 8800.88 crore which reached to
Rs. 10,310.16 crore by the 31st March, 2008, clearly indicating release of Rs. 1509.28 crore
during the last month of the financial year. The Department has not come up with any
clarification on this pertinent issue. The Committee is also not happy with the attempt
made by the Department in projecting a satisfactory utilization status of allocated funds by
drawing a comparison between RE allocation and utilization thereof. The fact remains that
inspite of increased allocation at the beginning of the year, the same had to be brought
down at the Revised Estimate Stage. Crucial programmes like Routine Immunisation, Pulse
Polio Immunisation, Intergrated Disease Survelliance Project showing this trend is a cause
of serious concern for the Committee.
The Committee is not prepared to accept the argument put forth by the Department
that balance remaining at the end of the year is mainly due to curtailed releases owing to
low absorptive capacity in the NE region. The Committee is constrained to observe that the
Department, instead of devising means to break through the obstacles to ensure proper
utilization of funds in the region, seems to pose a picture of resignation in the matter. The
Committee is of the firm belief that under the above circumstances, major healthcare
interventions in the NE region would not be reaching the targeted beneficiaries, thereby
depriving them of the healthcare initiatives. The Committee strongly feels that the
Department, being the apex nodal body in the country for healthcare initiatives, has to
strive harder so as to ensure their reach to the NE region in the real sense. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to take up this issue with the Chief
Secretaries of all the NE States as well as the Department of Development of NE Region.
(Para 2.5)
The Committee is disappointed to note that the Department has chosen to remain
silent on the reasons of steadily decreasing allocation of funds to such an important
healthcare programme like the Routine Immunisation Programme. The Committee is also
not convinced by the justification given by the Department with regard to Integrated
Diseases Surveillance Project. The Department has also, not indicated in its reply as to what
extent the number of labs was reduced resulting in less expenditure on the procurement of
equipments. Similarly, it is also not clear as to what is the exact number of units that were
planned to be linked by the NIC network. The Department has informed the Committee
that funds for networking could not be released to NIC since UCs and SOEs could not be
timely obtained from it. The Committee is aware that National Informatics Centre (NIC) is
a government set up. Therefore, it wonders as to what could be the reasons for which there
were delays in submission of UCs and SOEs by the latter. The Committee, under the
circumstances, can only conclude that the Department’s attempts in the matter have been
lackadaisical, and as a result of which, achieving targeted landmarks in fully
operationalising critical initiatives like that of the IDSP have been put on the backfoot. The
Committee observes that the Department should actively pursue the project of making IDSP
fully operational and should be extra vigilant towards achieving the targets set for such
critical health initiatives. (Para 2.6)
115

116
INFRASTRUCTURE STRENGTHENING
The Committee is happy to note that Punjab has been able to furnish all 20
Integrated District Health Action Plans (IDHAPs). However, its concern stands unabated for
the progress reported from the State of Himachal Pradesh and Bihar. It fails to understand
the reasons as to why the matter of formulation and submission of IDHAPs would go into
litigation. Under such a dismal scenario, the situation in a State like Bihar, where the need
for basic health facilities is urgent, could only worsen if timely action on the part of both
Central and State Government is not taken. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the
Department to take up this matter at the highest level in the State. The Committee also
recommends that the slow progress made by Haryana in respect of IDHAP may also be
monitored by the Department. (Para 3.6)
The Committee is disappointed with the Department’s reply to the Committee’s
observation regarding pending civil construction work for 66,382 Sub-Centres (SCs). The
Committee had also impressed upon the Department to undertake regular monitoring of
such SCs. However, the Department, instead of informing the Committee of the progress
made so far, and the monitoring mechanisms, if any, put in place, has chosen to take note
of the issue as a “matter of record”. Taking a serious note of the approach of the
Department, the Committee would appreciate if the Department furnishes the details of the
progress made in the civil construction work of the Sub-Centres in all the States and also
indicate the monitoring mechanism in place for the purpose. The data so furnished should
also contain details of the funds released to the States, the date of commencement of work,
a list of the number of units that were proposed to be built and those that have completed
construction, till date. (Para 3.7)
ASHA
The Committee notes with a sense of relief that the Department has at last come
to concur with the observations of the Committee regarding its apprehensions on the role
clarity and feasibility of discharging the duties assigned to ASHA. The Committee would like
to state here that these apprehensions were voiced by it in earlier reports so that the
objective with which the concept of ASHA was initiated under the NRHM doesn’t get diluted.
The Department has stated in its Action Taken Note that National Health System Resource
Centre (NHSRC) is reviewing the ‘job r esponsibilities’ and “Role clarity of ASHA” as well
as that of AWW and ANM. The Committee observes that the Department has not specified
any timeframe, within which NHSRC would be completing its review. In the meantime,
these Social Health Activists would continue discharging their duties originally mandated
with the likelihood of new ones adding to their responsibilities. The NHSRC has to complete
its review in a time bound manner so that such an important health initiative does not
become redundant. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Department to ensure the
timely submission of the Report by NHSRC, followed by expeditious implementation of the
same. (Para 3.14)
MOBILE MEDICAL UNITS (MMUs)
The Committee observes with constraint that no significant progress has been made
in the operationalisation of Mobile Medical Units (MMUs). As per the latest status furnished
by the Department, only 200 districts in the country are having this facility. Committee’s
apprehensions about States like Bihar, Maharashtra and U.P. failing to procure MMUs
inspite of provision of funds therefor continue to persist as confirmed in the response of
the Department. Notwithstanding availability of emergency ambulance services on a very

117
large scale in some States, the Committee would like to emphasize that effective steps need
to be taken for strengthening the facility of MMUs in the entire country. This task can be
accomplished if follow-up action on the constraints highlighted in this regard in the 1st
Common Review Mission (November, 2007) and second Common Review Mission (November,
2008) is taken by the Department in co-ordination with concerned States. (Para 3.16.1)
The Committee hopes that the Second Common Review Mission of NRHM of 13
States scheduled for November, 2008 must have been reviewed and corrective steps initiated
by the concerned States. The Committee is, however, not aware as to whether its suggestion
for including both performing and non-performing districts in the States selected for CRM
has been implemented. If not, the Committee would emphasize that in the absence of such
a framework, the very purpose of the Review would remain incomplete. (Para 3.16.2)
NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL  PROGRAMME
Apprehensions of the Committee with regard to shortage of surveillance and
supervisory staff in Malaria-endemic N-E States continue to persist. Out of 5057 contractual
MPWs (male) sanctioned in all the 14 high malaria-endemic States under  NVBDCP during
2007-08, with the exception of Nagaland, remaining N-E States like Tripura, Manipur,
Arunachal Pradesh and Assam have only initiated the process of recruitment. No mention
being made about other health functionaries like Health Supervisor (Male) and (Female) by
the Department is self- revealing. The Committee has been persistently drawing the
attention of the Department towards the problem of sanctioned posts of Health workers
remaining vacant. But it seems no viable solution has emerged so far . Involving ASHAs in
malaria-control activities can only be considered a stop-gap arrangement, that too not viable
due to their being already over-burdened with manifold tasks. The Committee can only
reiterate that the matter of filling up of sanctioned posts of Health workers in malaria-
endemic N-E States needs to the taken up at the highest level by the Department.
(Para 4.7)
JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS
The Committee observes that a number of measures have been initiated by the
Department in co-ordination with the State authorities with regard to control of Japanese
Encephalitis (JE) in eastern UP, the most endemic area. The Committee also takes note of
two problem areas - one of constraints in lab-testing and prevalence of other viruses, apart
from JE with vaccination being available only against JE. The Committee fails to understand
why, inspite of adequate funds being provided under the Programme, proper sample testing
facilities have been lacking. The Committee would like to state here that lack of proper
serological testing facilities would result in improper detection of infected cases and could
aggravate the situation further. The Committee suggests that mobile labs for conducting the
required test may be introduced so as to supplement the existing facilities and to overcome
the constraints faced in lab testing. The Committee would appreciate if such an initiative
is implemented at the earliest by the Directorate of NVBDCP after due consultation with
the State and district authorities in the JE infested Areas in Assam and U.P.
The Committee would like to point out that problem of other viruses, apart from JE
in eastern U.P. was deteted by NIV, Pune in 2006. By now, strategy for tackling these
viruses including vaccination should have been in place and being implemented. The
Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department to take the required action on an
urgent basis. (Para 4.11)

118
CHIKUNGUNYA
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department in intensifying multi
pronged approaches to contain the incidence of Dengue and Chikungunya cases. The
Committee feels that results of such measures would surely reflect in the numbers of cases
detected for the year 2008. The Committee would like to be apprised about the IEC
interventions undertaken in this regard.
The Committee’s attention is, however, drawn to the number of samples tested
against the suspected cases. The Committee notes that out of 59,535 suspected cases in 2007
only 13.2% were tested and of these 13.2% cases (7,850 samples tested), 23.3% of the
samples turned out to be confirmed cases. The Committee feels that 13.2% samples tested
is a fairly low number compared to the suspected cases figures and given the fact that more
than 23% turned out to be confirmed cases of the 7,850 tested samples, the figures could
be much more if the number of samples tested were increased.
The Committee apprehends that in such a situation, there are chances of there being
a large number of confirmed yet undetected cases. The Committee, therefore, suggests that
the Department should concentrate its efforts towards strengthening the testing lab
facilities so that maximum number of samples are tested. (Para 4.17)
NATIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME
The Committee is happy to note that the Department had acted on its suggestion for
evolving a national forum where participating NGOs/PPs share their experiences of
providing services under RNTCP. The Committee hopes that 60-70 NGOs/PPs  participating
in the conference held on 29-31st January, 2008 must have given some concrete suggestions
for successful implementation of RNTCP. The Committee would like to be apprised about
the report on an independent evaluation of selected NGOs conducted by the Department.
The Department has also informed that in order to strengthen advocacy and social
mobilization activities under the programme, it is closely working with professional bodies
with the support and collaboration of media agency. The Committee would like to be
apprised in detail about its plan under the proposed initiative and the outcome of such
enterprise. (Para 5.7)
The Committee appreciates the Department’s concerns and efforts on the prevention
of MDR-TB through the administration of high quality DOTS and the Programme Division’s
concerns regarding the availability of effective affordable drugs. However, the Committee
feels that perhaps the Department has missed the import of the Committee’s comment
seeking further information on the status regarding the trials of the affordable drug for
treatment of patients with Multi-Drug Resistant TB, developed by the pharma company
Johnson & Johnson. The Committee would like to be apprised of the recent developments
in the matter in detail and the preliminary findings of the trial reports, if any, of the drug.
(Para 5.8)
NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME
The Committee observes that the proposal for providing incentive of Rs.5000/-  for
Reconstructive Surgery to leprosy disabled persons from BPL families and to 20 institutions
for conducting RCS is yet to be approved by EFC, though more than half of the Eleventh
Plan period is over. Such an undue delay, that too on a proposal already going on a pilot
basis in four Central institutions, is uncalled for. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the
Department to expedite the completion of all the procedural formalities. (Para 6.5)

119
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS
Last year, while welcoming new initatives under the National Programme for Control
of Blindness for the Eleventh Plan with focused attention on NE States and also in Bihar,
Jharkhand, J&K, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, the Committee had voiced its
apprehensions about undue delay in their actual initation. More than one year has passed
since then and third year of the Eleventh Plan period is also reaching its end. However, the
EFC Memo for the proposed projects remains under active consideration in consultation with
the Integrated Finance Division. The Committee has been drawing the attention of the
Department to the trend of undue delay in getting the formal approval for the proposed
projects from all the authorities. However, no serious introspection on such a vital aspect
seems to have been done by the Department. As a result, funds continue to get allocated
for proposed projects year after year with their status remaining unchanged and funds
remaining unutilized. Preparatory activities for implementation of new proposals on
provisional basis may also prove to be counter-productive at the end simply because there
is always a possibility of the proposed projects undergoing drastic changes. The Committee,
therefore, once again emphasizes that the Department has to evolve a mechanism
whereunder all procedural formalities for a proposed project are expeditiously completed and
the project takes off in the real sense. (Para 7.4)
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department for monitoring and
evaluation of IEC activities, the functioning of the Eye Banks in the country and other
initiatives to boost eye donations. However, the Department has not mentioned clearly the
time lines of initiation or the conclusion of the evaluation studies for IEC activities and also
the comprehensive evaluation of NPCB on review of Eye Banks. The Committee would like
to be informed about the outcomes of the evaluation studies at the earliest and furnish the
relevant reports for its perusal. (Para 7.7)
NATIONAL IODINE DEFICIENCY DISORDERS PROGRAMME
The Committee finds the Status Report on the achievement level of physical targets
set under the National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme for 2007-08 very
discouraging. Out of 6 States, i.e. Jharkhand, Bihar, West Bengal, Puducherry, Madhya
Pradesh and U.P. targeted for setting up State IDD Control Cells, Jharkhand, U.P. and
Puducherry have failed to do so. Similarly, only U.P. could set up IDD Monitoring lab
although all the aforesaid 6 States were targeted to do so. What is more disturbing is that
the target of analysis of 20,000 salt samples @ 500 samples per district from 40 districts
could not be undertaken due to non-availability of programme vechicle by administration.
The Committee refuses to accept such flimsy justifications. The Committee would like to
point out that proper planning means achievement of targeted goals within the prescribed
apprehensions about undue delay in their actual initation. More than one year has passed
since then and third year of the Eleventh Plan period is also reaching its end. However, the
EFC Memo for the proposed projects remains under active consideration in consultation with
the Integrated Finance Division. The Committee has been drawing the attention of the
Department to the trend of undue delay in getting the formal approval for the proposed
projects from all the authorities. However, no serious introspection on such a vital aspect
seems to have been done by the Department. As a result, funds continue to get allocated
for proposed projects year after year with their status remaining unchanged and funds
remaining unutilized. Preparatory activities for implementation of new proposals on
provisional basis may also prove to be counter-productive at the end simply because there
is always a possibility of the proposed projects undergoing drastic changes. The Committee,
therefore, once again emphasizes that the Department has to evolve a mechanism

120
whereunder all procedural formalities for a proposed project are expeditiously completed and
the project takes off in the real sense. (Para 7.4)
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department for monitoring and
evaluation of IEC activities, the functioning of the Eye Banks in the country and other
initiatives to boost eye donations. However, the Department has not mentioned clearly the
time lines of initiation or the conclusion of the evaluation studies for IEC activities and also
the comprehensive evaluation of NPCB on review of Eye Banks. The Committee would like
to be informed about the outcomes of the evaluation studies at the earliest and furnish the
relevant reports for its perusal. (Para 7.7)
NATIONAL IODINE DEFICIENCIES DISORDERS PROGRAMME
The Committee finds the Status Report on the achievement level of physical targets
set under the National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme for 2007-08 very
discouraging. Out of 6 States, i.e. Jharkhand, Bihar, West Bengal, Puducherry, Madhya
Pradesh and U.P. targeted for setting up State IDD Control Cells, Jharkhand, U.P. and
Puducherry have failed to do so. Similarly, only U.P. could set up IDD Monitoring lab
although all the aforesaid 6 States were targeted to do so. What is more disturbing is that
the target of analysis of 20,000 salt samples @ 500 samples per district from 40 districts
could not be undertaken due to non-availability of programme vechicle by administration.
The Committee refuses to accept such flimsy justifications. The Committee would like to
point out that proper planning means achievement of targeted goals within the prescribed
time-schedule. Problems like non-availability of programme vehicle could have been easily
handled. The Committee, therefore, would like to impress upon the Department once again
to make all conceivable efforts in active co-ordination with State authorities for timely
achievement of goals. (Para 8.2)
JANANI SURAKSHA YOJANA
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department also shares a similar
view point with the Committee regarding putting a fool-proof monitoring mechanism in
place so that misuse of funds intended for the beneficiaries under the programme are
avoided. The Committee observes that nearly a year has passed since the Department has
stated in its ATN regarding preparing a S tatus Note on the pr ocedure of verification of
claims and release of compensation package under Janani Suraksha Yojana as desired by
the Committee. The Committee hopes that the Department must have obtained specific
inputs from the States for the Status Note. The Committee would like the Department to
furnish the said Status Note for its perusal and also to be apprised about the follow-up
action, if any, taken so far.
The Committee would also like to point out that the Department must have finalized
the modalities for concurrent evaluation of the scheme in six major States regarding the
impact of the scheme on the lowering of Maternal Mortality Rate. However, the Department
has not given any timelines for commencing or concluding the assessment. It, therefore,
urges upon the Department to draw the plan of action for making the assessment within
a specified timeline and apprise the Committee about its findings. (Para 9.13)
ROUTINE IMMUNISATION PROGRAMME
The Committee hopes that by this time the District Level Household Survey III
(DLHS-III) must have been completed and the Report received. The Committee would like
the Department to furnish a copy of the Survey Report for its perusal as also the progress

121
made on the proposed course of action in the EAG and NE states indicated in the Action
Taken Note. (Para 9.15)
In the light of shortage of vaccines in the country, the Committee observes that
the reply of the Ministry that the units are not schedule M compliant is unacceptable. It
also notes that since there have been no reckonable reports of adverse impact of the
vaccines produced by the units over the years, though they have not been schedule M
compliant during the said period, the Committee feels that suspension of vaccine
producing license and putting the existing facilities to alternative uses would not be a
viable move. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its earlier stand and recommends that
the suspension of the license of these units be revoked and the units be allowed to
produce vaccines. (Para 9.17)

MINUTES

125
II
SECOND MEETING
(2009-10)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 26th October, 2009 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shrimati Brinda Karat
6. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ashok Argal
8. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
9. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
11. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
12. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
13. Shri N. Kristappa
14. Dr. Tarun Mandal
15. Shri Datta Meghe
16. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
17. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
18. Shri M.K. Raghavan
19. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
20. Shrimati Meena Singh
21. Shri Ratan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director

126
2. *     *     *. The Committee considered the draft 35th Report on the Action Taken Note
(ATN) furnished by the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in its 27th Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of
Health and Family Welfare. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Report.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.34 
P.M.
***Relates to other matters.

127
127
III
THIRD MEETING
(2009-10)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 12th November, 2009 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ashok Argal
7. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
8. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
11. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
12. Shri N. Kristappa
13. Dr. Tarun Mandal
14. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
15. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
16. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
17. Shri M.K. Raghavan
18. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
19. Shrimati Meena Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director

128
2. * * *
3. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the 35th, 36th and 37th Reports may be presented
to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the 25th November, 2009.
The Committee authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Shrimati Viplove
Thakur and Dr. Radhakant Nayak to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. Tarun Mandal and
in his absence Dr. Jyoti Mirdha to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

129
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURES
PART – A
HEALTH SECTOR
131

133
ANNEXURES PART A HEALTH SECTOR
Annexure-A of Report
(Part–A — Health – Para No. 7.4)
Project Status Revised Sanctioned Cumulative Expenditure
scheduled Cost Expenditure planned in
date of upto end of 2008-09
completion 2007-08
Advanced More than 95% March, 2008 Rs.46.43 Rs.43.10 Rs.10.00
Cardiac work is completed. crores crores crores
Centre And most of the
equipments have
been procured.
Setting up The work has been December, Rs.11.74 Rs.9.00 Rs.2.74
of additional allotted to the 2008 crores crores crores
66KV sub- BBMB with an
stations outlay of Rs.1174
lacs for which
BBMB has further
awarded the work.
Advanced The construction December, Rs.22.37 Rs.17.45 Rs.3
Trauma work has been 2008 crores crores crores
Centre started and the
expected date of
commissioning is
by December, 2008.

134
134
Quantifiable Deliverables
(A) Setting up of 6 AIIMS like
Institutions
(i) Appointment of Design-DPR
Consultant
(ii) Appointment of Contractors
for Housing Complex
(B) For upgradation of 13
existing Government College
Institute
(i) Preparation of DPRs
(ii) Appointment of
Contractor for Civil Works
(iii) Start of construction
(iv) DPR for 5 Institute
(v) Appointment of Contractor
(vi) Purchase of equipment in
0-30 lakhs category
(vii) Procurement of some
Common/High Cost Items
Process/Timelines
6 Designs for AIIMS like
Institute by Sept., 2007
Start of construction of
residential component by
October, 2007
6 DPRs by April, 2007
6 sites by July, 2007
Initiate construction activities
in 6 sites by Dec.07
5 DPRs to be prepared by
August, 2007
By December, 2007
By December, 2007
By December, 2007
Achievements
Selected in November, 2007
For Jodhpur-October, 07 and
for other 5 cities, bid process
did not succeed.
4 DPRs finalised in November,
2007, 2 DPRs in December, 2007
6 sites by December, 2007
4 sites by December, 2007 and
2 sites by February, 2008
1 DPR by November, 2007
and 4 DPR by February, 2008
1 site by February, 2008 and 4
sites by April, 2008
By March, 2008
Process initiated, procurement
will be completed in November,
2008.
ANNEXURE-B OF REPORT
(Part–A — HEALTH – Para No. 11.5)

135
135
ANNEXURE-C OF  REPOR T
(Part–A — HEALTH – Para No. 22.3)
Sl. Recommendations
No.
12
1 Removal of stagnation at SAG and HAG
levels
(i) Upgradation of 458 posts at SAG
level
(ii) One time In-situ promotion to SAG
to those completed five years
service on 31.3.2006 in NFSG grade
2 Enhancement of retirement age from 60
to 62 years
3 Terminal benefits
4 Leave/Deputation/Training Reserves
5 Improvement of Infrastructure
6 Enhancement of Non-Practising
Allowance
Action Taken
3
The proposal has been referred to the Committee
of secretaries.
The proposal for enhancement of retirement age
of Teaching, Non-Teaching and Public-Health
sub-cadre of CHS has been approved by Cabinet
and orders issued on 16.1 1.2006. Proposal in
respect of General Duty Medical Officers has
been referred to 6th Pay Commission.
The proposal for grant of benefit of added years
of service over and above that is admissible
under Rule 30 of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 was
sent to Department of Pensions for obtaining their
approval but was not agreed to. The matter
was again referred to D/o Pensions for re-
consideration. They have agreed to the proposal
and had advised to approach D/o Economic
Affairs which is administering New pension
Scheme w.e.f. 1.1.2004 to explore possibility as
to whether any special dispensation could be
given under the New Pension Scheme. The
matter was referred to D/o P&PW for re-
consideration but the same has not been agreed
to.
Provision is being made in the proposed Revised
CHS Rules.
The proposal has been referred to DGHS for their
comments.
The proposal has been referred to 6th Pay
Commission.

136
3
The proposal has been referred to 6th Pay
Commission.
D/o Personnel and Training has informed that
Amendment in Consolidated Instructions on
Foreign Assignment of Indian Experts is under
process and this Ministry’s suggestions have been
noted down and will be considered while
finalizing the Consolidated Instructions.
The proposal is under consideration.
Orders in this regard has been issued by IC
Division vide  Order No. L.21020/85/2000-IC
dated 26.11.2007.
The process of Cadre review has already been
initiated. A meeting of the participating units of
CHS was held on 12.3.2007 under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (H&FW). The
information received from various units were
compiled and the proposals were discussed with
each unit Head in a series of meetings taken by
JS(VC). Subsequently the file was referred to
DGHS for holding final Meeting to finalise the
proposal.
12
7 Enhancement of Book/research/
Academic allowance
8 Deterrent to unplanned departure of CHS
doctors from service
9 Sharing of Consultancy fee
10 International Conference-Permission to
attend conference in two years-Financial
assistance to Rs.l.00 lakh per case
11 Cadre review of CHS

137
ANNEXURE-I
The list of autonomous bodies/societies/grantee institutions/programmes which is to be
covered during 2008-09 as under:—
Sl. No. Name of Unit
1. NEIGRIHMS, Shillong
2. SMS, Assam
3. RIMS, Imphal
4. SMS, Sikkim
5. SMS, Shillong
6. SMS, Arunachal Pradesh
7. SMS, Nagaland
8. SMS, Imphal
9. SMS, Aijwal
10. SMS, Tripura
11. RIPANS, Aijwal
12. LGBRIMH, Tejpur
13. MCI, New Delhi
14. CCRH, New Delhi
15. CCRAS, New Delhi
16. CCRUM, New Delhi
17. CCRYN, New Delhi
18. DCI, New Delhi
19. PCI, New Delhi
20. IRCS, New Delhi
21. ICMR, New Delhi
22. AIIMS, New Delhi
23. NIN, Pune
24. JIPMER, Pondicherry
137

138
ANNEXURE-II
Sl. Name of Unit Copy of Para No. Whether
No. compliance
received or not
1. Scheme Audit of NVBDCP, D elhi 02, 2(b), 2(c), 03, 05, No
07 (a, b, c and d), 09
and 11
2. NIMHANS, Bangalore 14 and 20 Yes
3. PGIMER, Chandigarh 01 and 03 No
4. ICMR, New Delhi 23 and 24 No
5. Vallabh Bhai Patel Chest Institute, 22, 24, 27 and 28 No
Delhi
138

139
Scheme audit of NVBDCP, Delhi
Para No. 02 : Irregularities in the procurement of Mosquito Bednets by procuring Agencies
Bids were invited for a total of 39 lacs Nos. of Bednets under 13 schedules through
Interntional Competitive Bidding (ICB) by RITES (Procurement Agency) on behalf of Directorate
of National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme (NVBDCP) Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare. Approval of the bidding document of the Bank was received on 20.9.20.0.4 and bids were
opened on 17th November, 2004 receiving bids from the 19 bidders.
1.1 Bid evaluation was conducted in the office of RITES in association with the representatives
from NVBDCP and recommendations were sent to NVBDCP on 16.12.20.0.4 seeking their
approval, subsequently Purchase Advisory Committee (PAC) held on 24.12.2004 and
NOAs were released in March, 2005 after approval of WorId Bank.
1.2 The NOAs were issued to the following five firms:
Sl. Name of the Supplier Qty. Nos. V alue excluding
No. Sales Tax (in Rs.)
1. M/s  EMCO Enterprises Delhi 12,85,000 11,69,35,000
2. M/s Global spin Weave 7,05,000 6,41,55,000
3. M/s V estergaard Function India, New Delhi 8,39,000 7,53,59,470
4. M/s Chemical International Ltd., New Delhi 5,30,000 4,67,60,000
5. M/s  Argas Consultancy Pvt. Ltd., 4,50,000 3,98,07,000
New Delhi
T
OTAL: 38,09,000 34,30,16,470
*M/s. Argas did not submit the Performance Bank Guarantee as per the required format
even after repeated reminders. The recommendation to cancel their NOA was taken by the
Director, NVBDCP  on 6.9.2005.
1.3 When the tender was under finalisation, the complaints were received against a number of
bidders regarding submission of faise perfonnance by them. Complaints regarding
performance were verified, wherever possible. It was also decided at that time that the
contracts may be released subject to submission of affidavits by all the bidders.
1.4 All the above five bidders submitted the declaration, in the form of affidavit.
1.0 After release of the NOAs, some more complaints were received against first four suppliers
indicated in para 1.2 above. Action was initiated by directing the suppliers to submit the
requisite documents of the contracts of their performance documents, against which
complaints were received. On receipt of the replies from the suppliers a detailed report
was prepared which was sent to World Bank vide letter No.RITES/MSM/MCP/08/2004,
dated 26.7.2005 with the approval of NVBDCP.
2.0 World Bank vide their reply dated 2.8.2005 issued ‘No Objection’ to the above proposal.
However, World Bank advised to take legal advise in the matter.
139

140
3.0 RITES took the legal advice. Based on the legal advice except for M/s Chemical
International, other three firms wer e cleared. The report was sent to Director, NVBDCP on
29.8.2005. As regards M/s Chemical International a final notice was issued on 2.9.2005,
wherein they were asked to furnish required information and it was advised that action shall
be taken as per terms and conditions as stipulated in the contract with special reference to
ITB Clause 36 read with the undertaking in the form of an affidavit submitted by them. The
firm replied to the notice vide their letter dated 19.9.2005.
4.0 Though M/s Verstergaard has not followed the terms of the contract, but in view of
urgency Directorate of NVBDCP directed for change in consignee allottment to
M/s Vestergaard for 20,000 Bednets for Raibareily and 2,00,000 Bednets for Gorakhpur.
The firm completed supply in the first week of September, 2005.
However, M/s Vestergaard who had supplied 2,20,000 bednets wrote vide their letter
dated 17.9.2005 that they have supplied the imported bednets, instead of
manufactured in India by doing value addition, deliberately violating condition of the
contract.
5.0 Based on above, following actions were proposed to be taken by Director, NVBDCP:—
(1) M/s Vestersgaard Frandsen:
On receipt of letter dated 17.9.05 from M/s V estergaard that they have supplied the Bednets
which were not of Indian Origin, but imported one, following actions were taken
immediately by RITES:
(a) The firm was advised on 22.9.05 to take back the supplied quantity of 2,20,000
imported Mosquito Bednets from consignees with copy of the letter endorsed to
Director, NVBDCP and consignee.
(b) To avoid any payment against above supply, necessary direction was given to the
bank where LC was opened Bank has confirmed that no payment has been released.
(c) These quantities were inspected against three inspection certificates. The
firm surrendered the two inspection certificates issued to them and the third
certificate was not released by RITES to them to avoid claim of any payment.
After taking legal advise, a show cause notice was issued to them as to why action should
not be taken for cancellation of contract for violation of terms and condition.
Firm replied vide their letter dated 17.11.2005. As their reply was not found to be
satisfactory, following recommendations were sent to Director, NVBDCP on 25.11.2005.
(I) To initiate action for cancellation of contract.
(II) T o initiate action to declare firm ineligible for further contracts as per [TB clause 36.1(c)].
(2) M/s Chemical International:—
M/s Chemical International replied to final notice dated 2.9.2005 vide their letter
dated 19.9.2005. Legal advice was taken on their reply. As per the legal advice
dated 24.10.2005 the firm’s statements are contradictory. Therefore, it has been concluded
in the legal opinion that the information furnished by the firm is incorrect/doubtful in certain
situations and definitely required explanation. It was further advised to issue Show Cause
Notice as to why their contract should not be cancelled in view of incorrect/false/doubtful
information. Accordingly show cause notice was issued by Procurement Agency. On receipt
of reply from M/s Chemical International the Department not initiate any further action for
cancellation of the contract.

141
2 (b). Scam by M/s Vestergaard Frendsom India Pvt. Ltd.
(i) Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, Government of India has unearth the scam
relating to the purchase of Mosquito ‘bed nets under World Bank aided Malaria
control Project of M/o HFW M/s Vestergaard Frendson Pvt. Ltd. in association
with their Denmark counterpart involved in cheating, frauds, embezzlement of
Government revenue, and financial crimes.
(ii) Misuse of CDEC by importing finished goods from clinic as against only raw material
permission amounting to theft of revenue towards customs duty wrong declarations.
(iii) D elivery of 2 lacks pieces to DMO Gorakhpur in violation of contracted terms.
(iv) Imported goods as such without any value addition in India as against their own
indigenously manufactured goods. Even the foreign levels are
(v) Without pre-delivery inspection.
(vi) Inspection clearance given in 2 days.
(vii) Inspection clearance was given for 4 lacs pieces out of which 2 1acks were diverted
but remaining 2 lacks are yet to be diverted which are absconding so either 4 lac
prices were not physically available when inspection were undertaken on remaining
2 lacks pieces have been vanished by the company. Hence either the inspection has
cheated or the company played with Government goods allocation of DMO
Gorakhpur even though not in contract and without any correspondence price
reduction and approval from the Competent Authority was required (involved Director
of the Company in India RITES/MSM officer Dr. C.S. Agarwal of Malaria).
Award of contract itself was wrong and manipulated. There was no evidence of
indigenously manufactured past supplies of Mosquito Bed nets. All the data documents on
this regard are manipulated and related to something else but not the bed nets certainly. The
previous two years supply through RITES one also imported finished goods and do not
qualify, though sailed through (Involved Director of Company in India RITES/MSM Officer,
Dr. C.S Agarwal of Malaria).
Expenditure on Bednets
Advances/Expenditure on bed nets
RITES No. of NOAs Rs.
M14014/7/200308/03/04 216-18 10,94,86,450
224.26
100000 approx.
14014/25/200424/06/05 248-56 34,82,32,849
268-71
38,00,000
M 14014/3/07 VBD 305.06.07 14,40,58,200
100,000
60,17,77,499(A)
HSCC
T.14014/11/2000 4,31,51,680{B)
G
RAND T OTAL A + B 64,49,29,179

142
Audit Review and Findings
The regular receipts of complaints is a serious matter which apparently indicate a serious
lapses in the entire procurement process. M/s  RITES and Directorate NVBDCP has examined these
complaints, but these should have been investigated by other agencies like specia1 Audit of
Ministry/Vigilance. This has also been learnt that Government has ordered a CBI inquiry into the
charges of fraud and corruption on the malaria project supported by the World Bank.
The procurement scams were uncovered in the detailed implementation. Review launched by
the World Bank supported by the Government of India. As some of the procurement are under
scanner the purchase policy require to be reviewed/take steps to streamline procurement procedure
of the Ministry. This need to make procurement procedure foolproof at all leve1. All these projects
now also require to go through more stringent audit and performance review.
2(c) : Procurement of sub-standard bed nets worth Rs.12.91 crore
Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi
has given contract for procurement of 10 lakh bed nets (2 lakh double size+8 lakh single size) to
Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (1) Limited (HSCC) for distribution in North Eastern
States under the National Anti Malaria Programme (renamed National Vector Disease Control
Programme in 2003). The Ministry accorded expenditure sanction for Rs.18.52 crore in
December, 2000 and an advance of Rs.4.32 crare was released to the HSCC during the year 2001.
HSCC placed the supply order in October, 2000 to three suppliers i.e. M/s R.S. Industries,
M/s ISSA Industries and Superior Industries. The supply of bed nets was to be completed within
90 days from the date of issue of order. The suppliers supplied 7,17,500 bed nets (double size
74,500 and single size 6,43,000) during February–April, 2001.
On receipt of a complaint of the supply of sub-standard bed nets, the Ministry issued
instructions in April, 2001 to the Government of Assam to withheld the distribution of bed
nets and deputed an officer of the rank of Deputy Secretary to investigate the matter.  By
the time, 1,63,000 bed nets (double size; 60,000 and single size 1,03,000) out of the above supply
had already been distributed by the concerned Stat Government. The samples lifted by the Deputy
Secretary from the State Government stores in Assam were tested at Indian Institute of
Technology, Delhi (IIT)  that showed that 3 out of 4 samples were inferior. Subsequently, more
samples were lifted in January, 2003 by an inspection team constituted with representatives of
various departments and IIT from the sealed stores in the presence of the representatives of HSCC
and supplier. These samples were also tested (March, 2003) at Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
(IIT). The report received from the IIT revealed that the bed nets have failed to meet the Bureau
of Indian Standards (BIS) specifications, which was required as per the contract, in a number of
areas like bursting strength, GSM, number of holes etc. In addition, these bed nets did not carry
any label or marking to indicate the manufactures nor was the marking  “NAMP” supply not
for sale’ found on bed nets. An Expert Committee  constituted by the Ministry, further,
observed (June, 2003) that test results of the sample indicate a huge variation from the BIS
standards and large size of holes made these nets almost unfit for use.
Based on the above report, notices were issued (March, 2003) by HSCC to above firms to
lift the sub-standard bed nets lying in the godown at Guwahati. However, the concerned firms have
refused to lift the material stating that they should have been informed within four months of
supply. 14,500 double size and 5,20,000 single size bed nets totally 5,34,500 valuing at
Rs.9.45 crores were lying in the godown which was hired by the Department at Rs.89,000/- per
month. The avoidable expenditure on rent of godown alone amounted to Rs.51.67 lakh as on
November, 2005.

143
Audit Review Findings
Failure on the part of the Dte. of NVBDCP to ensure quality of bed nets as per BID
specification not only defeated the very objective of providing relief from severe malaria in
high risk and remote area but also resulted in wasteful and avoidable expenditure of Rs.4.32
more and Rs.51.67 lakh, respectively.
Para No. 03 : Failure of procurement system (Badly delayed system)
Under the provision of scheme Director, NVBDCP, Delhi not only provides financial
assistance but also provide assistance in the form of commodity namely DDT, bed nets, RD Test
kits, Malarias Fenthion, Tempephos Malathion/20 Malathion Tec Principhas, synthetic Pyrethroids
etc. These articles are procured by NVBDCP through PSU like HIL, HLL, RITES, HSCC for supply
to State Health Society from there goes to the user s. Director, NVBDCP  gives advances to these
procurement agencies as per the requirement with the approval of M/o Health FW. The IA has
since collected information in r/o 12 items supplied by the procuring agencies to the State health
Society. The information contained the procurement from action plan to the end of user. The
statement is annexed at Annexure-IV .
In view of the above it can be glanced that there are 35 to 40 stages from the date of
sanction of Action Plan to the end of user. Time involved in the present processing system is more
than 16 months. It may be seen from the Annexure-IV that the Action Plan approved in the
financial year 2005-06 and procurement action is being taken in next financial year defeated the
purpose of approval of Annual Action Plan. The urgent effective steps are required to be taken to
minimize the period from Annual Action Plan to the end of user. In the whole process of supplies
there is no internal check in the form of receipt and use by the official at the village level. There
is no proper system which can prove that the articles reaches up to lower level as per guidelines
given by the Government of India.
As such procurement system is not foolproof, this requires to be streamlined. This need to
make procurement procedure at all level foolproof and more stringent audit and performance
review.
In view of the non maintenance of record the audit is of the view whether these material
actually reaches to the user or not.
Para No:05 Non adjustment of advance amounting to Rs.l,86,53,32,364/- in respect of NPSAs
as on 31.12.2007.
The National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme, Delhi have been making advance
payment to various procurement agencies for procuring drugs/insecticides etc. Huge amounts of
advances are outstanding to the tune of Rs.1,86,53,32,364/- as on 31.12.2007 against these
agencies. The details of outstanding advances is as given below:
Name of Opening Advance Adjustment Closing balance as
the PSUs Balance as paid During made During on 31.12.2007
on 01.12.07 December, 2007 December, 2007
12 3 4 5
Hindustan 514502288 Nil 17971361 1 334788677
Latex Ltd.,
New Delhi

144
12 3 4 5
HSCC(I) Ltd., 950695232 8260200 127792723 831 162709
Noida
RITES, B31 162709 Nil 290903637 540259072
Gurgaon
HIL, New 1.97145816 Nil 79702613 117443203
Delhi
IDPL, Gurgaon 41678703 Nil Nil 41678703
TOTAL: 2535184748 8260200 678112584 1865332364
It appears from the above that these NPSAs are not adjusting these advances
regularly. These advances are spilling over from one financial year to other financial years.
This has resulted huge pendency of  un-adjusted advances with NPSAs. In order to  liquidate
huge pendency of unadjusted advance, the concrete steps are required.
Para No. 07 : Status of V ector Borne Disease under NVBDCP.
(A) Status of Malaria and death cases during 2005 and 2006 (NE States).
Among the vector borne diseases, malaria stands apart as the leading killer disease. As per
the data given below its appeared that high percent age of malaria cases and deaths were reported
from the North East States—Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura, Orissa,
West Bengal etc. Incidence of malaria cases and deaths in N.E. States, Orissa, West Bengal
continued to remain unabated during 2005-06.
States 2005 2006
Positive Deaths Positive Deaths
Arunachal Pradesh 31215 0 14349 196
Assam 67885 113 1 15881 298
Meghalaya 16816 41 24875 118
Mizoram 10741 74 10644 120
Tripura 18008 20 22950 25
Orissa 396573 255 375907 253
West Bengal 185964 175 161260 203
Above data depicts that progress to control the malaria is not up to the mark despite the
fact that maximum allocation of funds.
(B) Status of Ka1a-Azar and death cases during 2001–06
Kala-Azar is a slow progressing indigenous disease caused by protozoan parasite Leishmania
donovani and spread by its vector sand fly. The National Health Policy has set the goal for
eliminating of Kala-Azar from the country by 2010. In last few years there is increasing trend as
indicated below:

145
Years No. of Cases Nos. of death
2001 12239 213
2002 12140 168
2003 18214 210
2004 24340 156
2005 32803 157
2006 30285 187
(C) Status of suspected Japanese Encephalitis from 2001-06 (up to 7.11.2006)
Years No. of Cases Nos. of death
2001 2061 479
2002 1765 466
2003 2568 707
2004 1714 367
2005 6727 1682
2006 2069 444
(D) Status of Dengue Cases and Death from 2001-06 (up to 20.11.2006)
Years No. of Cases Nos. of death
2001 3306 53
2002 1926 33
2003 12754 215
2004 4153 45
2005 1 1985 157
2006 10094 162
From the above table it is ascertained that from 2001 to September, 2006, the cases
detected and the number of deaths reported both have increased. In nutshell, the initiative
taken by the Department to contain the disease have not been effective enough so that
country can be free from Kala-Azar by 2010 and the goal as per National Health
Policy (2002) for the control of Japanese Encephalitis ahd Dengue, is reduction in mortality by
50% by the year 2010 can be achieved. Sincere steps needed to achieve the goal as per
National Health Policy (2002) for the contro1 of Ka1a-Azar, Japanese Encephalitis and
Dengue.
Para No. 09 : Non-recovery of outstanding Incidential Charges amounting to Rs.39023005/- from
the States/UTs.
The Dte. of NVBDCP have to recover 2% incidental charges for handling supplies of
material and equipments from the various state and UT Government. During scrutiny of records

146
its revealed that from 1991-92 to March, 2007 Rs.3,90,23,005 (Annexure-VIII) is lying outstanding
on account of 2% incidential charges from various States and UTs.
The recovery of outstanding incidential charges should be pursued with concerned States
and UTs Government and this amount may be recovered from further grants released to States by
M/o Health and Family Welfare so that the outstanding amount could be liquidated at the earliest.
Para No. 11 : Loss of Rs.1.18 crores due to expiry of drugs.
The Directorate of NVBDCP is engaged in procuring various Drugs/insecticides/Material and
Equipments and supply the same to the States/UTs for implementation of its programmes relating
to eradication of malaria. These procurements are being done through various procurement
agencies.
On scrutiny of relevant records it was noticed that huge amount of expired drugs
amounting to Rs.1.18 crore was outstanding for a long time (As per table given below). The same
was to be settled by way of Administrative and Financial efforts either for recovery,
accountability of responsibility or through write off the same with the approval of the
Competent  Authority.
Sl. No. Name Quantity Rate Amount Date of Expiry
1 Pentamidine 22260 394.00 8770440.00 11/96
2 SSG Injection 30425 4230 1286977.50 03/96
3 P & S Tab. 53000 2.00 106000.00 01/01
4 Arteecher 11583 72.00 833976.00 09/02
Injection
5 Pentamidine 1457 550.00 801350.00 03/03
Injection
T
OTAL: 11798743.50
In future the department may ensure that excessive procurement leading to expiry of the
drugs may be avoided by taking all the requirements from various States.
NIMHANS, Banglore
Para No.14 : 0utstanding earnest money/security depos it amount to the tune of
Rs.15,44,925/- as on 31.3.2007.
Government of India Note 2 below role 273 of GFR cleatly states that the earnest money
of all the successful tenderers shall be returned as early as possible after expiry of the bid validity
period but not later than 30 days of the award of contract.
It is the duty of the competent authority to ensure that the earnest money deposit is
refunded as early as possible to avoid any litigation by the unsuccessful bidders.
The earnest money of the successful bidders shall also be refunded after the security
deposit by way of FDR, DDs or Bank Guarantee etc. are furnished by the Tenderer as required
under Rule No. 273 of GIR.

147
During course of audit, it has been noticed that EMD /Security Deposit shown as under are
outstanding as on 31.3.2007.
Earnest Money Deposit 4,01,54, 059.00
Security Deposit 53,75,000.00
4,55,29,059.00
Out of which 19 items amounting to Rs.l5,44,925/- are more than 3 years old.
It is therefore suggested that urgent steps may please be taken to return outstanding amount
of EMD/Security Deposit under the rules and deposits remaining unclaimed for more than 3 years shall
be declared as lapsed deposits and required to the transferred to “Miscellaneous receipt” as income.
Compliance of the same may please be intimated to Internal Audit, New Delhi on top
priority please.
Para No. 20 : Difference of Rs. 7705.40 lakhs in cost of fixed assets as shown on 31.03.2006
and opening balance of fixed assets as on 1.4.2006
On Scrutiny of schedule 5 for fixed Assets as per Annual Accounts for the year 2005-06
it has been noticed that cost/valution at the end of the year i.e. on 31.3.2006 it has been shown
as Rs.15474.09 lakhs whereas as per schedule 5 of fixed assets attached with Annual
Accounts for the year 2006-07 cost/valuation at the beginning of the year it has been shown as
Rs.7768.69 lakhs as on 1.4.2006 i.e. to say there is a difference of Rs. 7705.40 lakhs which
shows the figures have not been carried over correctly.
The Audit may please be informed the reasons for difference in figures of closing balance
of last years balance sheet and opening balance of current years balance sheet.
PGIMER, Chandigarh
Para : 1 : Loss due to abandoned work and Blockade funds Rs.71.57 lakh.
Test check of records of Hospital Engineer (Civil-I), PGIMER, Chandigarh revealed that the
work “Construction of 36 Nos Type II houses in sector 12, PGI. Chandigarh” was Administratively
approved by the Standing State Committee in its 41st meeting held on 22.11.97 at a cost of Rs.1.20
crore vide SHE, PGI letter No. PGI/Engg/SHE/98/8852 dated 7.9.98. The work was awarded to
M/S A.P. Construction Co., Mohali for Rs.91,44,157.66 vide H.E. (Civil-I) PGI letter No. 5236
dated 5.9.02. The date of commencement of this work was to be reckoned from the seventh day
of issue of the award letter and time allowed to complete the work was 15 months i.e. up to
11.12.03 stipulated date of completion but the agency could not complete the work within the
stipulated, time period and as such provisional, extension in time was granted by H.E (Civil-I) vide
letter No. 616-20 dated 27.3.04 up to 30.6.04 up to 30.6.04, but even in the extended period the
agency had failed to complete the work.
The last opportunity was given to the contractor vide H.E (Civil-I) PGI letter No. 2002
dated 9.7.05 to explain his position and submit the completion schedule within 7 days failing which
Institute will be constrained to initiate action under Clause 2 and 3 of the contract agreement. Till
date neither reply was received from contractor nor was work completed by him. An expenditure
of Rs.71,56,534/- had been incurred on this work as per “Works Register for 2005-06” and last
payment was made to the contractor vide Bill No. 201 dated 29.12.04 through 7th Running bill
for Rs.4,33,790/-  against the gross amount of the bill Rs.73,66,118.53/-. As such the work was
lying stand still since December, 2004 and no action under Clause 2 and 3 of the agreement had
been initiated so far. The penalty leviable under clause 2 of agreement comes to Rs.914415/- and
work is to be got completed at the risk and cost of the contractor. As with the passage of time

148
there is every possibility of damages to the structure and escalation in the cost of construction.
Besides this, unnecessary payment of the avoidable house rent to the eligible employees who would
have been allotted the said houses and loans of standard licence fee recoverable from employees
if these houses had been completed well in time.
As the work remained stand still since 22.11.04 as per entry under on 7th running bill and
certificate recorded by the concerned J.E. thereon, an expenditure of Rs.71.57 lakh incurred on this
work was loss to the institution as this abandoned work does not  serve any purpose. Necessary
clarification may be given to internal audit.
PGIMER, Chandigarh
Para:- 3 Non initiation of action against faculty member Dr. R.S. Dhaliwal
Dr. R.S. Dhaliwal was Additional Professor, Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery
department. He carried out a number of open heart operations at PGI during the period 1994 to
2001. He used to purchase interior quality heart valves and accessories at very high rates on behalf
of patients under his treatment. He was asking them to deposit cash with unathorized agent who
supplied the material directly to Dr. Dhaliwal thereby ensuring that the patients could not check the
quality and quantity of  material supplied. The agent who was supplying the material was
Shri Surinder Singh Uppal owner of M/s Hitech Surgical Company 9/60, Rajouri Garden, New
Delhi allegedly having office in Sector 47, Chandigarh. M/s Northern Remedias (P) Ltd., SCO
No. 98, Sector 47, Chandigarh and M/s Paul Medical Hall. Sector 11, Chandigarh. Shri Uppal issued
bills for the sale of their heart valves in the these two firms which were found to be non existent
at the given address at Delhi.
The CBI registered Preliminary enquiry on 12.6.01 against Dr. R.S. Dhaliwal and others. After
investigation the CBI registered an FIR/RC on against Dr. R.S. Dhaliwal and others.
Dr. Dhaliwal performed 324 Tharacic Sargery during the period January, 1994 to July, 2001 of which
39 cases investigated by the CBI. The method adopted by Dr. Dhaliwala as by CBI was that he used
to personally take cash or drafts from patients for the valves at higher rates and passed on the
payments to Shri Uppal and Shri Singla. He also referred certain patients to Shri Uppal for supplying
valves who used to receive payments and supply the valves directly is Dr. R.S. Dhaliwal charging
higher rates. In certain cases the payments were taken for different brands of valves at a higher rate
and wrongful implantation was done. The investigation of CBI also mentions the personal diary of
Shri Uppal indicating the details of such cases, patients, profit and share given to Dr. Dhaliwal, which
is corroborated by GEQD and confessional statement of Shri Uppal. In the report it is mentioned that
Shri Uppal admitted before the  Magistrate that he has paid Rs.15 lakh to Dr. Dhaliwal for 160 such
patients out of the profits in addition to his own profits up to Rs.11 lakh.
The copy of the investigation report dated 22.3.2005 was sent the Secretary (Health) to
sanction prosecution under section 120B (Criminal conspiracy), 420 (cheating), 467, 468, 471
(forgery) of IPC and Section 13 of Prevention of Corruption Act. The Ministry asked the PGIMER
to send its comments on the case and to place the matter before the Governing Body for action.
The Governing Body discussed the matter in its meeting held on 31.8.05 vide Agenda Item
No. 14 and it was decided that the matter of sanction of prosecution against Dr. R.S. Dhaliwal
may be referred to the Ministry for taking decision in consultation with the Law Department. As
per decision of the Governing Body on the issue, the matter was referred to the Secretary, Health
and Family Welfare, Government of India, New Delhi vide letter Vig cell/PGI/F-545 dated 2.9.05.
The Government of India intimated that the Governing Body of the Institute is competent to grant
prosecution sanction against Dr. R.S. Dhaliwal now Professor and Head, Department of Cardic
vasscular and Thoracic Surgery, PGIMER, Chandigarh. Finally the matter was placed before the
Governing Body in its meeting no. 110 dated vide agenda item No. 17 where the Governing Body
authorized Director the PGIMER, Chandigarh who is a Member Secretary of the Governing sign
and convey the prosecution sanction on behalf of the Governing Body..

149
Final outcome of the case may be intimated to internal Audit.
ICMR, New Delhi
Para No: Over statement of Expenditure under the Retirement and Terminal Benefits and
Leave Salary and Pension Contribution by Rs.87,80,80,760/-
Scrutiny of records and information reveals that I.C.M.R, New Delhi has shown
overstatement of Expenditure under the Head Retirement and Tenninal Benefits and Leave Salary
and Pension Contribution by Rs.87,8050,80,760/- during the year 2006-07 as detailed below:—
(i) Retirement and Terminal Benefits 94,13,59,756
Actual as per work sheet (-) 18,36,67,775
Overstatement 75,76,91,981
(ii) Leave Salary and Pension Contribution 12,04,56,335
Actual Expenditure as per Work sheet (-) 67,556
Overstatement 12,03,88,779
(i)+ (ii) = Rs.87,80,80,760
It is proposed that reasons of overstatement of expenditure under the above mentioned
heads may be clarified and details of individual payments made on accounts of Retirement and
Terminal Benefits and Leave Salary and Pension Contribution should be provided to Internal Audit
Wing, MHFW, GoI, New Delhi. It is suggested that details of funds available against the provisions
of above two Heads may be shown separately.
ICMR, New Delhi
Para No. : Income Tax deducted recovered from the Government employees and private
parties in crores of Rupees (ICMR Hqrs. 2006-07 Rs.54,45,810/-) during the last years but
not remitted to the Government as per Annual Accounts/Balance Sheet
Scrutiny or records and information reveals that Income Tax deducted from the Govt.
employees and private parties in crores of rupees per annum but it is not remitted to the Govt.
as per Annual Accounts/Balance Sheet of the ICMR New Delhi. During the year 2006-07. Income
Tax was deducted for Rs.54,45,810/- in the ICMR Hqrs. Only (salary Rs. 48,91,676/- + Non salary
Rs.5,54,134/-) but it is also not reflected in the Annual Accounts. There are 30 Research Centres
funded and functioning under the control of ICMR (Hqrs.), New Delhi and Income Tax deducted
at their end is also required to be reflected in the Annual Accounts of the I.C.M.R. New Delhi as
other Income and Expenditure shown in the consolidated Annual Report/Annual Accounts. The
amount of Income Tax deduction worked out. in crores of rupees per annum and required to be
remitted to the Government regularly and it should be shown in the Annual Acounts fully and
properly.
It is proposed that Income Tax deducted by the ICMR Hqrs. and its regional centres may
be remitted to Government Treasury and transaction may be shown in the Annual Accounts of
ICMR, New Delhi.

150
Compliance in this regard may be intimated to the Internal Audit Wing, MHFW, G.O.I.,
Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi.
Vallabh Bahi Patel Chest Institute, Delhi
Para No.  22. : Non obtaining of performances security from suppliers firms Rs.11,50,000/-
In order to ensure due performance up the contract/agreement entered into with suppliers/
firms for purchase of Government Stores, it is necessary that performance security should be
obtained from every successful bidder. The performance security should be obtained for an amount
of five to ten percent of  the value of the contact. The VPCI, new Delhi have not been obtaining
the performance security from the suppliers. But only EMD amount is being treated as such. As
per rule 158(III) of GFR, the bid security of the successful bidder should be refunded immediately
and performances security (which normally higher amount) should be obtained. In one particular
case M/s. Shimadzu Medical Ltd. an amount of Rs.11,50,000/- as performances security which is
10% of the amount of value of stores purchased could have been obtained as the performance
security is to be obtained @5% to 10% of the value of the contract. In this case the EMD amount
of Rs.300000/- which was not refunded after bidding ceremony has been treated as security. Even
this securit:y has been refunded to  the firm before completion of five years stipulated period of
guarantee/warranty etc. Institute may elucidate the reasons for non obtaining of performances
security at specified rates from the suppliers and early release of security to the said firm.
Para No. 24:- Non charging of Building rent from SBI Ext. Counter.
During the course of audit it was noticed that the State Bank of India is opened one extension
counter in the office complex of the VPCI, Delhi. This portion of the building had been offered by
the Institute earlier to the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIE). Now the CSIR had
ready vacated their part of the building including the building of SBI extension counter.
But the extension counter is being free of rent ever since. The Institute is not taken the
congnigence of this reality. It is requested that this matter may be taken up with the SBI and rent
may be obtained from them including the arrear of rent. Such rent should be got determined in
consultation with PWD in terms of prevalent market rate.
Para No. 27:- Non maintenance of Liability Register and Outstanding Liabilities up to
Rs. 10,95,6,263/-.
On scrutiny of relevant records it was noticed that at the close of financial year 2006-07
Rs.10956263/- was outstanding liabilities. Proper accounting records for as many as 20 liabilities
has not been maintained by the institute for proper scrutiny and examination of liabilities. It is
necessary that the liabilities Register should be duly maintained. These liabilities may be cleared and
compliance may be shown to next audit.
Para No. 28:- Non Settlement of outstanding Interest amount of Rs.11,12,447/- under
scheme account.
The VPCI, Delhi has been receiving large number of funds from other source the
M/o Health and Family Welfare lunched nearly 100 of Projects/Scheme over the years. The element
of interest earned by the institute on such funds has been increased to Rs.11,12,447/- as on
31.03.07 and likely to be increased in the coming years. The item wise details of interest earned
on over the years in not identifiable. As such the amount may be taken as receipt of the institute
with the approval of competent authority.

151
ANNEXURE-III
Details of sanctioned, fined and vacant posts of group ‘C’ staff in all CGHS units (as on 31.12.2007)
Sl. No. Name of the Unit Sanctioned Strength Filled Post Vacant Post
1. Ahmedabad 43 42+1 1
2. Allahabad 86 69 17
3. Bangalore 115 93 22
4. Bhuwaneshwar 10 9 1
5. Chennai 155 134 21
6. Guwahati 24 23 1
7. Hyderabad 157 137 20
8. Jabalpur 27 26 1
9. Jaipur 68 60 8
10. Kanpur 107 77 30
11. Kolkata 173 140 33
12. Lucknow 75 63 12
13. Meerut 70 50 15
14. Mumbai 303 240 63
15. Nagpur 95 72 23
1.6. Patna 67 50 17
17. Pune 83 74 9
18. Ranchi 10 10 0
19. Trivandrum 24 23 1
T
OTAL Outside Delhi 1701 1425+1 276
20. Delhi 1321 1029 292
GRAND T OTAL: 3022 2454+1 568
151

152
Details of sanctioned post/filled post/vacant post of group ‘D’ staff in all CGHS units
Sl. No. Name of the Unit Sanctioned Strength Filled Post Vacant Post
1. Ahmedabad 40 34 6
2. Allahabad 65 53 12
3. Bangalore 110 96 14
4. Bhuwaneshwar 7 6 1
5. Chennai 142 128 14
6. Guwahati 24 23 1
7. Hyderabad 149 134 15
8. Jabalpur 26 25 1
9. Jaipur 60 52 8
10. Kanpur 97 78 19
11. Kolkata 177 161 16
12. Lucknow 61 58 3
13. Meerut 66 52 11
14. Mumbai 240 206 34
15. Nagpur 80 61 19
16. Patna 60 55 5
17. Pune 68 63 05
18. Ranchi 10 10 0
19. Trivandrum 25 19 6
T
OTAL Outside Delhi 1604 1320 184
20. Delhi 1377 1052 325
TOTAL: 2934 2384 550
Note : * Staff (other than medical officers) out sourced Through HHL in CGHS Dehradun, Bhubneswar (new)
and Ranchi (new).
** Staff (other than medical officers) engaged on counteract basis Chandigarh, Shillong and Bhopal.

153
Unit-wise incumbency statement of non teaching specialist sub-cadre of CHS
Sl. No. Name of the Unit Sanctioned Filled V acant Remarks
1 CGHS, Delhi 96 91 5
2 CGHS, Kolkata 6 1 5
3 CGHS, Mumbai 9 7 2
4 CGHS, Meerut 1 1 0
5 CGHS, Nagpur 7 4 3
6 CGHS, Kanpur 5 3 2
7 CGHS, Chennai 12 7 5
8 CGHS, Allahabad 7 3 4
9 CGHS, Hyderabad 9. 6 3
10 CGHS, Bangalore 7 5 2
11 CGHS, Patna 7 3 4
12 CGHS, Lucknow 8 5 3
13 CGHS, Pune 4 3 1
14 CGHS, Jaipur 6 6 0
General Duty Sub-Cadre Units Outside Delhi as on 01-02-08 (excluding SAG posts)
Sl. No. Name of the Unit Sanctioned Filled V acant Remarks
12 3 4 5 6
1 CGHS, Allahabad 42 37* 5 3offers * (including offers)
2 CGHS, Ahmedabad 17 14* 3 3offers * (including offers)
(11-02-08)
3 CGHS, Bangalore 54 53 1
4 CGHS, B’neswar 8 06+1@ 1 one offer U/T to
5 CGHS, Bhopal 3 3 0
6 CGHS, Chandigarh 5 5 0
7 CGHS, Chennai 64 61* 3 1 offer *(including offer)
11-02-08)
8 CGHS, Dehradun 2 2 0
9 CGHS, Guwahati 11 11 0
10 CGHS, Hyderabad 67 66 1
11 CGHS, Jabalpur 10 10 0

154
12 3 4 5 6
12 CGHS, Kolkata 86 85 1
13 CGHS, Kanpur 42 37* 5 04 offers (including offers)
J4 CGHS, Lucknow 31 30* 1 01 offers *(including offers)
15 CGHS, Jaipur 24 23 1
16 CGHS, Meerut 29 28* 1 02 offers (12025/219/07-CHS.II
15-4-08)* (including offers)
17 CGHS, Mumbai 110 82+2* 26 *02 on deputation
18 CGHS, Nagpur 43 42* 1 1 offer 10.04.07 *(including
offer)
19 CGHS, Patna 24 24 0
20 CGHS, Pune 32 32 0
21 CGHS, Ranchi 7 06* 1 offer *(including offer)
22 CGHS, Trivendrum 10 10 0
23 CGHS, Shillong 3 3 0
CBS GDMO sub-cadre incumbency/vacancy position of SAG level officers as on 01-07-08
Sl. No. Name of the org./ Sanctioned Filled V acant Remarks
Unit
12 3 4 5 6
1 CGHS, Delhi 32 3 29
2 CGHS, Allahabad 3 0 3
3 CGHS, Ahmedabad 1 0 1
4 CGHS, Bangalore 3 0 3
5 CGHS, Kanpur 3 0 3
6 CGHS, Lucknow 2 0 2
7 CGHS, Meerut 1 0 1
8 CGHS, Pune 3 0 3
9 CGHS, Patna 2 0 2
10 CGHS, Guwahati 1 0 1
11 CGHS, Bhopal 1 0 1
12 CGHS, Mumbai 8 0 8
13 CGHS, Shillong 1 1 0

155
12 3 4 5 6
14 CGHS, Kolkata 7 0 7
15 CGHS, Hyderabad 5 0 5
16 CGHS, Chennai 6 2 4
17 CGHS, Nagpur 2 0 2
18 CGHS, Jaipur 2 1 1
19 CGHS Chandigarh 1 0 1
Incumbency/vacancy position of Dental/Jr Staff Surgeon as on  11/1/2007
Sl. No. Institution Sanctioned Filled V acant Remarks
1 CGHS, Delhi 11 6 5 one post transferred from
Allahabad
2 CGHS, Hyderabad 1 1 0
3 CGHS, Mumbai 2 1 2 One filled on adhoc basis
4 CGHS, Kolkata 1 1 0
5 CGHS, Meerut 1 1 0
6 CGHS, Jaipur 1 1 0
7 CGHS, Ahmedabad 1 1 0
8 CGHS, Lucknow 1 I 0
9 CGHS, Chennai 1 2 1 Adjusted against non teaching spl.
10 CGHS, Nagpur 1 1 0
II CGHS, Patna 1 I 0
12 CGHS, Pune 1 I 0
13 CGHS, Bangalore 1 1 0
14 CGHS, Kanpur 1 0 1
AYUSH incumbency/vacancy position as on 30/03/08
Sl. No. Institution Sanctioned Filled V acant Remarks
12 3 4 5 6
1 Ahmedabad 3 2 1
2 Allahabad 4 4 0
3 Bangalore 7 7 0
4 Bhubaneswar 0 0 0

156
12 3 4 5 6
5 Bhubaneswar-II 0 0 0
6 Kolkata 8 7 1
7 Chennai 6 6 0
8 Delhi 82 73 9
9 Guwahati 2 1 1
10 Hyderabad 12 11 1
11 Jabalpur 0 0 0
12 Jaipur 4 4 0
13 Kanpur 6 3 3
14 Lucknow 6 5 1
15 Meerut 4 3 1
16 Mumbai 10 6 4
17 Nagpur 6 4 2
18 Patna 4 3 1
19 Pune 6 5 1
20 Ranchi 0 0 0
21 Ranchi-II 0 0 0
22 Trivandrum 3 3 0
23 Bhopal 0 0 0
24 Chandigarh 0 0 0
25 Shillong 0 0 0
26 Dehradun 0 0 0
T
OTAL: 173 147 26

157
ANNEXURE-IV
Sl. Name of Investigation/Treatment Procedure CGHS CGHS CGHS CGHS
No. Rates, Rates, Rates, Rates
Kolkata Mumbai Chennai Delhi
(Rs.) (Rs.)
12 3 4 5 6
1 Consultation First Visit 30 30 30 30
2 Consultation - Revisit or each subsequent visit 25 30 25 30
3 Consultation First Visit - Private, if any 50 50 50 50
4 Consultation Revisit or each subsequent visit 50 50 50 50
Private-if any
5 First Consultation by Medical Officer/Resident 40 40 35 40
Doctor
6 Subsequent Consultation by Medical Officer/ 30 30 25 30
Resident Doctor
7 First Visit by Specialists 60 60 60 60
8 Revisit by Specialists or each subsequent visit 60 60 40 60
9 Injections - SC 10 10 10 10
10 Injection - IM 10 10 10 10
11 Injection - IV 15 15 15 15
12 Dressings Small 30 40 30 40
13 Dressings Medium 45 45 45 45
14 Dressings Large 90 90 90 90
15 Suturing without local anesthesia 90 90 90 90
16 Suturing of wounds with local anesthesia 195 195 195 195
17 Removal of Benign Tumor 780 780 750 780
18 Aspiration Plural Effusion - Diagnostic 140 140 140 140
19 Aspiration Plural Effusion - Therapeutic 140 140 140 140
20 Abdominal Aspiration - Diagnostic 250 250 250 250
21 Abdominal Aspiration - Therapeutic 470 470 470 470
22 Pericardial Aspiration 275 300 300 300
23 Bone Marrow Aspiration 275 275 275 275
157

158
12 3 4 5 6
24 Joints Aspiration 230 230 230 230
25 Biopsy Skin except Hensens 200 200 200 200
26 Biopsy Lymphnode 400 400 400 400
27 Biopsy Liver 570 570 570 570
28 Strapping 65 65 65 65
29 Removal of Stitches 30 30 15 30
30 V enesection 90 90 90 90
31 Phimosis Under LA 970 970 970 970
32 Lumber puncture 150 150 150 150
33 Sternal puncture 150 150 150 150
34 Injection for Haemorrhoids 300 300 300 300
35 Injection for Varicose Veins 300 300 300 .300
36 Catheterisation 60 60 50 60
37 Dilatation of Urethra 420 420 420 420
38 Incision and Drainage 390 390 300 390
39 Intercostal Drainage 650 650 650 650
40 Lung function test 300 400 200 400
41 E.C.G. 75 75 75 75
42 E.E.G. 400 400 400 400
43 Stress test (TMT) 750 810 700 810
44 Peritoneal dialysis 1220 1220 1220 1220
Skin
45 Excision of Moles 280 280 280 280
46 Excision of Warts 410 410 410 410
47 Excision of Molluscumcontagiosum 400 400 400 400
48 Excision of Veneral Warts 210 210 210 210
49 Excision of Corns 210 210 210 210
50 I/D Injection Keloid of Acne 70 70 70 70
51 Chemical Cautery (per sittings) 80 80 80 80
E.N.T.
52 Pure Tone Audiogram 130 130 130 130

159
12 3 4 5 6
53 Impedence and other tests 210 210 170 210
54 SISI, Tone Decay and Difference times 130 130 130 130
55 Multiple hearing assessment test to Adults 130 130 130 130
56 Hearing Aid Selection 130 130 130 130
57 Hearing Aid Analysis 100 100 100 100
58 Speech Discrimination Score 65 65 65 65
59 Speech Assessment 80 100 100 100
60 Speech therapy per session of 30-40 minutes 95 95 95 95
61 Cold Calorie Test for Vestibular function 120 130 130 130
62 Removal of foreign body from nose 200 250 250 250
63 Removal of foreign body from ear 200 250 250 250
64 Syringing (Ear) 120 120 120 120
65 Polyp removal under LA 450 450 450 450
66 Peritonsillar abscess drainage under LA 1050 1050 1050 1050
Ear
67 Ear Piercing 150 150 150 150
68 Myringoplasty 8000 8000 8000 8000
69 Staepedectomy 9600 9600 8000 9600
70 Myringotomy 3500 3500 3500 3500
71 Grommet Insertion 4230 4500 4500 4500
72 Tympanotomy 4500 7050 7050 7050
73 Paracentesis 2400 2400 2000 2400
74 Tympanoplasty 8400 10800 10800 10800
75 Mastoidectomy 1 1900 11900 11900 11900
76 Otoplasty 12250 12250 12000 12250
77 Labyrinthectomy 10650 10650 10650 10650
78 Skull Base surgery 20400 20400 20400 20400
79 Facial Nerve Decompressi on 14360 15200 10000 15200
Nose
80 Septoplasty 6800 6800 6800 6800
81 Submucous Resection 5300 5300 5300 5300

160
12 3 4 5 6
82 Septo-rhinoplasty 9608 12350 12000 12350
83 Rhinoplasty 12100 12100 10000 12100
84 Fracture Reduction 4800 4800 4800 4800
85 Intra Nasal Diathermy 1760 1760 1760 1760
86 Turbinectomy 4400 4400 4400 4400
87 Endoscopic DCR 7500 9600 9600 9600
88 Endoscopic Surgery 9560 10000 10000 10000
89 Septal Perf. Repair 9500 10000 10000 10000
90 Antrum Puncture 700 700 600 700
91 Lateral Rhinotomy 880 880 880 880
92 Cranio-facial resection 18000 21900 20000 21900
93 Ethamoidectomy 11300 1 1300 11300 11300
94 Caldwell Luc Surgery 7700 7700 7700 7700
95 Angiofibroma Excision 11000 15200 15200 1 5200
96 Endoscopic Hypophysectomy 25000 25000 20000 25000
97 Endoscopic Optic Nerve Decompression 24950 24950 20000 24950
98 Decompression of Optic Nerve 20000 20000 20000 20000
Throat
99 Ranula Excision 6100 5750 6100 6100
100 Tongue Tie excision 1800 1800 1800 1800
101 Sub Mandibular Duct Lithotomy 4000 4000 4000 4000
102 Adenoidectomy 4700 4700 4700 4700
103 Palatopharyngoplasty 12540 13600 13600 13600
104 Cleft Palate repair 12600 12600 12600 12600
105 Pharyngoplasty 12800 12800 12800 12800
106 Styloidectomy 9500 9600 9600 9600
Eye
107 Cauterisation of ulcer/subconjuctival injection - 50 50 50 50
One eye
108 Cauterisation of ulcer/subconjuctival injection - 100 100 100 100
Both eyes
109 Retrobular Injection - One eye 50 50 50 50

161
12 3 4 5 6
110 Retrobular Injection - Both eyes 100 100 100 100
111 Syringing of Lacrimal Sac - For one eye 50 50 50 50
112 Syringing of Lacrimal Sac - For both eyes 100 100 100 100
113 Paracentesis 200 200 200 200
114 Foreign body - removal 130 130 85 130
115 Refraction/Fundoscopy 30 30 30 30
116 Ortbo-optic check up 50 50 50 50
117 Ortho-optic exercises 50 50 50 50
118 Plepoptic Exercises 50 50 50 50
119 Perimetry/field test 100 100 100 100
120 Chalazion operation - One eye 300 300 300 300
121 Chalazion operation - Both eyes 320 320 320 320
122 Dressing (Eye) 50 65 50 65
123 Clinical Photography 75 150 100 150
124 Pterygium Excision 830 830 830 830
125 Orbitotomy 5500 12000 5500 12000
126 Ptosis correction 4640 4640 4640 4640
127 Ectropion Correction 3000 3600 3000 3600
128 Xenon Arc Laser 585 1000 1000 1000
129 D C R (Dacryocystorhinostony) 4750 7000 5000 7800
130 ECCE/ICCE 4220 6600 6000 6600
131 Epicantuhus coorrection 1700 3850 3850 3850
132 Dacryocystectomy (DCY) 1950 7000 4000 5100
133 Squint Correction 4875 6000 6000 7000
134 Keratoplasty 11500 12000 10000 1 2000
135 Trabeculotomy 4750 6700 6000 6700
136 Trabeculectomy 4257 7200 6000 7800
137 Iridectomy 1000 1000 1000 1000
138 Goniotomy 4000 4000 4000 4000
139 Scalaral Bulding (Retinal Detachment Surgery) 9395 1 1000 10000 11000
140 ERG 575 575 575 575
141 Flourescein Angioraphy 650 800 500 800
138

162
12 3 4 5 6
142 A-Scan 120 150 150 150
143 Tono Graphy 297 100 50 400
144 VER 600 800 500 800
145 Goldmen Perimetry 400 400 100 400
146 Specular microscopy 280 280 150 280
147 Vitrectomy 8800 8800 8800 8800
148 Enucleation 3250 3600 3000 3600
149 Eviseration 3100 3600 3600 3600
150 Entropion correction 1000 1000 1000 1000
151 Indo cyaningreen Angiography of Retina 700 1200 500 1200
152 Indo cyaningreen Angiography - IRIS 560 560 560 560
153 Automated Perimetry 330 810 300 810
154 Corneal endothelial cell count 240 240 150 240
155 Corneal topography 240 240 240 240
156 Corneal pachymetry 220 220 200 220
157 Retinal nerve film analyzer studies 80 80 80 80
158 Auto Refrectemetry 30 30 30 30
159 Biometry 55 55 55 55
160 Ultrasound studies — A Scan 150 150 150 150
161 Ultrasound studies — B Scan 240 240 240 240
162 Retinal/Meter function studies 140 140 140 140
163 PAN ACUITY METER 1260 1300 150 1300
164 Laser interferometry 1300 1300 1300 1300
165 EKG , EOG 1200 750 650 1200
166 Dacryocystography (DGC) 1200 1200 900 1200
167 Orbital Angio studies 1700 1300 1000 1700
168 Cateract with IOL (Cost of lens extra) 7500 7500 5000 7500
Orthopaedic and Plaster Work
169 Fingers (post, slab) 195 195 195 195
170 Fingers full plaster 195 195 195 195
171 Colles Fracture - Below elbow 890 890 890 890

163
12 3 4 5 6
172 Colles Fracture - Full plaster 720 720 720 720
173 Colles fracture Ant. or post-slab 720 720 500 720
174 Above elbow full plaster 750 810 810 810
175 Above Knee post-slab 520 520 520 520
176 Below Knee full plaster 750 750 750 750
177 Below Knee post-slab 520 520 520 520
178 Tube Plaster (or plaster cylinder) 750 750 750 750
179 Above knee full plaster 1500 1500 925 1500
180 Above knee full slab 1800 1800 850 1800
181 Minerva Jacket 2000 2000 1400 2000
182 Plaster Jacket 1700 1700 1400 1700
183 Shoulder spica 1600 1600 1400 1600
184 Single Hip spica 1700 1700 1400 1700
185 Double Hip spica 1320 2100 1650 2100
Strapping
186 Strapping of Finger 125 130 130 130
187 Strapping of Toes 125 130 130 130
188 Strapping of Wrist 190 190 190 190
189 Strapping of Elbow 190 190 190 190
190 Strapping of Knee 260 260 250 260
191 Strapping of Ankle 260 260 250 260
192 Strapping of Chest 350 380 275 380
193 Strapping of Shoulder 350 390 360 390
194 Nasal bone fracture 325 390 390 390
195 Figure of 8 bandage 350 390 170 390
196 Colar and cuff sling 300 300 170 300
197 Ball bandage 325 380 380 380
Physiotherapy
198 Ultrasonic therapy 50 57 50 57
199 S.W. Diathermy 50 57 50 57
200 Electrical stimulation (therapeutic) 50 57 50 57

164
12 3 4 5 6
201 Muscle testing and diagnostic 50 57 50 57
202 Infra red 35 50 50 50
203 U.V . Therapeutic dose 57 57 50 57
204 Electric vibrator 50 57 50 57
205 Vibrator belt massage 57 57 50 57
206 Intra Lumbar Traction 57 57 50 57
207 Intermittent Cervical traction 57 57 50 57
208 Combined Lumbar and Cervical traction 57 57 50 57
209 Wax bath 40 57 50 57
210 Hot pack 55 57 50 57
211 Whirlpool bath 57 57 50 57
212 Obesity Exercises 35 57 50 57
213 Breathing Exercises and Postural Drainage 35 57 50 57
214 Cerebral Palsy - Massage 35 57 50 57
215 Post - polio exercise 35 57 50 57
Dental
216 Extraction of tooth including LA 81 81 80 81
217 Complicated Ext. per Tooth including LA 165 165 165 165
218 Flap Operation per Tooth 300 300 300 300
219 Gingivectomy per tooth 195 195 195 195
220 Cyst under LA (small) 195 195 195 195
221 Cyst under LA (large) 325 325 325 325
222 Impacted Molar including LA 545 545 545
223 Apisectomy induding LA 520 520 520 520
224 Fracture wiring including LA 650 650 650 650
225 Intra oral X-ray 50 50 50 50
Others
226 Upper G.I. Endoscopy 860 1200 900 1200
227 Upper G .I. Endoscopy with Biopsy 1040 1450 1190 1450
228 Esophageal scierotherapy for varices First sitting 1500 1650 1650 1650
229 Esophageal sclerotherapy for varices Subsequent 1300 1300 1000 1300
sitting

165
12 3 4 5 6
230 Sigmoidoscopy (rigid) 900 900 765 900
231 Sigmoidoscopy (flexible) 900 900 900 900
232 Oesophagoscopy 875 970 918 970
233 Colonoscopy 1425 1600 1530 1600
234 Fibroptic bronchoscopy 1700 1700 1190 1700
X-Ray
235 Fluroscopy chest 80 80 80 80
236 Dental 50 50 50 50
237 Occlusal 50 60 60 60
238 Abdomen AP or Erect (one film) 100 100 100 100
239 Abdomen Lateral view (one film) 100 100 100 100
240 Abdomen for Pregnancy 100 100 100 100
241 Chest PA view (one film) 100 100 100 100
242 Chest Oblique or Lateral (One film) 100 100 100 100
243 Mastoids 100 100 100 100
244 Extremities, bones and Joints (one film) 100 100 100 100
245 Pelvis (One film) 100 100 100 100
246 Paranual sinuses (One film) 100 100 100 100
247 T.M. Joints (One film) 100 100 100 100
248 Abdomen and pelvis for K.U.B. 104 104 104 104
249 Skull A.P. and Lateral 160 160 160 160
250 Spine A.P. and Lateral 160 160 160 160
251 Barium Swallow 550 565 525 565
252 Sinographyl Sialography 500 500 500 500
253 Cystographyl Urethrography 600 650 650 650
254 Hystero-Salpaingography 702 702 702 702
255 Artbrography 565 565 565 565
256 Retrograde Pyelography 650 650 650 650
257 Oral or I.V . Cholecystography 575 625 625 625
258 Barium Enema 770 770 770 770
259 Barium Meal Upper or Lower 750 800 800 800

166
12 3 4 5 6
260 Bronchography 875 875 875 875
261 I.V . Urography 940 940 940 940
262 Myelography 936 936 936 936
263 Pneumo Encephalography 750 750 750 750
264 Barium meal Complete 1000 1100 1100 1100
265 Cerebral/Femoral Angiography 1125 1125 1125 1125
Ultrasound Investigations
266 Obstetric First Scan 300 250 250 300
267 Obstetric Follow up (2nd visit) 300 250 200 300
268 Upper abdomen First Scan 350 350 350 350
269 Upper abdomen Follow up (2nd visit) 300 300 300 300
270 Quick look check-up for IUCD failure/Foetus 250 250 250 250
271 Total Abdominal survey or Multiple organ study 350 350 350 350
272 Special procedures and Aspiration etc. 500 500 500 500
273 Image Intensifiers 510 1090 680
Clinical Pathology
274 Urine routine 30 30 30 30
275 Quantitative Albumin/Sugar 15 15 15 15
276 Urine Bile Pigment and Salt 20 20 20 20
277 Urine Urobilinogen 30 30 20 30
278 Urine Ketones 30 30 20 30
279 Urine Occult Blood 30 30 20 30
280 Urine total proteins 30 30 30 30
281 Urine Sodium 40 60 50 60
282 Urine Chloride 40 60 50 60
283 Benee Jones protein 40 50 30 50
284 Stool routine 30 30 25 30
285 Stool occult blood 30 24 20 32
286 Post coital smear examination 40 40 40 40
287 Smear analysis 50 50 50 50
288 Body fluid (CSF/Ascitic Fluid etc.) Chemistry, 75 75 75 75
Sugar, Protein etc.

167
12 3 4 5 6
289 Body fluid for Malignant cells 80 80 80 80
Haematology
290 Haemoglobin (Hb) 24 24 20 24
291 Total Leucocytic Count (TLC) 24 24 20 24
292 Differential Leucocytic Count (DLC) 25 25 20 25
293 E.S.R. 24 24 20 24
294 Total Red Cell count 30 30 25 30
295 Platelet count 30 30 25 30
296 Reticulocyte count 30 30 30 30
297 Absolute Eosinophil count 30 30 30 30
298 Packed Cell V olume (PCV) 25 25 25 25
299 Peripheral Smear Examination 32 32 32 32
300 Smear for Malaria parasite 30 30 30 30
301 Bleeding and Clotting Time 30 30 30 30
302 Clot Retraction Time 30 30 30 30
303 R.B-C. Fragility Test 30 30 30 30
304 L.E. Cell 60 60 60 60
305 Foetal Haemoglobin (Hb-F) 50 50 50 50
306 Prothrombin Time (P.T.) 96 96 75 96
307 Complete Haemogram 60 60 60 60
308 Bone Marrow Smear Exmination 150 150 150 150
309 Partial Thromboplastin 130 130 100 130
310 Glucose Phosphate Dehydrogenase (G, 6PD) 130 130 130 130
Blood Bank
311 Blood Group and RHO Type 40 40 40 40
312 Cross match 30 30 30 30
313 Packed cell preparation 30 30 30 30
314 Coomb’s Test Direct 97 97 75 97
315 Coomb’s Test Indirect 97 97 90 97
316 Australia Antigen 100 100 100 100
317 RHO, Antibody titer 60 60 60 60

168
12 3 4 5 6
Bio-Chemistry
318 Glucose 30 30 30 30
319 Blood Urea Nitrogen 50 50 40 50
320 Serum Creatinine 50 57 40 57
321 Serum Uric Acid 55 55 40 55
322 Serum Bilirubin total and direct 50 50 56 50
323 Serum Iron 80 80 80 80
324 Serum Cholesterol 60 60 40 60
325 Total Iron Binding Capacity 100 100 100 100
326 Glucose (Fasting and PP) 50 50 50 50
327 Serum Calcium 60 60 40 60
328 Serum Phosphorus 60 60 40 60
329 Total Protein Alb/Glo Ratio 50 50 50 50
330 S.G.P.T. 60 60 50 60
331 S.G.O.T. 60 60 50 60
332 Serum amylase 100 100 100 100
333 Serum Electrolyte 64 64 64 64
334 Triglyceride 100 100 75 100
335 Gluco Tolerance Test (GTT) 100 100 100 100
336 C.P .K. 120 120 100 120
337 L.D.H. 120 120 90 120
338 Alkaline ‘Phosphatase 60 60 50 60
339 Acid Phosphatase 80 80 70 80
340 CKMB 100 100 100 100
341 T3, T4, TSH 200 200 200 200
342 HDL Cholestrol 75 75 50 75
343 L H 150 150 150 150
344 FSH 270 270 200 270
345 Prolactin 270 270 200 270
346 Blood gas analysis 230 230 205 230
347 Blood gas analysis with electrolytes 295 295 240 295

169
1 2 345 6
348 Cortisol 270 270 270 270
Histopathology
349 Pap Smear 100 100 100 100
350 Histopathology 100 150 150 150
351 Frozen section and Paraffin section 150 150 150 150
352 V aginal Cytology for Hormonal evaluation 100 100 100 100
Bactriology and Serology
353 Smea gram-strain examination 48 48 40 48
354 Sputum smear A.F.B. stain 48 48 40 48
355 V aginal Smear Examination 48 48 48 48
356 V .D.R.L. 60 60 50 60
357 Widal test 56 56 56 56
358 Rheumatoid Factor test 80 80 75 80
359 Culture and Sensitivity (other specimens) 96 96 96 96
360 Urine pregnancy test 80 80 80 80
361 C.R.P. 115 115 100 115
362 ASO Titer 100 100 100 100
363 Quantitative H.C.C. 145 145 145 145
364 Blood culture and sensitivity 120 120 120 120
365 Vibro cholera culture 100 100 100 100
ICI/CCU Charges (Special Care Cases)
366 Coronary Care with Cardiac Monitoring including 1250 1250 1250 1250
ECG and Diet
367 Respirator and Compressed air/piped oxygen 800 800 800 800
(Ventilator charges)
368 Post operative care (ICU) with Diet 1150 1150 1150 1150
369 Paediatric care for New born per day 190 190 190 190
(7 to 12 days)
370 General Nursery Care per day 250 250 250 250
371 Incubator charges (Per day) 300 300 300 300
372 Intensive care in Nursery (Per day) 975 1050 1000 1050
373 Phototherapy 150 160 150 160

170
1 2 345 6
374 Resuscitation 200 250 200 250
375 Resuscitation with Incubator attended by Specialist 650 600 650 650
376 Exchange Transfusion 810 810 810 810
377 O.T. Charges for Exchange transfusion 230 230 230 230
378 Pneupack ventilator ill Nursery (Per day) 560 560 560 560
Oxygen Charges
379 Operation theatre (including supply of Nitrous 650 650 380 650
Oxide)
380 Casuality ICU 30 30 30 30
381 General Ward 30 30 30 30
382 Semi-private wards 30 30 30 30
Burn Dressing
383 upto 30% Bums 1st Dressing 110 110 110 110
384 upto 30% Bums Subsequent Dressing 90 90 90 90
385 30% to 50% Burns 1st Dressing 140 140 140 140
386 30% to 50% Burns Subsequent Dressing 110 110 110 110
387 Extensive Burn above 50% Frist Dressing 200 200 200 200
388 Extensive Burn above 50% Subsequent dressing 140 140 140 140
Obstetric Cases
389 Normal delivery or with Episiotomy and P. repair 6500 6500 6500 6500
390 Low Forceps 7300 7300 7300 7300
391 Low midcavity forceps 7300 7300 7300 7300
392 Cesarean Section 11975 12000 12000 1 2000
393 Cesarean Hysterectomy 13750 13750 13750 13750
394 Rupture Uterus, closure and repair with Tubal 13750 13750 13750 13750
Ligation
395 Perforation of Uterus after D/E Laparotomy and 9700 9700 9700 9700
Closure
396 Laparotomy for Ectopic Rupture 9700 9700 9700 9700
397 Laparotomy-peritonitis Lavage and Drainage 8100 8100 8100 8100
398 Laparotomy-failed laparoscopy to explore 4050 4050 4050 4050
399 Salphingectomy 7760 7760 7760 7760

171
1 2 345 6
400 Salphingo-Oophorectomy 10600 10000 10600 10600
401 Ovarean Cystectomy 10600 100 00 10600 10600
402 Oopherctomy 8900 8900 8900 8900
403 Broad Ligment Haemotoma Drainage 5000 5000 5000 5000
404 Exploration of perineal Haematoma and 6500 6500 6500 6500
Resuturing of Episiotomy
405 Exploration of abdominal Haematoma (after 8900 8900 8900 8900
laparotomy + LUCS)
406 Internal podalic version and extraction 3000 3000 3000 3000
407 Manual Removal of Placenta 2500 2500 2000 2500
408 3rd stage Complication MRP for outside delivery etc. 3000 3000 3000 3000
409 Examination under anaesthesia 1650 1650 1650 1650
410 Burst-abdomen Repair 4000 8100 8100 8100
411 Gaping Pareneal Wound Secondary Suturing 1200 1200 1200 1200
412 Gaping abdominal wound Secondary Suturing 2500 2500 2040 2500
413 Complete perineal tear-repair 1650 1650 1650 1650
414 Exploration of PPH-tear repair 2800 2800 2800 2800
415 Destructive Operation 7300 7300 7300 7300
416 Suction evacuation vesicular mole, Missed 3900 3900 3900 3900
abortion D/E
417 Colpotomy-drainage P/V needling EUA 2800 2800 2800 2800
418 Repair of post-coital tear, perineal injury 2800 2800 2800 2800
419 Excision of urethral caruncle 2500 2500 2500 2500
420 Laparoscopy (Gynae) 4050 4050 4050 4050
421 Shirodhkar, Mc. Donalds stich 2500 2500 2500 2500
General Surgery
422 Drainage of Abscess 1200 1200 1200 1200
423 Dressing under G.A. 1200 1500 1500 1500
424 Aspiration of cold Abscess of Lympbnode 1400 1400 1400 1400
425 Aspiration of Empyema 1650 1650 1600 1650
426 Aspiration of Live Abscess 1200 1200 1200 1200
427 Open Drainage of Liver Abscess 6500 6500 6500 6500

172
1 2 345 6
428 Drainage of Pelvic Abscess 6500 6500 6500 6500
429 Drainage of Iscbiorectal Abscess 4400 4400 4200 4400
430 Drainage of Snbdiaphragmatic Abscess 8100 8100 8100 8100
431 Open Drainage of Perinepheric Abscess 8100 8100 8100 8100
432 Drainage of Perigastric Abscess 6500 6500 6500 6500
.433 Drainage of Perotid Abscess 4400 4400 3800 4400
434 Drainage of Retropbaryngeal Abscess 4400 4400 4250 4400
435 Open Drainage of Psoas Abscess 4400 4400 4400 4400
436 Open Drainage of Perivertebral Abscess 5250 6000 6000 6000
Injury of Superficial Soft Tissues
437 Suturing of small wounds 195 195 195 195
438 Secondary suture of wounds 300 300 300 300
439 Delayed primary suture 1150 1150 1100 1150
440 Debridement of wounds 300 300 300 300
Remioval of Foreign Bodies
441 Removal of F.B. Superficial 200 200 200 200
442 Removal of F.B. Deep 1650 1650 1650 1650
Biopsies
443 Cervical Lymph Node 1300 1300 1300 1300
444 Auxiliary Lymph Node 1650 1650 1600 1650
445 Inguinal Lymph Node 1650 1650 1600 1650
446 Excision/Biopsy of Large Lumph Nodes 1650 1650 1600 1650
447 Excision Biopsy of Ulcers 2424 2500 1700 2500
448 Excision Biopsy of Superficial Lumps 2500 2500 2500 2500
449 Incision Biopsy of Growths/Ulcers 1300 1300 1300 1300
450 Trucut Needle Biopsy 1300 1300 1300 1300
451 kidney biopsy 1500 1500 1500 1500
452 Percutaneous Kidney Biopsy 1300 1300 1300 1300
453 Spleen Aspiration 1300 1300 1300 1300
454 Marrow Biopsy (Open) 1300 1300 1300 1300
455 Muscle Biopsy 1300 1300 1300 1300

173
1 2 345 6
456 Scalene Node Biopsy 970 970 970 970
Excision of cyst/Small Tumours
457 Excision of Sebaceous Cysts 900 900 900 900
458 Excision of Superficial Liipoma 1400 1400 1400 1400
459 Excision of Superficial Neurofibroma 1950 1950 1950 1950
460 Excision of Dermoid Cysts 1650 1650 1650 1650
461 Haemorrhoids 1950 1950 1950 1950
462 Keloids 3600 3600 3600 3600
463 Superficial Veriscosity 3250 3250 3250 3250
Head and Neck
464 Ear Lobe Repair one side 410 410 410 410
465 Excision of Pinna for Growth (Squamous/ 3000 3000 2550 3000
Basal/lnjuries) Skin Only
466 Excision of Pinna for Growth (Squamous/Basal/ 3900 3900 3740 3900
lnjuries) Skin and Cartilage
467 Partial Amputation of Pinna 4700 4700 4080 4700
468 Total Amputation of Pinna 5500 5500 5100 5500
469 Total Amputation and Excision of External 7300 7300 7300 7300
Auditory Meatus
470 Excision of Cystic Hygroma Minor 3900 3900 3740 3900
471 Excision of Cystic Hygroma Major 5400 5400 5400 5400
472 Excision of Cystic Hygroma Extensive 8750 8750 8750 8750
473 Excision of Branchial Cyst 9000 9000 8500 9000
474 Excision of Branchial Sinus 8000 8000 7650 8000
475 Excision of Pharyngeal Diverticulum 8100 8100 8100 8100
476 Excision of Carotid Body Tumours 23975 24300 17500 24300
477 Operation for Cervical Rib 14500 15500 12920 15700
478 Block Dissection of Cervical Lymph Nodes 16200 16200 16200 16200
479 Pharyngectomy and Reconstruction. 24240 25100 24500 25100
480 Operation for Carcinoma Lip - Wedge Excision 6000 6000 6000 6000
481 Operation for Carcinoma Lip - Vermilionectomy 6000 6000 6000 6000
482 Operation for Carcinoma Lip - Wedge Excision 7000 7000 7000 7000
and Vermilonectomy

174
1 2 345 6
483 Estlander Operation 5700 5700 5700 5700
484 Abbe Operation 8000 9000 7550 9000
485 Cheek Advancement 7300 7300 7300 7300
486 Excision of the Maxilla 15600 15600 15600 15600
487 Excision of the Mandible Segmental 12200 12200 12200 12200
488 Hemimandibulectomy 18250 18250 18250 18250
489 Partial Glossectomy 4050 4050 4050 4050
490 Hemiglossectomy 9100 9100 9100 9100
491 Total Glossectomy 18250 18250 18250 18250
492 Commondo Operation 18250 18250 18250 18250
493 Parotidectomy - Superficial 12605 14000 13500 14000
494 Parotidectomy - Conservative 8450 8450 8450 8450
495 Parotidectomy - Radical Total 18250 18250 18250 18250
496 Repair of Parotid Duct 15400 12900 12900 15400
497 Removal of Submandibular Salivary gland 6650 6650 6650 6650
498 Hemithyroidectomy 9750 9750 9750 9750
499 Partial Thyroidectomy 9100 9100 9100 9100
500 Subtotal Thyroidectomy (Toxic Goitre) 12500 12500 12500 12500
501 Total Thyroidectomy (Cancer) 15900 15900 15900 15900
502 Resection Enucleation of Adenoma 8410 8410 8410 8410
503 Isthmectomy 8410 8410 8410 8410
504 Total Thyroidectomy and Block Dissection 21900 21900 21900 21900
505 Excision of Lingual Thyroid 12120 18100 17750 18100
506 Excision of Thyroglossal Cyst/Fistula 10000 10000 8500 10000
507 Ecision of Parathyroid Adenoma/Carcinoma 17800 17800 17800 17800
508 Laryngectomy 25600 25600 25400 25600
509 Laryngo Pharyngectomy 30000 30000 30000 30000
510 Sinus and Fistula repair 6000 6000 6000 6000
511 Lymph Node Excision 3600 3600 3600 3600
512 Hyoid Suspension 7850 7850 7850 7850
513 Genioplasty 9530 15000 13400 15000

175
1 2 345 6
514 Direct Laryngoscopy 4000 3900 3625 4000
515 Phonosurgery 1 1300 11300 11300 11300
516 Fibroptic Laryngoscopy 2500 2600 2500 2600
517 Microlaryngeal Surgery 7600 7600 7600 7600
518 Laryngofissure 13600 13800 12000 13800
519 Stenosis Excision 13430 16300 16300 16300
Head and Neck Cancer
520 Excisional Biopsies 5000 3000 5000 5800
521 Benign Tumour Excisions 6750 8900 8500 8900
522 Temporal Bone resection 16500 16500 16500 16500
523 Radical Neck Dissection 20160 20160 20160 20160
524 Carotid Body Excision 27360 28500 21400 28500
525 Total Laryngectomy 28400 26400 28400 28400
526 Flap Reconstructive Surgery 30084 24000 30400 30400
527 Parapharyngeal Tumour Excision 23500 24000 25000 28500
Breast
528 Drainage of Abscess 4725 4850 4250 4850
529 Excision of Lumps 7300 7300 5100 7300
530 Local Mastectomy (Simple) 9900 9900 9900 9900
531 Radical Mastectomy (Formal or Modified) 19975 24000 18000 24000
532 Excision of Mammary Fistula 11250 12120 7815 12120
533 Segment Resection of Breast 12000 12000 1 1050 1 2000
Cardio Respiratory Procedures
534 Direct Laryngoscopy 3630 4000 2325 4000
535 Bronchoscopy 1950 1950 1700 1950
536 Mediastinoscopy 1970 1970 1970 1970
537 Pleural Biopsy 2250 2250 2250 2250
538 Thoracoscopy 4900 4900 4900 4900
539 Tracheostomy 2500 2500 2500 2500
540 Thoracotomy (Penetrating Wounds) 1 1650 11650 11650 11650
541 Intercostal Drainage of empyema 3800 3800 3800 3800

176
1 2 345 6
542 Decortication (Pleurectomy) 19100 19100 19100 19100
543 Thoracoplasty 27200 27200 25500 27200
544 Pneumonectomy 22300 22300 22300 22300
545 Lobectomy(lung) 19900 19900 19900 19900
546 Segmental Resection 19900 19900 19900 19900
547 Hydatid Cyst 19900 19900 19900 19900
548 Pulmonary function test BMR 475 475 400 475
549 Spirometry 420 475 350 475
550 Spirometry with Helium Dilution 1100 1100 571 1100
551 Spirometry with a Heiium Dilution with diffusion 750 750 750 750
capacity studies
552 Pulmonery exercise testing 600 600 380 600
553 Open Lung Biopsy 11960 11960 10000 11960
554 Anterior medicistonotomy 21300 26000 24000 26000
555 Medicistinoscopy (cervical) 14300 240 00 13000 24000
556 Video-assisted thoracoscopy (VATS) 17900 17900 17750 17900
557 Video-assisted thoracoscopic lung Surgeries 22000 39480 30000 39480
558 Lung volume reduction surgery 39990 38000 35000 39990
559 Thoracoscopic Decortication 25700 35962 39000 40000
560 Thoracoscopic Pneumonectomy 30500 42000 27000 50000
561 Thoracoscopic Lebectomy 30600 359 62 30150 50000
562 Thoracoscopic Segmental Resection 30600 359 62 40000 50000
563 Thoracoscopic Hydatid Cyst excision 30600 35962 40000 42000
564 Thoracoscopic Sympathectomy 29500 29500 29500 29500
Cardiac/Cardio Thoracic Procedures
565 Coronary Bypass Surgery 120000 127500 130000 130000
566 Coronary Bypass Surgery-post Angioplasty 124850 127500 130000 130000
567 Coronary Baloon Angioplasty 60000 75000 69000 85000
568 Balloon angioplasty with Valvotomy 74950 93750 85000 105000
569 Open Heart Procedures 1 19500 127500 130000 130000
570 Total Correction of Tetralogy of Fallot 124000 120000 130000 130000
571 RSUV Correction 124500 1 12500 127000 130000

177
1 2 345 6
572 TAPVC Correction 128500 1 12500 127000 130000
573 Open ASD VSD 95000 123750 127000 130000
574 Open Pulmona ry V alvotomy 95000 123750 127000 130000
575 Open Aortic Valvotomy 95000 123750 127000 130000
576 Balock Taussing Operation 70000 97500 59500 1 10000
577 Mitral Valvotomy 55000 55000 42500 55000
578 Mitral Valve Replacement (cost of valve extra) 119525 130000 130000 130000
579 Aortic V alve Replacement (cost of valve extra) 120000 130000 130000 130000
580 Double Valve Replacement (cost of valve extra) 116000 120000 130000 130000
581 Closed Valvotomy 79050 75000 68000 1 10000
582 Coarctation-Arota Repair of Balock Taussing 75000 97500 93500 1 10000
Shunt
583 Patent Ductus Arteriousus 70000 73200 59500 73200
584 Mitral Valvotomy (Open) 90000 1 10000 425 00 130000
585 Pericardiostomy 44950 900 00 59500 1 10000
586 Pericardiectomy 59590 90000 59500 1 10000
587 Pericardio Centrosis 1000 1000 1000 1000
588 Permanent Pacemaker Implantation 13000 13000 12750 13000
589 Temporary Pacemaker Implantation 7000 9000 6800 9000
590 Test of Pacemaker 485 485 485 485
591 Embolectomy 16450 17300 15300 17300
592 Aneurysm Resection and Grafting 30000 30000 30000 30000
593 Thoracocentesis 1600 1600 1600 1600
594 Thorachost omy 8000 12000 10400 1 2300
595 Exploratory Thorocotomy 14900 14900 14900 14900
596 Aorta-Femoral Bypass 44950 48750 42500 50000
597 Removal of Foreign Body from Trachea or 3000 3000 3000 3000
Oesophagus
598 Rib Resection and Drainage 8100 8100 8100 8100
599 Mediastinal Tumour 24300 24300 24300 24300
600 Thymectomy 20300 20300 20300 20300
601 Partial Pericardectomy 14600 14600 14600 14600

178
1 2 345 6
602 Removal Tumours of Chest Wall 16160 15500 15300 16160
Oesophagus
603 Atresia of Oesophagus and Tracheo Oesophageal 24000 24000 10200 24000
Fistula
604 Operations for Replacement of Oesophagus by 20400 20400 20400 20400
Colon
605 Oesophagectomy for Carcinoma Easophagus 20400 20400 20400 20400
606 Oesophageal Intubation (Mausseau Barbin Tube) 10000 10000 10000 10000
607 Achalasia Carida Transthoracic 9700 9700 9700 9700
608 Achalasia Carida Abdominal 12000 12000 10700 12000
609 Oesopbago Gastrectomy for mid 1/3 lesion 20300 20300 20300 20300
610 Heller’s Operation 16200 16200 16200 16200
611 Colon-Inter position or Replacement of 18600 18600 18600 18600
Oesophagus
612 Oesophago-gastrectomy - Lower Corringers 16160 16160 16160 16160
procedure
Abdomen
613 Gastroscopy 975 1300 1275 1300
614 Gastric and Duodenal Biopsy (Endoscopic) 1280 1616 1445 1616
615 Pylerowyotomy 2424 2424 2424 2424
616 Gastrostomy 6868 6868 6868 6868
617 Simple Closure of Perforated peptic Ulcer 8100 8100 8100 8100
618 V agotomy Pyleroplasty /Gastro Jejunostomy 10100 10100 10100 10100
619 Duodenojejunostomy 15200 15200 14450 15200
620 Partial/Subtotal Gastrectomy for Car cinoma 17500 17500 17500 17500
621 Partial/Subtotal Gastrectomy for Ulcer 17500 175 00 17500 17500
622 Operation for Bleeding Peptic Ulcer 15200 15200 15200 15200
623 Gastrojejunostomy and Vagotom y 15200 15200 15200 15200
624 Operation for Gastrojejunal Ulcer 15200 15200 15200 15200
625 Total Gastrectomy for Cancer 22300 22300 22300 22300
626 Highly Selective Vagotom y 15200 15200 15200 15200
627 Selective Vagotomy and Drainage 15200 14652 15200 15200
628 Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia 14500 14500 14500 14500

179
1 2 345 6
629 Hiatus Hernia Repair Abdominal 16200 16200 16200 16200
630 Hiatus Hernia Repair Transthoracic 12500 12500 12500 12500
631 Exploratory Laparotomy 8900 8900 8900 8900
632 Epigastric Hernia Repair 8450 8450 8450 8450
633 Umbilical Hernia Repair 8450 8450 8450 8450
634 V entral and Scar Hernia Repair 10500 10500 10500 10500
635 Inguinal Hernia Herniorraphy 12000 12000 10880 12000
636 Inguinal Hernia - Hernioplasty 14600 13500 1 1050 1 4600
637 Femoral Hernia Repair 15000 15400 1 1050 1 5400
638 Rare Hernias Repair (Spigalion, Obturator, 18000 14000 12750 18000
Lumbar, Sciatic)
639 Splenectomy - For Traum a 15850 15850 15300 15850
640 Splenectomy - For Hypersplenism 15850 15850 15300 15850
641 Splenorenal Anastomosis 19000 19000 19000 19000
642 Portocaval Anastomosis 25900 25900 25900 25900
643 Direct Operation on Oesophagus for Portal 18800 18800 18800 1 8800
Hypertension
644 Mesentericocaval Anastomosis 24300 24300 24300 24300
645 Warren Shunt 24300 24300 24300 24300
646 Pancerato Duodenectomy 24300 24300 20400 24300
647 By Pass Procedure for Inoperable Carcinoma 17800 17800 17800 17800
of Pancreas
648 Cystojejunostomy or Cystogastrostomy 15000 150 00 15000 15000
649 Cholecystectomy 10200 10200 10200 10200
650 Cholecystectomy and Exploration of CBD 13300 13300 13300 13300
651 Repair of CBD (Common Bile Duct) 13300 13300 13300 13300
652 Operation for Hydatid Cyst of Liver 14220 14220 14220 14220
653 Cholecystostomy 10400 10400 10400 10400
654 Hepatic Resections (Lobectomy Hepatectomy) 16200 16200 16200 16200
655 Operation on Adrenal Glands - Bilateral 22700 22700 22700 22700
656 Operation on Adrenal Glands - Unilateral for 12000 12000 12000 12000
Tumour
657 Appendicectomy for Acute Appendicitis 12000 12000 12000 12000

180
1 2 345 6
658 Appendicectomy for Chronic/recurrent 12000 12000 12000 12000
Appendicitis
659 Appendicular Abscess - Drainage 7500 7500 7500 7500
660 Mesenteric Cyst - Excision 9700 9700 9700 9700
661 Peritonioscopy/Laparoscopy 3560 3560 3560 3560
662 Jejunostomy 10400 10400 10400 10400
663 Ileostomy 18100 15514 15300 18100
664 Congenital Atresia and Stenosis of Small Intestine 15850 15850 155 00  15850
665 Muconium ileus 13300 13300 13300 13300
666 Mal-rotation and V olvulus of the Midgut 13300 13300 13300 13300
667 Resection and Anastomosis of Small I ntestine 15600 15600 14620 15600
668 Excision of Meckle’s Deverticulum 15600 15600 14450 15600
669 Duodenal Diverticul um 15600 15600 15600 15600
670 Operation for Intestinal Obstruction 14300 14300 14300 14300
671 Operation for Intestinal perforation 14300 14300 14300 14300
672 Benign Tumours of Small Intestine 14300 14300 14300 14300
673 Excision of Small Intestine Fistual 14300 14300 14300 14300
674 Operations for Haemorrhage of the Small 16200 16200 16200 16200
Intestines
675 Operations of the Duplication of the Intestines 18800 18800 17000 18800
676 Operations for Recurrent Intestinal Obstruction 18800 18800 18800 18800
(Noble Plication and Other Operations for the
Adhesions)
677 llieosigmoidostomy 14600 14600 14600 14600
678 llieotransverse Colostom y 14600 14600 14600 14600
679 Caecostomy 2828 2828 2828 2828
680 Loop Colostomy Transverse Sigmoid 11400 11400 11400 11400
681 Terminal Colostomy 14000 14000 14000 14000
682 Closure of Colostomy 14300 14300 1 1050 1 4300
683 Right Hemi-Colectomy 14300 14300 14300 14300
684 Left Hemi-Colectomy 14300 14300 14300 14300
685 Total Colectom y 30800 18200 18000 30800
686 Operations for V olvulus of Large Bowel 18200 18200 17000 18200

181
1 2 345 6
687 Operations for Sigmoid Diverticulitis 14600 14600 14600 14600
688 Fissure in Ano - Dilatation 4550 4550 4250 4550
689 Fissure in Ano - Fissurectomy 10000 10000 6800 10000
690 Rectal Polyp - Excision 4100 4100 3825 4100
691 Operation of Haemorrhoids - Lords procedure 5000 5000 5000 5000
692 Fistula in Ano - High Fistulectomy 7272 12160 10700 12160
693 Fistula in Ano - Low Fistulectomy 7150 7150 7150 7150
694 lmperforate Anus - Colostomy 10550 10550 10550 10550
695 Imperforate An - Pull Through Oper ation 10109 10109 10109 10109
696 Prolapse Rectum - Theirch Wiring 7700 7700 6800 7700
697 Prolapse Rectum - Rectopexy 5700 5700 5700 5700
698 Prolapse Rectum - Grahams O peration 14600 14600 13600 14600
699 Operations for Hirschsprungs Disease 11200 11200 11200 11200
700 Excision of Pilonidal Sinus 9400 9400 8500 9400
701 Abdomino-Perineal Excision of Rectum 17800 17800 17000 17800
702 Anrerior Resection of rectum 17800 17800 14450 17800
703 Pull Through Abdominal Resection 14600 14600 14600 14600
704 Operations for Neuroblastoma 14600 14600 14600 14600
Nephrology/Genitourinary
705 Partial Nephrectomy 14100 14100 13600 14100
706 Nepbrolitbomy 14100 14100 14100 14100
707 Pyelolithotomy 13000 13000 13000 13000
708 Operations for Hydronephrpsis 14100 14100 14100 14100
709 Open Drainage of Perineph Abscess 8100 8100 8100 8100
710 Cavernostomy 1 1550 11550 11550 11550
711 Operations for Cyst of the Kidney 10400 10400 10400 10400
712 Ureterolithotomy 9700 9700 9700 9700
713 Nephroureterectomy 9700 9700 9700 9700
714 Operations for Ureter for - Double Ureters 16200 16200 14450 16200
715 Operations for Ureter - for Ectopia of Single 18100 18100 13600 18100
Ureter
716 Operations for Vesico - ureteric Reflux 20000 20000 13600 20000

182
1 2 345 6
717 Ureterostomy - Cutaneous 13000 13000 13000 13000
718 Uretero - Colic anastomosis 13000 13000 13000 13000
719 Formation of an Ileal Conduit 13000 13000 13000 13000
720 Ureteric Catheterisation 4250 4250 2550 4250
721 Dormia Extraction of Calculus 6565 6565 6565 6565
722 Biopsy of Bladder (Cystoscopic) 4550 4550 3400 4550
723 Diathermy Destruction of Bladder Neoplasm 7110 7110 7110 7110
724 Litholapexy 8450 8450 8450 8450
725 Operations for Injuries of the Bladder 10500 13900 12750 13900
726 Suprapubic Drainage (Cystostomy) 8000 8000 6800 8000
727 Total Cystectomy 18600 186 00 18600 18600
728 Diverticulectomy 18000 18000 12750 18000
729 Open Resection of the Bladder Neck 15600 15600 1 1900 1 5600
730 Y -V Plasty of the Bladder Neck 15600 15600 14450 15600
731 Cystoplasty 18600 18600 15300 18600
732 Operations for Extrophy of the Bladder 16160 16160 16160 16160
733 Repair of Ureterocoel 10400 10400 10400 10400
734 Suprapubic Prostatectomy 16200 16200 15300 16200
735 Retropubic Prostatectomy 15900 15900 15300 15900
736 Transurethral Resection of Prostate (TURP) 16200 16200 15300 16200
737 Urethroscopy 3500 3500 2040 3500
738 Operations for Injury to Urethra 24000 24000 13600 24000
739 Internal urethrotomy 8000 8000 6670 8000
740 Urethral Reconstruction 16900 169 00 15300 16900
741 Operation for Congenital Valves of Urethra 9050 9050 7650 9050
742 Operations for Incontinence of Urine - Male 14200 14200 10200 14200
743 Operations for Incontinence of Urine - Female 14200 14200 10200 14200
744 Reduction of Paraphimosis 1700 1700 1700 1700
745 Circumcision 2950 2950 1700 2950
746 Meatotomy 1700 1700 1700 1700
747 Meatoplasty 2500 2500 2500 2500

183
1 2 345 6
748 Operations for Hypospadias - Chordee Correction 9100 9100 8500 9100
749 Operations for Hypospadias - Second Stage or 18000 18000 15300 18000
One Stage Repair
750 Operations for Epispadias 9696 9696 9696 9696
751 Partial Amputation of the Penis 7800 7800 6800 7800
752 Total amputation of t he Penis 12000 12000 12000 12000
753 Orchidectomy 8500 8500 7650 8500
754 Epididymectomy 8500 8500 7650 8500
755 Adreneclectomy Unilateral/Bilateral for Tumour/ 20400 13500 20400 20400
For Carcinoma
756 Operations for Hydrocele - Unilateral 4250 4250 4250 4250
757 Operations for Hydrocele - Bilateral 6200 6200 6200 6200
758 V asectomy (Should be ree for Family Welfare) Free Free Free Free
759 Operation for Torsion of Testis 8500 8500 7650 8500
760 V asovasostomy 1 1700 11700 9350 1 1700
761 Operations for Varicocele 7300 7300 7300 7300
762 Block Dissection of Inguinal Nodes - One Side 16200 16200 1 1900 1 6200
763 Block issection of Inguinal Nodes - Both Sides 20200 202 00 17000 20200
764 Excision of Filarial Scrotum 10400 10400 10400 10400
765 Emergency Dialysis Femoral Puncture 810 810 810 810
766 Emergency Dialysis Subclavian Puncture 1010 1010 1000 1010
767 Fistula/Shunt 4040 4040 4040 4040
768 Dialysis Femoral Catheterisation Bilateral 1000 1000 1000 1000
769 Haemo Dialysis 960 960 960 960
770 Double Lumen Sub Clavian Catheter 1400 1400 1400 1400
771 Continuous Arterio V enus Dialysi s (CA VD) 12200 12200 1500 12200
772 Subclavian Access 1300 1300 1275 1300
773 Femoral Access 900 900 900 900
774 Plasma Exchange 1616 1200 1020 1616
775 Donor Nephrectomy 45000 25200 17000 45000
776 Renal Transplantation 148000 148000 1 14750 148000
777 Ureteric Reimplant 10908 1 1475 3500 19320

184
1 2 345 6
778 Lymphocoel 12000 12000 1 1050 1 2000
779 Transplant Nephrectomy 16000 17000 17000 17000
780 Bilateral Nephrouretectomy (Native) 15500 17000 15700 17000
781 V ascular Prosthetic Graft 20000 200 00 13000 20000
782 CAPD 6000 6000 6000 6000
783 PCNL - Unilateral 16160 16160 16160 16160
784 PCNL - Bilateral 24300 24300 24300 24300
785 Palomo’s Unilateral 4850 4850 4850 4850
786 Palomo’s Bilateral 7272 9700 9700 9700
787 Endoscopic Tenon Inject 4000 4000 4000 4000
788 Testicular Biopsy 3000 3000 2800 3000
789 Gil-Verner’s Extended Pyelolithotomy 14400 14400 14400 14400
790 Nephrectomy Complicated Tumour or Adhesions 16160 16160 16160 16160
791 Anderson Hynes pyeloroplasty 13000 13000 13000 13000
792 V asico V aginal Fistula Repair 13000 13000 13000 13000
793 Radical Cystectomy 19400 19400 19400 19400
794 Caeco Cystoplasty 10000 10000 10000 10000
795 Nepbrectomy Simple 12000 12000 12000 12000
796 Nepbrostomy 7300 7300 7300 7300
797 Ureteric Reimplant 7300 7300 7300 7300
798 Partial Cystectomy 10000 10000 10000 10000
799 TURP and TUR Bladder Tumour 16160 16160 16160 16160
800 TURP Cystolithotripsy 15600 15600 15600 15600
801 Open Prostatectomy 16000 16000 14500 16000
802 Closure of Urethral Fistula 8100 8100 8100 8100
803 Orchidopexy - Unilateral 7150 7150 7150 7150
804 Orchidopexy - Bilateral 8880 8900 8500 8900
805 CystoJithotomy - Suprapubic 7950 7950 7950 7950
806 Endoscopic Removal of Stone in Bladder 2500 2500 2500 2500
807 Resection Bladder Neck Endoscopic 8450 8450 8450 8450
808 Ureteroscopic Removal 10504 10550 10550 10550

185
1 2 345 6
809 Cystoscopic Basketing of Urethra 8100 8100 8100 8100
810 Urethroplasty 1st Stage 8100 8100 8100 8100
811 Optical Urethrotomy 7800 7800 7800 7800
812 Exploratory Scrototomy 6200 6200 6200 6200
813 Perineal Urethrostomy 4900 4900 4900 4900
814 Dilatation of Stricture Urethra under G.A. 2050 2050 1500 2050
815 Dilatation of Stricture Urethra without Anesthesia 1500 1500 1000 1500
816 Retroperitoneoscopy Nephrectomy 20500 22500 28000 28000
817 Retroperitoneoscopy partial Nephrectomy 21480 22500 27300 27300
818 Retroperitoneoscopic nephrolithotomy 25400 22500 25400 25400
819 Retroperitoneoscopic pyelolithotomy 20220 22500 25200 25200
820 Retroperitoneoscopic operation for 22000 22500 25000 25000
Hyderonephrosis
821 Retroperitoneoscopic surgery for Renal cyst 19700 19700 19700 19700
822 Retroperitoneoscopic ureterolithotomy 20000 20500 23900 23900
823 Retroperitoneoscopic Nephroureteroectomy 20500 22500 27000 27000
824 Laproscopy aassisted orchidopexy 17050 17500 15000 17500
825 Laproscopic operation for varicocele 12600 14500 14500 14500
826 Lithotripsy 18000 18000 18000 18000
Plastic Surgery
827 Primary Suture of Wound 2600 2600 1175 2600
828 Injection of Keloids - Ganglion 2000 2000 1770 2000
829 Injection of Keloids  - Haemangioma 4100 4100 4100 4100
830 Free Grafts - Wolfe Grafts 5200 5200 5200 5200
831 Free Grafts - Theirecb- Small Area 5% 5700 5700 5700 5700
832 Free Grafts - Large Area 10% 6700 6700 6700 6700
833 Free Grafts - Very Large Area 20% 8300 8300 8300 8300
834 Skin Flaps - Rotation Flaps 7000 7000 6800 7000
835 Skin Flaps - Advancement Flaps 9500 9500 8160 9500
836 Skin Flaps - Dired - cross Leg Flaps- Cross 10400 10400 10400 10400
Arm Flap
837 Skin Flaps - Cr oss Finger 10400 10400 4250 10400

186
1 2 345 6
838 Skin Flaps - Abdominal 10400 10400 4250 10400
839 Skin Flaps - Thoracic 10400 10400 4250 10400
840 Skin Flaps - Arm Etc. 12000 12000 4250 12000
841 Subcutaneous Pedicle Flaps Raising 5200 5200 5200 5200
842 Subcutaneous Pedicle Flaps Delay 5700 5700 5700 5700
843 Subcutaneous Pedicle Flaps Transfer 6500 6500 6500 6500
844 Cartilage Grafting 6500 6500 6500 6500
845 Reduction of Facial Fractures of Nose 7450 8000 4250 8000
846 Reduction of Facial Fracture s of Maxilla 10000 10000 10000 10000
847 Reduction of Fractures of Mandible and Maxilla- 5700 5700 5700 5700
Eye Let Splinting
848 Reduction of Fractures of Mandible and Maxilla- 5200 5200 5200 5200
Cast Netal Splints
849 Reduction of Fractures of Mandible and Maxilla- 6000 6000 6000 6000
Gumming Splints
850 Internal Wire Fixation of Mandible and Maxilla 9100 9100 9100 9100
851 Cleft Lip - repair 9700 9700 9700 9700
852 Cleft Palate Repair Severe Degree 9700 9700 9700 9700
853 Primary Bone Grafting of Cleft Lip Palate 8500 8500 8500 8500
854 Secondary Surgery for Cleft Lip Deformity 8100 8100 8100 8100
855 Secondary Surgery for Cleft Palate 9450 10000 10000 10000
856 Reconstruction of Eyelid Defects - Minor 5333 5900 5900 5900
857 Reconstruction of Eyelid .Defects - Major 7999 8100 8100 8100
858 Plastic Surgery of Different Regions of the Ear- 5333 5900 5900 5900
Minor
859 Plastic Surgery of Different Regions of the Ear- 7999 8100 8100 8100
Major
860 Plastic Surgery of the Nose - Minor 5333 5900 5900 5900
861 Plastic Surgery of the Nose - Major 7999 8100 8100 8100
862 Plastic Surgery for Facial Paralysis (Support 15100 15100 13500 15100
with Reanimation)
863 Pendulous Breast - Mammoplasty 15100 15100 13900 15100
864 Underdeveloped Breast Mammoplasty 13300 J3300 12140 1 3300

187
1 2 345 6
865 After Mastectomy (Reconstruction) Mammoplasty 13300 13300 13300 13300
866 Syndactyly Repair 13300 13300 10100 13300
867 Dermabrasion Face 10700 10700 7450 10700
Orthopaedic Surgery Procedure
868 Application of P.O.P Casts for Upper and Lower 850 850 750 850
Limbs
869 Application of Functional Cast Brace 1150 1150 1090 1150
870 Application of Skin Traction 800 800 750 800
871 Application of Skeletal Tractions 1500 1500 1500 1500
872 Bandage and Strappings for Fractures 400 400 400 400
873 Aspiration and Intra Articular Injections 500 500 500 500
874 Application of P.O.P  Spices and Jackets 2450 2450 2450 2450
875 Close Reduction of Fractures of Limb and P.O.P 2000 2000 2000 2000
876 Reduction of Compound Fractures 2000 2000 2000 2000
877 Open Reduction and Internal Fixation of Fingurs 4000 4000 4000 4000
and Toes
878 Open Reduction offracture of Long Bones of 7000 7000 7000 7000
Upper and Lower Limb - Nailing and External
Fixation
879 Open Reduction of fracture of Long Bones of 7000 7000 7000 7000
Upper and Lower Limb-AO Prores
880 Tension Band Wirings 4100 4100 4100 4100
881 Bone Grafting 6000 6000 6000 6000
882 Excision of Bone Tumours - Superficial 8000 8000 8000 8000
883 Excision of Bone Tumours - Deep 12000 12000 12000 12000
884 Excision or other Operations for Scaphoid 5000 5000 5000 5000
Fractures.
885 Sequestrectomy and Saucerisation - Superficial 5000 5000 5000 5000
886 Sequestrectomy and Saucerizations - Deep 7000 7000 7000 7000
887 Sequestrectomy and Saucerizations - Arthrotomy 8000 8000 8000 8000
888 S.P. Nailing for Fracture Neck Femur 9000 9000 9000 9000
889 Multiple Pinning Fracture Neck Femur 10000 10000 10000 10000
890 Nail Plate Fixations for Fracture Neck Femur 12000 12000 12000 12000

188
1 2 345 6
891 A.O. Compression Procedures for Fracture Neck 12000 12000 12000 12000
Femur
892 Open Reduction of Fracture Neck Femur Muscle 15000 15000 15000 15000
Pedicle Graft and Internal Fixations
893 Close Reduction of Dislocations 2300 2300 2300 2300
894 Open Reduction of Dislocations - Superficial 4660 4660 4660 4660
895 Open Reduction of Dislocations - Deep 15400 15400 13300 15400
896 Open Reduction of Fracture Dislocation and 10000 10000 10000 10000
Internal Fixation
897 Neurolysis/Nerve Suture 10100 10100 10000 10100
898 Nerve Repair with Grafting 15000 15000 14250 15000
899 Tendon with Transplant or Graft 8000 8000 8000 8000
900 Tendon Lengthening/Tendon Sutures 6000 6000 6000 6000
901 Tendon Transfer 8000 8000 8000 8000
902 Laminectomy, Excision Disc and T umours 15000 15000 15000 15000
903 Spinal Ostectomy and Internal Fixations 20000 20000 20000 20000
904 Anterolateral Clearance for tuberculosis 18000 18000 17600 18000
905 Antereolateral Decompression and Spinal Fusion 20000 20000 20000 20000
906 Costo Transversectomy 15000 150 00 15000 15000
907 Corrective Osteotomy and Internal Fixation-Minor 10000 10000 10000 10000
908 Corrective Osteotomy and Internal Fixation-Major 8000 8000 8000 8000
909 Arthrodisis of - Minor Joints 8000 8000 6500 8000
910 Arthrodisis of - Major Joints 8000 8000 8000 8000
911 Soft Tissue Operations for C.T.E.V. 6000 6000 6000 6000
912 Soft Tissue Operations for Polio 5000 5000 5000 5000
913 Partial Hip Replacement 14000 14000 14000 14000
914 Operations for Brachial Plexus and Cervical Rib 19800 19800 19800 19800
915 Amputations - Below Knee 5000 5000 5000 5000
916 Amputations - Below Elbow 5000 5000 5000 5000
917 Amputations - Above Knee 8000 8000 8000 8000
918 Amputations - Above Elbow 8000 8000 8000 8000
919 Amputations - Forequarter 12000 12000 12000 12000

189
1 2 345 6
920 Amputations - Hind Quarter and Hemipelvectomy 15000 15000 15000 15000
921 Disarticulations - Maj or 16500 16500 14250 16500
922 Disarticulations - Minor 10100 10100 10100 10100
923 Arthrography and Osteomedullograpby 7150 7150 5000 7150
924 Arthroscopy - Diagnostic 7450 7450 6800 7450
925 Arthroscopy - Operative 12000 12000 12000 12000
926 Soft Tissue Operation on Knee 12000 12000 12000 12000
927 Myocutaneous and Fasciocutaneous Flat 15000 15000 15000 15000
Procedures for Limbs
928 Removal of Nails, Wires and Screw 4600 4600 4500 4600
929 Removal of Plates 3000 3000 3000 3000
930 Total Hip Replacement 85000 75000 68000 90000
931 Total Ankle Joint Replacement 121000 1 10000 130000 130000
932 Total Knee Joint Replacement 100000 100000 910 00 110000
933 Total Shoulder Joint Replacement 95000 100000 100000 100000
934 Total Elbow Joint Replacement 95000 89100 100000 100000
935 Total Wrist Joint Replacement 92500 89000 100000 100000
Neuro Surgery
936 Craniotomy and Evacuation of Haematoma- 40000 31500 40000 40000
Subdural
937 Craniotomy and Evacuation of Haematoma- 40000 35280 40000 40000
Extradural
938 Evacuation of Brain Abscess 37000 36540 40000 40000
939 Excision of Lobe (Frontal, Temporal, 37000 40000 40000 40000
Cerebelium etc.)
940 Excision of Brain Tumours - Supratentotial 40000 40000 40000 40000.
941 Excision of Brain Tumours - Subtentorial 37500 40000 40000 40000
942 Surgery-of Cord Tumours 37500 40000 40000 40000
943 V entriculoatrial/Ventriculoperitoneal  Shunt 20000 20000 20000 20000
944 Excision of Cervical Inter - Vertebral Discs 24000 240 00 24000 24000
945 Sympathetectomy - Lumbar 11400 11400 11400 11400
946 Sympathetectomy - Cervical 2500 2500 2500 2500
947 Twist Drill Craniostomy 20000 16240 1 1400 2 0000

190
1 2 345 6
948 Subdural Tapping 1780 1780 1780 1780
949 V entricular Tapping 2150 2150 2150 2150
950 Abscess Tapping 2150 2150 2150 2150
951 Placement of ICP Monitor 2000 2000 2000 2000
952 Urokinase Therepy for ICH. 1000 1000 1000 1000
953 Skull Traction Application 2700 3500 3500 3500
954 Lumber Pressure Monitoring 4900 4900 3400 4900
955 V ascular Malformations 17800 17800 17800 17800
956 Peritoneal Shunt 9700 9700 9700 9700
957 Atrial Shunt 9700 9700 9700 9700
958 Meningo Encepbalocoel 32000 26082 17600 32000
959 Meningomyelocoel 32000 30240 20400 32000
960 C.S.F. Rhinorrhaea 32000 32000 27200 32000
961 Cranioplasty 19400 19400 19400 19400
962 Posterior Cervical Dissectomy 16160 16160 16160 16160
963 Anterior Cervical Dissectomy 16160 16160 16160 16160
964 Brachial Plexus Exploration Microsuturing 11400 11400 11400 11400
965 Median Nerve Decompression 9600 1 1000 11000 11000
966 Peripheral Neurectomy (Trigeminal) 9900 1 1000 11000 11000
967 Trigeminal Rhiotomy 11400 11400 11400 11400
968 Cranial Nerve Anastomosis 8800 8800 8800 .8800
969 Meningocoele Excision 10000 10000 10000 10000
970 Peripheral Nerve Surgery - Major 14000 14000 14000 14000
971 Peripheral Nerve Surgery - Minor 5333 6000 6000 6000
972 V entriculo-Atrial Shunt (Exclud. Cost of valve) 9700 9700 9700 9700
973 Nerve Biopsy 5500 5500 4250 5500
974 Brain Biopsy 6868 16968 1 1900
975 Anterior Cervical Spine Surgery with fusion 24300 24300 24300 24300
976 Anterior Lateral Decompression 21600 21600 21600 21600
977 Brain Mapping 2900 2900 2900 2900
978 Cervical or Dorsal Laminectomy 18600 18600 18600 18600

191
1 2 345 6
979 Combined Trans-oral Surgery and CV Junction 34200 34200 34200 34200
Fusion
980 C.V . Junction Fusion 24300 243 00 24300 24300
981 Depressed Fracture 22700 22700 22700 22700
982 Discectomy 21600 21600 21600 21600
983 Endarterectomy 16700 16700 16700 16700
984 R.F. Lesion for Trigeminal Neuralgia 20000 4848 8150 20000
985 Spasticity Surgery - 31200 31200 31200 31200
986 Spinal Fusion Procedure 25300 25300 25300 25300
987 Spinal Intra Medullary Tumours 24200 25300 25300 25300
988 Spinal Bifida Surgery Major 13900 139 00 13900 13900
989 Spina Bifida Surgery Minor 13900 13900 13900 13900
990 Stereotaxic Procedures 17000 17000 17000 17000
991 Trans Sphenoidal Surgery 22000 31000 31000 31000
992 Trans Oral Surgery 30000 30000 30000 30000
993 Trans Cranial Doppler 2500 2500 2500 2500
V asculur Surgery
994 Patch Graft Angioplasty 18500 20250 20300 20300
995 Femoropopliteal by pass procedure 24300 24300 24300 24300
 996 Thrombendarterectomy 20300 20300 20300 20300
997 Surgery for Arterial Aneursysm - Distal 28000 28000 28000 28000
Abdominal Aorta
998 Surgery for Arterial Aneursysm - Upper 32400 30000 30600 32400
Abdominal Aorta
999 Surgery for Arterial Aneursysm - V ertebral 33500 30000 28900 35000
1000 Intrathoracic Aneurysm - Aneurysm not 27000 28000 25500 28000
Requiring Bypass Techniques
1001 Intrathoracic Aneurysm - Requiring Bypass 32000 32500 32500 32500
Techniques
1002 Dissecting Aneurysms 31500 35000 28900 35000
1003 S tripping of Short or Long Sephenous V eins 10500 12200 1 1390 11200
1004 Ligation of Ankle Perforators 14000 13500 9350 15600
1005 Excision and Skin Graft of V enous Ulcer 12000 12500 1 1050 1 2500

192
1 2 345 6
1006 V enous Thrombectomy 18000 19000 1 1050 1 9000
l007 L ymphatics Excision of Subcutaneous Tissues 19400 19400 1 1900 1 9400
in Lymphoedema
1008 V ascular Procedure - Major 50000 27750 28900 50000
1009 V ascular Procedure - Minor 25450 18000 20400 26462
1010 Sur gery for Arterial Aneurysm Spleen Artery 20000 20000 20000 20000
1011 Surgery for Arterial Aneurysm Renal Artery 20000 20000 20000 20000
1012 Sur gery for Arterial Aneurysm Carotid 22000 22000 2250 22000
1013 Sur gery for Arterial Aneurysm Main Arteries of 20000 20000 20000 20000
the Limb
1014 Operations for Acquired Arteriovenous Fistual 23000 23000. 23000 23000
1015 Congenital Arterio Venous Fistula 20000 18938 20000 20000
1016 Operations for Stenosis of Renal Arteries 20200 20200 20200 20100
1017 Trendelenburg Operations 10300 8400 10300 10300
Paediatric Surgery
1018 Excision of thyroglossal Duct/Cyst 10500 12700 8500 12700
1019 Diaphragmatic Hernia Repair (Thoracic or 12600 12600 12600 12600
Abdominal Approach)
1020 Tracheo Oesophageal Fistula (Correction Surgery) 20150 20150 17000 20150
1021 Colon Replacement of Oesopbagus 18880 18880 18880 18880
1022 Ompbalo Mesenteric Cyst Excision 13900 13900 12240 13900
1023 Omphalo Mesenteric Duct - Excision 12650 12650 12240 12650
1024 Meckels Diverticulectomy 12650 12650 1 1050 1 2650
1025 Ompbalocele 1st Stage (Hernia Repair) 11350 11350 11050 11350
1026 Omphalocele 2nd Stge (Hernia Repair) 12650 12650 1 1050 1 2650
1027 Gastrocbisis Repair 12650 12650 1 1900 1 2650
1028 Inguinal Herniotomy 9100 9100 9100 9100
1029 Congenital Hydrocele 9100 9100 6800 9100
1030 Hydrocele of Cord 9100 9100 6800 9100
1031 T orsion T estis Operation 11475 11700 10200 11700
1032 Congenital Pyloric Stenosis - operation 10100 10100 10100 10100
1033 Duodenal - Atresia Operation 11350 11350 11350 11350

193
1 2 345 6
1034 Pancreatic Ring Operation 23500 23500 15800 23500
1035 Meconium Ileus Operation 13000 13000 13000 13000
1036 Malrotation of Intestines Operation 13900 13900 13900 13900
1037 Rectal Biopsy (Megacolon) 10000 3030 2100 10000
1038 Colostomy Transverse 13000 13000 9350 13000
1039 Colostomy Left Iliac 13000 13000 9350 13000
1040 Abdominal Perineal Pull Through (Hirschaprugis 16200 16200 12700 16200
Disease)
1041 Imperforate Anus Low Anomaly - Cut Back 7800 7800 7800 7800
Operation
1042 Imperforate Anus Low Anomaly - Perineal 9696 10400 10200 10400
Anoplasty
1043 Inperforate Anus High Anomaly - Sacroabdomino 16200 16200 12750 16200
Perineal Pull Through
1044 Inperforate Anus High Anomaly - Closure of 6500 6500 6500 6500
Colostomy
1045 Intususception Operation 13840 13840 13840 15600
1046 Choledochoduodenostomy for Atresia of Extra 16200 16200 15300 16200
Hepatic Billiary Duct
1047 Operation of Choledochal Cyst 16200 16200 15300 16200
1048 Nephrectomy for - Pyonephrosis 16200 16200 15300 16200
1049 Nephrectomy for - Hydronephrosis 16200 16200 15300 16200
1050 Nephrectomy for - Wilms Tumour 16200 16200 15300 16200
1051 Paraortic Lymphadenoctomy with Nephrectomy 18800 18800 18700 18800
for Wilms Tumour
1052 Sacro - Coccygeal Teratoma Excision 13900 13900 13900 13900
1053 Neuroblastoma Debulking 13900 13900 13900 13900
1054 Neuroblastoma Total Excision 16200 16200 16200 16200
1055 Rhabdomyosarcoma wide Excision 18800 18800 18800 18800
Gynae, Operation Charges
1056 Abdominal Hysterectomy 13000 13000 13000 13000
1057 V agioal Hysterectomy 13000 13000 13000 13000
1058 Myomectomy 1 1400 11400 11400 1 3000
1059 V aginoplasty 12700 12700 12700 12700

194
1 2 345 6
1060 Laparotomy (Ectopic Pregnancy) 11400 11400 11400 11400
1061 V ulvectomy (Simple/Radical) 16200 16200 13500 16200
1062 RVF Repair 16200 16200 16000 16200
1063 Other Major Operations 16000 16000 13600 16000
1064 Manche ster Operations 13000 13000 1 1400 1 3000
1065 Perineorrhaphy 1 1400 11400 8500 1 1400
1066 Colporraphy 1 1400 11400 8840 1 1400
1067 M odified Gilliam 10000 10000 10000 10000
1068 Shirodkar’s Operation 7500 7500 7500 7500
1069 Diagnostic Curettage 1800 1800 1800 1800
1070 Fractional Curettage 2000 2000 2000 2000
1071 D and C and Cervical Biopsy 2300 2300 2300 2300
1072 Polypectomy 1100 1100 1100 1100
1073 Other-Minor Operation 2600 2600 2600 2600
1074 Excision Vaginal Cyst/Burtholin Cyst 2600 2600 2600 2600
1075 Excision Vaginal Septum 3500 3500 3500 3500
1076 Laparoscopy Diagnostic 4040 4040 4040 4040
1077 Laparoscopy Sterilisation 4300 4300 4300 4300
1078 Laparoscopy Operative 9875 12000 12000 12000
1079 Laparoscopy LAVH 18800 22000 15000 22000
1080 Drilling of Overy 9000 1 1700 11700 11700
1081 Myomectomy 13000 10500 13000 1 1400
1082 Ectopic pregnancy 13400 13400 13400 13400
1083 Hysteroscopy ICRE 7852 1 1500 7200 12400
1084 Hysteroscopy Removal of IUCD 3350 5250 4500 6500
1085 Hysteroscopy Removal of Septum 6750 8250 8000 8250
1086 Hysteroscopy Diagnostic 5700 5700 3000 5700
1087 W erthimas Hystrectomy for Cancer cervix 21000 21000 21000 21000
1088 Sterilisation Post Pertum 3000 3000 3000 3000
1089 Sterilisation Intravaginal 2900 2900 2900 2900
1090 Abortion - D and C 3000 3000 3000 3000

195
1 2 345 6
1091 Abortion - Evacuation 2200 2200 2200 2200
1092 MTP - 1st Trimester 2200 2200 2200 2200
1093 MTP - 2nd Trimester 3500 3500 3500 3500
Laproscopic Operations in Gen. Surgery/Gastrohepatic/Nephro
1094 Laproscopic Pyloromyotomy 14100 16000 16000 16000
1095 Laproscopic Gastrostomy 15200 15200 15150 15200
1096 Laproscopic Closure of Perforated peptic ulcer 19800 199 00 19900 19900
1097 Laproscopic Vagotomy Pyleroplasty/gastro 18000 21000 23600 23600
jejunostomy
1098 Laproscopic umbilical hernia repair 16084 21000 16900 24600
1099 Laproscopic ventral hernia repair 21000 21000 18800 22400
1100 Laproscopic cystogastrostomy 20500 20500 20500 20500
1101 Lap. Cholecystectomy and CBD exploration 21500 22000 23100 23100
1102 Lap. Hydatid of liver surgery 17050 21000 24000 24000
1103 Lap. Hepatic resection 25000 22000 25000 25000
1104 Lap. Assisted small bowel resection 18000 15000 20250 20250
1105 Lap. For intestinal obstruction 19300 20000 20800 20800
1106 Lap. For intestinal perforation 19300 20800 20800 20800
1107 Lap. Assisted Right Hemicolectomy 20500 22000 23200 23200
1108 Lap. Assisted left Hemicole ctomy 20500 22000 23200 23200
1109 Lap. Assisted Total Colectomy 25000 22000 25000 25000
1110 Laproscopic Rectopexy 21000 19500 24000 24000
1111 Lap. Asisted Abdominoperineal Resection of 25000 25000 25000 25000
rectum
1112 Lap. Assisted anterior resection 20500 22500 25000 25000
1113 Laproscopic Cholecystectomy 16400 12500 16400 16400
1114 Laproscopic Appendicectomy 13200 12500 16500 16500
1115 Laaproscopic Hernia Repair 16500 12500 20100 20100
1116 Laproscopic Hiatus Hernia Repair 19300 12500 20500 20500
1117 Laproscopic Adrenalectomy 16800 12500 16800 16800
1118 Laproscopic Thyroidectomy 24400 12500 24400 24400
1119 Laproscopic Spleenectomy 20500 12500 24000 24000

196
1 2 345 6
1120 Laproscopic Colectomy 25000 125 00 24000 25000
1121 Laproscopic donor Nephroctomy 20500 15000 25000 25000
1122 Infrared coagulation in Haemeroohoids 6600 4500 5000 6600
1123 Laproscopic Pyelolithotomy 20300 15000 20300 20300
1124 Laproscopic ureterolithotomy 17080 150 00 17080 17080
Specialised Procedures/Investigations
1125 Cat Scan (C.T.) Head/Brain - without contrast 900 900 900 900
1126 Cat Scan (C.T.) Head/Brain - with contrast 1400 1400 1400 1400
1127 C.T. Head Scan Involv. Spl. Investigation - 1400 1400 1400 1400
without contrast
1128 C.T. Head Involv. Spl. Investigation - with 1900 1900 1900 1900
contrast
1129 C. T. Chest (HRCT) - without contrast 1500 1700 1700 1700
1130 C.T. Chest (HRCT) - with contrast 2140 2140 2140 2140
1131 C.T. Spine (Cervical, Dorsal, Lumbar, Sacral)- 1440 1440 1440 1440
without contrast
1132 C.T. Spine (Cervical, Dorsal, Lumbar, Sacral)- 2300 2300 2300 2300
with contrast
1133 C.T. Cervical C.T. 3D Reconstruction only - 2945 2945 1870 2945
1134 C.T. Guided Biopsy 1000 1000 1000 1000
1135 CT. Gnidedpercutaneous cath drainage 1200 1200 1200 1200
1136 C.T. Myelogram (Cervical Spine) - without 1500 1800 1800 1800
contrast
1137 C.T. Myelogram (Cervical Spine) - with contrast 2500 2558 2558 2558
1138 C.T. Myelogram (Lumbar Spine or  D/S) - 1500 2000 2000 2000
Without contrast
1139 C.T. Myelogram (Lumbar Spine or D/S) - 1930 2558 2400 2558
with contrast
1140 C.T. Scan Chest - without contrast 1400 1400 1400 1400
1141 C.T. Scan Chest - with contrast 2325 2325 2325 2325
1142 C.T. Scan Upper Abomen - Without contrast 1300 1300 1300 1300
1143 C.T. Scan Upper Abdomen - with contrast 2092 2092 2092 2092
1144 C.T. Scan Lower Abdomen - without contrast 1500 1680 1680 1680
1145 C.T. Scan Lower Abdomen - with contrast 2092 2092 2092 2092

197
1 2 345 6
1146 C.T. Scan Whole Abdomen - without contrast 2092 2092 2092 2092
1147 C.T. Scan Whole Abdomen - with contrast 3400 3400 3200 3400
1148 C.T. Scan Neck (Thyroid Soft Tissue) - without 1500 1560 1560 1560
contrast
1149 C.T. Scan Neck (Thyroid Soft Tissue) - with 1940 1940 1940 1940
contrast
1150 C.T. Scan Orbits - without contrast 1200 1200 1200 1200
1151 C.T. Scan Orbits - with contract 1350 1750 1750 1750
1152 C.T. Scan Limbs - without contrast 1400 1700 1700 1700
1153 C.T. Scan Limbs - with contrast 1900 2300 2300 2300
1154 C.T. Scan Whole Body - without contrast 6700 6000 3400 6700
1155 C.T. Scan Whole Body - with contrast 9000 7000 5100 9000
1156 C.T. Scan of Para Nasal Sinus - without contrast 1500 1520 1520 1520
1157 C.T. Scan of Para Nasal Sinus - with constrast 1860 1860 1860 1860
MRI
1158 MRI Head - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1159 MRI Head - with contrast 3500 3500 3500 3500
1160 MRI Orbits - without contrast 1700 1700 1700 1700
1161 MRI Orbits - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1162 MRI Nasopharynx and PNS - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1163 MRI Nasopharynx and PNS - with constrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1164 MRI Neck - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1165 MRI Neck - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1166 MRI Shoulder - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1167 MRI Shoulder - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1168 MRI Shoulder both Joint- without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1169 MRI Shoulder both Joint - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1170 MRI Wrist Single Joint - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1171 MRI Wrist Single Joint - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1172 MRI Wrist both Joint - without contrast 1000 1000 1000 1000
1173 MRI Wrist both Joint - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1174 MRI Knee - Single Joint - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500

198
1 2 345 6
1175 MRI Knee Single Joint - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1176 MRI Knee both Joint - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1177 MRI Knee both Joint - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1178 MRI Ankle Single - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1179 MRI Ankle Single - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1180 MRI Ankle Both - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1181 MRI Ankle Both - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1182 MRI Hip - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1183 MRI Hip - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1184 MRI Pelvis - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1185 MRI Pelvis - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1186 MRI Extremities - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1187 MRI Extremities - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1188 MRI Temporomandibular Single Joint - without 2500 2500 2500 2500
contrast
1189 MRI Temporomandibular Single Joint - with 5000 5000 5000 5000
contrast
1190 MRI Temporomandibular Double Joints - without 2500 2500 2500 2500
contrast
1191 MRI Temporomandibular Double Joints - with 5000 5000 5000 5000
contrast
1192 MRI Abdomen  - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1193 MRI Abdomen  - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1194 MRI Breast - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1195 MRI Breast - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1196 MRI Spine Screening - without contrast 1000 1000 1000 1000
1197 MRI Spine Screening - with contrast 4000 4000 4000 4000
1198 MRI Chest - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1199 MRI Chest - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1200 MRI C ervical Spine - without contrast 1000 1000 1000 1000
1201 MRI Cervical Spine - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1202 MRI Lumber Spine - without contrast 2500 2500 2500 2500
1203 MRI Lumber Spine - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000

199
1 2 345 6
1204 MRI S creening - without contrast 1000 1000 1000 1000
1205 MRI Screening - with contrast 4000 4000 4000 4000
1206 MRI Angiography - without contrast 1200 1200 1200 1200
1207 MRI Angiography - with contrast 5000 5000 5000 5000
1208 Mammography (Single side) 450 450 450 450
1209 Mammography (Both sides) 540 540 540 540
1210 Bone Densitometry Single site 800 800 800 800
1211 Bone Densitometry Two sites 1000 1000 1000 1000
1212 Bone Densitometry Three sites (Spine, Hip and 2000 2000 2000 2000
one extremity)
1213 Bone Densitometry Whole body 1600 1650 1650 1650
1214 2 D Echo with colour Doppler 1100 1100 700 1100
1215 Trans Oesophaedral Echo (TEE) 1000 1300 805 1300
1216 Hol ter Analysis 800 800 800 800
1217 Fluoroscopic Screening 120 120 120 120
1218 Holter Report (with Prd. Specification) 770 1200 1200 1200
1219 T est of Pacemaker 485 485 485 485
1220 Oxygen Saturation 250 250 170
1221 Cardiac Cath Angiography  (W/o Coronary Angio) 10950 1 1350 11350 11350
1222 Aortogram 3250 3250 3250 3250
1223 Pulmonary function test 300 430 250 430
1224 T est for Pacemaker 325 325 325 325
1225 Package charges for Cardiovascular investigation 570 500 340 570
1226 Fibroptic Bronchoscopy with Washing/Biopsy 2300 2300 2000 2300
1227 Uroflow Study (Micturometry) 400 400 340 400
1228 Urodynamic Study (Cystometry) 400 400 400 400
1229 Cystoscopy with Retrograde Catheter - Unilateral 3300 3300 3000 3300
1230 Cystoscopy with Retrograde Catheter - Bilateral 4050 4050 4050 4050
1231 Cystoscopy Diagnostic 1950 1950 1950 1950
1232 Cystoscopy with Bladder Biopsy 2450 2450 2100 2450
1233 V oiding-cysto-urethrogram 300 300 300 300
1234 Renal Transplant Evaluation 700 700 700 700

200
1 2 345 6
1235 Whole body scan 1616 1616 1616 1616
1236 Spect bone Scan 2200 2200 2200 2200
1237 Bone Marrow Scan 1500 1500 1500 1500
1238 Scan (Spect) 2404 2404 2404 2404
1239 Stress Thallium 3000 3000 3000 3000
1240 Muga (Resting) 2175 2200 1275 2200
1241 Muga (Stress) 2500 2800 1700 2800
1242 A.V . Fistula 4000 4000 3060 4000
1243 Coronary Angiography 10000 10000 10000 10000
Cobalt 60 Therapy
1244 Radical Treatment 20100 20100 20100 20100
1245 Palliative Treatment 10100 10100 10100 10100
1246 Adjustment Theapy 16150 16150 16150 16150
Linear Accelerators
1247 Radical Radiotherapy Linear 25240 25240 25240 25240
1248 Palliative Radiotherapy Linear 25000 25000 25000 25000
Brachy Therapy
1249 Intracavitary 1000 1000 1000 1000
Interestical (Implant)
1250 Head and Neck 8100 8100 8100 8100
1251 Breast 9700 9700 9700 9700
1252 Soft Tissue Sarcoma 12110 12110 12110 12110
Chemotherapy Charges
1253 Single Drug Therapy per day 400 400 400 400
1254 Multiple Drug Therapy per day 500 650 650 650
1255 Infusional Chemotherapy 500 750 750 750
The rates indicated above are for semi-private
ward category. There will be 15% increase in
package rates for treatment in private ward
and 10% decrease in package rates for treatment
in General ward. Rates for all other procedures
and investigations will be same for all categories.
Cost of implants will be extra, as per ceiling rates.

201
ANNEXURE-V
Dr. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI
(H.A.-I Section)
Subject:- Filling up of the posts for Expansion and Upgradation of the Existing and
Emergency Services at Dr. RML Hospital, New Delhi - Present status of the
posts-regarding.
(Vacancy status as on 22.05.2008)
Sl. Name of Post Scale of Pay (Rs.) No.of
No. post(s)
12 3 4
1. Chief Medical Officer 12000-16500 03
(Group-A)
2. Dresser 2610-3540 03
(Group-D) (By 100%
promotion)
3. Anesthetist 14300-18300 03
(Group-A)
Present status
5
Requested to  M/O H&FW to
nominate the officers, vide
hospital letter No.6-9/2003-
RMLH(HA-10/36 dated 1.1.2004
and last reminder letter No.6-9/
2001-RMLH(HA-I)/6066 dated
09.05.2007. However, DGHS has
taken up the matter for filling up
the said posts with  M/O and FW,
vide  their endorsement/letter
No.A.l1013/6/2001-MH dated Nil.
Already filled
Requested to MlO H&FW to
nominate the officers, vide
hospital letter No.6-9/2003-
RMLH(HA-10/36 dated 1.1.2004
and last reminder letter No.6-9/
2001-RMLH(HA-l)/6066 dated
9.05.2007. However, DGHS has.
taken up the matter for filling up
the said posts with  M/O and FW,
vide  their endorsement/letter
No.A.11013/6/2001-MH dated Nil.
One post has been filled up on
regular basis and one post on
contract basis.
201

202
Already filled
Already filled
Requested to M/O H&FW to
nominate the officers, vide
hospital letter No.6-9/2003-RMLH
(HA-10/36 dated 1.1.2004 and last
reminder letter No.6-9/2001-
RMLH (HA-I)/6066 dated
9.05.2007. However, DGHS has
taken up the matter for filling up
the said posts with M/O and FW,
vide  their  endorsement/letter
No.A.11013/6/2001-MH dated Nil.
Posts filled on Contract basis.
Presently, 17 Senior Residents are
in working. Under process for
filling up remaining vacancies
Already filled
Already filled
Already filled
(and one DNS and 7 ANS)*
Process for filling of this post is
on
Already filled.
Offer of Appointment has been
sent to the Selected Candidates,
Last date of acceptance of Offer
is 30th May, 2008.
Already filled
Process for filling of this post is
on.
4. Surgeon 14300-18300 02
(Group-A)
5. Ortho Surrreon 14300-18300 02
(Group-A)
6. Neuro Surgeon 14300-18300 02
(Group-A)
7. Senior Residents 10940-11650 20
8. Junior Residents 9400 25
9. Staff Nurse 5000-8000 75
(Group-C) (By 100% Direct
Recruitment) (47)*
10. Nursing Sister 5500-9000 05
(Group-C) (By promotion) (20)*
11. Technical Supervisor 6500-10500 01
(X-ray) (By promotion)
(Group-B)
12. Sr. Radiographer 5000-8000 02
(Group-C) (By promotion)
13. Radiographer 4500-7000 04
(Group-C) (By Direct
Recruitment)
14. Dark Room Assistant 3050-4590 06
(Group-C) (By Direct
Recruitment-2 and
By Promotion-4)
15. Technical Supervisor 6500-10500 01
(OT) (Group-B) (By promotion)
12 3 4 5

203
12 3 4 5
16. Sr. Theatre Technician 4500-7000 06
(Group-C) (By promotion)
17. O.T./Plaster Assistant 3050-4590 07
(Group-C) (Pro.-4 and DR-3)
18. Nursing/Theatre Orderly 2550-3200 10
(Group-D) (By Direct
Recruitment)
19. Physiotherapist 5500-9000 02
TOTAL 179
(174)*
5 posts has been filled by
promotion, remaining 1 post being
filled by DR, for which process
has been completed and offer is
being sent.
Already filled
Already filled
These posts are filled on contract
basis. The process for filling of
these posts on regu1ar basis
through SSC is on
* Position changed due to revision of posts approved by M/o H.F.W.

204
ANNEXURE-VI
Statement of PG Courses being conducted in PGIMER Dr. RML Hospital during the
Academic Session 2008-09
Course Title Intake Duration Entry level Whether Whether
Seats/ Qualification approved. If affiliated. If so,
year so, the body the affiliating
approving it authority
MD (Medicine) 6 3 yrs MBBS MCI DU/IP/AIQ
(2 each)
MD (Anaesthesia) 3 3 yrs MBBS MCI DU/IP/AIQ
(1 each)
MD (Radiodiagnosis) 2 3 yrs MBBS MCI DU
DCH (paediatrics) 1 2 yrs MBBS MCI DU
MD/Dip. (Dermatology) 3(2+1) 3/2 yrs MBBS MCI DU/AIQ/IP
(1 each)
Dip. (Opthalmology) 1 2 years MBBS MCI DU
MS/Dip. (ENT) 3(2+1) 3/2 yrs MBBS MCI IP/AIQ
MD (Pathology) 2 3 yrs MBBS MCI IP/AIQ
MD (Gynae and Obstet.) 2 3 yrs MBBS MCI IP/AIQ
MS (General Surgery) 2 3 yrs. MBBS MCI DU
MS (Orthopaedics) 1 3 yrs. MBBS MCl DU
Total Seats 26
Delhi University = 11
GGSIP University = 08 (7 PG + 1 PG Dip.)
All India Quota (AIO) = 07
204

205
205
ANNEXURE-VII
DETAILS OF PERKS AND OTHER F ACILITIES PROVIDED TO FACULTY
MEMBERS AT THE AIIMS, NEW DELHI
1. Housing Facility
The faculty members of the Institute have been categorized under essential category for
allotment of residential accommodation and accordingly; they are being allotted accommodation.
2. Salary
The pay scales of the faculty members of the AIIMS are as under:—
(i) Assistant Professor - Rs.11625-325-15200
(ii) Associate Professor - Rs.14300-400-18300
(iii) Additional Professor - Rs.16400-450-20900
(iv) Professor - Rs.18400-500-22400
– 25% of the sanctioned posts of Professor (sanctioned posts-110) will be placed in the
higher scale of Rs.22400-525-24500.
– The Non Practising Allowance is also being paid to the medical faculty @25% of basic
pay subject to basic pay + N.P.A. does not exceed Rs.29,500/-)
– Rs.2500/- per month is being paid to faculty members as Clinical Research Allowance.
– Two advance increments are being provided to the existing Additional Professors.
– All the faculty posts under reference above, carry usual allowances as admissible to
Central Government servants of similar status stationed in Delhi/New Delhi.
3. Conveyance Allowance
A sum of Rs.1650/- per month is being paid to the faculty members as Conveyance
Allowance.
4. Assessment Promotion Scheme
– 100% Assistant Professors who have completed 4 years of service as on 30th June
every year being promoted to the post of Associate Professor subject to their Fitness.
– 75% Additional Professors who have completed 4 years of service as on 30th June
every year being promoted to the post of Additional Professor subject to their Fitness.
– 50% Additional Professors who have completed 7 years of service as on 30th June
every year being promoted to the post of Professor subject to their Fitness.

206
5. Attendance of various Conferences/meetings etc. in each financial year
(i) Abroad
A maximum amounts of the tune of Rs.l,00,000/- is being granted to the faculty members
once in two years to the faculty members, subject to availability of funds, for attending
conference/Symposium/Workshop/meeting etc.
(ii) In India
Faculty members of the Institute were being permitted to attend two Conferences/
Meetings/Symposia/Workshop etc. in India/SAARC Countries with T A/DA The Registration Fee for
upto 3 Conferences. However, they are being permitted to attend 8 Conferences/Meetings/
Symposia/Workshop etc. on duty terms in each financial year. In addition to the above, they are
also being permitted to conduct examination, to deliver lectures in various institutions on duty
terms. 42 days duty leave is being granted to them for each financial year for the above purpose.
6. Learning Resource Allowance
A sum of Rs.20,000/- is being reimbursed to faculty members in each financial year for
purpose of books, journals, CDs, video films, floppies, colour films, mounting charges and
membership fee for national or international societies.
7. Newspaper Allowance
Newspaper allowance is being paid to the faculty members in accordance with their
entitlements as per orders of the Government of India.
8. Re-imbursement of Telephone Bills
The Director, Dean, Medical Superintendent, Chief of Centres and the Head of the
Departments are being allowed to reimburse the charge of telephone calls at par with the Central
Government Departments. All other faculty members are being allowed to reimburse the charges
of the telephone calls upto 1000 calls bi-monthly.

207
ANNEXURE-VIII
List of New schemes/Proposals for implementation during Eleventh Five Year Plan Period
(Rs in Lakhs)
I. Augmentation of Patient Care Facilities
Cardio Pulmonary Rehabilitation 150.00
Expansion of 24 hours Emergency facility 150.00
National Allergy, Asthma and Clinical Immunology Centre 2680.00
Clinical Pharmacology 620.00
Radio-diagnosis 860.00
Augmentation of diagnostic facilities 860.00
Running cost 1200.00
6520.00
II. Renovation/Infrastructure development
Clinical Research Centre (Viswanathan Chest Hospital) 900.00
Resident hostel for postgraduate (PG) students 500.00
1400.00
III. Augmentation of facilities of the Laboratories
V arious laboratories 3400.00
3400.00
IV. Implementation of Oversight Committee Report 3880.00
3880.00
V. Introduction of New Courses and Induction
of Junior/Senior Resident Students
University of Delhi
(a) DM (pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine) (Two)
(b) Diploma in Allergy and  Clinical Immunology (Two)
National Board of Examinations 500.00
(a) DNB (pathology) (Two)
(b) Fellowship in Bronchology (Two)
500.00
VI. Others
Animal House 100.00
100.00
G
RAND T OTAL 15800.00
207

208
I. Augmentation of Patient Care Facilities
Cardio Pulmonary Rehabilitation
This is a new Unit which has been approved by the Governing Body of this Institute and is to
be developed during Eleventh Plan to provide comprehensive medical rehabilitation to patients
suffering from chronic respiratory diseases. A medical doctor and a physiotherapist have already
been trained in Cardio Pulmonary rehabilitation from Canada and they have initiated the work.
Expansion of 24 hours Emergency Facility
The existing 24 hours respiratory emergency section requires expansion due to increase in load of
emergency patients attending the hospital. The existing services that are provided to the patients
are insufficient to provide state-of-the-art facilities. Additionally, life-saving equipments have to be
upgraded in this section.
National Allergy, Asthma AND Clinical Immunology Centre
V .P Chest Institute is a well known for its patient care and research activities in the field of Allergy
Asthma and Clinical Immunology in the last 50 years. As the specialty of Allergy and Immunology
has made tremendous advancement during the last decade, Governing Body has approved the
establishment of a National Allergy, Asthma and Clinical Immunology Centre with subsidiary units
located in various parts of the Country.
Clinical Pharmacology
This is a new unit which has been approved by the Governing Body of this Institute to study the
respiratory pharmacology in relation to patient management.
Radio-diagnosis
This is an expansion to the existing facilities, which require upgradation and replacement of
obsolete radio imaging equipment. In addition, the new equipment is also proposed to be added for
more advanced diagnostics facilities for patient care.
Augmentation of diagnostic facilities
Due to the increase in patient care and related increase in the diagnostic investigations, the existing
facilities are inadequate and require up gradation and replacement, which is essential for patient care
management.
Running cost
This forms an important component to maintain optimal patient care services along with
management of the various diagnostic facilities provided. It inter alia  includes annual maintenance
of equipment, consumables, chemicals and related materials, testing kits etc. as required for
efficient patient care.
II. Renovation/Infrastructure development
Clinical Research Centre (Renamed as Viswanathan Chest Hospital)
This is the hospital wing of the Institute, which has been renamed as “Viswanathan Chest Hospital”
by the Governing Body of this Institute. The current hospital facilities housed in this wing had been

209
in place since last 50 years and there is an urgent need to upgrade the hospital building for
enhancement of patient bed strength and handling increasing patient load.
Resident hostel for Postgraduate students
The existing residential hostel for postgraduate (PG) students is insufficient to accommodate all the
resident doctors admitted to various postgraduate courses. In addition, due to the implementation
of the Oversight Committee Report with regard to enhanced seats in the reservation category in
postgraduate admission, the number of postgraduate resident will increase considerably (54%) and
there is an urgent need to increase the hotel facilities.
III. Augmentation of facilities of the Laboratories
The following laboratories of the Institute (Biochemistry, Physiology, Pharmacology, Microbiology,
Pathology, Mycology and Respiratory Virology) are in a dilapidated condition. These laboratories are
in existence since last 50 years without modernization and are not maintained as per the standards
required for running the facilities efficiently. These laboratories require adequate up-gradation and
renovation including life saving diagnostic facilities.
IV. Implementation of Oversight Committee Report
As per the implementation of the Oversight Committee Report, the number of Post Graduate seats
has to be increased by 54% from the existing level of seats. This requires creation of additional
infrastructure in terms of patient beds, other diagnostic and patient care management facilities,
augmentation of manpower especially in area of resident doctors (junior and senior), nursing and
other technical staff and augmentation of library and information sciences. Residential quarters are
to be provided to the additional nursing and other technical staff.
V. Introduction of New Courses and Induction of Junior/Senior Resident Students
V .P Chest Institute being a post graduate medical educational Institute, it is proposed to introduce
new post graduate medical courses in order to strengthen the specialty of Respiratory Medicine and
related sub-specialties.
VI Others
In order to augment the research facilities of this Institute, the existing Animal House has to be
upgraded to improve the research capabilities of the Institute.

210
ANNEXURE-IX
Proposed Training Courses/Workshops during 2008-09
I. Proposed Workshops
1. Workshop on “Yogic management of cardio-respiratory disorders” in collaboration with
Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga on 5-6th April, 2008.
2. Workshop on “Diagnostic bronchology” to general medical practitioners on 29th June, 2008.
We have approached the Delhi Medical Council to accredit the workshop for
postgraduate training.
3. Workshop on “Recent Advances in Pulmonary Pathology” on 6-7 December, 2008.
Pulmonary pathology is a neglected area in our country and there are not many
pulmonary pathologists. In order to upgrade the skills of general pathologists, this
workshop is planned.
4. Workshop on “Respiratory Allergy: diagnosis and management” from 10-14 February, 2009.
This workshop is intended to train Pulmonologists, Pediatricians and ENT specialists
in scientific principles of immunotherapy in allergic rhinitis and bronchial asthma.
II. Proposed Orations
1. 10th “Professor Raman Viswanathan-VPCI Oration” on 6 April, 2008.
2. 4th “Professor Autar Singh Paintal Memorial Oration” on 24 September, 2008.
210

211
211
ANNEXURE-X
Proposed Training courses/workshops during 2008-09
I. Proposed Workshops
1. Workshop on “Yogic management of cardio-respiratory disorders” in collaboration with
Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga on 5-6th April, 2008.
2. Workshop on “Diagnostic bronchology” to general medical practitioners on 29th June 2008.
We have approached the Delhi Medical Council to accredit the workshop for
postgraduate training.
3. Workshop on “Recent Advances in Pulmonary Pathology” on 6-7 December, 2008.
Pulmonary pathology is a neglected area in our country and there are not many
pulmonary pathologists. In order to upgrade the skills of general pathologists, this
workshop is planned.
4. Workshop on “Respiratory Allergy: diagnosis and management” from 10-14 February, 2009.
This workshop is intended to train Pulmonologists, Pediatricians and ENT specialists
in scientific principles of immunotherapy in allergic rhinitis and bronchial asthma.
II. Proposed Orations
1. 10th “Professor Raman Viswanathan-VPCI Orationt” on 6 April 2008.
2. 4th “Professor Autar Singh Paintal Memorial Oration” on 24 September, 2008.

212
ANNEXURE-XI
EFC for the Scheme of Development of Nursing Services (HR - Nurses) for
implementation during Eleventh Plan with an estimated cost of Rs.2900 crores–
Information regarding location of Centres/Schools/Colleges
A. Establishment of 24 Centres of Excellence in States
Location - The Centres of Excellence would be established as follows:—
Sl. No. State Location
1. Andhra Pradesh Hyderabad
2. Assam Guwahati
3. Bihar Patna
4. Chhattisgarh Raipur
5. Goa Panaji
6. Gu jarat Ahmedabad
7. Haryana Rohtak
8. Himachal Pradesh Shimla
9. Jammu and Kashmir Jammu and Srinagar
10. Jharkhand Ranchi
11. Karnataka Bangalore
12. Kerala Thiruvananthapuram
13. Madhya Pradesh Indore
14. Manipur Imphal
15. Orissa Behrampur
16. Punjab . Jalandhar
17. Rajasthan Jaipur
18. Sikkim Gangtok
19. Tamil Nadu Chennai
20. Tripura Agartala
21. Uttar Pradesh Lucknow and Raibareli
22. Uttaranchal Dehradun
212

213
B. Establishment of 4 Regional Institutes of Nursing
Location
Sl. No. State Location
(i) Maharashtra Mumbai
(ii) W est Bengal Kolkata
(iii) T amil Nadu Chennai
(iv) Delhi Delhi
C. Establishment of 6 Colleges of Nursing
Location
Sl. No. State Location
(i) Rajasthan Jodhpur
(ii) Bihar Patna
(iii) Chhattisgarh Raipur
(iv) Madhya Pradesh Bhopal
(v) Orissa Bhubaneswar
(vi) Uttar Pradesh Rai Bareli
D. Establishment of ANM/GNM Schools
Location for ANM Schools
Sl. State Districts Location
No.
12 3 4
1 Bihar 17 Baxer, Kamur, Shivher, Siwan, Jahanabad,
Arwl, Aurangabad, Nwada, Jamui, Lakhisarai,
Shekhpura, Khagaria, Banka, Araria, Madhepura,
Supaul, Bhagalpur
2 Chhattisgarh 8 Dantewada, Janggir, Kanker, Kavardha, Koria,
Mahasamund, Bilaspur, Durgi.
3 Jharkhand 12 Koderma, Sahebganj, Pakur, Godda, Bokaro,
Jamthara, Gumla, Latehar, Saraikela Kharsanwa,
Garhwa, Lohardaga, East Singhbhum
4 Madhya Pradesh 22 Bhopal, Vidisha, Sheopur, As hoknagar, Gwalior,
Harda, Khandwa, Khargone, Jabalpur, Katni,
Dindori, Rewa, Anuppur, Umariya, Damoh,
Dewas, Shajapur, Tikamgarh, Ujjain, Mandsaur,
Neemuch, Ratlam.

214
12 3 4
5 Orissa 13 Angul, Bargarh, Bhadrak, Boudh, Malkangiri,
Dhenkanal, Gajapati, Jagatsinghapur, Jharsuguda,
Kalahandi, kandhamal, Khordha, Koraput
6 Rajasthan 5 H anumangarh, Rajsamnd, Sawai Madhopur
Baran, Dausa
7 Uttaranchal 7 Haridwar, Uttarkashi, Bageshwar, Champawat,
Udham Singh Nagar, Tehri, Rudraprayag
8 Uttar Pradesh 24 Ambedkar Nagar, Etah, Auraiya, Kannauj,
Kanpur Dehat, Kushinagar, Kaushmbi, Gautam
Buddh Nagar, Chadauli, Chitrakoot, Jalaun,
Fatehpur, Firojabad, Badaun, Balrampur,
Baghpat, Bulandshahr, Bhadohi, Mahamaya
Nagar (Hathras), Maharajganj, Lalitput,
Shravasti, Sant Kabir nagar, Sonebhadra
9 Mizoram 7 Champhai, Kolasib, Lunglei, Mami, Saiha,
Serchhip, Lawngtlai
10 Meghalaya 4 Jaintia Hills, South Garo Hills, Ri Bhoi, West
Khasi Hills
11 Arunachal Pradesh 5 Anjaw, Changlang, Dibang Valley, Lohit
12 Assam 4 Bongaigaon, Kokrajhar, Udalguri, Chirang
13 Nagaland 4 Mon,Zunheboto,Phek,Mokokchung
T
OTAL 132
Location for GNM Schools
Sl. State Location Districts
No.
12 3 4
1 Bihar 26 Baxer, Kamur, Shivher, Siwan, Jahanabad,
Arwl, Aurangabad, Nawda, Jamui, Lakhisarai,
Shekhpura, Khagaria, Banka, Araria,
Madhepura, Supaul, Bhagalpur, Begusarai,
Bhojpur, Darbhanga, Gaya, East Chanparan,
Gopalganj, Katihar, Kishanganj, Madhubani.
2 Chhattisgarh 7 Janggir, Kanker, Kavardha, Korba, Koria,
Bilaspur, Durgi.
3 Jharkhand 17 Koderma, Sahebganj, Pakur, Chatra, Godda,
Bokaro, Jamthara, Gumla, Latehar, Saraikela
Kharsanwa, Garhwa, Lohardaga, East
Singhbhum, Jamshedpur, Dhanbad, Ranchi,
Bokaro.

215
12 3 4
4 Madhya Pradesh 17 V idisha, Sheopur, Ashoknagar, Harda,
Khargone, Katni, Dindori, Anuppur, Umariya,
Damoh, Dewas, Shajapur, Tikamgarh, U.ijain,
Mandsaur, Neemuch, Radam
5 Orissa 18 Angul, Baleshwar, Debagarh, Bargarh,
Bhadrak, Boudh, Malkangiri, Dhenkanal.,
Gajapati, Ganjam, Jagatsinghapur, Jharsuguda,
Kalahandi, kandhamal, Khordha, Koraput,
Nayagarh, Nabarangapur
6 Rajasthan 6 Sirohi, Bundi, Dholpur, Jaisalmer, Tonk, Baran
7 Uttaranchal 11 Haridwar, Uttarkashi, Bageshwar, Champawat,
Udham Singh Nagar, Tehri, Rudraprayag,
Mysori, Alrno Pithoragarh, Dehradun
8 Uttar Pradesh 35 Ambedkar Nagar, Unnao, Etah, Auraiya,
Kannauj, Kanpur Dehat, Kushinagar,
Kaushrnbi, Ghazipur, Gautam Buddh Nagar,
Chadauli, Chitrakoot, Jalaun, Jyotiba Phule
Nagar, Fatehpur, Firojabad, Badaun,
Balrampur, Baghpat, Barabanki, Bulandshahr,
Bhadohi, Mau, Mahamaya Nagar (Hathras),
Maharajganj, Mahoba, Lalitput, Shravasti,
Sant Kabir nagar, Sonebhadra, Hardoi,
Lakhimpurkhiri, Siddharthnagar, Sultanpur,
Hamirpur.
T
OTAL 137
E. Strengthening of State Nursing Councils
F. Strengthening of State Nursing Cells in Directorate of Health Services
Location
Andhra Pradesh Assam Bihar
Delhi Gu jarat Haryana
Himachal Pradesh Karnataka Kerala
Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Orissa
Punjab Rajasthan T amil Nadu
Uttar Pradesh West Bengal

216
ANNEXURE-XII
Sl. No. Name of the medical college/institute Status
12 3
1. Dr. Pinnamaneni Siddhartba Institute of Recommendations from MCI are
Medical Sciences and Research Foundation, awaited.
Chinoutpally, Andhra Pradesh.
2. GSL Medical College, Rajamundary, Andhra Recommendations from MCI are
Pradesh. awaited.
3. Maharaja’s Institute of Medical Sciences, Recommendations from MCI are
Nellimarala, Vizianagaram, Andhra Pradesh. awaited.
4. NRI Medical College, Chinnakakani, Andhra Recommendations from MCI are
Pradesh. awaited.
5. Chelmeda Anandrao Institute of Medical Recommendations from MCI are
Sciences, Karimnagar, Andhra Pradesh. awaited.
6. Swami Vivekanand Institute of Medical Recommendations from MCI are
Sciences and Research, V allia, Gujarat. awaited.
7. Shrimati Bhikhiben Kanjibhai Shah Medical Recommendations from MCI are
Institute and Research Centre, Piparia, Gujarat. awaited.
8. Maharishi Markhandeshwar Institute of Recommendations from MCI are
Medical Sciences and Research, Mullana, awaited.
Ambala, Haryana.
9. S. Nijalinggappa Medical College, Bagalkot, Recommendations from MCI are
Karnataka. awaited.
10. Pushpagiri Institute of Medical Sciences and Recommendations from MCI are
Research Centre, Trivalla, Kerala. awaited.
11. Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church Medical Recommendations from MCI are
Mission, Kolencherry, Kerala. awaited.
12. Dr. Somervel Memorial CSI Hospital and Recommendations from MCI are
Medical College, Karakonam, awaited.
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala.
13. Jubliee Mission Medical College and Research Recommendations from MCI are
Centre, Thrissur, Kerala. awaited.
14. Amla Institute of Medical Sciences, Recommendations from MCI are
Amalanagar, Kerala. awaited.
216

217
12 3
15. Government Medical College, Latur, Recommendations from MCI are
Maharashtra. awaited.
16. Government Medical College, Akola, Recommendations from MCI are
Maharashtra. awaited.
17. Meenakshi Medical College and Research Recommendations from MCI are
Institute, Enathur, T amil Nadu. awaited.
18. Sree Balaji Medical College and Hospital, Recommendations from MCI are
Chennai, Tamil Nadu. awaited.

218
218
ANNEXURE-XIII
STATUS OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE JA VED CHOUDHARY
COMMITTEE AND CADRE REVIEW
Sl. Recommendations
No.
12
1 Removal of stagnation at SAG and HAG
levels
(i) Upgradation of 458 posts at SAG
level
(ii) One time In-situ promotion to SAG
to those completed five years
service on 31.3.2006 in NFSG grade
2 Enhancement of retirement age from 60
to 62 years
3 Terminal benefits
Action Taken
3
The proposal has been referred to the Committee
of Secretaries. Meeting fixed on 8.7.2008 has
since been postponed. No date for fresh Meeting
has been intimated.
The proposal for enhancement of retirement age
of Teaching, Non-Teaching and Public-Health
sub-cadre of CHS has been approved by Cabinet
and orders issued on 16.11.2006. Proposal in
respect of General Duty Medical Officers has
been referred to 6th Pay Commission. 6
th CPC is
not in favour of recommending a blanket increase
in the age of superannuation for all General Duty
Medical Officers belonging to CHS. The
Commission had recommended that the current
age of superannuation should be maintained.
Further except in the case of Scientists and
Medical Specialists, no extension should be given
in any other case. Tenure based posts should be
filled by incumbents who have sufficient period
of service left before the stipulated age of retirement.
The proposal for grant of benefit of added years
of service over and above that is admissible under
Rule 30 of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 was sent to
Department of Pensions for obtaining their approval
but was not agreed to. The matter was again
referred to D/o Pensions for re-consideration.
They have agreed to the proposal and had advised
to approach D/o Economic Affairs which is
administering New pension Scheme w.e.f. 1.1.2004
to explore possibility as to whether any special
dispensation could be given under the New
Pension Scheme. The matter was referred to D/o
P&PW for re-consideration but the same has not
been agreed to.

219
12
4 Leave/Deputation/Training Reserves
5 Improvement of Infrastructure
6 Enhancement of Non-Practising
Allowance
7 Enhancement of Book/research/Academic
allowance
8 Deterrant to unplanned departure of CHS
doctors from service
9 Sharing of Consultancy fee
10 International Conference-Permission to
attend conference in two years-Financial
assistance to Rs.1.00 lakh per case
11 Cadre review of CHS
Provision has been made in the proposed Revised
CHS Rules which has got concurrence of D/o
Personnel and Training for concurrence. The
same will be sent to UPSC.
The proposal has been referred to DGHS for their
comments.
The proposal was referred to 6
th Pay Commission.
Even though NPA from 25% to 40% was not
agreed to by 6
th CPC, the Ministry has
recommended the proposal with slight modification
i.e. enhancement of NPA from 25% to 30% to
COS constituted by the Government to look into
the grievances/demands of various Associations/
Organisations.
The proposal has been referred to 6
th Pay
Commission and the same has been agreed to.
D/o Personnel and Training had informed that
Amendment in Consolidated Instructions on
Foreign Assignment of Indian Experts is under
process and this Ministry’s suggestions have
been noted down and will be considered
while finalizing the Consolidated Instructions.
Consolidated instructions on foreign assignment
of Indian Experts issued by DOPT vide O.M. No.
AB-14017/2/07-Estt.(RR) dated 29.2.2008 does
not include these suggestions and DOPT has been
requested to re-consider the matter for inclusion
of this Ministry’s proposal in the terms and
conditions for foreign assignment.
A Research Incentive Scheme has been prepared
and the same is being finalized.
Orders in this regard has been issued by IC
Division vide  Order No. L.21020/85/2000-IC
dated 26.11.2007.
The process of Cadre review has already been
initiated. A meeting of the participating units of CHS
was held on 12.3.2007 under the Chairmanship of
Secretary (H&FW). The information received from
various units were compiled and the proposals were
discussed with each unit Head in a series of
meetings taken by JS(VC). Subsequently DGHS
held the meeting on 16.6.2008 and decided to
collect some additional information.
3

ANNEXURES
PART – B
NRHM
221

ANNEXURE—A OF REPORT
(Part-B — NRHM; Para No. 2.5)
(Rs. in crores)
Schemes 2006-07 2007-08 20008-09
Approved Expdt. Approved Revised Expdt. Approved
Outlay Outlay Estimate upto Outlay
29.02.08
12 3 4 5 6 7
Disease Control
Programmes 721.00 695.03 882.00 899.92 685.09 1086.25
Integrated Disease
Surveillance
Programme 102.00 12.93 80.00 55.00 33.1 1 72.00
(i) RCH Flexible
Pool 1705.72 1427.03 1725.00 1928.58 1643.62 2535.00
Routine
Immunisation 345.00 228.83 317.00 260.00 171.88 615.00
Pulse Polio
Immunisation 1049.00 1064.60 1341.48 1 146.48 930.65 1068.43
(ii) Mission
Flexible Pool 1943.18 2069.36 3155.32 3155.32 2505.05 2285.00
Grants to State
Training
Institutions 91.15 52.07 92.07 93.65 86.00 105.49
Free Distribution
and Social
Marketing of 200.00 267.48 275.00 294.00 221.80 300.00
Condoms for
NACO
Free distribution
of contraceptives 100.00 91.25 60.00 36.98 30.27 65.00
Area Projects 202.77 120.59 50.01 50.01 42.41 50.01
NGOs (Public-
Private Partnership
- PPP) 32.91 3.68 20.50 20.50 16.85 20.50
Family
Welfare 218.88 123.11 235.00 200.16 142.31 278.00
223

224
12 3 4 5 6 7
Social Marketing of
Contraceptives 49.50 20.30 50.00 28.42 15.16 30.00
Other Schemes 43.19 23.24 61.84 68.08 36.79 163.15
(a) Research and
Study 8.00 6.23 8.00 6.00 3.60 6.00
(g) MIS 22.07 8.87 29.56 48.00 24.49 137.00
Overall allocation/ 8985.48 7485.06 10890.00 10668.61 8800.88 1 1930.00
Expdt.

225
ANNEXURE-B OF REPORT
(Part-B — NRHM; Para No. 2.7)
Summary of outstanding utilization certificates as on 1.02.2008
(Rs. in crores)
Year Department of Family Welfare Total (as on 1.2.2008)
No. of UCs Amount No. of UCs Amount
1976-93 20 0.45 27 0.61
1993-94 12 0.48 29 3.19
1994-95 33 0.47 49 6.82
1995-96 85 8.55 136 16.84
1996-97 88 2.39 113 4.44
1997-98 53 2.96 109 12.21
1998-99 44 2.92 102 23.42
1999-2000 31 4.86 114 28.18
2000-01 50 23.38 121 42.29
2001-02 54 16.22 98 26.81
2002-03 86 22.08 140 43.33
2003-04 177 83.11 480 143.18
2004-05 215 360.23 419 473.01
2005-06 510 2046.92 855 2433.71
T
OTAL 1458 2575.02 2792 3258.04
225

226
ANNEXURE-C OF REPORT
(Part-B — NRHM; Para No. 3.3)
Activity T imeline Target Progress
12 3 4
1. ASHA for every 1000 population 3,00,000 by 2007 5,87,512 ASHAs/Link workers
50% by 2007 selected.
2. VHSC in all villages with untied 2,00,000 by 2007 2,06,833 VHSCs already
grant functional, untied grant of
30% by 2007 Rs. 10,000 for each
3. Service Guarantees with 2 ANMs 45,000 by 2007 1,31,166 Joint Accounts 19,634
at 1,75,000 SHCs SCs with 2 ANMs
30% by 2007
4. Service Guarantees as per IPHS 6801 by 2007 8756 PHCs working 24X7.
with 3 Staff Nurses at all PHCs Over 3444 PHCs have 3 SNS
30% by 2007
5. Service Guarantees as per IPHS 1950 by 2007 2360 Specialists, 14288 SN on
at 6500 CHCs contract 2453 Facility Survey
30% by 2007 Upgradation work completed in
454 CHCs.
6. 1800 Taluka/Sub-Divisional 540 by 2007 IPHS for SDH finalised, facility
Hospitals strengthened surveys started
30% by 2007
7. 600 DH strengthened 180 by 2007 382 DH being upgraded
30% by 2007 Rs.20 lakhs given to all DHs
for basic services.
8. Rogi Kalyan Samiti established 12,500 by 2007 RKS in 527, DH, 3991 CHCs/
in all CHCs/SDH/DH SDH and 13,827 PHCs (18,345)
50% by 2007
9. District Health Plan (IDHAP) 300 by 2007 First IDHAP in 523 districts.
05-12
50% by 2007
10. Untied grants to various levels – Provided to every institution.
50% by 2007
11. AMG to various levels – Provided for PHCs, CHCs and
50% by 2007 DH
226

227
12 3 4
12. SHS+DHS fully functional – Societies merged in 32 States
50% by 2007 and 530 Districts, DHS
constituted in most States.
13. MMUs to every District – 319 districts funded for MMUs,
30% by 2007 198 MMUs operational.

228
ANNEXURE-D OF REPORT
(Part-B — NRHM; Para No. 3.8)
(Position as on March, 2006)
State Sub-Centres Sub-Centres having ANM living in Sub-
ANM Quarters Centre  Quarters
Andhra Pradesh 12522 2600 (21%) NA
Bihar 8858 6375 (72%) 623 (10%)
M.P. 8874 3996 (45%) NA
Manipur 420 230 (55%) 0 (0%)
Meghalaya 401 401 (100%) 171 (43%)
Punjab 2858 1 194 (42%) 685 (57%)
Rajasthan 10512 8235 (78 %) 685 (8%)
Uttarakhand 1631 562 (34%) NA
228

229
ANNEXURE-E OF REPORT
(Part-B — NRHM: Para No. 5.6)
States Opening Funds T otal funds Expenditure Closing
balances released upto balance as on
on 1st April (2007-08) 31st  December 31st December
2007 2007 2007
Bihar 3.06 6.55 9.61 6.08 3.52
Gujarat 1.14 9.27 10.41 6.89 3.51
Jharkhand 1.91 3.60 5.51 2.42 3.09
Karnataka 1.52 7.10 8.62 6.54 2.07
Madhya Pradesh 1.23 8.77 10.00 6.57 3.42
Tamil Nadu 1.11 9.25 10.36 6.07 4.28
Uttar Pradesh 2.75 25.25 28.03 17.30 10.72
TOTAL : 23.88 170.11 193.99 118.52 75.47
229

230
ANNEXURE-I
NATIONAL RURAL HEALTH MISSION
SCHEME-WISE BE, RE AND ACTUAL EXPENDITURE FOR 2006-07 AND 2007-08
(Rs. in crores)
Sl. Name of Scheme 2006-07 2007-08
No. BE RE Actual % w.r.t. BE RE Actual % w.r.t.
Expdt. RE Expdt. RE
1 2 34 5 6 78 9 1 0
CENTRALLY SPONSORED 8679.12 7778.86 7350.56 94.49 10575.00 10413.45 10094.09 96.93
SCHEMES
A DISEASE CONTROL 721.00 770.30 695.03 90.23 882.00 899.92 848.04 94.24
PROGRAMMES
1 National V ector Borne 371.58 381.56 318.13 83.38 399.50 399.50 375.99 94.12
Disease Control
Programme
2 National TB Control 202.17 224.50 220.62 98.27 267.00 267.00 261.91 98.09
Programme
3 National Leprosy 42.25 38.63 34.15 88.40 40.00 27.12 25.00 92.18
Eradication Programme
4 National Iodine Deficiency 15.00 15.17 11.79 77.72 25.00 25.00 16.38 65.52
Disorders Control
Programme
5 National Programme for 90.00 110.44 110.34 99.91 140.00 171.87 159.87 93.02
Control of Blindness
6 National Drug De- 10.50 9.43 8.89 94.27
Addiction Programme
B Free Distri. and Social 200.00 300.00 267.48 89.16 275.00 294.00 276.94 94.20
Mktg. of Condoms for
NACO
C FAMILY WELFARE 7758.12 6708.56 6188.05 95.22 9418.00 9219.53 8969.11 97.28
1 Direction and 245.00 152.43 147.47 96.75 255.28 215.31 213.91 99.35
Administration
2 Rural FW Services 1556.68 1003.74 977.12 97.35 1939.00 2041.47 2025.97 99.24
(Sub-Centres)
3 Urban FW Services 125.00 72.71 73.59 101.21 122.84 131.73 130.99 99.44
4 Grants to State Training 91.15 45.55 52.07 114.31 92.07 93.65 91.99 98.23
Institutions
5 Free distribution of 100.00 100.00 91.25 91.25 60.00 36.98 36.98 100.00
contraceptives
6 Sterilization (Beds) 2.02 1.16 1.16 100.00
7 Procurement of Supplies 250.00 200.00
and Materials
230

231
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
8 Routine Immunisation 3 45.00 280.00 228.83 81.73 317.00 260.00 236.48 90.95
9 Pulse Polio Immunisation 1049.00 1049.00 1064.61 101.49 1341.48 1146.48 1084.03 94.55
10 IEC (lnf., Edu. and 130.10 145.80 134.60 92.32 160.00 160.00 108.00 67.50
Communication)
1 1 Area Projects 215.27 191.32 120.96 63.22 50.01 50.01 46.23 92.44
12 Flexible Pool for State 3648.90 3666.85 3496.39 95.35 4880.32 5083.90 4994.53 98.24
PIPs
(a) RCH Flexible Pool 1705.72 1419.72 1427.03 100.51 1725.00 1928.58 1842.89 95.56
(b) Mission Flexible Pool 1943.18 2247.13 2069.36 92.09 3155.32 3155.32 3151.64 99.88
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES 320.88 172.22 136.06 79.00 315.00 255.16 216.07 84.68
A DISEASE CONTROL 102.00 36.86 12.93 35.08 80.00 55.00 41.07 74.67
PROGRAMMES
1 Integrated Disease 102.00 36.86 12.93 35.08 80.00 55.00 41.07 74.67
Surveillance Project
B FAMILY WELFARE 218.88 135.36 123.13 90.96 235.00 200.16 175.00 87.43
1 Social Marketing Area 1.00 0.50 1.00 1.73 1.70 98.27
Proiects
2 Social Marketing of 49.50 23.46 20.31 86.57 50.00 28.42 25.13 88.42
Contraceptives
3 F.W. Training and Res. 5.00 4.90 0.33 6.73 5.50 1.45 0.24 16.55
Centre, Bombay
4 NIHFW New Delhi 6.05 5.45 4.67 85.69 6.60 5.53 4.98 90.05
5 IIPS Mumbai 2.90 2.90 2.50 86.21 3.60 2.92 3.39 116.10
6 Rural Health Training Centre, 1.31 1.00 0.30
Najafgarh
7 Population Research Centres 8.00 8.00 6.08 76.00 9.00 9.50 8.60 90.53
8 CDRI, Lucknow 3.00 3.00 3.00 100.00 3.97 3.97 3.85 96.98
9 Family Welfare Linked 10.00 2.50 2.37 94.80 11.00 3.18 3.17 99.69
Health Insurance Plan
10 RCH Training 7.38 1.77 1.84 103.95 5.99 2.59 2.51 96.91
11 ICMR and IRR 40.00 40.00 51.44 128.60 45.00 45.00 45.00 100.00
12 Travel of Experts/Conf./ 1.00 1.50 1.11 74.00 1.10 1.00 0.93 93.00
Meetings etc. (Melas)
13 International Co-operation 1.64 1.54 1.28 83.12 1.90 1.89 1.33 70.37
14 NPSF/National Commission 6.00 4.32 1.28 29.63 7.00 4.10 1.37 33.41
on Population
15 NGOs (Public-Private 32.91 5.40 3.68 68.15 20.50 20.50 18.01 87.85
Partnership - PPP)
16 MIS 22.07 11.38 8.87 77.94 29.56 48.00 40.46 84.29
17 Other Schemes 21.12 18.74 14.37 76.68 32.28 .20.08 14.33 71.36
(a) Research in RCH Activities 8.00 6.60 6.23 94.39 8.00 6.00 4.16 69.33

232
1 2 34 5 6 78 9 1 0
(b) Role of Men in Planned 2.92 1.92 0.89 46.35 3.21 2.70 0.91 33.70
Parenthood
(c) Recanalization 0.30 0.30 0.07 23.33 3.00 0.16 0.02 12.50
(d) Assistance to I.M.A. 0.25 0.20 0.20 100.00 0.20 0.20
(e) Testing Facilities 0.70 0.67 0.64 95.52 0.67 0.67 0.67 100.00
(f) Expenditure at HOs (RCH) 3.50 3.50 2.77 79.14 10.00 3.00 2.98 99.33
(g) Regional Offices 3.75 3.85 2.54 65.97 4.00 3.75 2.52 67.20
(h) Information Technology 0.70 0.70 0.70 100.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 100.00
(i) FW Programme in Other 1.00 1.00 0.33 33.00 1.20 1.00 0.47 47.00
Ministries
(j) Gandhigram Institute 1.00 1.60 1.60 100.00
GRAND TOTAL 9000.00 7951.08 7486.62 94.16 10890.00 10668.61 10310.16 96.64

233
ANNEXURE-II
UTILIZATION STATUS OF THE SCHEMES DURING 2006-07, 2007-08
AND BE FOR 2008-09
(Rs. in crores)
Schemes 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09
BE RE Expdt. % BE RE Expdt. % w.r.t. BE
Utilization Utilization
w.r.t. RE w.r.t. RE
Integrated Disease 102.00 36.86 12.93 35.08 80.00 55.00 41.07 74.67 72.00
Surveillance Programme
Routine Immunisation 345.00 280.00 228.83 81.73 317.00 260.00 236.48 90.95 615.00
Grants to State Training 91.15 45.55 52.07 114.31 92.07 93.65 91.99 98.23 105.49
Institutions
Free distribution of 100.00 100.00 91.25 91.25 60.00 36.98 36.98 100.00 65.00
contraceptives
Area Projects 202.77 187.77 120.59 64.22 50.01 50.01 46.23 92.44 50.01
NGOs (Public-Private 32.91 5.40 3.68 68.15 20.50 20.50 18.01 87.85 20.50
Partnership - PPP)
233

234
ANNEXURE-III
Details of year-wise Utilisation Certificates as on 31.3.2007 & 31.3.2008 and UCs
cleared during the year
(Amount in Rs. lakhs)
Y ear Outstanding UCs Outstanding UCs UCs cleared Outstanding UCs
as on as on during year as on
31.3.2007 31.3.2008 the 2007-08 1.5.2008
Number Amount Number Amount Number Amount Number Amount
1976-93 23 0.49 0 0.00 23 0.49 0 0.00
1993-94 14 0.49 12 0.48 2 0.01 5 0.09
1994-95 36 0.49 29 0.41 7 0.08 0 0.00
1995-96 89 8.63 85 8.54 4 0.09 63 1.64
1996-97 93 6.03 88 2.39 5 3.64 78 2.30
1997-98 53 2.96 53 2.96 0 0.00 48 2.87
Total from 308 19.09 267 14.78 41 4.31 194 6.90
1976-77 to
1997-98
1998-99 48 3.02 44 2.92 4 0.10 37 1.88
1999-2000 36 5.60 31 4.86 5 0.74 25 3.31
2000-2001 68 39.76 50 23.37 18 16.39 54 11.33
2001-2002 60 17.73 53 15.97 7 1.76 49 7.60
2002-2003 112 29.20 84 20.96 28 8.24 78 20.25
Total from 324 95.31 262 68.08 62 27.23 243 44.37
1998-99 to
2002-03
2003-04 226 109.89 174 78.30 52 31.59 155 69.72
2004-05 274 462.71 211 354.05 63 108.66 213 215.25
2005-06 770 2914.59 489 1684.63 281 1229.96 473 1676.47
Total from 1270 3487.19 874 2116.98 396 1370.21 841 1961.44
2003-04 to
2005-06
G
RAND T OTAL 1902 3601.59 1403 2199.84 499 1401.75 1278 2012.71
* Number of UCs increased due to bifurcation of certain sanctioned amounts during 2008-09 in respect of Utilization
Certificates pertaining to the years 2000-01 and 2004-05.
234

235
ANNEXURE-IV
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
E.II (A) Branch
Subject: Dispensation under National Rural Health Mission.
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may refer to their proposal in D.O. letter No. L.1335/
Secy (HFW)/2007 dated 21.11.2007 on the subject.
2. The proposal has been examined in this Department. As regards Proposal-I seeking
dispensation under Rule 209 (6) (iii) of the GFRs, the following has been agreed to:—
(i) By relaxing conditions under Rule 209 (6) (iii) for release of recurring grants, unspent
balances  of 2006-07 may not be taken into account for release to be made during
the financial year 2007-08. This relaxation, however, will be limited till 31.12.2007
and only with respect to funds under the Mission Flexi Pool of NRHM.
(ii) 75% of recurring grants may be released during 2007-08 based on provisional
certificates without considering unspent balances of FY 2006-07, while remaining
amount may be released as per provisions of GFRs, 2005
(iii) Further, only unspent balances as in (ii), which are explicitly acknowledges by
Statement of Expenditure duly signed by authorized persons shall be recognized for
the purpose. Where no such accounts have been rendered, this relaxation will not be
applicable.
(iv) A report should be furnished to this Department immediately to the effect that all UCs
for releases made during 2005-06 have been obtained as per the format and
requirement of GFRs.
(v) A review of the position will be carried out in the last quarter of the current financial
year (2007-08).
(vi) It is reiterated that the above dispensation by relaxing the provisions of GFRs shall
be limited for release of funds under Mission Flexi-Pool of NRHM programme only.
3. The Proposal-II allowing National Programme Coordination Committee (NPCC) to approve
financial allocations for the State Sector Programme Implementation Programmes (PIPs) for more
than the BE of the concerned financial year has not been agreed to.
4. This issues with the approval of Secretary (Expenditure).
Sd/-
(Rubina Ali)
Under Secretary-E.II(A)
AS&FA (Health)
Ministry of Finance D/o Expr. I.D. No.8/4 E.II (A)/05, dated 20.12.2007
235

236
ANNEXURE-V
ACTIVITY-WISE COMPENSATION PACKAGE FOR ASHA
Sl. Head of Compensation Suggested Compensation
No. (In Rs.)/per case
1 JSY-Institutional Delivery 350 for ASHA and 250 for
Referral Transport
2 For Urban Areas 200
3 Motivation for TubectomylMotivation for 150/200
Vasectomy/NSV
4 Immunization Session 150
5 Pulse Polio Day - if it is full day work it should be 25
Rs.75
6 Organizing Village Health Nutrition Day 150
7 DOTS 250
8 Household toilet promo, Fee 100
9 Detection, referral, confirmation and registration of 100/200/400
Leprosy case/after complete treatment for PB Leprosy
cases/after complete treatment for MB Leprosy cases
236

237
ANNEXURE-VI
INFORMATION ON THE PERFORMANCE OF NGO
Report 1
➢ Name of the District where evaluation was conducted – East Khasi Hills, Meghalaya
➢ Internal Evaluation conducted during the period – 9th – 12th August, 2007
➢ Name of 1 NGO selected in that district – World Vision of India
➢ Date of signing the MOU with the DTCS – lst March, 2004
➢ Scheme under which the NGO is involved – Scheme I and II
➢ Population covered by the NGO – 150000
➢ Activities performed by the NGO – The NGO sensitizes and train volunteers,
disseminate information, provide counseling to patients and families, sensitize, orient
and advocate with key groups, and, retrieve defaulters in their area.
NGOs also play a role in formulating, developing, and revising information, education and
communication (IEC) materials which are appropriate for the local context. The role of the
NGO is also to identify, train, and supervise volunteers who are providing DOT. The NGO
ensures that treatment and Records ( e.g. Tuberculosis Treatment Card) are maintained
strictly as per RNTCP policy.
➢ Funds released to the NGO in the financial year 2006-2007 – Rs.4000/-
➢ Performance of the NGO in the year 2006-2007 with respect to district performance-
CAT I: 2 cases; CAT II: 3 cases; CAT III: 2 cases
➢ Has the NOO submitted Utilisation certificate and Audit report? Yes
Report 2
➢ Name of the District where evaluation was conducted and when?
Pathanamthitta, 21-24th February, 2007
➢ Name of 1 NGO selected in that district?
SLET (Sahyadri Leprosy Eradication Trust), Ranni, Pathanamthitta
➢ Date of signing the MOU with the DTCS.
14/2/2005, was working without any signed schemes since 2003, scheme IV
signed in 2005, being renewed every year.
237

238
➢ Scheme under which the NGO is involved - Scheme IV
➢ Population covered by the NGO - 1 Lakh
➢ Activities performed by the NGO -
The NGO provides AFB microscopy and TB treatment services free of charge. The
NGO is responsible for ensuring the treatment or referral of all patients found to
have a positive AFB smear, and for ensuring follow-up treatment and sputum
examinations for all patients placed on treatment. The NGO ensures referral for
treatment of patients found to be smear-positive but who live outside the NGO’s
catchment area. In the case of patients with chest symptoms who are found to have
negative AFB smears or are suspected to have other forms of tuberculosis, the
NGO will either evaluate the patient as per RNTCP policy, or will refer the patient
to an identified referral centre for such evaluation. The NGO also provides a
trained laboratory technician and a qualified Medical Officer (MO) trained in the
RNTCP.
➢ Funds released to the NGO in the financial year 2006-2007.
Rs 50,000/-
➢ Performance of the NGO in the year 2006-2007 with respect to district performance.
Very good case detection and case holding. There is consistent good
performance for the last 4 years.
➢ Has the NGO submitted Utilisation certificate and Audit report?
YES
Report 3
➢ Name of the district:  South 24 Parganas.(evaluation done in 10-14th march, 2008)
➢ Name of the NGO: Southern health Improvement society (SHIS)
➢ Date of signing MOU with DTCS:  6th July 2003
➢ Scheme under which the NGO is involved:  Scheme-V (Running 3 TUs in the
riverine belts of Sunderbans)
➢ Population covered by the NGO  – 15 Lakhs
➢ Activities performed by the NGO –
The NGO ensures full services for microscopy, treatment, direct observation, defaulter
retrieval, recording and registration, supervision, etc. and ensure all programme
implementation responsibilities. The NGO coordinates closely with all public and other health
facilities in the area. The NGO maintains RNTCP records and submits quarterly reports to
the District TB Officer in the prescribed manner and in a timely fashion.

239
➢ Funds released in the FY 2006-07 to the NGO:  Rs.10,20,000 (Rupees Ten lakhs and
twenty thousand only)
➢ Performance of the NGO in FY 2006-07 in respect to district performance:
Average ACDR of the 3 TUs is 132, Average NSP case detection percentage of 3 TUs
is 71 %, average Cure rates are 94%. All the performance indicators are better than
the overall district performances.
➢ Has the NGO submitted UC and audit report?
Yes through the district in December , 2007.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.