PA R L IAM E N T  O F IND IA
R A JY A  SA B H A 30
D E PA R T M E N T -R E L A T E D P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  S T A N D IN G 
C O M M IT T E E O N H E A L T H A N D F A M IL Y  W E L FA R E
THIR TIETH REPOR T
ON
THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
ST   
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 21 OCT OBER, 2008)
ST   
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 21 OCT OBER, 2008)
ST   
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 21 OCT OBER, 2008)
ST   
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 21 OCT OBER, 2008)
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
O C TO B E R , 2008/A SV IN A , 1930 (SA K A )O C TO B E R , 2008/A SV IN A , 1930 (SA K A )

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
THIRTIETH REPORT
ON
THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)-(iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—20
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS —AT A G LANCE .............................................................. 21—28
5. N OTES OF DISSENT ................................................................................................................. 29—32
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................ 33—51
7. A NNEXURES I TO V ............................................................................................................... 53—155
Annexure–I (Copy of the Bill) .................................................................................. 55—90
Annexure–II (Study Note Phase-I) ........................................................................... 91—119
Annexure–III (Study Note Phase-II) ........................................................................ 121—147
Annexure–IV (List of W itnesses at New Delhi) ..................................................... 148—149
Annexure–V (List of witness at places of study visit) ......................................... 150—155

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. P. J. Kurien
3. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
4. Shrimati Maya Singh
5. Shri Digvijay Singh
6. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
@7. Shri Lalhming Liana
8. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
9. Shrimati Kanimozhi
*10. Shri Rajeev Shukla
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli
12. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
13. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
$14. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
15. Shri Rajendra Kumar
16. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
17. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
18. Shri Rasheed Masood
19. Dr. Chinta Mohan
20. Shri Nihal Chand
21. Shri D.B. Patil
22. Shrimati K. Rani
23. Shri Pannian Ravindran
24. Dr. R. Senthil
25. Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin
26. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
27. Shri Uday Singh
28. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
29. Shri Vinod Khanna
30. Shri R.L. Jalappa
31. Shrimati Yashodhara Raje Scindia
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
@ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 18th July, 2008.
* Nominated w.e.f. 18th February, 2008.
$ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 3rd March, 2008.

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2008-09)
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Prof. P. J. Kurien
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla
5. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
6. Shrimati Maya Singh
7. Shri Digvijay Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
*10. Shri Lalhming Liana
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
12. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
13. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli
14. Shri Vinod Khanna
15. Shri Rajendra Kumar
16. Shri R.L. Jalappa
17. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
18. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
19. Shri Rasheed Masood
20. Dr. Chinta Mohan
21. Shri Nihal Chand
22. Shri D.B. Patil
23. Shrimati K. Rani
24. Shri Pannian Ravindran
25. Shrimati Yashodhara Raje Scindia
26. Dr. R. Senthil
27. Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shri Uday Singh
30. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
#31. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
* Nominated w.e.f. 12th August, 2008.
# Nominated w.e.f. 20th August, 2008.

(iii)
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section-2, dated 21st August, 2007.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No. 44391, dated 24th August, 2007.
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, after having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
present this Thirtieth Report of the Committee on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)
Bill-2007*.
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the
Council of States, relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007
(Annexure-I), as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 21st August 2007 and pending therein, to
the Committee on the 23rd August 2007 for examination and report.
3. A Press Release inviting suggestions/comments from general public was issued in
September, 2007. In response thereto, the Committee received 40 memoranda.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in its meetings held on the 9th and 31st October, 2007,
25th January, 7th and 27th May, 9th and 29th July and 12th August, 2008. The Committee visited
Karnataka (Bangalore), Kerala (Thiruvanthapuram), Tamil Nadu (Chennai) and Andhra Pradesh
(Hyderabad), from 7th to 14th January, 2008 (Annexure-II — Study Note Phase I) ; Madhya
Pradesh (Indore), Gujarat (Ahmedabad) Maharashtra (Mumbai) and Goa (panajim) from 12th to
19th February, 2008 (Annexure-III—Study Note Phase II) . These were the States with
maximum (about 75%) concentration of the drugs manufacturing units.
5. The Committee held wide ranging discussions with all the stake-holders on various
provisions of the Bill. Divergent views were expressed by the representatives of the associations
of drug manufacturers, cosmetics industry, medical devices industry represented by CII and FICCI,
pharmacists, experts, chemists, Drug Inspectors’ associations, Drug Controllers' associations, State
Governments etc., Besides, NGOs and Consumers’ Fora highlighting concerns of the consumers
also appeared before the Committee. The Committee also interacted with the Secretary, Department
of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Drug Controller General
of India, representatives of Drug Technical Advisory Boards (DTABs) and Pharmacy Council of
India and also heard Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, on whose report the Bill is modeled. The list of witnesses
is given in Annexure-IV and V . The Committee sought clarifications from the above entities not
only on the various viewpoints put forth before it on the Bill but also shared its apprehensions on
the existing drug control scenario in the country.
6. The Committee, thereafter, took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill at its meeting
held on the 12th August 2008. One or two members of the Committee expressed reservations on
certain provisions of the Bill. At its meeting held on 20th August 2008, the Committee discussed
and adopted the draft Report. However, Dr. R.C. Dome and Shri Pannian Ravindran put forth their
‘‘Note of Dissent’’ and stated that the same may be appended to the report.
7. The Committee has relied upon the following documents/information in finalizing its Report:
(i) Background Note on the Bill received from the Department of Health and Family
Welfare;

(ii) Presentation and clarification by the Secretary of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare and Drug Controller General of India;
(iii) Memoranda received on the Bill from various associations, NGOs and experts;
(iv) Replies to the Questionnaires on the Bill; and
(v) Oral evidence on the Bill.
8. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions
made by those who deposed before the Committee and submitted their valuable suggestions on the
subject matter of the Bill.
9. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report.
AMAR SINGH
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
August 20th, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary
Asvina 29, 1930 (Saka) S tanding Committee on Health and Family Welfare.
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 is a consumer protection legislation which is mainly
concerned with the standards and quality of drugs and regulates the import, manufacture, sale and
distribution of drugs and cosmetics. During its more than half a century of being in force, the Act
has undergone modifications at twelve occasions, the last being carried out in 1995. However,
efforts made by Government through these amendment legislations to make the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act adaptive to the fast charging scenario, both in the country and at the global level,
have not proved to be very effective.
2. The Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill 2007, (hereinafter to be referred in the
Report as ‘Bill’)  is the latest initiative of the Government which seeks to address the problems
of the drugs regulatory system in the country. The Main features of the Bill are as follows:—
(a) substitution of the “Drugs Technical Advisory Board” as well as the “Drugs Technical
Advisory Board for Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs” by the “Central Drugs
Authority”;
(b) insertion of a new Chapter 1A in the Act with a view to providing for the constitution
of the Central Drugs Authority and other connected or incidental matters thereto;
(c) insertion of a new Chapter 1B in the Act, providing for grant of permission for clinical
trials, punishment for conducting clinical trial without permission, trial of offences,
etc; and
(d) expansion of the compositions of the Drugs Consultative Committees.
The statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill states as under:—
“The Central Government had constituted an Expert Committee under the chairmanship of
Dr. R.A. Mashelker, Director General of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research in
January 2003 to undertake a comprehensive examination of drug regulatory issues, including the
problem of spurious drugs and to suggest measures to improve the drug administration in the
country. The Committee, inter alia, recommended setting up of a Central Drugs Authority reporting
directly to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and a system of centralised licensing. The
Central Government considered the recommendations of the Committee and proposes to make
amendments in the Act, in order to facilitate setting up of a Central Drugs Authority and
introduction of Centralised licensing for manufacture of drugs in pursuance of the said
recommendations.’’
3. The Additional Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, during the course of
his evidence before the Committee on the 9th October, 2007, gave an idea about the remarkable
achievement made by the Indian Pharmaceutical industry in the production of drugs and
pharmaceuticals in the Indian market as well as export market in the last few decades. The country
was rated as the fourth largest producer of drugs in the world. In addition to industry’s growth,
the service sector of pharmaceutical industry was also attracting global pharmaceutical industry.
Not only this, India has become a favourite destination for drugs related research. Its capability
was acknowledged by the fact that the largest number of USFDA approved sites outside the United
States were in our country. The Committee was given to understand that this encouraging scenario
was hampered by the weak and ineffective drug regulatory system in different States of the
country. Although the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 has been in force for more than half a

2
century, the implementation of this Act had been less than satisfactory. The main reasons for the
uneven levels of enforcement across the States, as cited by him are, non-uniformity in the
interpretation of the provisions of law and their implementation, varying levels of competence of
the regulatory officials and the lack of a comprehensive and effective Centralised regulatory system
in the nature of a Central Drugs Authority, as available in most of the countries of the world. He
explained that the problems in the drugs regulatory system in the country are further compounded
by shortage of drug inspectors, inadequate and weak drugs control infrastructure at the State and
Central levels, inadequate testing facilities, lack of specially trained cadres for specific regulatory
areas, non-existence of data banks, non-availability of accurate information, etc. thereby resulting
in a steady deterioration of the regulatory system. The existing weak and fragmented drugs
regulatory system had failed to deal effectively with the changing scenario in the drugs sector.
4. Keeping in view the wide-ranging national concern about the quality and efficacy of drugs
and pharmaceuticals and an urgent need for a world-class drugs regulatory system in the country,
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare constituted an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship
of Dr. R.A. Mashelker, Director-General, CSIR in 2003 to suggest further measures to improve the
control and management of drugs administration in the country. The Committee examined the
broader issues by looking at the recommendations of earlier Committees (Hathi Committee Report
of 1975, the Pharmaceutical Research and Development Committee Report of 1999) as well as
relevant policies (Drugs Policy, 1986, Drugs Policy, 1994, Pharmaceutical Policy, 2002, Health
Policy, 2002). The Committee also examined the drugs regulatory systems prevailing in large
number of countries around the world. Part ‘A’ of the Mashelkar Committee Report submitted in
November, 2003, contained recommendations related to amendments for improvement in the drugs
regulatory infrastructure in the country including setting up of a Central Drugs Authority and a
system of centralized licensing. The Committee was given to understand that the Drugs and
Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007 has been brought forward pursuant to the aforesaid
recommendations of the Mashelker Committee.
5. Due to the far-reacting implications of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a Press
Release seeking the views from all the stakeholders as well as public at large. In response, the
Committee had received a large number of memoranda. After scrutinizing them, the Committee felt
that for an in-depth examination of all conceivable aspects connected with the Bill, it was necessary
to interact with all the stakeholders. The Committee, accordingly, visited Karnataka (Bangalore),
Kerala (Thiruvanthapuram), Tamil Nadu (Chennai) and Andhra Pradesh (Hyderabad), from 7th to
14th January, 2008; Madhya Pradesh (Indore), Gujarat (Ahmedabad) Maharashtra (Mumbai) and
Goa (Panajim) from 12th to 19th February, 2008. These were the States with maximum (about
75%) concentration of the drugs manufacturing units.
6. During these study visits, the Committee had the opportunity to interact with all the
stake-holders directly, right from the representatives of the small and medium pharmaceutical
companies, representatives of associations of drug manufacturers, cosmetics industry, medical
devices industry, pharmacists, chemists, Drug Inspectors’ associations, Drug Controllers’
associations, NGOs and Consumers’ fora and representatives of State Governments. Besides, the
Committee also held a series of meetings in Delhi where quite a few witnesses representing
different Government agencies involved in the implementation of the Act appeared before it. Finally,
the Committee also heard Dr. R.A. Mashelker, whose Report has been projected as the very basis
of the Bill. These interactions enabled the Committee to understand the complexities and problems
prevailing in the existing regulatory system, and also the lack of co-ordination between the Central
and the State Governments in the context of carrying out its various functions. The Committee also
sought the views of the Department on the various issues/apprehensions raised by the stakeholders
through detailed questionnaire as well as direct discussion with the Health Secretary and his team
of officers. It would not be wrong to conclude that this exercise re-confirmed the Committee’s

3
observations and recommendations contained in the Report. The Committee would like to emphasize
that during this prolonged exercise, Committee’s endeavor was to make an objective assessment of
the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill 2007 and report thereon.
7. The clauses where amendments have been suggested by the Committee are discussed
in the succeeding paragraphs.
8. CLAUSE-2
8.1 Section 3 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 deals with ‘definitions’. Clause 2(i) seeks
to insert the definition of the term ‘clinical trial’ as follows:—
“(aaii) “clinical trial” means systematic study of any drug or cosmetic in human subjects
to generate data for discovering or verifying its clinical, pharmacological (including
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic) or adverse effects with the objective of determining
safety, efficacy or tolerance of the drug or the cosmetic;”
An objective analysis of the definition of ‘clinical trial’ indicates that allopathic drugs as well as
Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani (ASU) drugs, medical devices and its associated products and
cosmetics will be brought under its purview.
8.2 During the course of its interactions with representatives of a number of Ayurvedic, Unani
and Siddha (ASU) drug manufacturers’ associations, emphatic objections were raised on the
proposed inclusion of ASU drugs under the ambit of Clinical Trials. Main reason cited was that
ASU medicines being not formulated on the lines of modern medicines, it required different
approach for assessing their efficacy and utility. Their exclusion from the scope of clinical trial
was, accordingly, advocated by them. The Committee had the opportunity to ascertain the views
of representatives of ASU Drug Technical Advisory Board on various provisions of the Bill. On a
specific query about clinical trial of ASU drugs being envisaged in the Bill, it was clarified to the
Committee that clinical trial of ASU drugs needed to be based on different parameters and restricted
only to new drugs. The Committee was given to understand that in the case of ASU drugs, clinical
trial was only validation of the claims mentioned in the classical literature and pharmacopeias
without any change being made in the ingredients and method of preparation. Clinical trials were
also being carried out for the same formulation but for a different disease without changing the
composition. It was, accordingly, suggested that definition of ‘clinical trial’ in the context of ASU
drugs should be specifically in accordance with their traditional concepts and classical scriptures.
8.3 Representatives from the Cosmetic industry, who appeared before the Committee, stated
that the definition of ‘clinical trial’ was too wide and not in line with the definition of ‘Cosmetics’
as given in the Act. It was pointed out that the impact of cosmetics on human body could not
be equated with that of drugs since the physiological and therapeutic use of both were completely
different. Agreeing to the fact that cosmetics and its related products also needed to be regulated,
they were of the opinion that instead of clinical trial for cosmetics, the words ‘dermatological
safety studies’  may be substituted in the Bill for ascertaining their safety and efficacy.
8.4 The Committee had the opportunity to interact with a number of representatives from the
medical devices industry also. With the inclusion of the term ‘medical device’ under the definition of
the term ‘drug’, definition of the term ‘clinical trial’ was also applicable on the medical devices. It
was, however, pointed out that medical devices differed significantly from drugs. Accordingly, the
definition of clinical trial of medical devices needed to be in accordance with their components and
utility and formulated in such a manner that it was” consistent with the international standards, i.e.
the definition of Global Harmonization Task Force - the international body regulating medical devices.
8.5 In reply to a specific query regarding the appropriateness of clubbing the clinical trial of
medical devices, a different class of product from drugs, under one umbrella definition of the terms

4
‘clinical trial’, the Ministry admitted that owing to the distinct nature and functions of medical
devices, it would be appropriate to give a separate definition for their clinical trial.
8.6 The Committee, after analysing the opinion of the stakeholders, is of the view that
even though ASU drugs are formulated by methods different from that used for modern
allopathic drugs, the chances of harm that a drug - either modern or ASU, may likely cause
are similar and cannot be ruled out. The Committee would also like to point out that
definition of ‘drug’ as given in the Act is applicable to both allopathic and ASU drugs. The
Committee, therefore, opines that Ayurvedic, Unani and Siddha drugs should not be
excluded from the scope of definition of clinical trial of drugs.
8.7 The Committee is inclined to agree with the contention of representatives of the
cosmetics industry that physiological and therapeutic impact of drugs and cosmetics on
human body is completely different. Therefore, there is a need to separate trials of
cosmetics from drugs so far as the case of ascertaining their safety and efficacy is
concerned. Such a study may be carried out on human volunteers under pre-defined test
conditions as per standard industry protocol to ascertain the performance safety and efficacy
of a cosmetic. The Committee’s attention has also been drawn by ever-increasing number
of cosmetic products including Ayurvedic and herbal products flooding the market-both
domestic and international. Reports indicating harmful effects of some of such products on
consumers also continue to be received. Main reason for such a situation is lack of any
effective mechanism to check such products. The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that
like clinical trial envisaged for drugs, similar provision should be there for regulating the
dermatological safety studies for cosmetics. Necessary modification in the Bill may,
accordingly, be made.
8.8 The Committee feels that the issue raised by the medical devices industry for having
a separate definition of clinical trial for medical devices is very pertinent. It is convinced
that owing to the distinct nature and functions of medical devices from that of the drugs,
a separate definition of clinical trials for medical devices would be necessary. The
Committee also takes note of the clarification given by the Ministry that medical devices
are a separate and distinct category. Due to exigency, a few medical devices were being
treated under the category of drugs. Now suitable amendment would be made to put these
under the category of medical devices, to be defined separately in the Act. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that a separate definition of clinical trial for medical devices may
be included in the Act. The Committee is also of the opinion that the definition of clinical
trial for medical devices may be formulated in such a manner that it is consistent with the
international standards which may read as follows:—
“Any systematic investigation or study in or on human subjects, undertaken to
assess the safety and/or performance of a medical device”
8.9 Committee’s attention was also drawn to another drawback in the definition of the term
‘clinical trial’ by a number of stakeholders. It was pointed out that the use of words ‘any drug’
in the definition implied that clinical trial of all types of drugs whether new or already in circulation
could be conducted. The Committee also took note of the fact that already a definition of ‘clinical
trial’ as given under rule 122 DAA of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, specifically mentions
only ‘new drug’. It was accordingly, suggested that the proposed definition of ‘clinical trial’ should
relate only to new drugs. The Committee is inclined to agree with the suggestion in view
of the fact that all substances intended for use as components of a drug are included
under the definition of ‘drug’ given in the Principal Act. Thus a product with a
marketing authorization, when used or assembled in a different form, can be considered a
new drug.

5
8.10 The Committee would also like to point out that the term ‘any drug’ gives rise to
apprehensions about chances of clinical trial of drugs in circulation taking place due to unhealthy
competition among pharmaceutical companies. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the
words “any drug” in Clause 2 (i) (aaii) be replaced with the words “any new drug”. The
Committee also observes that with the definition of ‘clinical trial’ being included in the Act,
there was no need of having the same in the Rules.
8.11 Clause 2 (ii) of the Bill seeks to substitute the definition of ‘medical device’ as given in
Section 3 (iv) of the Act by a more elaborate definition reproduced below:—
“drug” includes
“(iv) such medical device, medicated device, instrument, apparatus, appliance, material,
software necessary for their application, intended for internal or external use in human
beings or animals, whether used alone or in combination, as may be specified from time
to time by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, after consultation
with the Central Drugs Authority, for the purpose of diagnosis, prevention, monitoring,
treatment or mitigation of any disease or disorder; diagnosis, monitoring, treatment,
alleviation of or compensation for, any injury or handicap; investigation, replacement or
modification of anatomy or physiology; or control of conception, and which does not
achieve its intended action primarily by any pharmacological or immunological or metabolical
process, but is included in the pharmacopoeias mentioned in the Second Schedule;”;
8.12 It was strongly advocated by the representatives of the medical devices industry appearing
before the Committee that instead of including medical devices under the definition of drugs, they
needed to be treated as an independent entity, as both were two different classes of products so
far as their manufacturing, use and outcomes were concerned. It was also clarified that medical
devices comprised three categories of products, viz. Implantable Devices, In-Vitro Diagnostic
Products and Medical Electronic Products. Implantable Devices were implanted within the human
body ranging from syringes/needles to coronary stents. In-Vitro Diagnostic Products covered entire
range of equipments, devices etc. for diagnosis of all types of diseases such as Diabetes, Cancer,
T.B. etc. Medical Electronic Products were used in any hospital set up. It was, accordingly,
suggested that the Global Harmonization Task Force ( GHTF) definition of ‘medical devices’ should
be inserted, being more comprehensive, covering intended uses not covered in the proposed
definition and ‘encompassing the broad and diverse range of medical devices in use today and in
foreseeable future.
8.13 Another problem area highlighted was the industry’s experience with regulation of the few
categories of medical devices presently covered under the Act, although limited but being far from
satisfactory. While agreeing to the fact that medical devices and its related products have remained
improperly regulated over the past few decades, it was also pointed out that with the development
of new advanced technology and rapidly increasing product range every year, it would become
extremely difficult to conform to and get regulated by the existing regulations/standards. Another
point raised was that while imported Medical Devices were being registered, for indigenous Medical
Devices the process was yet to be implemented, thus putting the local industry at disadvantage so
far as their export was concerned. An additional menace faced by the Medical Device industry was
device re-use beyond the recommended usage cycles. Presently, there was no provision looking
into the regulation of this crucial aspect. It was, accordingly, suggested that a separate chapter for
Medical Devices offering a ‘comprehensive legal framework’ needed to be included in the Act.
8.14 The Committee finds logic in the view aired by the medical devices industry that the
current system is inadequate in regulating certification, quality assurance and post
marketing surveillance of both imported and locally made medical devices. Given the fact

6
that use of medical devices in healthcare is increasing day by day and also the fact that the
industry was at a growing stage, proper regulation is required to meet safety and efficacy
norms as also to meet global standards and competitiveness of the medical devices products.
The Committee also observes that the Mashelker Committee, in its Report, had dwelt at
length on the issue of regulation of medical devices in the country. It was emphasized
therein that the medical devices should be specifically defined and relevant rules and
guidelines framed for their proper regulation. The other two major recommendations of the
Committee were (i) the setting up of a specific Medical Devices Division for proper
management of approval, certification and quality of medical devices and an appropriate
regulatory mechanism for certification, quality assurance and post-marketing surveillance of
both imported and indigenous medical devices. The Committee is however, surprised to note
that the only action proposed in the Bill was substitution of existing definition of medical
device by a more detailed definition. Another disturbing feature was continuance of medical
devices under drugs. The Committee also feels that mere inclusion of medical devices in the
pharmacopeias mentioned in the Second Schedule of the Act along with drugs will not serve
the purpose.
8.15 On being asked about the appropriateness of making separate provisions for the
regulation, surveillance and monitoring of medical devices, the Ministry had replied in the
affirmative. It was assured that keeping in view the distinct nature and functions of medical
devices, the same would be defined separately with specific provisions for their regulation,
surveillance and monitoring. The Committee, therefore,’ recommends that suitable
modifications may be made in the Act with a separate chapter covering all the related
aspects of regulation of medical devices. The Committee also strongly feels that a dedicated
division as recommended by the Mashelkar Committee may be set up to deal with
regulation, licensing, surveillance and monitoring of uniform implementation of the laws on
medical devices in the country. The Committee also recommends that a comparative
analysis of the GHTF definition of Medical devices and the proposed definition in the Bill
may be made and should be followed by necessary modifications in the definition of ‘medical
device.
8.16 Committee’s attention was drawn towards another draft Medical Devices Regulation Bill
floated in the public domain by the Department of Science and Technology. On being specifically
asked about the implications of this development on the proposed legislation before the Committee,
the Ministry clarified that as the present Bill included medical devices, the replication of it by the
Department of Science and Technology appeared to be uncalled for. Views of the Ministry have
already been conveyed to the Cabinet Secretariat. The Committee fails to understand the
circumstances leading to such an initiative by the Department of Science and Technology
with the nodal Ministry obviously being taken unaware. The Committee can only hope that
this issue is resolved at the earliest.
9. CLAUSE-3
9.1 Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to introduce a new Chapter lA in the Act, relating to
CENTRAL DRUGS AUTHORITY. Section 5 under the new Chapter lA provides for constitution
of a Central Drugs Authority. Relevant provisions read as follows:—
“5. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Authority to be known as the Central Drugs Authority of India.
(3) The Central Drugs Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and not more than five
but at the least three, Members to be appointed by the Central Government by notification
in the Official Gazette.

7
5A. The Chairperson and Members of the Central Drugs Authority shall be appointed
by the Central Government from amongst persons who have special knowledge of, and at
the least fifteen years’ professional experience in pharmaceutical industry, research or
teaching, or public administration, finance or law:
Provided that a person who is, or has been, in the service of Government shall not
be appointed as a Chairperson or Member unless such person has held the post of Secretary
and Additional Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the Central
Government or a State Government or a public sector undertaking.”
9.2 Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill mentions that the proposed constitution of
Central Drugs Authority is based on the specific recommendation made by the Mashelker
Committee in this regard. Status note submitted by the Ministry and subsequent interactions of the
Committee with its representatives gave the genesis of this proposal. It was informed that the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 had been in force for more than half a century but the
implementation of the Act has been less than satisfactory. The main reasons for this were uneven
levels of enforcement across the States, non-uniformity in the interpretation of the provisions of
law and their im plementation, varying levels of competence of the regulatory officials and the lack
of a comprehensive and effective centralized regulatory system in the nature of a Central Drugs
Authority, as was available in many countries in the world. It was also explained that inspite of
the Central Government’s repeated efforts to strengthen the State Drug Control Organizations and
Central Drug Standard Control Organisation—through various schemes, like the Capacity Building
Project implemented with the help of the World Bank, during the last four decades, the situation
in many States has remained disheartening. The CDSCO had also been functioning with the
limitation of being a branch of the Central Government.
9.3 Against this background, an Expert Committee under the chairmanship of Dr. R.A.
Mashelker was constituted by the Government in 2003. The Committee examined the broader
issues by looking at the recommendations of earlier Committees (Hathi Committee Report of 1975,
the Pharmaceutical Research and Development Committee Report of 1999) as well as Drugs Policy,
1986, Drugs Policy, 1994, Pharmaceutical Policy, 2002 and Health Policy , 2002. The Committee
also interacted with all the stakeholders. It was recommended by the Committee that the most
appropriate solution would be a strong, well equipped and professionally managed Central Drugs
Authority reporting directly to the Ministry. The existing organisation for drugs regulation in the
country at the central level, i.e. Central Drugs Standard and Control Organization (CDSCO) would
be restructured into a Central Drugs Authority which apart from the traditional functions of
CDSCO would address the new emerging fields pertaining to biotechnology products, medical
devices, diagnostics, new drugs and clinical trials etc.
9.4 During its extensive interactions with different stakeholders, representing the entire
spectrum of the pharmaceutical industry as well as the State authorities and central bodies, one
view which was emphatically impressed upon constantly was that it would not be desirable to
create a Central Drugs Authority, a small body having a wider mandate but lacking in representation
of technically qualified/experienced experts. It was also pointed out that the position was further
proposed to be made complicated and impractical by doing away with the two Drug Technical
Advisory Boards representing technical expertise from allopathic and ASU drug sector.
9.5 While the existing Drug Technical Advisory Boards (DTABs) are highly technical bodies
comprising of experts from various fields, the Central Drugs Authority would comprise of a
Chairperson and three to five members to be nominated by the Government from amongst eminent
persons having special knowledge of, and at least 15 years’ professional experience in
pharmaceutical industry, research or teaching or public administration, finance or law. The
proposed CDA was not considered to be a progressive reform-based step but actually a set-back

8
with the absence of required technical expertise from different fields. It was also felt that the
proposed CDA would simply create a resting ground for retired bureaucrats with technical experts
having minimal chances of becoming its members. It was, accordingly, advocated by some
stakeholders that CDA, if established, should be a more broad-based organisation having
representation of State Drug Control Organizations, pharmaceutical industry and professional and
Consumer associations etc.
9.6 Committee’s attention was also drawn, both duri ng its study visits and meetings at
Delhi, with all the witnesses representing different categories of stakeholders — be it small
and big pharma industry associations, various State Governments, Drugs Controllers/
Inspectors/Associations/ bodies/associations from ASU sector — that recommendation of the
Mashelker Committee was for a strong, well-equipped and professionally managed CDSCO,
to be given the status of Central Drugs Administration and not creation of a Central Drugs
Authority.
After making a comparative analysis of Mashelker Committee recommendations and
the different provisions of the Bill, the Committee was surprised to note that the contention
of various witnesses was justified. The Committee would like to point out the following
specific recommendation made by the Mashelker Committee.
“The existing infrastructure at the Centre and States was not adequate to perform the
assigned functions efficiently and speedily. Creating another authority such as a National
Drug Authority (NDA) will not solve the problem at hand. It was essential to strengthen
the existing organisations to enable them to undertake all the functions envisaged for
NDA. A strong, well equipped, empowered, independent and professionally managed
CDSCO, which could be given the status of Central Drug Administration (CDA),
reporting directly to Ministry of Health would be the most appropriate solution.’’
9.7 Feeling somewhat surprised by these conflicting reports, the Committee took up this
matter with the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in its meeting held on the
29th July, 2008. Admitting some important departures in the Bill from the Mashelkar Committee
recommendations, Secretary apprised the Committee that this deviation was reflected in the proposed
legislation only after discussion by the then Health Secretary with Dr. Mashelkar, as given in the file
notings. Realizing the complexity of the issue the Committee ascertained the views of Dr. Mashelkar
also in its meeting held on the 12th August, 2008. The Committee was given to understand that in
the light of considerable time gap between the Mashelkar Committee Report given in November, 2003
and proposed Bill coming up in 2007, ground realities have somewhat changed. A Central Drugs
Authority in place of a restructured CDSCO has now become a viable option.
9.8 The Committee observes that the Mashelkar Committee was an Expert Committee
constituted by the Government in 2003 to examine all the aspects relating to quality control
of drugs and their regulatory mechanism. The Committee also notes that the aforesaid
conclusive recommendation made by the Mashelkar Committee has been arrived at after
very intensive consultations with all the stakeholders. Not only this, in the Questionnaire
sent to all the State Drug Controllers by the Mashelkar Committee, one of the questions
asked was if CDSCO was to be strengthened, then would there be still a need for a National
Drug Authority. In response, 19 out of 31 States (with 4 no comments) stated that there
was a definite need to strengthen the Central Administration and if CDSCO could perform
the statutory functions efficiently, there was certainly no need of NDA. The Committee also
takes note of the fact that out of the 19 States which responded, five were Andhra Pradesh,
Goa, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu which belonged to the seven States having more
than 75 per cent drug manufacturing units in the country.

9
9.9 In order to have first-hand information at the ground level, the Committee had
undertaken study visits of all the States having 75 per cent of drug manufacturing units in
the country. The only exception was West Bengal. This exercise of the Committee was
supplemented by extensive discussions in a series of meetings held at Delhi and also
feedback received in response to the press release. It would not be wrong to conclude that
Committee’s experience has also matched with the Mashelker Committee’s findings. In view
of the above assessment, the Committee is not inclined to accept the reasoning offered by
the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for making such a major departure
from the recommendations made by an Expert Committee.
9.10 The Committee would also like to draw attention to the following statement made in
the Pharmaceutical Policy, 2002:—
“The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare would set up a world class Central Drugs
Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) by modernizing, restructuring and reforming the
existing system and establish an effective network of drugs standards enforcements
administrations in the States with the CDSCO as a nodal centre, to ensure high standards
of quality, safety and efficacy of drugs and pharmaceuticals.’’
9.11 The Committee fails to understand as to why, instead of implementing the
recommendations of the Mashelkar Committee for strengthening, modernizing,
restructuring and reforming the existing Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
(CDSCO) into a world class system, the Government has entered into a rigmarole of setting
up a new Authority. Central Drugs Authority, a small body primarily having members with
administrative background taking the place of the two Drug Technical Advisory Boards
having technical expertise from allopathic and ASU drug sector, is simply not acceptable to
the Committee. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the setting up of a “Central Drug
Administration” as an independent body under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
with its headquarters at Delhi, with its Zonal and Sub-Zonal offices at State level, by
strengthening, modernizing and restructuring the CDSCO.
9.12 The Ministry, while informing the Committee on the manner in which it planned to
restructure the CDA , elaborated that in the proposed CDA , the CDSCO with its Headquarters,
Zonal Offices, Sub-Zonal Offices, Port Offices, Laboratories and Training Centre, would be
absorbed into it. Thereafter, the CDA would become functional with 10 Divisions at the
Headquarters. In addition to new Zonal Offices and Sub-Zonal Offices, new Laboratories would be
created and some of the existing Sub-Zonal Offices would be up-graded to Zonal Offices and the
Laboratories would be strengthened, restructured and reoriented. The proposed CDA would have
ten distinct divisions to handle all the areas. These ten divisions would be:—
(1) Division for Regulatory Affairs, Enforcement, Legal and Consumer Affairs,
(2) Division for New Drugs and Clinical Trials,
(3) Division for Biological and Biotechnology Products,
(4) Division for Pharmacovigilance/Drugs Safety,
(5) Division for Medical Devices and Diagnostics,
(6) Division for Imports,
(7) Division for Organisational Services and Finance,
(8) Division for Quality Control Affairs,

10
(9) Division for Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy,
(10) Division for Training and International Cooperation.
9.13 The Committee observes that broadly speaking, the proposed set up under the
Central Drugs Authority is based on the set-up of Central Drug Administration proposed by
the Mashelkar Committee. Ten Divisions are proposed under both the set-ups, the only
difference being a separate division of Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy under
the Ministry set-up. Another major difference between the two set-ups is that the Central
Drugs Authority would be replacing the two drugs Technical Advisory Boards and performing
their functions and also advising the Drug Controller General (I), who will be the Member-
Secretary of CDA on all matters relating to drugs and cosmetics. Since the Committee is
not in favour of creation of a separate “Central Drugs Authority”, and has recommended
the restructuring of CDSCO as “Central Drug Administration” - an independent body under
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Central Drug Administration as suggested
by the Mashelker Committee may be brought into effect as early as possible.
9.14 Representatives of the organisations from AYUSH-sector strongly advocated the need
for having an Additional Drug Controller (AYUSH), keeping in view the ever increasing
acceptance of AYUSH drugs. The Committee is inclined to agree with this viewpoint. The
Committee finds that the Ministry, while elaborating the proposed plan of expansion of the
offices and the necessary expansion in the number of senior-level officers and supporting
staff that would be required for its efficient functioning under the CDA, has stated that the
post of Drug Controller General (India) would be raised from the present level of the grade
of Joint Secretary to Government of India to that of the grade of Additional Secretary to
Government of India.
It was also proposed to revive one post of Additional Drugs Controller (AYUSH) to
assist DCG (I) in the quality control and regulation of ASU products, and along with it, one
more post of Additional Drugs Controller (India) was proposed to be created for assisting
DCG (I) in all other matters.
9.15 The Committee observes that in view of the wider mandate of a “Central Drug
Administration” necessary expansion in the number of senior-level officers and supporting
staff would be required for its efficient functioning. The Committee has been informed that
an elaborate plan of expansion has been approved and being brought into shape. A special
drive to fill up all the vacant posts in the CDSCO and the Drug Labs was already underway.
62 new posts of Drug Inspectors and 10 posts of Technical officers have already been created
for strengthening of CDSCO and mitigating the problem of shortage of Drug Inspectors to
some extent. The Committee observes this as a welcome measure.
9.16 Under new chapter lA, Section 5B speaks of the term of office of Chairperson and
Members, of Central Drugs Authority; Section 5C relates to salaries, allowances, pensions
and other conditions of service of Members, Section 5 D is regarding vacancies, etc. not to
invalidate proceedings and Section 5 E refers to staff of the Central Drugs Authority.
In view of the Committee’s disagreement with the Ministry’s proposal for creating a
separate Central Drugs Authority, Sections 5B, 5C, 5D, and 5E mentioned above stand void.
9.17 Section 5F under new chapter 1A deals with the Powers and Functions of Central Drugs
Authority.
Sub-clause (1) of Clause states as under:—
“5F. (1) The Central Drugs Authority may issue licences under clause (c) of section 10,
clause (c) of section 18 and clause (c) of section 33EEC, and collect fees therefor.”

11
9.18 The Committee notes that the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, is a central legislation and
is implemented by the Central and State Governments together. Under the Act, the following are
the responsibilities of the Central Government—
1. Clearance (Market approval) of new drugs;
2. Laying down of standards;
3. Control over import of drugs and cosmetics;
4. Enactment of legislation; and
5. Licensing under the Central Licensing Approving Authority  (CLAA) schemes.
The responsibilities of State Government are as follows:-
1. Licensing of manufacture of drugs;
2. Licensing for sale of drugs; and
3. Post Marketing Surveillance.
9.19 The Ministry has informed that one of the major problems faced in enforcement of the rules
and regulations under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act was the non-uniformity of licensing process
among the Centre and States. In spite of repeated pleas made by the National Human Rights
Commission, Hathi Committee, Estimates Committee (7th Lok Sabha) for the Central Government
to assume the responsibility for granting manufacturing licenses, the same could not be
implemented for one reason or the other. Therefore, the Bill proposes to streamline the licensing
activity by shifting the drug manufacturing license issuing power from the States to the Centre.
States will be, thus, responsible only for granting licenses for stock, distribution and sale of drugs
and to carry out Post Marketing Surveillance on the quality of drugs moving in the market. The
Ministry stated that it will give the needed focus and uniformity to the work of licensing and
manufacturing on the one hand, while allowing the States to pay greater attention to the distribution
aspect, which appears currently somewhat neglected. The regulatory system, therefore, would
become more effective. It was also stated that the bringing in of a Central Drugs Authority with
licensing functions will also help in the creation of data banks, especially with respect to
manufacture and licensing of drugs.
9.20 During the Committee’s interactions with the stakeholders – drug manufacturers’
associations, State Drug Controllers’ associations, experts and also State Governments, strong
apprehensions were expressed by majority of them on the proposed switching over to centralized
licensing of drug manufacturing activities in the country. Undue delays in grant and renewal of
licenses, difficulties in filing of appeal by manufacturing units located far from Delhi and lack of
incentives for the industry to set up their units in backward areas were the main reservations
expressed. It was also argued that the existing system is superior to the proposed central licensing
on the grounds that it offers better control of the drug manufacturing units as the authority has
to control one State only. It was also pointed out by many State Governments and the State Drug
Controllers that the fee for grant of licenses, product permission and various certificates being the
only source of revenue for State Drug Departments, centralized licensing would cause loss of
revenue to the State Governments. One centralised agency like CDA dealing with the issue of
licensing for manufacture, distribution and sale of drugs across the country that too without the
assistance of DTAB and Ayurveda Siddha Unani Drug Technical Advisory Board (ASUDTAB) was
not considered a practical proposition.
9.21 The Committee found that it was a general perception among majority of the
stakeholders that with the Centralized licensing coming into effect, every activity including

12
procedural formalities would be centered in Delhi leading to number of hurdles being faced
by the drug manufacturing units, specially small units. The Committee, however, observes
that the apprehension stands suitably addressed, keeping in view the fact that CDA through
its network of Zonal and Sub-Zonal offices and port offices would have its presence in most
of the States where there is significant concentration of drug manufacturing activity. This
would also facilitate Centralized licensing and Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)
Certification. Besides, these offices would also take care of concerns regarding inordinate
delays in issuance of licenses etc. raised by the stakeholders subsequent to centralized
licensing coming into force. The Committee is of the view that in this age of IT
advancement, the restructured CDSCO with its ten divisions having a well-defined
jurisdiction and network of subordinate offices spread across the country, apprehension
about delay factor do not seem to be genuine. The notion of the States that the existing
system is superior to the proposed central licensing on the grounds that it offers better
control by the States pre-supposes the existence of an efficient infrastructure and quality
of enforcements in every State. The Committee observes that this assumption is far
removed from the ground realities in majority of the States.
9.22 In this regard, the Committee takes note of the specific recommendation for
licensing of drug manufacturing units by the Central Drug Administration made by the
Mashelkar Committee after a detailed analysis of ground realities, recommendations of
earlier expert Committees and views of all the stakeholders. Issue of non-uniformity of
enforcement at the State level with regard to quality control of drugs was the main factor
behind such a recommendation made by all the bodies like NRHC, Hathi Committee,
Estimates Committee (Seventh Lok Sabha) and Mashelkar Committee. Committee’s
attention has been drawn by the guiding principle driving this suggestion, aptly summarized
in para 33 of the Hathi Committee Report quoted below:—
“quality control of products manufactured anywhere in India was not solely the
responsibility of the State in which the manufacturing unit is located, since the
product is sold all over the country. If a unit in one State was allowed to
manufacture and market a product of substandard quality, this would nullify the
measures taken by other States. It was essential that the Central Government
should assume responsibility for ensuring statutory enforcement and control over the
manufacture of drugs all over  the country.”
9.23 The Committee agrees with the assessment made by all the earlier Committees that
there was an urgent need for having a world class drug regulatory system in the country
which can effectively handle the health concerns of one sixth of humanity. The Committee
can only reiterate that wherever the health and safety of life of the people is concerned,
cutting across regional/State specific interests/issues, the emphasis should be protecting the
same.
9.24 On being asked as to how the Ministry proposes to centralise the licensing activity, the
Secretary, while deposing before the Committee at its meeting held on 29th July, 2008, stated that
progressive central licensing through reforming and expanding the existing Central Licensing
Approving Authority (CLAA) system, rather than by the State by State method, was a more feasible
proposition. He clarified that in order to avoid the resultant ambiguity of jurisdiction by the Centre
as well as the States; it was thought best that by including more and more health products under
the existing CLAA system, it would result in a progressive increase in the number of centrally
licensed items leading to a gradual shift of the licensing activity from State to Centre.
9.25 The Committee notes that presently, under the CLAA system, following items are being
licensed concurrently by the State and Central licensing authorities:

13
– Human blood and blood products.
– Seral vaccines.
– Large volume parenterals.
– Medical devices except needle, syringes and perfusion sets.
The representatives from quite a number of drug manufacturing organisations pointed out
that a lot of bottlenecks were being faced by them under the CLAA system. It was stated that
undue delays in grant and renewal of licenses for the above categories of products were a constant
source of discomfiture for them.
9.26 The Committee’s attention has been drawn to the following specific excerpts from the
Mashelker Committee Report:—
“The matter of licensing of manufacturing units by Central Government has been
considered on several occasions in the past. During 1988-89, the reports of poor quality
of I V fluids and substandard blood made the Central Government focus on the issue of
having a stricter control on these products. This resulted in the amendment of Rules to
provide for dual licensing mechanism in December 1992, the Central authority being the
License Approving Authority (CLAA) and the States being the license giving authorities.
The idea was to improve the quality and implement uniform norms but the experience
has not been encouraging. The change, however, has not made the desired level of
impact.’’
“The National Human Rights Commission in their order of 1999 clearly stated that:
the present dual system of control does not appear to have achieved desired
effectiveness, therefore, Central Government must immediately take steps to
examine the entire system of Licensing (including loan licensing), Certification and
Complaint handling under effective Central Government control through CLAA or
other suitable means”.
9.27 T he Committee observes that though the method of progressive increase in the
number of items under CLAA seems to be a good measure aimed at smooth transition of
the licensing activity from the States to the Centre, it has its own apprehensions regarding
the timely disposal of applications, effective co-ordination with the industry, interpretation
of law under the CLAA system. The facts stated above by the witnesses and supported by
the findings of the Mashelkar Committee all point out that the present mechanism under
the CLAA system is far from satisfactory. The Committee was also given to understand that
the number of units involved was very large, volume of records need to be handled was also
enormous and every unit would have to be inspected after one year. Keeping in view the
tremendous strain the above-mentioned exercise was likely to have on the Central
Government; transition period from State licensing to centralized licensing may be spread
over a period of ten years. On Committee’s showing its concern on such a long time-span,
Secretary, Health admitted that it was too long a period. He assumed that every effort would
be made to switch over to centralized licensing in six to seven years.
9.28 The Committee was surprised to note that the proposed move was in direct
contravention to the roadmap in three phases drawn by the Mashelkar Committee for
implementation of centralized licensing. During Phase-I, the manpower was to be
strengthened and infrastructure of Central Drug Administration was to be in place.
Expansion of zonal and sub-zonal offices, creation of additional infrastructure for new
offices in States, creation of considerable number of additional senior level and supporting
posts are the specific requirements for implementation of the above recommendation.

14
During Phase-II, the licensing functions of States having minimum concentration of
manufacturing units were to be shifted to the Centre, and during Phase-III, licensing in
seven States having maximum concentration of drug manufacturing units (75 per cent) of
licenses was to be taken over by the Central Drug Administration. All this exercise was to
be completed within a span of three years.
9.29 On being asked about reasons for not accepting this specific recommendation of the
Mashelkar Committee, the Secretary informed that this issue was also discussed with
Dr. Mashelkar who has agreed to the progressive transfer from the State Licensing to the
Central licensing rather than going State by State. The Committee has its own reservations
on not going for the roadmap having a specific time frame drawn by the Expert Committee
for switch-over to centralized licensing which was the outcome of extensive interactions with
all concerned based on the ground-realties.: The Committee would also like to point out
that so far no plan of action having a specific time-limit has been drawn by the Ministry.
As indicated by the representative of the Ministry, it can be anywhere from five to ten
years. Apprehension of the Committee on this vital issue is strengthened by the fact that
a reputed consultancy firm/consultant would be engaged by the Ministry for suggesting the
roadmap based on the best practices available across the globe. The Committee can only
conclude that against such a background, chances of things falling into place in the near
future seem to be very dim. The Committee feels that the roadmaps drawn by the
Mashelkar Committee is backed by sound logic and fully endorses the line of action pointed
out by it for implementing the centralized licensing of drug manufacturing units. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that every effort should be made for
implementing the same within the specified time-frame.
9.30 An important issue that was raised by several witnesses was that the Bill was silent about
the grievance redressal mechanism. It was pointed out that whereas under the present system of
licensing where licenses are issued by the State Licensing Authorities, an aggrieved party can file
the appeal with the State Government, the appeal shall lie with the Central Government, irrespective
of the State where the unit filing the appeal is located if the licensing system is centralized. With
the power to grant, renew, suspend or cancel the licenses being given to the proposed CDA, this
would result in undue hardship, wastage of precious time and additional financial burden especially
to small scale units located far away from the CDA. The licensee would have to file an appeal
against the order of CDA before the Central Government and therefore, run to the Centre frequently
for redressal.
9.31 In reply to a specific query on the issue, the Ministry has stated that the appeal would lie
with the Government (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare) and the provisions in this regard will
be accordingly incorporated in the proposed Bill which would read as under:—
“Any person aggrieved by a decision of the CDA(I) passed under section 5(F) may within
ninety days of the date of such decision prefer an appeal to the Central Government and
the Central Government, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, shall pass
a reasoned order”.
9.32 The Committee is inclined to agree to the view-point of the stakeholders that they
would be at a serious disadvantage in terms of undue hardship, wastage of precious time
and additional financial burden especially for small scale units located far away from Delhi.
Since the Centre would be carrying out its licensing operations from its various zonal and
sub zonal offices placed in each State/UT, the Committee recommends that the appellate
authority for grievance redressal of the aggrieved party should be placed in such offices,
keeping in mind the comparative disadvantages that the small scale pharma units would
otherwise face.

15
9.33 Section 5-I provides for creation of a Fund that would be called Central Drugs Authority
of India Fund which reads as follows:—
“5-I. ( 1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Central Drugs Authority
of India Fund and there shall be credited thereto—
(a) all grants, fees and charges received by the Central Drugs Authority under this Act;
and
(b) all sums received by the Central Drugs Authority from such other sources as may
be determined by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Chairperson and other
Members and the administrative expenses, including the salaries, allowances and
pensions payable to or in respect of the Drugs Controller General (India) and other
officers and employees of the Central Drugs Authority; and
(b) the expenses to carry out the objects and purposes of this Act.”
9.34 The Ministry had informed the Committee that initially, the Central Government would
provide grants for running of the CDA. It will have financial autonomy to the extent that it will
retain the revenues earned by it to be utilised for its operational expenses. During the first 5 years,
all the revenues of CDA will be met through license fee and other ancillary functions. Details about
the proposed earnings of CDA as indicated by the Ministry are given as below:—
“Presently the CDSCO earns revenues through import registration fees, new drug
registration, license fees etc. Once the CDA becomes functional, it is proposed to add new
fees for GMP certification inspection and to increase the rate of present fees for import
registration (started in 2002), new drug registration (started in 2002), license for
manufacturing/ inspection/products (revised in 2001) and clinical trials (started in 2002).
It has been assumed that while there would not be any regular yearly appreciable increase
in the category of new drug registration and license fees, the other fee categories
would show an increase of 5% per annum. While expenditure of CDA would vary from
Rs.7.30 crore (in year 1) to Rs.23.67 crore (in year 10), the revenue of the proposed
Authority would vary from Rs.21.31 crore (in year 1) to Rs.32.94 crore (in year 10).
Hence, the net inflows of CDA would vary from Rs.14.07 crore (in year 1) to
Rs.9.27 crore (in year 10). Reason for downward trend in the cash flow is because it has
been calculated on the assumption that the rate of various fees would remain constant over
the 10 year period. If, however, the fees were to be enhanced at a 5 yearly interval then
the cash flows would undergo a change.”
9.35 The Committee notes that the proposed Fund for Central Drugs Authority will be
receiving all grants, fees and charges levied for different purposes. Only initial funds are
sought to be provided by the Central Government The Committee apprehends that this
would be grossly inadequate. Given the fact that strengthening of the CDSCO as Central
Drug Administration would require expanding the Zonal and Sub-zonal offices, creation of
additional infrastructure for new offices in the States and manpower to match equally, for
setting up a world class Central Drug Administration, substantive additional funds would be
required for such activities. The Committee strongly feels that the Central Government will
have to play a major role. In view of majority of the States facing funds constraints, the
required funds will have to be provided by the Central Govt. It, therefore, suggests that
like major social sector central/centrally sponsored schemes, the task of setting up a world

16
class Central Drug Administration may be taken up in a mission mode. Accordingly, a
Central Fund meant for Central Drug Administration with major contribution from the
Centre in the form of a Corpus Fund may be set up.
9.36. Section 5L under new chapter lA deals with Power to make Rules
It provides that the Central Government may, after consultation with, or on the
recommendation of the Central Drugs Authority may make rules relating to the functioning of CDA.
In view of the Committee’s disagreement with the proposal for creating a separate
Central Drugs Authority, Clause 5L stands void.
10. Clause 3 of the Bill also introduces another Chapter 1B, after Chapter lA, that deals with
the regulation of Clinical Trials.
10.1 Section 5N  under the new Chapter 1B,  which speaks about conducting Clinical Trial
without Permission, states that:—
“5N. No person shall conduct clinical trials in respect of any drug or cosmetic except
under, and in accordance with, the permission granted by the Central Drugs Authority.”
10.2 It was argued by a number of witnesses that Clause 5N will bring all post marketing clinical
trials and academic research to a complete halt. The surveillance studies generate useful data on
local population for drugs that are not tested extensively before marketing in India. To avoid such
situation, the word ‘‘Any Drug” used in the clause should be substituted by “Any Investigational
New Drug’’ . Clinical trials should be necessary only on new drugs which were at investigational
stage. It was also emphasized that the Confirmatory trials, Pilot trials, trials for submission to
foreign regulatory authorities and contract research trials may be exempted from this provision.
10.3 In the light of observations made by the Committee with regard to the definition of
the term ‘clinical trial’, permission for conducting clinical trials of only investigational new
drugs and cosmetics and medical devices may be included. Secondly, under the proposed
restructured CDSCO as envisaged by the Mashelkar Committee, out of the ten divisions
which would be functioning at the Headquarters, there are two separate divisions one for
New Drugs and Clinical Trials, and the other for Medical Devices and Diagnostics. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that these two Divisions may be entrusted with the
responsibility for granting permission for conducting clinical trials for drugs and
dermatological safety studies for cosmetics, and evaluation of safety and performance of
medical devices and other allied issues.
10.4 Section 5O regarding Punishment for Conducting Clinical Trial without Permission, lays
down that:—
“5O. ( 1) Whoever, him self or by any other person on his behalf, conducts clinical trials in
contravention of section 5N shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever having been convicted of an offence under subsection (1) is again
convicted of an offence under that sub-section, shall be punished with Imprisonment for a
term which may extend to ten years and with fine which may extend to twenty lakh rupees.”
10.5 Some of the stakeholders had pointed out that the punishment for conducting clinical trial
without permission was very harsh and it was likely that the students conducting academic
research in Government/Private Institutions or for post graduate courses may face such serious
consequences of harsh punishment merely due to not obtaining permission from the CDA out of
ignorance. In such cases liability should be fixed on the concerned institutions. It was also

17
suggested that a distinction was needed to be made between clinical trials conducted strictly in
accordance with the Good Clinical Practices and in compliance with all ethical requirements but
without obtaining permission and unauthorised clinical trials causing adverse impact or grievous
hurt to the volunteers. Lesser punishment of only fine may be prescribed and in such cases they
should be considered as compoundable offences.
10.6 The Committee, after carefully weighing the contention of the stakeholders as well
as of the Department, is of the view that the provisions of punishment, for conducting
Clinical trial without permission should be retained. Such a provision would act as a
deterrent for violators of law. The Committee is disinclined to agree that academic research
would be brought to a halt by such a provision. It contends that if the punishment norms
for academic research are relaxed, chances of drug manufacturing companies carrying out
trials through private institutions by financially supporting them cannot be ruled out. The
Committee suggests that in such cases the onus of proving themselves not guilty should be
fixed on the Institutions where the students are conducting academic research.
10.7 The Committee would also like to point out that a careful perusal of the clause
reveals that the punishment would vary with the degree and nature of violation. Thus the
question of this provision being very harsh does not arise. The Committee also feels that
punishments for cases related to ‘drugs’ and those related to ‘cosmetics’ should be separate
and clearly defined. Similarly, those cases related to ‘medical devices’ should be dealt
separately under a chapter concerning regulation of medical devices, as mentioned earlier.
11. CLAUSE-5
11.1 Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to omit Section 5 of the Principal Act, which relates to
constitution of the Drug Technical Advisory Board.
11.2 When asked to justify the abolition of the Drugs Technical Advisory Boards, the Ministry
clarified that under the existing provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, there are two
separate Drugs Technical Advisory Boards (DTABs), for the allopathic and ASU drugs. The DTAB
is a broad based body wherein, in addition to persons involved in regulatory system, representatives
from IMA, pharmaceutical manufacturers, Indian Pharmaceutical Associations etc. are also
included. It advises the Government on matters relating to implementation of provisions of D&C
Act and Rules made thereunder as well as to make suitable amendments in the Rules and
Regulations as per the requirements.
11.3 Clarifying a query regarding the justifiability of replacing the highly technical
eighteen-member DTAB with a small body like Central Drugs Authority, the Ministry stated that the
process of translating the recommendations of this advisory body into rules and regulations
inevitably results in some delay because of the procedures involved. This was sought to be
streamlined by empowering the CDA which would be replacing DTAB to formulate regulations
based on the recommendations of the DCC and its own expertise and analysis. It was further
clarified by the Ministry that the Drug Consultative Committee would be reconstituted to include
all the stake holders who were members in the erstwhile DTAB.
11.4 During its interactions, one view which was strongly advocated by all the stakeholders was
that the proposal to abolish the DTAB with CDA  taking its role was unjustified. It was pointed out
that such a move would inevitably lead to depriving the drug industry in the country from the
advice and expertise of this highly technical Board. It was also mentioned that such a proposal was
not there in the Mashelkar Committee Report.
11.5 The Committee is of the opinion that the DTAB is a highly technical body with
representation of experts from various fields and whose main function is to advise the

18
Central Government and the State Governments on technical matters arising out of the
administration of the Act and to carry out the other functions assigned to it under the Act.
Being the most important body under the Central Drug Administration, the Committee feels
that DTAB should be retained. The issue has been dealt with earlier also in this Report.
Hence, it recommends that Section 5 of the Principal Act which deals with the Constitution
and Composition of the Drugs Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) may be retained.
12. CLAUSE-6
12.1 Clause 6 of the Bill speaks of amending certain provisions of Section 6 of the Principal
Act which deals with the Central Drugs Laboratory
“6. In the principal Act, in section 6,—
(a) for the word “Laboratory”, wherever it occurs, the words “Laboratory or Laboratories”
 shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the word “Board”, the words “Central Drugs Authority” shall be
 substituted.”
12.2 The Ministry infonned the Committee that the Bill proposes that all the Central Drug
Laboratories be placed under the CDA as bringing all the drug laboratories under CDA will facilitate
proper planning, utilization of the capacities of these laboratories by restructuring and reorienting
their objectives and goals. For example, at present, almost all the laboratories are notified for
analyzing all categories of drugs, but some of the laboratories can be assigned with specific jobs
like testing of medical devices, testing of cosmetics etc. Based on the techniques of analysis, each
laboratory can be given a focus on a specific technique like chromatography, microbiology,
instructional biology etc. and such focus will facilitate creation of expertise and capacity of testing.
This restructuring will strengthen the CDA in evaluation of the quality of the drugs.
12.3 The Comm ittee would like to state here that the Mashelkar Committee Report had also pointed
out serious deficiencies in the State and Central Government drug testing labs. The limitations in
testing of drug samples in the Government labs are related to the absence or lack of sophisticated
instruments, lack of trained analysts, lack of commitment, lack of reagents, non-validated methods,
shortage of funds, inadequate number of staff and in many cases a combination of more than one
of these constraints. The Committee has also been given to understand that efforts made by the
Central Government for setting up/upgrading their testing facilities in States under various Five Year
Plans and through WHO funds, have been far from satisfactory.
12.4 The Committee observes that, keeping in view the need for quality control of drugs
across the country, the proposed move of bringing all the Central Drug Laboratories under
the control of one central agency is called for. However, in view of the Committee’s
recommendation for having Central Drug Administration in the form of re-structured
CDSCO, all the Central Drug Laboratories may be placed under the Division of Quality
Control Affairs under the Central Drug Administration.
13. CLAUSE-7
13.1 Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend Section 7 of the Act for substituting the words “Drugs
Technical Advisory Board” with the words “Central Drugs Authority”. It also provides for
change in the composition of the Drugs Consultative Committee.
Sub-clauses (b) (2) under the above clause states as follows:—
“(b) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
(2) the Drugs Consultative Committee shall consist of such number of representatives
of the Central Government, industry, consumer associations, academic and research

19
institutions, as may be prescribed and one representative of each State Government to
be nominated by the State Government concerned.”;
13.2 Justifying the proposed changes in this section, the Ministry had stated that it was proposed
to restructure the composition of the Drugs Consultative Committee (DCC) to make it more
representative and broad-based. It would be an advisory Committee constituted by the Central
Government to advise the Central Government, State Governments and the proposed CDA on any
matters tending to secure uniformity throughout India or any other matter referred to it for the
administration of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act. The DCC would be reconstituted to include all the
stake-holders who were members in the erstwhile DTAB.
In view of the Committee’s recommendations to retain DTAB at Clause 5, the
proposed change at Section 7 (a) of the Act stands void. Drugs Consultative Committee as
envisaged may continue.
14. CLAUSE-18
14.1 Clause 18 (b) (i) does away with the rule making powers of the Government to prescribe
the qualifications and duties of the two important officials under the CDSCO–Government Analysts
and Inspectors, provided under Section 33 of the Principal Act.
14.2 W itnesses were of the opinion that with the proposed Central Drugs Authority not being
empowered to prescribe qualifications and duties of the Government Analyst and the qualification
of Inspectors, any person without any professional qualifications would be entitled to be appointed
as the Government Analyst and Drugs Inspector – by the licensing authority, a situation not
desirable in the interest of effective implementation. Hence, Section 33(2) (b) and (n) should be
retained.
On a specific query in this regard, the Ministry replied that the omission of clauses (b) and
(n) of Section 33 (2) is an inadvertent error in typing which would be duly rectified.
15. CLAUSE-19
15.1 Clause 19 of the Bill provides for omission of Section 33 of the Act dealing with the
Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board.
15.2 In view of the Committee’s recommendation at Clause 5 to retain DTAB, the
provision under Section 33C of the Principal Act for constitution of ASU DTAB may be
retained. The proposed clause 19 of the Bill accordingly, stands void.
16. CLAUSE-20
16.1 Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to amend section 33D of the Principal Act which deals with
the ASU Drugs Consultative Committee.
16.2 In view of the Committee’s recommendation to retain Drug Consultative Committee
as envisaged in Section 7(2)(b) of the Principal Act, the proposed change in section 33 D
(1) of the Act stands void.
17. In view of Committee not agreeing to the replacement of DTAB by the CDA, the
consequential changes in the relevant Clauses stand void.
18. MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES
1. During the course of his deposition before the Committee on the 12th August, 2008,
Dr. Mashelkar was asked to apprise the Committee of the updated status of the Implementation
Committee on Drug Regulatory Reform’ supposedly set up by the Ministry of Health and Family

20
Welfare under his chairmanship. Dr. Mashelkar expressed his ignorance on the existence of any
such Committee. The Committee takes serious exception to the fact that though almost a year has
passed since the Ministry has informed the Committee that the process for setting up of an
‘Implementation Committee on Drugs Reglliatory Reform’ has been initiated, no progress seems to
have been made on the issue. The Committee would like to state that the Ministry should apply
caution in future and use all care and circumspection before furnishing such information to a
Parliamentary Standing Committee.

21
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS—AT A GLANCE
The Committee, after analysing the opinion of the stakeholders, is of the view that
even though ASU drugs are formulated by methods #different from that used for modern
allopathic drugs, the chances of harm that a drug - either modern or ASU, may likely cause
are similar and cannot be ruled out. The Committee would also like to point out that
definition of ‘drug’ as given in the Act is applicable to both allopathic and ASU drugs. The
Committee, therefore, opines that Ayurvedic, Unani and Siddha drugs should not be
excluded from the scope of definition of clinical trial of drugs. (Para 8.6)
The Committee is inclined to agree with the contention of representatives of the
cosmetics industry that physiological and therapeutic impact of drugs and cosmetics on
human body is completely different. Therefore, there is a need to separate trials of
cosmetics from drugs so far as the case of ascertaining their safety and efficacy is
concerned. Such a study may be carried out on human volunteers under pre-defined test
conditions as per standard industry protocol to ascertain the performance safety and efficacy
of a cosmetic. The Committee’s attention has also been drawn by ever-increasing number
of cosmetic products including Ayurvedic and herbal products flooding “the market-both
domestic and international. Reports indicating harmful effects of some of such products on
consumers also continue to be received. Main reason for such a situation is lack of any
effective mechanism to check such products. The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that
like clinical trial envisaged for drugs, similar provision should be there for regulating the
dermatological safety studies for cosmetics. Necessary modification in the Bill may,
accordingly, be made. (Para 8.7)
The Committee feels that the issue raised by the medical devices industry for having
a separate definition of clinical trial for medical devices is very pertinent. It is convinced
that owing to the distinct nature and functions of medical devices from that of the drugs,
a separate definition of clinical trials for medical devices would be necessary. The
Committee also takes note of the clarification given by the Ministry that medical devices
are a separate and distinct category. Due to exigency, a few medical devices were being
treated under the category of drugs. Now suitable amendment would be made to put these
under the category of medical devices, to be defined separately in the Act. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that a separate definition of clinical trial for medical devices may
be included in the Act. The Committee is also of the opinion that the definition of clinical
trial for medical devices may be formulated in such a manner that it is consistent with the
international standards which may read as follows:—
“Any systematic investigation or study in or on  human subjects, undertaken to assess the
safety and/or performance of a medical device” (Para 8.8)
The Committee is inclined to agree with the suggestion in view of the fact that all
substances intended for use as components of a drug are included under the definition of
‘drug’ given in the Principal Act. Thus a product with a marketing authorization, when used
or assembled in a different form, can be considered a new drug. (Para 8.9)
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the words “any drug” in Clause 2 (i)
(aaii) be replaced with the words “any new drug”. The Committee also observes that with
21

22
the definition of ‘clinical trial’ being included in the Act, there was no need of having the
same in the Rules. (Para 8.10)
The Committee finds logic in the views aired by the medical devices industry that the
current system is inadequate in regulating certification, quality assurance and post
marketing surveillance of both imported and locally made medical devices. Given the fact
that use of medical devices in healthcare is increasing day by day and also the fact that the
industry was at a growing stage, proper regulation is required to meet safety and efficacy
norms as also to meet global standards and competitiveness of the medical devices products.
The Committee also observes that the Mashelker Committee, in its Report, had dwelt at
length on the issue of regulation of medical devices in the country. It was emphasized
therein that the medical devices should be specifically defined and relevant rules and
guidelines framed for their proper regulation. The other two major recommendations of the
Committee were (i) the setting up of a specific Medical Devices Division for proper
management of approval, certification and quality of medical devices and an appropriate
regulatory mechanism for certification, quality assurance and post-marketing surveillance of
both imported and indigenous medical devices. The Committee is, however, surprised to note
that the only action proposed in the Bill was substitution of existing definition of medical
device by a more detailed definition. Another disturbing feature was continuance of medical
devices under drugs. The Committee also feels that mere inclusion of medical devices in the
pharmacopeias mentioned in the Second Schedule of the Act alongwith drugs will not serve
the purpose. (Para 8.14)
On being asked about the appropriateness of making separate provisions for the
regulation, surveillance and monitoring of medical devices, the Ministry had replied in the
affirmative. It was assured that keeping in view the distinct nature and functions of medical
devices, the same would be defined separately with specific provisions for their regulation,
surveillance and monitoring. The Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable
modifications may be made in the Act with a separate chapter covering all the related
aspects of regulation of medical devices. The Committee also strongly feels that a dedicated
division as recommended by the Mashelkar Committee may be set up to deal with
regulation, licensing, surveillance and monitoring of uniform implementation of the laws on
medical devices in the country. The Committee also recommends that a comparative
analysis of the GHTF definition of medical devices and the proposed definition in the Bill
may be made and should be followed by necessary modifications in the definition of ‘medical
device’. (Para 8.15)
The Committee fails to understand the circumstances leading to such an initiative by
the Department of Science and Technology with the nodal Ministry obviously being taken
unaware. The Committee can only hope that this issue is resolved at the earliest.
(Para 8.16)
The Committee’s attention was also drawn, both during its study visits and meetings at
Delhi, with all the witnesses representing different categories of stakeholders – be it small and
big pharma industry associations, various State Governments, Drugs Controllers/Inspectors/
Associations/bodies/associations from ASU sector – that recommendation of the Mashelker
Committee was for a strong, well-equipped and professionally managed CDSCO, to be given the
status of Central Drugs Administration and not creation of a Central Drugs Authority.
After making a comparative analysis of Mashelker Committee recommendations and
the different provisions of the Bill, the Committee was surprised to note that the contention
of various witnesses was justified. The Committee would like to point out the following
specific recommendation made by the Mashelker Committee.

23
“The existing infrastructure at the Centre and States was not adequate to perform the
assigned functions efficiently and speedily. Creating another authority such as a National
Drug Authority (NDA) will not solve the problem at hand. It was essential to strengthen
the existing organisations to enable them to undertake all the functions envisaged for
NDA. A strong, well-equipped, empowered, independent and professionally managed
CDSCO, which could be given the status of Central Drug Administration (CDA),
reporting directly to Ministry of Health would be the most appropriate solution.”
(Para 9.6)
The Committee observes that the Mashelkar Committee was an Expert Committee
constituted by the Government in 2003 to examine all the aspects relating to quality control
of drugs and their regulatory mechanism. The Committee also notes that the aforesaid
conclusive recommendation made by the Mashelkar Committee has been arrived at after
very intensive consultations with all the stakeholders. Not only this, in the Questionnaire
sent to all the State Drug Controllers by the Mashelkar Committee, one of the questions
asked was if CDSCO was to be strengthened, then would there be still a need for a National
Drug Authority. In response, 19 out of 31 States (with 4 no comments) stated that there
was a definite need to strengthen the Central Administration and if CDSCO could perform
the statutory functions efficiently, there was certainly no need of NDA. The Committee also
takes note of the fact that out of the 19 States which responded, five were Andhra Pradesh,
Goa, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu which belonged to the seven States having more
than 75 percent drug manufacturing units in the country. (Para 9.8)
In order to have first-hand information at the ground level, the Committee had
undertaken study visits of all the States having 75 per cent of drug manufacturing units in
the country. The only exception was West Bengal. This exercise of the Committee was
supplemented by extensive discussions in a series of meetings held at Delhi and also
feedback received in response to the press release. It would not be wrong to conclude that
Committee’s experience has also matched with the Mashelker Committee’s findings. In view
of the above assessment, the Committee is not inclined to accept the reasoning offered by
the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for making such a major departure
from the recommendations made by an Expert Committee. (Para 9.9)
The Committee would also like to draw attention to the following statement made in
the Pharmaceutical Policy, 2002:—
“The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare would set up a world class Central Drugs
Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) by modernizing, restructuring and reforming the
existing system and establish an effective network of drugs standards enforcements
administrations in the States with the CDSCO as a nodal centre, to ensure high standards
of quality, safety and efficacy of drugs and pharmaceuticals.” (Para 9.10)
The Committee fails to understand as to why, instead of implementing the
recommendations of the Mashelkar Committee for strengthening, modernizing,
restructuring and reforming the existing Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
(CDSCO) into a world class system, the Government has entered into a rigmarole of setting
up a new Authority. Central Drugs Authority, a small body primarily having members with
administrative background taking the place of the two Drug Technical Advisory Boards
having technical expertise from allopathic and ASU drug sector, is simply not acceptable to
the Committee. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the setting up of a “Central Drug
Administration” as an independent body under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
with its headquarters at Delhi, with its Zonal and Sub-Zonal offices at State level, by
strengthening, modernizing and restructuring the CDSCO. (Para 9.11)

24
The Committee observes that broadly–speaking, the proposed set up under the
Central Drugs Authority is based on the set-up of Central Drug Administration proposed by
the Mashelkar Committee. Ten Divisions are proposed under both the set-ups, the only
difference being a separate division of Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy under
the Ministry set-up. Another major difference between the two set-ups is that the Central
Drugs Authority would be replacing the two drugs Technical Advisory Boards and performing
their functions and also advising the Drug Controller General (I), who will be the Member-
Secretary of CDA on all matters relating to drugs and cosmetics. Since the Committee is
not in favour of creation of a separate “Central Drugs Authority”, and has recommended
the restructuring of CDSCO as “Central Drug Administration” - an independent body under
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Central Drug Administration as suggested
by the Mashelker Committee may be brought into effect as early as possible. (Para 9.13)
Representatives of the organisations from AYUSH-sector strongly advocated the need
for having an Additional Drug Controller (AYUSH), keeping in view the ever increasing
acceptance of AYUSH drugs. The Committee is inclined to agree with this view point. The
Committee finds that the Ministry, while elaborating the proposed plan of expansion of the
offices and the necessary expansion in the number of senior-level officers and supporting
staff that would be required for its efficient functioning under the CDA, has stated that the
post of Drug Controller (India) would be raised from the present level of the grade of Joint
Secretary to Government of India to that of the grade of Additional Secretary to
Government of India. It was also proposed to revive One post of Additional Drugs
Controller (AYUSH) to assist DCG(I) in the quality control and regulation of ASU products,
and along with it, one more post of Additional Drugs Controller (India) was proposed to be
created for assisting DCG(I) in all other matters. (Para 9.14)
The Committee observes that in view of the wider mandate of a “Central Drug
Administration” necessary expansion in the number of senior-level officers and supporting
staff would be required for its efficient functioning. The Committee has been informed that
an elaborate plan of expansion has been approved and being brought into shape. A special
drive to fill up all the vacant posts in the CDSCO and the Drug Labs was already underway.
62 new posts of Drug Inspectors and 10 posts of Technical officers have already been created
for strengthening of CDSCO and mitigating the problem of shortage of Drug Inspectors to
some extent. The Committee observes this as a welcome measure. (Para 9.15)
Under new chapter 1A, Section 5B speaks of the term of office of Chairperson and
Members of Central Drugs Authority; Section 5C relates to salaries, allowances, pensions
and other conditions of service of Members; Section 5D is regarding vacancies, etc. not to
invalidate proceedings and Section 5E refers to staff of the Central Drugs Authority.
In view of the Committee’s disagreement with the Ministry’s proposal for creating a
separate Central Drugs Authority, Sections 5B, 5C, 5D, and 5E mentioned above stand void.
(Para 9.16)
The Committee found that it was a general perception among majority of the
stakeholders that with the Centralized licensing coming into effect, every activity including
procedural formalities would be centred in Delhi leading to number of hurdles being faced
by the drug manufacturing units, specially small units. The Committee, however, observes
that the apprehension stands suitably addressed, keeping in view the fact that CDA through
its network of Zonal and Sub-Zonal offices and port offices would have its presence in most
of the States where there is significant concentration of drug manufacturing activity. This
would also facilitate Centralized licensing and Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)
Certification. Besides, these offices would also take care of concerns regarding inordinate

25
delays in issuance of licenses etc. raised by the stakeholders subsequent to centralized
licensing coming into force. The Committee is of the view that in this age of IT
advancement, the restructured CDSCO with its ten divisions having a well-defined
jurisdiction and network of subordinate offices spread across the country, apprehension
about delay factor do not seem to be genuine. The notion of the States that the existing
system is superior to the proposed central licensing on the grounds that it offers better
control by the States pre-supposes the existence of an efficient infrastructure and quality
of enforcements in every State. The Committee observes that this assumption is far
removed from the ground realities in majority of the States. (Para 9.21)
In this regard, the Committee takes note of the specific recommendation for
licensing of drug manufacturing units by the Central Drug Administration made by the
Mashelkar Committee after a detailed analysis of ground realities, recommendations of
earlier expert Committees and views of all the stakeholders. Issue of non-uniformity of
enforcement at the State level with regard to quality control of drugs was the main factor
behind such a recommendation made by all the bodies like NRHC, Hathi Committee,
Estimates Committee (Seventh Lok Sabha) and Mashelkar Committee. Committee’s
attention has been drawn by the guiding principle driving this suggestion, aptly summarized
in para 33 of the Hathi Committee Report quoted below:—
“quality control of products manufactured anywhere in India was not solely the
responsibility of the state in which the manufacturing unit is located, since the
product is sold all over the country. If a unit in one state was allowed to
manufacture and market a product of substandard quality, this would nullify the
measures taken by other States. It was essential that the Central Government
should assume responsibility for ensuring statutory enforcement and control
over the manufacture of drugs all over the country.” (Para 9.22)
The Committee agrees with the assessment made by all the earlier Committees that
there was an urgent need for having a world class drug regulatory system in the country
which can effectively handle the health concerns of one sixth of humanity. The Committee
can only reiterate that wherever the health and safety of life of the people is concerned,
cutting across regional/State specific interests/issues, the emphasis should be protecting the
same. (Para 9.23)
The Committee’s attention has been drawn to the following specific excerpts from the
Mashelker Committee Report:—
“The matter of licensing of manufacturing units by Central Government has been
considered on several occasions in the past. During 1988-89, the reports of poor quality
of I V fluids and substandard blood made the Central Government focus on the issue of
having a stricter control on these products. This resulted in the amendment of Rules to
provide for dual licensing mechanism in December 1992, the Central authority being the
License Approving Authority (CLM) and the States being the license giving authorities.
The idea was to improve the quality and implement uniform norms but the experience
has not been encouraging. The change, however, has not made the desired level of
impact.’’
“The National Human Rights Commission in their order of 1999  clearly stated that: the
present dual system of control does not appear to have achieved desired effectiveness,
therefore, Central Government must immediately take steps to  examine the entire system
of Licensing (including loan licensing), Certification and Complaint handling under
effective Central Government control through CLAA or other suitable means”  (Para 9.26)

26
The Committee observes that though the method of progressive increase in the
number of items under CLAA seems to be a good measure aimed at smooth transition of
the licensing activity from the States to the Center, it has its own apprehensions regarding
the timely disposal of applications, effective co-ordination with the industry, interpretation
of law under the CLAA system. The facts stated above by the witnesses and supported by
the findings of the Mashelkar Committee all point out that the present mechanism under
the CLAA system is far from satisfactory. The Committee was also given to understand that
the number of units involved was very large, volume of records need to be handled was also
enormous and every unit would have to be inspected after one year. Keeping in view the
tremendous strain the above-mentioned exercise was likely to have on the Central
Government; transition period from State licensing to centralized licensing may be spread
over a period of ten years. On Committee’s showing its concern on such a long time-span,
Secretary, Health admitted that it was too long a period. He assumed that every effort would
be made to switch over to centralized licensing in six to seven years. (Para 9.27)
The Committee was surprised to note that the proposed move was in direct
contravention to the roadmap in three phases drawn by the Mashelkar Committee for
implementation of centralized licensing. During Phase-I, the manpower was to be
strengthened and infrastructure of Central Drug Administration was to be in place.
Expansion of zonal and sub-zonal offices, creation of additional infrastructure for new
offices in States, creation of considerable number of additional senior level and supporting
posts are the specific requirements for implementation of the above recommendation.
During Phase-II, the licensing functions of States having minimum concentration of
manufacturing units were to be shifted to the Centre, and during Phase-III, licensing in
seven States having maximum concentration of drug manufacturing units (75 per cent) of
licenses was to be taken over by the Central Drug Administration. All this exercise was to
be completed within a span of three years. (Para 9.28)
On being asked about reasons for not accepting this specific recommendation of the
Mashelkar Committee, the Secretary informed that this issue was also discussed with
Dr. Mashelkar who has agreed to the progressive transfer from the State Licensing to the
Central licensing rather than going State by State. The Committee has its own reservations
on not, going for the roadmap having a specific time frame drawn by the Expert Committee
for switch-over to centralized licensing which was the outcome of extensive interactions with
all concerned based on the ground-realities. The Committee would also like to point out that
so far no plan of action having a specific time-limit has been drawn by the Ministry. As
indicated by the representative of the Ministry, it can be anywhere from five to ten years.
Apprehension of the Committee on this vital issue is strengthened by the fact that a
reputed consultancy firm/consultant would be engaged by the Ministry for suggesting the
roadmap based on the best practices available across the globe. The Committee can only
conclude that against such a background, chances of things falling into place in the near
future seem to be very dim. The Committee feels that the roadmaps drawn by the
Mashelkar Committee is backed by sound logic and fully endorses the line of action pointed
out by it for implementing the centralized licensing of drug manufacturing units. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that every effort should be made for
implementing the same within the specified time-frame. (Para 9.29)
The Committee is inclined to agree to the view-point of the stakeholders that they
would be at a serious disadvantage in terms of undue hardship, wastage of precious time
and additional financial burden especially for small scale units located far away from Delhi.
Since the Centre would be carrying out its licensing operations from its various zonal and
sub zonal offices placed in each State/UT, the Committee recommends that the appellate

27
authority for grievance redressal of the aggrieved party should be placed in such offices,
keeping in mind the comparative disadvantages that the small scale pharma units would
otherwise face. (Para 9.32)
The Committee notes that the proposed Fund for Central Drugs Authority will be
receiving all grants, fees and charges levied for different purposes. Only initial funds are
sought to be provided by the Central Government. The Committee apprehends that this
would be grossly inadequate. Given the fact that strengthening of the CDSCO as Central
Drug Administration would require expanding the Zonal and Sub-zonal offices, creation of
additional infrastructure for new offices in the States and manpower to match equally, for
setting up a world class Central Drug Administration, substantive additional funds would be
required for such activities. The Committee strongly feels that the Central Government will
have to play a major role. In view of majority of the States facing funds constraints, the
required funds will have to be provided by the Central Government. It, therefore, suggests
that like major social sector central/centrally sponsored schemes, the task of setting up a
world class Central Drug Administration may be taken up in a mission mode. Accordingly,
a Central Fund meant for Central Drug Administration with major contribution from the
Centre in the form of a Corpus Fund may be set up. (Para 9.35)
In view of the Committee’s disagreement with the proposal for creating a separate
Central Drugs Authority, Clause 5L stands void. (Para 9.36)
In the light of observations made by the Committee with regard to the definition of
the term ‘clinical trial’, permission for conducting clinical trials of only investigational new
drugs and cosmetics and medical devices may be included. Secondly, under the proposed
restructured CDSCO as envisaged by the Mashelkar Committee, out of the ten divisions
which would be functioning at the Headquarters, there are two separate divisions one for
New Drugs and Clinical Trials, and the other for Medical Devices and Diagnostics. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that these two Divisions may be entrusted with the
responsibility for granting permission for conducting clinical trials for drugs and
dermatological safety studies for cosmetics, and evaluation of safety and performance of
medical devices and other allied issues. (Para 10.3)
The Committee, after carefully weighing the contention of the stakeholders as well as
of the Department, is of the view that the provisions of punishment, for conducting Clinical
trial without permission should be retained. Such a provision would act as a deterrent for
violators of law. The Committee is disinclined to agree that academic research would be
brought to a halt by such a provision. It contends that if the punishment norms for academic
research are relaxed, chances of drug manufacturing companies carrying out trials through
private institutions by financially supporting them cannot be ruled out. The Committee
suggests that in such cases the onus of proving themselves not guilty should be fixed on the
Institutions where the students are conducting academic research. (Para 10.6)
The Committee would also like to point out that a careful perusal of the clause
reveals that the punishment would vary with the degree and nature of violation. Thus the
question of this provision being very harsh does not arise. The Committee also feels that
punishments for cases related to ‘drugs’ and those related to ‘cosmetics’ should be separate
and clearly defined. Similarly, those cases related to ‘medical devices’ should be dealt
separately under a chapter concerning regulation of medical devices, as mentioned earlier.
(Para 10.7)
The Committee is of the opinion that the DTAB is a highly technical body with
representation of experts from various fields and whose main function is to advise the

28
Central Government and the State Governments on technical matters arising out of the
administration of the Act and to carry out the other functions assigned to it under the Act.
Being the most important body under the Central Drug Administration, the Committee feels
that DTAB should be retained. The issue has been dealt with earlier also in this Report.
Hence, it recommends that Section 5 of the Principal Act which deals with the Constitution
and Composition of the Drugs Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) may be retained.
(Para 11.5)
The Committee observes that, keeping in view the need for quality control of drugs
across the country, the proposed move of bringing all the Central Drug Laboratories under
the control of one central agency is called for. However, in view of the Committee’s
recommendation for having Central Drug Administration in the form of re-structured
CDSCO, all the Central Drug Laboratories may be placed under the Division of Quality
Control Affairs under the Central Drug Administration. (Para 12.4)
In view of the Committee’s recommendations to retain DTAB at Clause 5, the
proposed change at Section 7 (a) of the Act stands void. Drugs Consultative Committee as
envisaged may continue. (Para 13.2)
In view of the Committee’s recommendation at Clause 5 to retain DTAB, the
provision under Section 33C of the Principal Act for constitution of ASU DTAB may be
retained. The proposed clause 19 of the Bill accordingly, stands void.  (Para 15.2)
In view of the Committee’s recommendation to retain Drug Consultative Committee
as envisaged in Section 7(2)(b) of the Principal Act, the proposed change in section 33D (1)
of the Act stands void. (Para 16.2)
In view of Committee not agreeing to the replacement of DTAB by the CDA, the
consequential changes in the relevant Clauses stand void. (Para 17)

29
NOTES OF DISSENT

To
The Chairman,
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare, Parliament of India,
Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
Subject: Note of dissent on the Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment), Bill 2007.
Dear Sir,
This is to state you that it is not possible for me as a Member of the said Committee to
endorse the draft-report of the Committee on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment), Bill 2007 in
the present form as the principal objective of the said Bill is setting up of the “Central/National
Drugs Authority” thereby centralizing the powers of the State Governments. The very intention of
the Bill is to take away the powers of the State Government in terms of Licensing; this would be
tantamount to centralizing the authority for Licensing in a vast country like India and might be
detrimental to a healthy and balanced regulation of drugs industries in the country. This enactment
will also deprive the State Governments financially by scuttling the revenues earned through
issuance of licenses to the manufacturers.
Moreover, this Bill might have constitutional implications, jeopardizing the Centre-State
relations and infringement on the sovereignty of the States.
Though the spirit of the Bill is acceptable and, I have no objection if Central Drug Authority
is set up in place of DTAB without investing this body with powers to issue licenses under
Section 18 (c) and Section-33EEC.
Therefore, considering the above aspects I, have serious reservation to support the Bill.
Hope, you will appreciate the position.
With regards.
Sd/-
(DR. RAMCHANDRA DOME)
31

To
The Chairman,
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare,
Parliament of India,
New Delhi.
Dear Sir,
I would like to put the note of dissent on the report on the Drugs and Cosmetics
(Amendment) Bill, 2007 for the following reasons—
(i) Formation of CDA and thereby centralizing process of Licensing, taking away the powers
of State Governments is not desirable.
(ii) It will jeopardize Centre-State relation as it encroaches upon the powers of State
Governments, which is against federal structure of the country.
I request you not to recommend this Bill for enactment.
Thanking you,
Sd/-
(PANNIAN RA VINDRAN)
32

MINUTES

35
II
SECOND MEETING
(2007-08)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 9th October, 2007 in Committee Room
‘‘D’’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. P.J. Kurien
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri Digvijay Singh
5. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli
7. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
8. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
9. Shri Rajendra Kumar
10. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
11. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
12. Dr. Chinta Mohan
13. Shri Nihal Chand
14. Shri Pannian Ravindran
15. Shri Uday Singh
16. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri R.B.Gupta, Joint Director
Shri T.N. Pandey, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
WITNESSES FROM MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
1. Shri Deepak Gupta, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Devashish Panda, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. M. V enkateshwarlu, Drugs Controller General (India)
2. At the outset Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting i.e. evidence of the Additional Secretary, Department of Health and Family
Welfare on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendments) Bill, 2007. He also informed Members that
another Bill, namely the Clinical Establishment (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007 has also been

36
referred to the Committee for examination and report and a Press Release inviting views of the
various stakeholders on the subject would be issued shortly.
3. Thereafter, Committee heard the representatives of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare on the various issues arising out of Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendments) Bill, 2007.
Initially, the Joint Secretary of the Department made a brief power-point presentation on the Bill.
During the course of discussion, Members raised serious reservations about the composition of the
Central Drugs Authority of India (C.D.A.I) and felt that the proposed provisions relating to its
composition have serious implications on the autonomy of the (C.D.A.I). The Committee also
pointed out that there is no provision in the Bill for setting up of an appellate authority. Members
also raised a number of other queries, some of which were replied by the witnesses. Thereafter
the Committee directed the representatives of the Ministry to furnish its comments on the remaining
queries shortly.
4. In order to examine the entire spectrum of the issues involved in the Bill on the issue of
drug testing and other related matters the Committee decided to hear the views of some of the
representatives of small and large scale pharmaceutical companies/industries on a later date.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 
P.M.

37
37
*** Relates to other matter.
III
THIRD MEETING
(2007-08)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 3lst October, 2007 in Committee Room
‘‘E’’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Prof. P.J. Kurien — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Maya Singh
LOK SABHA
3. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
4. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
5. Shri Rajendra Kumar
6. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
7. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
8. Shri Rasheed Masood
9. Dr. Chinta Mohan
10. Shri Nihal Chand
11. Dr. R. Senthil
12. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
13. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
14. Shri R.L. Jalappa
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B.Gupta, Joint Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
A. * * *
B. On the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007
(i) Dr. R.K.Srivastava, Director General, Health Services.
(ii) Dr. M. V enkateshwarlu, Drugs Controller General (India) represented Central Drugs
Standard Control Organisation and Drugs Consultative Committee.

38
(iii) Dr. K.R. Mani, Director, Central Research Institute, Kasuali (CRI), represented Drugs
Technical Advisory Board for Allopathy.
(iv) Dr. M.C. Sharma, Director, National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA), Jaipur represented
Drugs Technical Advisory Board for AYUSH.
(v) Dr. P.K. Guha, Director, Central Drugs Laboratory (CDL), Kolkata.
(vi) Dr. Gopa Ghosh, Director-in-charge, Central Drugs Laboratory (CDL), Mumbai.
2. In the absence of Chairman of the Committee, Prof. P.J. Kurien presided over the meeting.
3. The Committee discussed its future programme. Given the wider ramifications of the two
Bills i.e. the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Clinical Establishments
(Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007 under its consideration, the Committee was of the opinion
that there was a need to interact with a number of stakeholders and State Governments and also
undertake study visits before finalizing the Reports. The Committee, accordingly, approved an
action plan for the purpose.
4. Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007 was to be presented by
22nd November, 2007. However, the Committee had proposed interaction with quite a few
stakeholders involving study visits. The Committee, therefore, decided to seek extension of time for
six months i.e. upto 22nd May, 2008 for presentation of its Report on the Drugs and Cosmetics
(Amendment) Bill, 2007 and authorized Chairman of the Committee to approach Hon'ble Chairman
for the purpose.
5. * * *
6. The Committee, then, heard the witnesses on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)
Bill, 2007. The Drugs Controller General (India) made a brief presentation on the subject. The
Chairman and Members raised queries on various aspects of the Bill, particularly the composition
and autonomy of the proposed Central Drugs Authority, and functioning of the Drug Laboratories
in the country. The witnesses replied to some of the queries. The Committee directed the
Secretariat to forward a set of questionnaire to the Secretary, Department of Health and Family
Welfare for detailed replies at the earliest on the aforesaid Bill.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

39
IV
FOURTH MEETING
(2007-08)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 5th December, 2007 in Committee
Room ‘‘A’’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. P.J. Kurien
3. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
4. Shri Lalhming Liana
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Bhavana P.Gawali
6. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
7. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
8. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
9. Shri Pannian Ravindran
10. Dr. R. Senthil
11. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B.Gupta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh,Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed Members to the meeting and
briefed them about the business pending before the Committee.
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. The Committee then discussed the future course of action concerning the examination of
the two Bills, namely, the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Clinical
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007. The Chairman of the Committee apprised
the members of the progress made towards examination of the said Bills and also informed them
that a number of stakeholders from across the country have furnished memoranda containing their
views on the Bills and have also desired to appear in person before the Committee to share their
suggestions and concerns. The stakeholders who have furnished their comments and are desirous
of appearing in person before the Committee include Association of Large and Small Pharmaceutical
*** Relate to other matters.
39

40
*** Relates to other matter.
companies, NGOs, and Associations of Private Hospitals/Nursing Homes/Diagnostic Centres/
Pathological Centres. The Chairman further informed the Members that the representatives of
Government Hospitals, Experts, representatives of State Branches of IMA, M.C.I., Pharmacy
Council of India, ICMR, BIS etc., will also be called to appear before the Committee to share their
views on the said Bills. The Committee felt that in order to examine the whole gamut of issues
involved in the Bills, study tours needed to be undertaken before finalizing the Reports. Since the
deadline given by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Committee to submit its Report on the
Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007 expires on 27th December 2007, and
keeping in view the wider ramifications of the Bill and also the preoccupation of the Committee
with examination of Demands for Grants 2008-09, the Committee decided to seek an extension of
time for six months, i.e. 27th June 2008, for presenting its Report on this Bill.
5. The Committee accordingly authorized the Chairman to seek necessary permission from the
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha *** also to undertake study visit to Trivandrum, Bangalore,
Chennai and Hyderabad in the second week of January, 2007, in the first phase.
6. The Committee adjourned at 3.40 
P.M.

41
V
FIFTH MEETING
(2007-08)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 25th January, 2008 in Committee Room
‘‘A’’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Digvijay Singh — In the Chair
2. Prof. P.J. Kurien
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri Lalhming Liana
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
7. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
8. Shri Rasheed Masood
9. Shri Nihal Chand
10. Shrimati K. Rani
11. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
12. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
The Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007
A. Representatives of Confederation of Indian Industry
1. Shri Alok Mishra, Area Manager International, South Asia, Johnson and Johnson
2. Shri Ajay Pitre, Managing Director, Sushrut Surgical Pvt. Ltd.
3. Shri Pavan Choudary, CEO and MD, Vygon India Pvt. Ltd.
4. Shri Ajay Maggo, Director, Finance and Accounts, Philips Electronic India Ltd.
B. Representatives of SME Pharma Industries Confederation
1. Shri Lalit Kumar Jain, Vice Chairman
2. Shri Jagdeep Singh, Secretary General
41

42
3. Shri J. Mathew, Representative, SME Pharma Industries
4. Shri Ramesh Arora, Confederation
5. Shri B.K. Gupta
** *
2. In the absence of Chairman, Shri Digvijay Singh, M.P. presided over the meeting. At the
outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and apprised them about the progress
made so far with regard to examination of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and
the Clinical Establishment (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007, including the study visit
undertaken by the Committee from 7th to 14th January, 2008 to Bengaluru, Thiruvananthapuram,
Chennai and Hyderabad.
3. * * *
4. In view of the fact that the Committee was yet to interact with a large number of
stakeholders including Drugs Manufacturers Associations concentrated in northern and western
parts of the country, the Committee decided to seek further extension of time upto the last day
of the Budget Session 2008 for the presentation of its Report on the Bill. The Committee reiterated
its decision taken during its study visit referred to above for undertaking another study visit to
Indore, Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Goa from 12th to 19th February, 2008, on both the Bills. The
Committee authorized its Chairman to seek necessary permission from Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha in this regard.
5. Thereafter the Committee heard the representatives of the Confederation of Indian Industries
and SME Pharma, on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007.
6. The representatives from Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), speaking on the Drugs and
Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007, inter alia , stated that there is a need for separate provisions for
regulation of medical devices, instruments, apparatus, appliances, materials etc., since provisions
relating to devices cannot be clubbed with the provisions relating to drugs and cosmetics in view of
the completely different characteristics of devices and equipments as compared to drugs and
cosmetics. They further stated that the Government is proposing to set up the Medical Devices
Regulatory Authority of India (MDRA). The MDRA being a national certifying and regulatory agency
in India for medical equipment and devices would be expected to formulate appropriate guidelines.
They pointed out that it was very important to ensure that there was no regulatory overlapping for
the medical devices industry. It was informed that the Draft Medical Device Regulation Bill, 2006 and
the proposed Medical Device Regulatory Authority (MDRA) in this bill was based on tenets of
European Medical Device Directive, which was largely accepted even by the Global Harmonization
Task Force (GHTF) recommendations. They stated that such an independent Act or such a separate
comprehensive sub-section for medical devices within the Drugs Control Act and the Rules framed
thereunder are essential for appropriate and comprehensive regulation of medical devices and that just
the existing Drugs Control Act and the Rules framed thereunder (without this special comprehensive
sub-section for Medical Devices) should not be made applicable to medical devices.
7. The representatives from SME Pharma were of opinion that centralizing the licensing
system would lead to concentration of powers with the Central Government and would not be
effective in tackling the moot problem of spurious drugs and fake drugs. They were also of the
opinion that creation of zonal offices catering to four to five States would not go in the interest
of the SSI and the said Bill was designed to decimate SSI by large scale Pharma industries and
MNCs functioning in Pharma sector. They further contended that with the creation of Central Drug
*** Relate to other matters.

43
Authority, there would be problems and difficulties in investigation of cases of sub-standard/
spurious drugs as State Drug Control Officers may not have jurisdiction to inspect the
manufacturing establishments leading to difficulties in answering questions in the State Assemblies
owing to its responsibility in providing quality manufacturing of medicines within the States.
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
12. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

44
RECORD OF DISCUSSION OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 11th February, 2008, in Committee Room
‘‘D’’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
LOK SABHA
3. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
4. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
5. Shri Pannian Ravindran
6. Shri Uday Singh
7. Shrimati Yashodhra Raje Scindia
SECRETARIAT
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Dr. R. K. Srivastava, Director General, Health Services
2. Shri K. Ramamoorthy, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. H. C. Goel, Additional DGHS
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and apprised them about
the progress made so far, with regard to examination of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)
Bill, 2007 and the Clinical Establishment (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007, including the
study visit undertaken by the Committee from 7th to 14th January, 2008 to Bengaluru,
Thiruvananthapuram, Chennai and Hyderabad and the proposed study visit to Indore, Ahmedabad,
Mumbai and Goa from 12th to 19th February, 2008. The Chairman also briefed them about the
need to seek a second extension of time for presentation of the Report on the Clinical
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007. However, since the necessary quorum to
transact official business could not be achieved, the Committee decided to defer taking a decision
in this regard.
3. * * *
44
*** Relates to other matter.

45
4. Though there was lack of quorum, the Committee heard oral evidence of the DGHS and
the Joint Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare on the Paramedical and Physiotherapy
Central Councils Bill, 2007. Members raised a number of queries, some of which were answered
by the witnesses. The DGHS was asked to furnish written replies to those queries of Members,
which remained unanswered.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.02 
P.M.

46
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
(2007-08)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 7th May, 2008 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. P.J. Kurien
3. Shri Digvijay Singh
LOK SABHA
4. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
5. Shri Rajendra Kumar
6. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
7. Dr. Chinta Mohan
8. Shrimati K. Rani
9. Shri Pannian Ravindran
10. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
11. Shrimati Yashodhra Raje Scindia
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI)
1. Shri Anjan Bose, Chairman FICCI Medical Electronic Forum,
2. Shri Ram Sharma, Country Manager-India, Nepal, Sri Lanka,
3. Shri Sanjay Banerjee, Managing Director, Zimmer India,
4. Dr. Kulwant S. Saini, Vice-President, Johnson and Johnson
5. Shri R. Kailasnath, Managing Director, CPC Diagnostics, Chennai,
6. Shri Sumati Randeo, Manager-Regulatory Affairs,
7. Shri V . K Topa, Advisor to Secretary General, FICCI,
8. Shri Bishakha Bhattacharya, Additional Director, FICCI
Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumers’ Education (VOICE)
1. Prof. Sri Ram Khanna,
2. Shri H.K. Awasthi
46

47
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and apprised them about the
progress made so far regarding the examination of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007.
3. The Committee heard representatives of the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce
and Industry (FICCI) on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007. Members sought
clarifications which were replied to. The Committee also directed the representatives of FICCI to
forward their comments on the Questionnaire on the Bill prepared by the Secretariat.
4. The Committee, thereafter, took oral evidence of the representatives of VOICE on the Bill.
Members sought clarifications which were replied to. During the course of interaction with the
representatives of VOICE, the Committee was given to understand that many African countries
were being flooded with fake/substandard drugs and India was seen as one of the major fake drug
manufacturing countries. The Committee decided to seek a status note in this regard from the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
5. Representatives of VOICE also apprised the Committee that their organization got the
fairness cream of many brands tested from NABL accredited Laboratories and barring a few, the
results of most of the brands including some reputed ones showed a considerable gap between
their claims and outcomes of usage. The witnesses were directed to forward a copy of their
report.
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee decided to meet again at 3.00 
P.M. on the 27th May, 2008.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 4.16 P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

48
RECORD OF DISCUSSION OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 27th May, 2008 in Committee Room No.
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Maya Singh
3. Shri Digvijay Singh
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Rajendra Kumar
6. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
7. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
8. Dr. Chinta Mohan
9. Shri Pannian Ravindran
10. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. Representatives of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drug Technical Advisory Board
(ASUDTAB):—
1. Dr. S.K. Sharma, Advisor (Ayurveda), Department of A YUSH
2. Dr. S.S. Handa, Former Director, RRL (CSIR), Jammu
3. Dr. P. Jaya Prakash Naraynan, Rtd. Principal, Siddha Medical College, Chennai.
4. Prof. M.C. Sharma, Director, N.I.A, Jaipur
5. Dr. V .R. Seshadri, Secretary, IMP, Co-op. Pharmacy and Stores Ltd. Chennai.
6. Dr. Asad Mueed, Director (R&D), Hamdard Wakf Laboratories, New Delhi
7. Prof. Shakir Jamil, Dean, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi
8. Prof. Anis Ansari, Dean, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh
III. * * *
IV. * * *
48
*** Relate to other matters.

49
V. * * *
VI. * * *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and apprised them about
the progress made so far regarding the examination of the three Bills, viz. , the Clinical
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007, the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill,
2007 and the Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007.
3. * * *
4. The Committee thereafter took oral evidence of the representatives of Ayurveda, Siddha
and Unani Drug Technical Advisory Board (ASUDTAB) on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)
Bill, 2007. Members sought clarifications on various provisions of the Bill which were replied to.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.03 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

50
I
FIRST MEETING
(2008-09)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 12th August, 2008 in Committee Room
No. ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Shri Rajeev Shukla
4. Shrimati Maya Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
6. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
7. Shri Rajendra Kumar
8. Shri R.L. Jalappa
9. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
10. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
11. Shri Rasheed Masood
12. Dr. Chinta Mohan
13. Shrimati K. Rani
14. Shri Pannian Ravindran
15. Shri Uday Singh
16. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
WITNESS
Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, Director General (Retired), Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and apprised them of the
progress made in respect of examination of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007.
** *
50
*** Relate to other matters.

51
3. The Committee, thereafter, heard Dr. Mashelkar on the various provisions of the Drugs and
Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill-2007 and Members raised certain queries related to the Bill, which
were clarified by him. On being asked to apprise the Committee of the updated status of the
‘Implementation Committee on Drug Regulatory Reform’ supposedly set up by the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare under his chairmanship, Dr. Mashelkar expressed his ignorance on the
existence of any such Committee. The Committee took serious exception to the fact that though,
almost a year has passed since the Ministry’s informing the Committee that the process for setting
up of an ‘Implementation Committee on Drug Regulatory Reform’ has been initiated, no progress
seems to have been made on the issue.
4. The Committee, thereafter, discussed the Clause-by-Clause provisions of the Drugs and
Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007. Some Members demanded that the present system of
decentralized licensing should continue as opposed to the centralized licensing system, proposed in
the Bill. However, as there was lack of consensus on the issue, it was decided that the Committee
would discuss the issue more elaborately at its next meeting.
5. * * *
6. Attention of the witness was also drawn to the fact that presently the drugs related aspects
were being looked after by different agencies-like formulation, licensing, regulation of distribution
by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, and manufacturing and price control by the Ministry
of Chemicals and Fertilizers. It was suggested that all the aspects relating to drugs should be
brought under one agency i.e., the Ministry on Health and Family Welfare.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
TO BE INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
21 August, 2007
Bill No. L VII of 2007
THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics
(Amendment) Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different
provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the
coming into force of that provision.
2. In the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in section 3,—
55
Short title, and
commencement.
23 of 1940 Amendment of
section 3.

56
(i) for clause ( aa), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘(aa) ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ means the
Central Drugs Authority of India constituted under sub-
section (1) of section 5;
(aai) ‘‘Chairperson’’ means the Chairperson of
the Central Drugs Authority;
(aaii) ‘‘clinical trial’’ means systematic study of
any drug or cosmetic in human subjects to generate
data for discovering or verifying its clinical,
pharmacological (including pharmacodynamic and
pharmacokinetic) or adverse effects with the objective
of determining safety, efficacy or tolerance of the drug
or the cosmetic;’;
(ii) in clause ( b), for sub-clause ( iv), the following
sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:-
‘‘(iv) such medical device, medicated device,
instrument, apparatus, appliance, material, software
necessary for their application, intended for internal or
external use in human beings or animals, whether used
alone or in combination, as may be specified from
time to time by the Central Government by notification
in the Official Gazette, after consultation with the
Central Drugs Authority, for the purpose of diagnosis,
prevention, monitoring, treatment or mitigation of any
disease or disorder; diagnosis, monitoring, treatment,
alleviation of or compensation for, any injury or
handicap; investigation, replacement or modification of
anatomy or physiology; or control of conception, and
which does not achieve its intended action primarily by
any pharmacological or immunological or metabolical
process, but is included in the pharmacopoeias
mentioned. in the Second Schedule;’’;
(iii) after clause ( b), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:-
‘(bb) ‘‘Drugs Controller (India)’’ means the Drugs
Controller (India) appointed under sub-section ( 1) of
section 5E;
(bbb) ‘‘Fund’’ means the Fund constituted under
sub-section (1) of section 5-I;’;
(iv) in clauses ( c) and ( e), for the words ‘‘Central
Government’’, wherever they occur, the words ‘‘Central
Drugs Authority’’ shall be substituted;
(v) in clause ( f), for the words ‘‘sale or distribution’’,
the words ‘‘sale or export or distribution’’ shall be substituted;

57
(vi) after clause ( f), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(ff) ‘‘Member’’ means a Member of the Central
Drugs Authority and includes the Chairperson;’;
(vii) in clause ( h), in sub-clause ( ii), for the words
‘‘Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under section 5’’,
the words ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ shall be substituted.
3. In the principal Act, after Chapter I, the following Chapters
shall be inserted, namely:—
CHAPTER IA
C
ENTRAL D RUGS A UTHORITY OF I NDIA
5. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette, constitute an Authority to be known as the Central
Drugs Authority of India.
(2) The Central Drugs Authority shall be a body corporate by
the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal
with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold
and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to
contract, and may, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The Central Drugs Authority shall consist of a Chairperson
and not more than five, but at the least three, Members, to-be
appointed by the Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette.
(4) The headquarters of the Central Drugs Authority shall be
at Delhi.
(5) The Central Drugs Authority may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, establish its offices at Such other places in India
as it considers necessary.
5A. The Chairperson and Members of the Central Drugs
Authority shall be appointed by the Central Government from
amongst persons who have special knowledge of, and at the least
fifteen years' professional experience in pharmaceutical a industry,
research or teaching, or public administration, finance or law:
Provided that a person who is, or has been, in the service of
Government shall not be appointed as a Chairperson or Member
unless such person has held the post of Secretary or Additional
Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the
Central Government or a State Government or a Public Sector
Undertaking.
5B. The Chairperson or Member shall hold office as such for
a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his
office, and shall be eligible for reappointment for a further term of
three years:
Provided that the Chairperson or Member shall not hold office
as such on attaining the age of seventy years.
Insertion of
new Chapters.
Constitution
of Central
Drugs
Authority.
Qualifications
of Chairperson
and Members.
Term of office
of Chairperson
and Members.

58
5C. The salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, and
other conditions of service of, the Members shall be such, as may
be prescribed by the Central Government.
5D. No act or proceeding of the Central Drugs Authority shall
be invalidated merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of,
the Central Drugs Authority;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a
Member of the Central Drugs Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not
affecting the merits of the case.
5E. ( 1) The Central Drugs Authority shall appoint a Drugs
Controller (India), and such other officers and employees as it
considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions and
exercise of its powers under this Act.
(2) The salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, and
other conditions of service of, the Drugs Controller (India), other
officers and employee of the Central Drugs Authority appointed
under sub-section (1) shall be such as may be determined by the
Central Drugs Authority by regulations.
(3) The Drugs Controller (India) shall be the Secretary of the
Central Drugs Authority.
5F. ( 1) The Central Drugs Authority may issue licences under
clause ( c) of section 10, clause ( c) of section 18 and clause ( c) of
section 33EEC, and collect fees therefor.
(2) The Central Drugs Authority may cancel or suspend any
licence issued under sub-section ( 1).
(3) The Central Drugs Authority shall collect charges for
granting permission for conduct of clinical trials in respect of drugs
and cosmetics.
(4) The Central Drugs Authority may constitute such
committees or sub-committees as it considers essential for the
efficient discharge of its functions and exercise of its powers under
this Act.
(5) The Central Drugs Authority shall recommend to the
Central Government—
(a) standards for drugs and cosmetics;
(b) the Central Drugs Laboratories for the purpose of
testing drugs and cosmetics;
(c) measures to regulate import of drugs and cosmetics;
Salaries,
allowances,
pensions and
other condi-
tions of
service of
Members.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings.
Staff of the
Central Drugs
Authority.
Powers and
functions of
Central Drugs
Authority.

59
(d) measures to regulate manufacture for sale or for
export or for distribution, or sale, stock or exhibition of drugs
and cosmetics;
(e) standards for good manufacturing and laboratory
practices and other such practices;
(f) measures to regulate clinical trials;
(g) amounts of fees and other charges payable under
this Act;
(h) any other measures for the purpose of giving effect
to the provisions of this Act.
(6) The Central Drugs Authority shall regulate its own
procedure.
5G. (1) The Drugs Controller (India) shall exercise the powers
conferred upon him under this Act or the rules framed thereunder
or assigned to him by the Central Drugs Authority.
(2) The Drugs Controller (India) shall be the Chief Executive
Officer and the legal representative of the Central Drugs Authority,
and shall be responsible for—
(a) the day-to-day administration of the Central Drugs
Authority;
(b) drawing up of proposals for the work programmes
of the Central Drugs Authority;
(c) implementing the work programmes approved and
the decisions made by the Central Drugs Authority;
(d) the preparation of the statement of revenue and
expenditure and the execution of the budget of the Central
Drugs Authority;
(e) the preparation of draft annual report for submission
to and approval of the Central Drugs Authority.
(3) The Drugs Controller (India) shall have administrative
control over other officers and employees of the Central Drugs
Authority.
5H. The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Central Drugs
Authority grants of such sums of money as are required by it.
5-I. ( 1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the
Central Drugs Authority of India Fund and there shall be credited
thereto—
(a) all grants, fees and charges received by the Central
Drugs Authority under this Act; and
Powers and
functions of
Drugs Control-
ler (India).
Grants by
Central
Government.
Fund.

60
(b) all sums received by the Central Drugs Authority
from such other sources as may be determined by the Central
Government.
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the
Chairperson and other Members and the administrative
expenses, including the salaries, allowances and pensions
payable to or in respect of the Drugs Controller (India) and
other officers and employees of the Central Drugs Authority;
and
(b) the expenses to carry out the objects and purposes
of this Act.
5J. ( 1) The Central Drugs Authority shall maintain proper
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement
of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Central Drugs Authority shall be
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such
intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred
in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Central Drugs
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any
other person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the
accounts of the Central Drugs Authority shall have the same rights
and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has, in connection with
the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have
the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the
offices of the Central Drugs Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Central Drugs Authority as certified
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person
appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and
that Government shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may
be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
5K. ( 1) The Central Drugs Authority shall prepare every year
an annual report in such form and manner and at such time as may
be prescribed by the Central Government, giving summary of its
activities during the previous year and copies of the report shall be
forwarded to the Central Government.
(2) A copy of the report forwarded under sub-section ( 1)
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each
House of Parliament.
Accounts and
audit.
Annual
report.

61
5L. ( 1) The Central Government may, after consultation with, or
on the recommendation of, the Central Drugs Authority and after
previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that consultation with the Central Drugs Authority
may be dispensed with if the Central Government is of opinion that
circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make rules
without such consultation, but in such a case the Central Drugs
Authority shall be consulted within six months of the making of the
rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration any
suggestions which the Central Drugs Authority may make in relation
to the amendment of the said rules.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for the following matters, namely:—
(a) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, and
other conditions of service of, the Members under section 5C;
(b) the manner and form in which the accounts of
the Central Drugs Authority shall be maintained under sub-
section ( 1) of section 5J;
(c) the form and manner in which and the time within
which annual report is to be made to the Central Government
under sub-section ( 1) of section 5K.
5M. ( 1) The Central Drugs Authority may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and
the rules made thereunder, to discharge its functions and exercise its
powers.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to,
and other conditions of service of, the Drugs Controller
(India) and other officers and employees of the Central Drugs
Authority under sub-section ( 2) of section 5E;
(b) the regulation of the procedure of the Central Drugs
Authority under sub-section ( 6) of section 5F.
CHAPTER IB
C
LINICAL  T RIALS
5N. No person shall conduct clinical trials in respect of any
drug or cosmetic except under, and in accordance with, the
permission granted by the Central Drugs Authority.
5O. ( 1) Whoever, himself or by any other person on his
behalf, conducts clinical trials in contravention of section 5N shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
Power to
make rules.
Power to make
regulations.
No clinical
trial without
permission.
Punishment
for conduct-
ing clinical
trial without
permission.

62
(2) Whoever having been convicted of an offence under sub-
section ( 1) is again convicted of an offence under that sub-section,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to ten years and with fine which may extend to twenty lakh rupees.
5P. ( 1) No prosecution under section 5-O shaIl be instituted
except upon complaint made in writing in this behalf by an officer
authorised by the Central Drugs Authority.
(2) No Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or
of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try an offence
punishable under section 5-O.
SQ. ( 1) The Central Government may after consultation with,
or on the recommendation of, the Central Drugs Authority and after
pervious publication by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this
Chapter:
Provided that consultation with the Central Drugs Authority
may be dispensed with if the Central Government is of opinion that
circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make rules
without such consultation, but in such a case the Central Drugs
Authority shall be consulted within six months of the making of the
rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration any
suggestions which the Central Drugs Authority may make in relation
to the amendment of the said rules.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for the form and conditions of the
permission under section 5N, the charges payable therefor, and the
cancellation or suspension of such permission in any case where
any provision of this Act or the rules made thereunder is
contravened or any of the conditions subject to which the
permission is granted is not complied with.
4. In the principal Act. in Chapter II, for the Chapter heading
‘‘T
HE D RUGS  T ECHNICAL  A DVISORY  B OARD , T HE C ENTRAL  D RUGS
LABORATORY AND T HE D RUGS C ONSULTATIVE C OMMITTEE ’’, the Chapter
heading ‘‘T HE  C ENTRAL  D RUGS  L ABORATORY  AND  T HE  D RUGS
CONSULTATIVE C OMMITTEE ’’ shall be substituted.
5. In the principal Act, section 5 shall be omitted.
6. In the principal Act, in section 6,—
(a) for the word ‘‘Laboratory’’, wherever it occurs, the
words ‘‘Laboratory or Laboratories’’ shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the word ‘‘Board’’, the
words ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ shall be substituted.
7. In the principal Act, in section 7,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words ‘‘Drugs Technical
Advisory Board’’, the words ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ shall
be substituted;
Trial of
offences.
Power to
make rules.
Substitution of
heading of
Chapter II.
Omission of
section 5.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 7.

63
(b) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(2) the Drugs Consultative Committee shall consist of
such number of representatives of the Central Government,
industry, consumer associations, academic and research
institutions, as may be prescribed and one representative of
each State Government to be nominated by the State
Government concerned.’’;
(c) after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘‘(4) The Central Government may, after consultation
with the Central drugs Authority, make rules prescribing the
number of representatives under sub-section ( 2).’’.
8. In the principal Act, section 7 A shall be omitted.
9. In the principal Act, in section 8, in sub-section ( 2), for
the word ‘‘Board’’, the words ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ shall be
substituted.
10. In the principal Act, in section 10, in the second proviso,
for the word ‘‘Board’’, the words ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ shall
be substituted.
11. In the principal Act, in section 12,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the word ‘‘Board’’, wherever
it occurs, the words ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ shall be
substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), in clause ( a), the words ‘‘the
authority empowered to issue the same’’ shall be omitted.
12. In the principal Act, in section 16, in sub-section ( 2), for
the word ‘‘Board’’, the words ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ shall be
substituted.
13. In the principal Act, in section 18,—
(a) for the words ‘‘manufacture for sale or for
distribution’’, wherever they occur, the words ‘‘manufacture
for sale or for export or for distribution’’ shall be substituted;
(b) in the second proviso, for the word ‘‘Board’’, the
words ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ shall be substituted.
14. In the principal Act, in sections 20 and 21, for the words
‘‘Central Government’’, wherever they occur, the words ‘‘Central
Drugs Authority’’ shall be substituted.
15. In the principal Act. in section 22, in sub-section ( 1), in
clause ( cca ), for the words ‘‘manufacture for sale or for
distribution’’, the words ‘‘manufacture for sale or for export or for
distribution’’ shall be substituted.
Omission of
section 7A.
Amendment
of sections 20
and 21.
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 12.
Amendment
of section 16.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment of
section 22.

64
16. In the principal Act, in sections 27 and 27 A, for the
words ‘‘manufactures for sale or for distribution’’, at both the
places where they occur, the words ‘‘manufactures for sale or for
export or for distribution’’ shall be substituted.
17. In the principal Act, in section 31, in sub-section ( 1), in
clause ( ii ), for the words ‘‘manufacture for sale, or for
distribution’’, the words "manufacture for sale or for export or for
distribution’’ shall be substituted.
18. In the principal Act, in section 33,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the word ‘‘Board’’, wherever
it occurs, the words ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ shall be
substituted;—
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) clause (b) shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause ( e),—
(A) for the words ‘‘manufacture for sale or
for distribution’’, the words ‘‘manufacture for
sale or for export or for distribution’’ shall be
substituted; and
(B) the words ‘‘the authority empowered to
issue the same, the qualifications of such
authority’’ shall be omitted;
(iii) clause ( n) shall be omitted.
19. In the principal Act, section 33C shall be omitted.
20. In the principal Act, in section 33D,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words ‘‘Ayurveda,
Siddhaand Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board’’, the
words ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ shall be substituted;
(b) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(2) the Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs
Consultative Committee shall consist of such number of
representatives of the Central Government. industry,
consumer associations, academic and research institutions,
as may be prescribed and one representative of each State
Government to be nominated by the State Government
concerned.’’.
21. In the principal Act, in section 33EEB, for the words
‘‘manufacture for sale or for distribution’’, the words ‘‘manufacture
for sale or for export or for distribution’’ shall be substituted.
Amendment
of sections 27
and 27a.
Omission of
section 33C.
Amendment
of section
33EEB.
Amendment
of section 31.
Amendment
of section 33.
Amendment
of section
33D.

65
22. In the principal Act, in section 33EEC,—
(A) in clause ( a), for the words ‘‘manufacture for sale
or for distribution’’, the words ‘‘manufacture for sale or for
export or for distribution’’ shall be substituted;
(B) in clause ( c),—
(i) for the words ‘‘manufacture for sale or for
distribution’’, the words ‘‘manufacture for sale or for
export or for distribution’’ shall be substituted; and
(ii) the words ‘‘by the prescribed authority’’ shall
be omitted.
23. In the principal Act, in sections 33F and 33G, for the
words ‘‘Central Government’’, wherever they occur, the words
‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ shall be substituted.
24. In the principai Act, in section 33-I, for the words
‘‘manufactures for sale or for distribution’ ’, the word ‘‘ manufactures
for sale or for export or for distribution’’ shall be substituted.
25. In the principal Act, in section 33L, for the words
‘‘manufacture for sale’’, at both the places where they occur, the
words ‘‘manufacture for sale or for export or for distribution’’ shall
be substituted.
26. In the principal Act, in section 33N,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the word ‘‘Board’’, wherever
it occurs, the words ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) clause ( b) shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause (e),—
(A) for the words ‘‘manufacture for sale’’,
the words ‘‘manufacture for sale or for export or for
distribution’’ shall be substituted; and
(B) the words ‘‘the authority empowered to
issue the same’’ shall be omitted;
(iii) after clause ( f), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘‘(ff) prescribe the number of representatives
under sub-section (2) of section 33 D;’’.
27. In the principal Act, in section 33-O, for the word
‘‘Board’’, the words ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’ shall be substituted.
28. In the principal Act, for section 38, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
Amendment
of section
33EEC.
Amendment
of sections
33F and 33G.
Amendment
of section
33-I
Amendment
of section 33L.
Amendment
of section 33N.
Amendment
of section
33-O.
Substitution of
new section for
section 38.

66
‘‘38. Every rule and every regulation made under this
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses
agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule
or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule or regulation.’’.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.

67
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (the Act) is a consumer protection
legislation, which is mainly concerned with the standards and quality of drugs and
regulates the import, manufacture, sale and distribution of drugs and cosmetics.
2. The Central Government had constituted an Expert Committee under the
Chairmanship of Dr. R.A. Mashelker, Director-General of the Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research in January, 2003 to undertake a comprehensive examination
of drug regulatory issues, including the problem of spurious drugs and to suggest
measures to improve the drug administration in the country. The Committee, inter
alia, recommended setting up of a Central Drugs Authority reporting directly to the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and a system of Centralised licensing. The
Central Government considered the recommendations of the Committee and proposes
to make amendments in the Act, in order to facilitate setting up of a Central Drugs
Authority and introduction of Centralised licensing for manufacture of drugs in
pursuance of the said recommendations. The Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)
Bill, 2007, inter alia , provides for:—
(a) substitutation of the ‘ ‘Drugs Technical Advisory Board’’ as well as
the ‘‘Drugs Technical Advisory Board for Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani
Drugs’’ by the ‘‘Central Drugs Authority’’;
(b) insertion of a new Chapter IA with a view to providing the
constitution of the Central Drugs Authority and other connected or incidental
matters;
(c) insertion of a new Chapter IB in the Act, providing for grant of
permission for clinical trials, punishment for conducting clinical trial without
permission, trial of offences, etc.; and
(d) expansion of the compositions of the Drugs Consultative
Committees.
3. Certain consequential changes in the Act are also proposed so as to make
it in consonance with proposal for setting up of the Central Drugs Authority.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; ANBUMANI RAMADOSS.
The 7 th June, 2007.
67

68
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1 relates to short title and commencement of the Act.
Clause  2 amends section 3 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940
(hereinafter referred to as the Act) in order to add definitions of the terms ‘‘Central
Drugs Authority’’, ‘‘Chairperson’’, ‘‘Member’’, ‘‘Drugs Controller (India)’’, ‘‘clinical
trial’’ and ‘‘Fund’’, amend the definition of the term ‘‘drug’’, and substitute the
words ‘‘Central Government’’ in the definitions of the terms ‘‘Government analyst’’
and ‘‘Inspector’’ with the words ‘‘Central Drugs Authority”, the words “sale or
distribution” in the definition of the term “manufacture” with the words “sale or
export or distribution” and the words “Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted
under section 5” in the definition of the term “patent or proprietary medicine” with
the words “Central Drugs Authority”.
Clause 3 inserts a new Chapter, CHAPTER IA titled “C
ENTRAL D RUGS
AUTHORITY OF I NDIA” containing proposed new sections 5 to 5M and CHAPTER IB
titled “C LINICAL T RIALS” containing proposed new sections 5N to 5Q.
Proposed new section 5 provides for the constitution of the Central Drugs
Authority of India, its nature, composition, location of headquarters and power to
set up offices in other places in India.
Proposed new section 5A provides for qualifications of Chairperson and
Members of the Central Drugs Authority.
Proposed new section 5B provides for the term of office of the Chairperson
and Members of the Central Drugs Authority.
Proposed new section 5C gives the power to the Central Government for
prescribing the salaries, allowances, pensions payable to, and other conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and Members of the Central Drugs Authority.
Proposed new section 5D provides that any vacancy in, or any defect in
the constitution of, or any defect in the appointment of the Chairperson or a
Member of the Central Drugs Authority or any irregularity in its procedure not
affecting the merits of a case, would not invalidate its proceedings.
Proposed new section 5E gives power to the Central Drugs Authority to
appoint Drugs Controller (India) and other officers and employees of the Authority
and to fix their salaries, allowances and pensions. It also provides that the Drugs
Controller (India) shall be the Secretary of the Central Drugs Authority.
Proposed new section 5F enumerates the powers and functions of the
Central Drugs Authority.
Proposed new section 5G provides for the powers and functions of the
Drugs Controller (India).
Proposed new section 5H provides for grants to be made by the Central
Government to be Central Drugs Authority.
68

69
Proposed new section 5-I provides for constitution of the Central Drugs
Authority of India Fund as well as what shall be credited thereto. It also provides
the purposes for which the Fund shall be applied.
Proposed new section 5J provides for maintenance of proper accounts by
the Central Drugs Authority and the details regarding procedure for auditing of its
accounts.
Proposed new section 5K provides for preparation of an annual report by
the Central Drugs Authority, which shall be forwarded to the Central Government
and also laid before each House of Parliament.
Proposed new section 5L lays down the power of the Central Government
to make rules, in consultation with the Central Drugs Authority, for giving effect
to the provisions as contained in CHAPTER IA.
Proposed new section 5M provides for power of the Central Drugs Authority
to make regulations for discharge of its functions and exercise of its powers.
Proposed new section 5N prohibits the conduct of clinical trials in respect
of any drug or cosmetic without due permission from the Central Drugs Authority.
Proposed new section 5-O provides for punishment for conducting clinical
trials without permission.
Proposed new section 5P provides for procedure for trial of offences under
section 5-O.
Proposed new section 5Q gives powers to the Central Government to make
rules, in consultation with the Central Drugs Authority, to give effect to the
provisions of CHAPTER IB.
Clause 4 provides for substitution of the existing heading of CHAPTER II
of the Act with “T
HE C ENTRAL D RUGS L ABORATORY AND T HE D RUGS C ONSULTATIVE
COMMITTEE ”.
Clause 5 provides for omission of section 5 of the Act dealing with the
Drugs Technical Advisory Board.
Clause 6 amends section 6 of the Act for substituting the word ‘Laboratory’
with the words ‘Laboratory or laboratories and the word ‘Board’ with the words
‘Central Drugs Authority’.
Clause 7 amends section 7 of the Act for substituting the words “Drugs
Technical Advisory Board” with the words “Central Drugs Authority”. It also
provides for change in the composition of the Drugs Consultative Committee.
Clause 8 omits section 7A of the Act.
Clauses 9 to 18 and clauses 20 to 27 amend various sections of the Act
for replacing the word “Board”, wherever it occurs, with the words “Central Drugs
Authority”, the words “manufacture for sale or for distribution”, wherever they
occur, with the words “manufacture for sale or for export or for distribution” and
the words “Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board”, wherever
they occur, with the words “Central Drugs Authority”, and to provide for new
composition of the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee.

70
Clause 19 provides for omission of section 33C of the Act dealing with the
Ayuryedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board.
Clause 28 substitutes new section 38 dealing with laying of every rule and
every regulation made under the Act before each House of Parliament within a
stipulated timeframe.

71
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007 proposes to
insert, inter alia, new section 5A in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 empowering
the Central Government to appoint the Chairperson and Members of the Central
Drugs Authority of India and new section 5C in the said Act empowering the
Central Government to decide on the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to,
and other conditions of service of, the Members of the Central Drugs Authority of
India. Some recurring expenditure will be involved in regard to payment of salaries,
allowances and pensions payable to the Chairperson and Members of the Central
Drugs Authority of India. The exact amount of expenditure involved will depend on
the number of Members appointed and will be met out of the revenues of the
Central Drugs Authority of India.
2. It is estimated that no expenditure, either of recurring or non-recurring
nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India, would be involved.
71

72
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to insert new Chapters IA and IB (containing
new sections 5 to 5Q) in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. New section 5L
proposes to confer power on the Central Government to make rules for giving
effect to the provisions of Chapter IA after consultation with, or on the
recommendation of, the Central Drugs Authority and after previous publication by
notification in the Official Gazette. New section 5M proposes to confer power
upon the Central Drugs Authority to make regulations consistent with the said Act
and the rules made thereunder to discharge its functions and exercise its powers.
New section 5Q proposes to confer power on the Central Government to make
rules for giving effect to the provisions of Chapter IB after consultation with, or
on the recommendation of the Central Drugs Authority and after previous publication
by notification in the Official Gazette. Clause 7 of the Bill proposes to insert new
sub-section (4) in section 7 of the said Act to confer power on the Central
Government to make rules for prescribing the number of Central Government’s
representatives in the Drugs Consultative Committee under sub-section (2) of
section 7 of the said Act, after consulation with Central Drugs Authority. Clause
26(b) (iii) of the Bill proposes to insert new clause (ff) after clause (f) in sub-
section (2) of section 33N of the said Act, to confer power on the Central
Government to make rules for the purpose of prescribing the number of Central
Government's representatives in the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative
Committee under sub-section (2) of section 33D of the said Act.
These matters are the matters of procedure and administrative detail. Hence,
it is not practical to provide for them in the Bill. The delegation of legislative
powers is, therefore, normal in character.
72

73
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE D RUGS AND C OSMETICS A CT, 1940
(23 OF 1940)
** * **
3. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or
context,—
(aa) ‘‘the Board’’ means—
(1) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, the
Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board
constituted under section 33C; and
(ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, the Drugs
Technical Advisory Board constituted under section 5;
(b) “drug” includes—
** * **
(iv) such devices intended for internal or external use in
the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease or
disorder in human beings or animals, as may be specified from
time to time by the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette, after consultation with the Board;
(c) “Government Analyst” means—
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, a
Government Analyst appointed by the Central Government or a
State Government under section 33F; and
(ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, a Government
Analyst appointed by the Central Government or a State
Government under section 20;
** * **
(e) “Inspector” means—
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, an
Inspector appointed by the Central Government or a State
Government under section 33G; and
(ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, an Inspector
appointed by the Central Government or a State Government
under section 21;
(f) “manufacture” in relation to any drug or cosmetic includes
any process or part of a process for making, altering, ornamenting,
73
Definitions.

74
finishing packing, labelling, breaking up or otherwise treating or adopting
any drug or cosmetic with a view to its sale or distribution but does
not include the compounding or dispensing of any drug, or the
packing of any drug or cosmetic, in the ordinary course of retail
business; and “to manufacture” shall be construed accordingly;
** * **
‘(h) “patent or proprietary medicine”,—
(ii) in relation to any other systems of medicine, a drug which
is a remedy or prescription presented in a form ready for internal or
external administration of human beings or animals and which is not
included in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia for the time being
or any other Pharmacopoeia authorised in this behalf by the Central
Government after consultation with the Drugs Technical Advisory
Board constituted under section 5;’
** * **
CHAPTER II
T
HE D RUGS T ECHNICAL A DVISORY B OARD, T HE C ENTRAL D RUGS
LABORATORY AND THE D RUGS C ONSULTATIVE C OMMITTEE
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be,
constitute a Board (to be called the Drugs Technical Advisory Board)
to advise the Central Government and the State Governments on
technical matters arising out of the administration of this Act and to
carry out the other functions assigned to it by this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(i) the Director General of Health Services, ex officio ,
who shall be Chairman;
(ii) the Drugs Controller, India, ex officio ;
(iii) the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory, Calcutta,
ex officio ;
(iv) the Director of the Central Research Institute, Kasauli,
ex officio ;
(v) the Director of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute,
Izatnagar, ex officio ;
(vi) the President of the Medical Council of India,
ex officio ;
(vii) the President of the Pharmacy Council of India,
ex officio ;
(viii) the Director of the Central Drug Research Institute,
Lucknow, ex officio ;
The Drugs
Technical
Advisory
Board.

75
(ix) two persons to be nominated by the Central
Government from among persons who are in charge of drugs
control in the States;
(x) one person, to be elected by the Executive Committee
of the Pharmacy Council of India, from among teachers in
pharmacy or pharmaceutical chemistry or pharmacognosy on
the staff of an Indian university or a college affiliated thereto;
(xi) one person, to be elected by the Executive Committee
of the Medical Council of India, from among teachers in
medicine or therapeutics on the staff of an Indian university or
a college affiliated thereto;
(xii) one person to be nominated by the Central Government
from the pharmaceutical industry;
(xiii) one pharmacologist to be elected by the Governing
Body of the Indian Council of Medical Research;
(xiv) one person to be elected by the Central Council of
the Indian Medical Association;
(xv) one person to be elected by the Council of the
Indian Pharmaceutical Association;
(xvi) two persons holding the appointment of Government
Analyst under this Act, to be nominated by the Central
Government.
(3) The nominated and elected members of the Board shall hold
office for three years, but shall be eligible for re-nomination and re-
election:
Provided that the person nominated or elected, as the case may
be, under clause ( ix) or clause ( x) or clause ( xi) or clause ( xvi) of
sub-section (2) shall hold office for so long as he holds the appointment
of the office by virtue of which he was nominated or elected to the
Board.
(4) The Board may, subject to the previous approval of the
Central Government; make bye-laws fixing a quorum and regulating its
own procedure and the conduct of all business to be transacted by it.
(5) The Board may constitute sub-committees and may appoint
to such sub-committees for such periods, not exceeding three years,
as it may decide, or temporarily for the consideration of particular
matters, persons who are not members of the Board.
(6) The functions of the Board may be exercised notwithstanding
any vacancy therein.
(7) The Central Government shall appoint a person to be Secretary
of the Board and shall provide the Board with such clerical and other
staff as the Central Government considers necessary.

76
6. ( 1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be
establish a Central Drugs Laboratory under the control of a
Director to be appointed by the Central Government, to carry out the
functions entrusted to it by this Act or any rules made under this
Chapter:
Provided that, if the Central Government so prescribes, the
functions of the Central Drugs Laboratory in respect of any drug or
class of drugs or cosmetic or class of cosmetics shall be carried out
at the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, or at any other prescribed
Laboratory and the functions of the Director of the Central Drugs
Laboratory in respect of such drug or class of drugs or such cosmetic
or class of cosmetics shall be exercised by the Director of that
Institute or of that other Laboratory, as the case may be.
(2) The Central Government may, after consultation with the
Board, make rules prescribing—
(a) the functions of the Central Drugs Laboratory;
** * * *
(d) the procedure for the submission to the said Laboratory
under Chapter IV or Chapter IVA of samples of drugs or
cosmetics for analysis or test, the forms of the Laboratory’s
reports thereon and the fees payable in respect of such reports;
(e) such other matters as may be necessary or expedient
to enable the said Laboratory to carry out its functions;
(f) the matters necessary to be prescribed for the purposes
of the proviso to sub-section ( 1).
7. ( 1) The Central Government may constitute an advisory
committee to be called “the Drugs Consultative Committee” to advise
the Central Government, the State-Governments and the Drugs Technical
Advisory Board on any matter tending to secure uniformity throughout
India in the administration of this Act.
(2) The Drugs Consultative Committee shall consist of two
representatives of the Central Government to be nominated by that
Government and one representative of each State Government to be
nominated by the State Government concerned.
(3) The Drugs Consultative Committee shall meet when required
to do so by the Central Government and shall have power to regulate
its own procedure.
7A. Nothing contained in sections 5 and 7 shall apply to
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.
CHAPTER III
I
MPORT OF D RUGS AND C OSMETICS
8. (1) * * * * *
The Drugs
Consultative
Committee.
Sections 5
and 7 not
apply to
Ayurvedic,
Siddha or
Unani drugs.
Standards of
quality.
The Central
Drugs
Laboratory.

77
(2) The Central Government, after consultation with the Board
and after giving by notification in the Official Gazette not less than
three months’ notice of its intention so to do, may by a like notification
add to or otherwise amend the Second Schedule for the purposes of
this Chapter, and thereupon the Second Schedule shall be deemed to
be amended accordingly.
** * * *
10. From such date as may be fixed by the Central Government
by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, no person shall
import—
(a) any drug or cosmetic which is not of standard
quality;
(b) any misbranded drug or misbranded or spurious
cosmetic;
(bb) any adulterated or spurious drug;
(c) any drug or cosmetic for the import of which a
licence is prescribed, other-wise than under, and in accordance
with, such licence;
(d) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is
displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or container
thereof the true formula or lost of active ingredients contained
in it together with the quantities thereof;
(e) any drug which by means of any statement, design or
device accompanying it or by any other means, purports or
claims to cure or mitigate any such disease or ailment, or to
have any such other effect, as may be prescribed;
(ee) any cosmetic containing any ingredient which may
render it unsafe or harmful for use under the directions indicated
or recommended;
(f) any drug or cosmetic the import of which is prohibited
by rule made under this Chapter:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the import,
subject to prescribed conditions, of small quantities of any drug for
the purpose of examination, test or analysis or for personal use:
Provided further that the Central Government may, after
consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official Gazette,
permit, subject to any conditions specified in the notification, the
import of any drug or class of drugs not being of standard quality.
** * * *
12. (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with or
on the recommendation of the Board and after previous publication by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of
giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:
Prohibition of
import of
certain drugs or
cosmetics.
Power of
Central
Government to
make rules.

78
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed
with if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances have
arisen which render it necessary to make rules without such
consultation, but in such a case the Board shall be consulted within
six months of the making of the rules and the Central Government
shall take into consideration any suggestions which the Board may
make in relation to the amendmept of the said rules.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may—
(a) specify the drugs or classes of drugs or cosmetics or
classes of cosmetics for the import of which a licence is
required, and prescribed the form and conditions of such licences,
the authority empowered to issue the same, the fees payable
therefor and provide for the cancellation, or suspension of such
licence in any case where any provision of this Chapter or the
rules made thereunder is contravened or any of the conditions
subject to which the licence is issued is not complied with;
(b) prescribe the methods of test or analysis to be employed
in determining whether a drug or cosmetic is of standard
quality;
(c) prescribe, in respect of biological and organometallic
compounds, the units of methods standardisation;
(cc) prescribe under clause ( d) of section 9A, the colour
or colours which a drug may bear or contain for purposes of
colouring;
(d) specify the diseases or ailments which an imported
drug may not purport or claim to prevent, cure or mitigate and
such other effects which such drug may not purport or claim
to have;
(e) prescribe the conditions subject to which small
quantities of drugs, the import of which is otherwise prohibited
under this Chapter, may be imported for the purpose of
examination, test or analysis or for personal use;
(f) prescribe the places at which drugs or cosmetics may
be imported, and prohibit their import at any other place;
(g) require the date of manufacture and the date of expiry
of potency to be clearly and truly stated on the label or
container or any specified imported drug or class of such drug,
and prohibit the import of the said drug or class of drug after
the expiry of a specified period from the date of manufacture;
(h) regulate the submission by importers, and the securing,
of samples of drugs or cosmetics for examination, test or
analysis by the Central Drugs Laboratory, and prescribe the
fees, if any, payable for such examination, test or analysis;

79
(i) prescribe the evidence to be supplied, whether by
accompanying documents or otherwise, of the quality of drugs
or cosmetics sought to be imported, the procedure of officers
of Customs in dealing with such evidence, and the manner of
storage at places of import of drugs or cosmetics detained
pending admission;
(j) provide for the exemption, conditionally or otherwise,
from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter and the rules
made thereunder of drugs or cosmetics imported for the purpose
only of transport through, and export from, India;
(k) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing
in bottles, packages or other containers, of imported drugs or
cosmetics including the use of packing material which comes
into direct contract with the drugs;
(l) regulate the mode of labelling drugs or cosmetics
imported for sale in packages, and prescribe the matters which
shall or shall not be included in such labels;.
(m) prescribe the maximum proportion of any poisonous
substance which may be added to or contained in any imported
drug, prohibit the import of any drug in which that proportion
is exceeded, and specify substances which shall be deemed to
be poisonous for the purposes of this Chapter and the rules
made thereunder;
(n) require that the accepted scientific name of any
specified drug shall be displayed in the prescribed manner on
the label or wrapper of any imported, patent or proprietary
medicine containing such drug;
(o) provide for the exemption, conditionally or otherise,
from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter or the rules
made thereunder, of any specified drug or class of drugs or
cosmetic or class of cosmetics.
** * * *
CHAPTER IV
M
ANUFACTURE, S ALE AND D ISTRIBUTION OF D RUGS AND C OSMETICS
16. (1) * * * * *
(2) The Central Government, after consultation with the Board
and after giving by notification in the Official Gazette not less than
three months’ notice of its intention so to do, may by a like notification
add to or otherwise amend the Second Schedule for the purposes of
this Chapter, and thereupon the Second Schedule shall be deemed to
be amended accordingly.
** * * *
Standards of
quality.

80
18. From such date may be fixed by the State Government by
notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, no person shall
himself or by any other person on his behalf—
(a) manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or stock or
exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute—
(i) any drug which is not of a standard quality, or is
misbranded, adulterated or spurious;
(ii) any cosmetic which is not of a standard quality, or
is misbranded or spurious;
(iii) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is
displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or container
thereof the true formula or list of active ingredient contained in
it together with quantities thereof;
(iv) any drug which by means of any statement design
or device accompanying it or by any other means, purports or
claims to prevent, cure or mitigate any such disease or ailment,
or to have any such other effect as may be prescribed;
(v) any cosmetic containing any ingredient which may
render it unsafe or harmful for use under the directions indicated
or recommended;
(vi) any drug or cosmetic in contravention of any of the
provisions of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder;
(b) sell, or stock or exhibit of offer for sale, or distribute any
drug or cosmetic which has been imported or manufactured in
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule made
thereunder;
(c) manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or stock or
exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute any drug or cosmetic, except
under, and in accordance with the conditions of, a licence issued for
such purpose under this Chapter:
** * * *
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the
manufacture, subject to prescribed conditions, of small quantities of
any drug for the purpose of examination, test or analysis:
Provided further that the Central Government may, after
consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official Gazette,
permit, subject to any conditions specified in the notification, the
manufacture. for sale or for distribution, sale, stocking or exhibiting or
offering for sale or distribution of any drug or class of drugs not
being of standard quality.
** * * *
Prohibition of
manufacture
and sale of
certain drugs
and cosmetics.

81
20. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the
prescribed qualifications, to be Government Analysts for such areas in
the State and in respect of such drugs or classes of drugs or such
cosmetics or classes of cosmetics as may be specified in the notification.
** * * *
(2) The Central Government may also, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the
prescribed qualifications, to be Government Analysts in respect of
such drugs or classes of drugs or such cosmetics or classes of
cosmetics as may be specified in the notification.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) or
sub-section (2), neither the Central Government nor a State Government
shall appoint as a Government Analyst any official not serving under
it without the previous consent of the Government under which he is
serving.
(4) No person who has any financial interest in the import,
manufacture or sale of drugs or cosmetics shall be appointed to be a
Government Analyst under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of this
section.
21. ( 1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks
fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Inspectors for such
areas as may, be assigned to them by the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be.
(2) The powers which may be exercised by an Inspector and
the duties which may be performed by him, the drugs or classes of
drugs or cosmetics or classes of cosmetics in relation to which and
the conditions, limitations or restrictions subject to which, such powers
and duties may be exercised or performed shall be such as may be
precribed.
(3) No person who has any financial interest in the import,
manufacture or sale of drugs or cosmetics shall be appointed to be an
Inspector under this section.
(4) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall
be officially subordinate to such authority, having the prescribed
qualifications, as the Government appointing him may specify in this
behalf.
22. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of section 23 and of any rules
made by the Central Government in this behalf, an Inspector may,
within the local limits of the area for which he is appointed,—
** * * *
Government
Analysts.
45 of 1860.
Inspectors.
Powers of
Inspectors.

82
(cca) require any person to produce any record, register,
or other document relating to the manufacture for sale or for
distribution, stocking, exhibition for sale, offer for sale or
distribution of any drug or cosmetic in respect of which he has
reason to believe that an offence under this Chapter has been,
or is being, committed;
** * * *
27. Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf
manufactures for sale or for distribution, or sells, or stocks, or
exhibits or offers for sale or distributes,—
(a) any drug deemed to be adulterated under section 17A
or spurious under section 17B or which when used by any
person for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, or prevention
of any disease or disorder is likely to cause his death or is likely
to cause such harm on his body as would amount to grievous
hurt within the meaning of section 320 of the Indian Penal
Code, solely on account of such drug being adulterated or
spurious or not of standard quality, as the case may be, shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than five years but which may extend to a term of life. and
with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees;
(b) any drug—
(i) deemed to be adulterated under section 17A, but
not being a drug referred to in caluse ( a), or
(ii) without a valid licence as required under clause
(c) of section 18,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than one year but which may extend to three years
and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special
reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of
imprisonment for a term of less than one year and of fine of less than
five thousand rupees;
(c) any drug deemed to be spurious under section 17B, but not
being a drug referred to in clause ( a) shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but
which may extend to five years and with fine which shall not be less
than five thousand rupees:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special
reasons, to be recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of
imprisonment for a term of less than three years but not less than one
year;
(d) any drug, other than a drug referred to in clause ( a) or
clause ( b) or clause ( c) in contravention of any other provision of this
Penalty for
maufacture,
sale, etc. drugs
in contraven-
tion of this
Chapter.
45 of 1860.

83
Chapter or any rule made thereunder, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but
which may extend to two years and with fine:
Provided that the Court may for any adequate and special
reasons to be recorded in the judgment impose a sentence of
imprisonment for a term of less than one year.
27A. Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf
manufactures for sale or for distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhibits
or offers for sale—
(i) any cosmetic deemed to be spurious under section
17C shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years and with fine;
(ii) any cosmetic other than a cosmetic referred to in
clause ( i) above in contravention of any provisions, of this
Chapter or any rule made thereunder shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both.
31. ( 1) Where any person has been convicted under this Chapter
for contravening any such provision of this Chapter or any rule made
thereunder as may be specified by rule made in this behalf, the stock
of the drug or cosmetic in respect of which the contravention has
been made shall be liable to confiscation and if such contravention is
in respect of—
(i) manufacture of any drug deemed to be misbranded
under section 17, adulterated under section 17A or spurious
under section 17B; or
(ii) manufacture for sale, or for distribution, sale or
stocking or exhibiting or offering for sale, or distribution of any
drug without a valid licence as required under clause ( c) of
section 18,
any implements or machinery use in such manufacture, sale or
distribution and any receptacles, packages or coverings in which such
drug is contained and the animals vehicles, vessels or other conveyances
used in carrying such drug shall also be liable to confiscation.
** * * *
33. ( 1) The Central Government may “after consultation with,
or on the recommendation of, the Board” and after previous publication
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of
giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed
with if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances have
arisen which render it necessary to make rules without such
consultation, but in such a case the Board shall be consulted within
six months of the making of the rules and the Central Government
Penalty for
manufacture,
sale, etc., of
cosmetics in
contravention
of this
Chapter.
Confiscation.
Power of
Central
Government to
make rules.

84
shall take into consideration any suggestions which the Board may
make the relation to the amendment of the said rules.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may—
** * * *
(b) prescribe the qualifications and duties of Government
Analysts and the qualifications of Inspectors;
** * * *
(e) prescribe the forms of licences for the manufacture
for sale or for Distribution for the sale and for the distribution
of drugs or any specified drug or class of drugs or of cosmetics
or any specified cosmetic or class of cosmetics, the form of
application for such licences may be issued, the authority
empowered to issue the same the qualifications of such authority
and the fees payable therefor; and provide for the cancellation
or suspension of such licences in any case where any provision
of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder is contravened or
any of the conditions subject to which they are issued is not
complied with.
** * * *
(n) prescribe the powers and duties of Inspectors and the
qualifications of the authority to which such Inspectors shall be
subordinate and specify the drugs or classes of drugs or cosmetics or
classes of cosmetics in relation to which and the conditions, limitations
or restrictions subject to which, such powers and duties may be
exercised or performed;
** * * *
33C. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette and with effect from such date as may be specified
therein, constitute a Board (to be called the Ayurvedic, Siddha and
Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board to advise the Central Government
and the State Governments on technical matters arising out of this
Chapter and to carry out the other functions assigned to it by this
Chapter.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(i) the Director General of Health Services, ex officio ;
(ii) the Drugs Controller, India, ex officio ;
(iii) the Principal Officer dealing with, Indian systems of
medicine in Ministry of Health ex-officio;
(iv) the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory, Calcutta,
ex officio ;
(v) one person holding the appointment of Government
Analyst under section 33F, to be nominated by the Central
Government;
Ayurvedic,
Siddha and
Unani Drug
Technical
Advisory
Board.

85
(vi) one Pharmacognocist to be nominated by the Central
Government;
(vii) one Phyto-chemist to be nominated by the Central
Government;
(viii ) four persons to be nominated by the Central
Government, two from amongst the member of the Ayurvedic
Pharmacopoeia Committee, one from amongst the members of
the Unani Pharmacopoeia Committee and one from amongst the
members of the Siddha Pharmacopoeia Committee;
(ix) one teacher in Dravyaguna and Bhaishajya Kalpana,
to be nominated by the Central Government;
(x) one teacher in ILM-UL-ADVIA  and T AKLISWA-
DAW ASAZI, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(xi) one teacher in Gunapadam to be nominated by the
Central Government;
(xii) three persons, one each to represent the Ayurvedic,
Siddha and Unani drug industry, to be nominated by the Central
Government;
(xiii) three persons, one each from among the practitioners
of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb systems of medicine to be
nominated by the Central Government.
33D. ( 1) The Central Government may constitute an Advisory
Committee to be called the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs
Consultative Committee to advise the Central Government, the State
Governments and the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical
Advisory Board on any matter for the purpose of securing uniformity
throughout India in the administration of this Act in so far as it relates
to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.
(2) The Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative
Committee shall consist of two persons to be nominated by the
Central Government as representatives of that Government and not
more than one representative of each State to be nominated by the
State Government concerned.
** * * *
33EEB. No person shall manufacture for sale or for distribution
any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs except in accordance with such
standards, if any, as may be prescribed in relation to that drug.
33EEC. From such date as the State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, no person,
either by himself or by any other person on his behalf, shall—
The Ayurvedic,
Siddha and
Unani Drugs
Consultative
Committee.
Regulation of
manufacture
for sale of
Ayurvedic,
Siddha and
Unani drugs.
Prohibition of
manufacture
and sale of
certain
Ayurvedic,
Siddha and
Unani drugs.

86
(a) manufacture for sale or for distribution—
(i) any misbranded, adulterated or spurious
Ayurvedic Siddha or Unani drug;
(ii) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there
is displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or
container thereof the true list of all the ingredients
contained in it; and
(iii) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug in
contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter or
any rule made thereunder;
** * * *
(c) manufacture for sale or for distribution, any Ayurvedic,
Siddha or Unani drug, except under, and in accordance with the
conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under this
Chapter by the prescribed authority:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to Vaidyas and
Hakims who manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug for the use
of their own patients:
Provided further that nothing in this section shall apply to the
manufacture, subject to the prescribed conditions, of small quantities
of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug for the purpose of
examinations, test or analysis.
33F. ( 1) The Central Government or a State Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such person as it thinks
fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Government Analysts for
such areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or
the State Government, as the case may be.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), neither
the Central Government nor a State Government shall appoint as a
Government Analyst any official not serving under it without the
previous consent of the Government under which he is serving.
(3) No person who has any financial interest in the manufacture
or sale of any drug shall be appointed to be a Government Analyst
under this section.
33G ( 1) The Central Government or a State Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it
thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Inspectors for
such areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or
the State Government, as the case may be.
(2) The powers which may be exercised by an Inspector and
the duties which may be performed by him and the conditions,
limitations or restrictions subject to which such powers and duties
may be exercised or performed shall be such as may be prescribed.
Inspectors.
Government
Analysts.

87
(3) No person who has any financial interest in the manufacture
or sale of any drug shall be appointed to be an Inspector under this
section.
(4) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code and shall
be officially subordinate to such authority as the Government appointing
him may specify in the behalf.
** * * *
33-I. Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf—
(1) manufactures for sale or for distribution,—
(a) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug—
(i) deemed to be adulterated under section
33EE, or
(ii) without a valid licence as required under
clause
(c) of section 33EEC,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than
two thousand rupees;
(b) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug deemed to be
spurious under section 33EEA, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year
but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall
not be less than five thousand rupees:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special
reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of
imprisonment for a term of less than one year and of fine of less than
five thousand rupees; or
(2) contravenes any other provisions of this Chapter or of
section 24 as applied by section 33H or any rule made under this
Chapter, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three months and with fine which shall not be less than five
hundred rupees.
** * * *
33L. The provisions of this Chapter except those contained in
section 33K shall apply in relation to the manufacture for sale, sale or
distribution of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug by any department
of Government as they apply in relation to the manufacture for sale,
sale, or distribution of such drug by any other person
33N. ( 1) The Central Government may, after consultation with,
or on the recommendation of, the Board after previous publication by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of
giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:
45 of 1860.
Penalty for
manufacture,
sale, etc., of
Ayurvedic,
Siddha or
Unani drug in
contravention
of this
Chapter.
Application of
provisions to
Government
Departments.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.

88
** * * *
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed
with if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances arisen
which render it necessary to make rules without such have consultation,
but in such a case, the Board shall be consulted within six months of
the making of the rules and the Central Government shall take into
consideration any suggestions which the Board may make in relation
to the amendment of the said rules.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power
such rules may—
(a) provide for the establishment of laboratories for testing
and analysing Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani.
(b) prescribe the qualifications and duties of Government
Analysts and the qualifications of Inspectors;
(c) prescribe the methods of test or analysis to be employed
determining whether any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug is
labelled with the true list of the ingredients which it is purported
to contain;
(d) specify any substance as a poisonous substance;
(e) prescribe the forms of licences for the manufacture
drugs for sale of drugs the forms of application for such
licences, the conditions subject to which such licences may be
issued, the authority empowered to issue the same and the fees
payable therefor and provide for the cancellation or suspension
of such licences in any case where any provision of this
chapter or rules made thereunder is contravened or any of the
conditions subject to which they are issued is not complied
with.
(f) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing
of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani durgs including the use of
packing material which comes into direct contact with the
drugs, regulate the mode of labelling packed drugs and prescribe
the matters which shall or shall not be included in such labels;
(g) prescribe the conditions subject to which small
quantities of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs may be
manufactured for the purpose of examination, test or analysis;
and
(gg) prescribe under clause ( d) of section 33EE the
colour or colours which an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug
may bear or contain for purposes of colouring;
(gga) prescribe the standards for Ayurvedic, Siddha or
Unani drugs under section 33EEB;
(h) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed
under this Chapter.

89
Power to
amend First
Schedule.
Rules to be
laid before
Parliament.
33-O. The Central Government, after consultation with the
Board and after giving, by notification in the Official Gazette, not less
than three months’ notice of its intention so to do, may, by a like
notification, add to or otherwise amend the first Schedule for the
purposes of the Chapter and thereupon the said Schedule shall be
deemed to be amended accordingly.
** * * *
38. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may
be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the
expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,
as the case may be; so however that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
** * * *

90
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmestics Act, 1940.
(Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)

ANNEXURE-II
STUDY NOTE
PHASE I
OF
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
VISIT
TO
Bengaluru, Thiruvananthapuram, Chennai and Hyderabad
from 7th to 14 January, 2008
on
The Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007
91

93
INTRODUCTION
The Committee in its examination of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007,
(hereinafter referred to as Bill) undertook a study visit to Bengaluru, Thiruvananthapuram, Chennai
and Hyderabad from 7th to 14th January, 2008. During its study visit the Committee had interacted
with various associations of large and small Pharmaceutical companies, NGOs, Consumer Fora,
individuals and experts, representatives from IMA and other stakeholders who approached the
Committee on the various provisions of the Bill. The list of witnesses who appeared before the
Committee is given at Annexure IV . The views and suggestions expressed by different stakeholders
are enumerated in succeeding paragraphs.
KARNATAKA
(Dated 07.01.08)
The Committee heard the following entities on the Bill at Bengaluru—
Indian Pharmaceutical Association, Karnataka State Branch, Karnataka Indian
Medicine Manufacturers’ Association, Pharmaceutical Association, Indian Hospital
Pharmacists’ Association, Indian Pharmacy Graduates’ Association, All India Drugs Control
Officers’ Confederation, Karnataka Drugs and Pharma Manufacturing Associations, and,
Karnataka State Pharmacy Council, and the State Government of Karnataka.
INDIAN PHARMACEUTICAL ASSOCIATION, KARNATAKA STATE BRANCH
The representatives of the IPA were opposed to the Bill. They quoted following
extracts of  Mashelkar Committee report stating that the report did not favour establishing the
Central Drugs Authority.
“There were several complex operational, legal and constitutional issues involved in
setting up the National Drug Authority. Creating another authority will not solve the
problem at hand”.
• The report recommended creation of strong, well equipped independent and
professionally managed Central Drug Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO).
Although strengthening of Drugs Control Organisations both at Central and
State level had been strongly recommended, the present Bill is silent on
strengthening of the Drugs Control Organizations at State level.
• It was their contention that if the objective of the Bill is to achieve upgradation in view
of exports, uniformity of implementation, eradication of spurious and counterfeits the
same can be achieved by the following:
° Upgradation to establish a good image of India products:
The process of CDSCO evaluating GMP of export units and certifying them may
be strengthened. The GMP certification may be made essential for exports.
Moreover, these units should have to be self upgrading in view of the respective
regulatory agency audits.

94
° Uniformity in implementation
The object of uniformity in implementation and effective quality monitoring
at national level can be achieved if the CDA focuses its energy, expertise
and resources in key areas like legislation, framing policies, review and
monitoring of the activities of the State Drugs Control Organizations,
import, clinical trials and approval of new drugs. Therefore, the powers and
functions of the Central Drugs Authority should be laid down in elaborate manner
to provide for the above said issues.
° To conduct training programs in Drugs Safety and Standards, technical, legal and
investigation aspects for the Drugs Control Officers and all concerned.
° To prepare and periodically update a National Formulary of Fixed Dose
Combinations (FDCs) for the guidance of State Licensing Authorities (SLAs). The
permission to grant product licenses by SLAs will be restricted to FDCs included
in such National Formulary. This will not only result in speedy disposal with
minimum manpower but will also result in uniformity in grant of product
permission. This will also obviate the necessity of approaching Drugs Control
General of India for grant of each Fixed Dose Combination.
° Eradication of spurious and counterfeit drugs
Solution to tackle spurious drugs and sub-standard drug not in centralising of
licensing system but in building competence in the existing State and Central Drug
Control Organisation by taking the following measures:
A. Should strengthen CDSCO and State Organizations
B. Reinforce the expertise for investigations through scientifically designed
training programmes
C. Formation of a Coordination Cell to coordinate between CDSCO and State on
information sharing and in investigations
D. Facilitate cooperation and coordination with connected forces like Police, CID
and the Drugs Inspectors to improve and adequately investigate the
complaints on spurious and counterfeit drugs.
E. Sensitizing the professionals from ancillary industry.
Following objections and suggestions to the under-mentioned provisions of the Bill were
made:
• The terms “spurious drug” “substandard drug” and “counterfeit drug” should be
defined separately.  Combining them under a single heading was like bracketing
criminal offenders and miscellaneous traffic offenders in the same group.
• The Central Drugs Authority (under clause 5 of the proposed Bill)  is proposed as a
substitute for the existing Drugs Technical Advisory Board. The existing Drugs Technical
Advisory Board is a technical body and is much broad based having representation of
technical experts from the cross section of pharmaceutical profession. As compared to
this, the Central Drugs Authority will consist of only 5 representatives to be appointed by
the Central Government from amongst persons having experience in public administration,
teaching, finance or law but not pharmacy field. Therefore, establishment of Central
Drugs Authority comprising non-technical persons will have adverse effect on
effective implementation of the Act.

95
As per the proviso to clause 5A , only Secretary or Additional Secretary to the
Government of India can be appointed as Chairperson or member of the Central Drug
Authority. This proviso disqualifies State Drugs Controller either working or retired
from being appointed as a Chairperson or Member of the Central Drug Authority.
Central Drugs Authority, if established, should consist of  more members and should
be broader based with representation from the Central Government, State Drugs
Control Organisations and Pharmaceutical Industry etc., as  mentioned below:
(1) Secretary or Joint Secretary to represent following Ministry:
(i) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(ii) Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals
(iii) Ministry of Small Scale Industry
(iv) Ministry of Consumer Affairs
(2) One representative each from the pharmaceutical industry association like OPPI,
Indian Drugs Manufacturers’ Association and Small Scale Industry Association
(3) One representative from the Consumer organizations
(4) One representative each from the professional associations like IPA, IHPA, IPGA,
APTI and AIDCOC
(5) One representative from  AIOCD
(6) Five members to be appointed by rotation every 3 years from amongst the
State Drugs Control Organisations (Commissioner of Drug Safety as proposed).
(7) At least three Government Analysts from various State Drugs Control
Laboratories including Director, CDL.
• Clause 5A may be suitably amended to make officer of the rank of State Drugs
Controller or Joint Drugs Controller and above with outstanding record eligible
for appointment to the post of Chairperson or member of Central Drugs
Authority.
• Clause 5B specifies qualification and tenure of the Chairperson and members.
However, procedure for selection and also the manner in which the Chairperson or
members can be removed is not specified including the circumstances under which
the Chairperson/members can be removed. (For eg., acquiring financial or other
interest, conviction of an offence involving moral turpitude becoming physically or
mentally incapable or abusing his powers etc.– as stipulated under Section 8 of Food
Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
• The subject of drug is on the Concurrent List and therefore both Central Government
and State Governments can legislate on the subject. The proposal will take away
powers of State Governments to implement the Act effectively and monitoring the
quality through licensing system, which is accepted as an effective tool for quality
monitoring. The proposal is thus against the principle of federal structure outlined in
the Constitution of India.
• In 1992-93 the Government of India took decision to take powers as Central License
Approving Authority (CLAA) for the purpose of regulating activities of Blood Banks
and Large V olume Parenterals. However, this experiment has not yielded the desired

96
results and has in fact, resulted in delay in grant or renewal of licenses, presumably
because of the inadequate manpower in CDSCO and dilution of the responsibility.
• Difficulties in filing appeal
Under clause 5F (2) , the CDA will have powers to suspend or cancel any license
issued by it. Under Rule 85, the licencee has right to file an appeal against the order
of the Licensing Authority. In this case, no specific provision is there to provide for
the right of appeal. Even if the provisions of Rule 85 are taken into consideration, the
licencee will have to file an appeal before CDA. This means for presenting an appeal
or for arguing appeal, every licensee in this country will have to go to Delhi or zonal
offices causing delay in disposal of appeals and also harassment to the licensee.
• Constitution of Drugs Consultative Committee
Clause 7 of the proposed Bill makes provision for nomination on the Drug Consultative
Committee. It provides for nomination from industry, consumer associations and
academic and research institutions. However, there is no provision for having
representation from the professional bodies of the pharmacists.  It was, therefore,
suggested that representatives of Indian Pharmaceutical Association, Indian
Hospital Pharmacists’ Association, Indian Pharmacy Graduates’ Association and
All India Drugs Control Officers’ Confederation etc., should also be included.
Withdrawal of powers of Central Body to make rules on certain aspects
• Under Clause 18, it is proposed to omit sub-clause (b) of Section 33 (2). By this
omission, the CDA has not been given any power to prescribe the qualification and
duties of the Government Analyst and qualifications of Inspector.
In the absence of such specific provision any person without any professional
qualification would be entitled to be appointed as Government Analyst and Drugs
Inspector. Such situation is not desirable and will go contrary to the premise of
bringing uniformity in implementation.
• It is also proposed to omit sub-clause (e) of Section 33 (2). This affects the powers
to prescribe qualification of Licensing Authority. The proposal to omit sub-clause (2)
of Section 33 (2) will remove the empowerment to prescribe powers and duties of
inspection and Licensing Authorities.
• In the event of opting for Centralization, the concept of ‘timelines and ‘transparency’
(which are practiced in developed countries where there is centralized control) should
be made mandatory. Computerization is a must to accomplish this.
Following suggestions were also made:
° Making it mandatory that the drugs are transported and stored under prescribed
conditions of temperature. This will reduce the incidences of ‘sub-standard drugs’.
° According to schedule M of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, the shelf life of the
product should be decreased to match the shelf life of the inputs used. This
results in a lot of wastage which a country like ours can ill afford. This
requirement is only in India and none of the Regulated country requirements
specify this. As long as the expiry date of the inputs is within prescribed shelf
life, the same can be used to manufacture formulations and normal shelf life can
be assigned for the product. After all the responsibility of assuring quality of the
formulations the shelf life assigned is with the formulator.

97
The representatives of the Karnataka Drugs and Pharma Manufacturing Associations, and,
Karnataka State Pharmacy Council agreed to what was stated by the IPA and reiterated similar
stand on the issues raised on  the various provisions of  the Bill by the IPA.
KARNATAKA INDIAN MEDICINE MANUFACTURERS’ ASSOCIATION
The representatives from the above organization had also held similar views. While stating
the difficulties that would manifest if the Bill under examination was to become an Act, they stated
that:—
• the present proposal to have a Central Drugs Authority which would be covering all
licensing activities concerning the manufacture of drugs, including drugs produced
under the Indian System of Medicines (ISM). The proposal would have serious impact
on the growth and survival of ISM drugs industry due to the following reasons:—
(i) There is no set up at Central Level to take care of licensing activities of
AYUSH drugs.
(ii) The method of performing clinical trials in case of ISM Drugs is different
and complex unlike that of the modern drugs. It requires technically sound
persons who are well versed in the methods of manufacture and trials of the
ISM drugs. Therefore, the definition of clinical trails needed to address these
issues.
(iii) There are also differences between the ‘Drugs’ and ‘Cosmetics’ prepared
under ISM and these issues were also needed be given due care when the
issue of clinical trails is dealt with.
• Due to reasons cited as above, it was necessary to have in the composition of the
Central Drugs Authority, proper technical persons who can deal with issues related to
drugs and cosmetics from ISM industries.
STATE GOVERNMENT OF KARNATAKA DATE
Following reservations on the Bill were expressed:
• The licensing of special categories of drugs, as is the present system, should be
continued so that large manufacturing units would be under the jurisdiction of the
Centre and small scale units may be left under the jurisdiction of the State Drug
Manufacturing Licensing Authority. This they added would lead to lessening the burden
of the Centre and also not task the SSI units in Pharma sector, as apprehended by
them.
• The move to centralize the licensing mechanism would lead to loss of revenue to the
States, and to Karnataka, to the tune of Rs. 200 lakhs per annum.
• It may not be practicable to inspect units located in remote areas of the country
leading to improper surveillance, lack of authority to inspect the premises of industries
and shops thereby posing embarrassing situations.
• Prosecutions against offenders have to be instituted in JMFC courts at the Taluk-levels,
District courts and High Courts. Since these complaints are treated as “private
complaints” by the courts, the presence of the Drug Inspector is essential on all
hearing dates. Having Headquarters in Delhi would make things very difficult in such
instances.

98
Apart from the reasons mentioned above, the State Government has also furnished their views
on the various provisions of the Bill and which have been attached to the report as
Annexure-I.
KERALA
(Date 09.01.2008)
The Committee heard the following entities on the Bill at Bengaluru,—
Kerala State Drugs Control Enforcement Officers’ Association, All Kerala Pharma Traders
Forum, Kerala Pharmaceutical Manufacturer’s Association, Ayurvedic Medicine
Manufacturers Organization of India (Kerala branch), Shri Unnikrishna Panicker, M.M.
(a Senior Lecturer in Hospital and Clinical Pharmacy Medical College), Shri Chitra Thirunal
Institute of Medical Science & Technology (SCTIMST), State Government of Kerala
KERALA STATE DRUGS CONTROL  ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION,
ALL KERALA PHARMA TRADERS FORUM, AND KERALA PHARMACEUTICAL
MANUFACTURER’S ASSOCIATION
The basic issues that arose as a response to their submissions before the Committee
are:—
• The formation of CDA would lead to centralizing of the powers of licensing of
manufacture of drugs that is currently vested with the State Governments and which
currently the manufacturers’ associations do not want to be centralized. It was
pointed out that the Central Government has proposed to centralize the licensing
system without giving weightage to the fact that the manufacture, sale and distribution
of spurious drugs is a clandestine activity and that licensing should be de-linked for
tackling this problem. Therefore, centralizing the licensing system is not the solution
to the problem of spurious drugs.
• Presently, the State Drugs Control Administration has offices at every district place,
while as per provisions in the Bill, the CDSCO will have offices only at Delhi and at
zonal levels. Therefore, the applicants will face inconvenience in filing and processing
of applications, in filing the appeals against the order of the licensing authority. For
every small matter they will be required to go to Delhi or the zonal offices catering
to four to five States, thereby causing hardships to the medium and small scale
manufacturers. Procedural delay for processing of the documents for exports, may
result in loss of business altogether.  Attention was drawn to the procedure of Blood
Bank Licensing wherein joint inspection of officers of the State as well as CDSCO are
at present involved which has been causing a lot of delay in the grant of licenses.
• The Bill envisages two different licensing authorities viz. Central Drug Authority for
drugs manufacturing licenses and State Drugs Control Organizations for drugs selling
licenses. As a result of the proposed arrangement, the State Drugs Control Officers
will face difficulties in investigations of cases of substandard or spurious drugs as they
may not have jurisdiction to inspect the manufacturing establishments.
• Currently license for manufacture and sale of drugs is issued by the State Drugs
Controller and involves, in the State of Kerala, inspection of the premises by the Drugs
Controller/Assistant Drugs Controller along with Regional Drugs Inspector prior to
issuance of manufacturing license. Subsequently, the same procedure described above
is followed for routine renewal of manufacturing license and for endorsement of
additional products to be manufactured. Centralizing of the licensing powers with the

99
proposed National Drugs Authority will, thus result in undue delay in issuing
manufacturing license and endorsement of additional products since it is time
consuming and expensive for the licensing authority located in Delhi to conduct
inspection. Even if their powers to inspect manufacturing establishments are
retained, action on the inspection reports of the State Drugs Control Officers may
not be taken with the desired speed and effectiveness if two different authorities are
responsible for licensing of manufacturing establishments and selling
establishments . In this regard attention was drawn to the difficulties already
experienced in the State of Maharashtra under the Prevention of Food Adulteration
Act, 1954 where the implementation is with State FDA and the licensing is with
Mumbai Municipal Corporation.
It was accordingly, emphasized that manufacture, sale and distribution is a
composite activity and therefore it is necessary that only one agency is responsible for
monitoring the activity of the manufacturers, distributors and retailers
• After the enactment of the Bill, the entire licensing system will have to be regulated
by the CDA. As a result thereof the States will loose all powers pertaining to
manufacturing and sale of drugs and cosmetics along with the huge loss of revenue
to the State Governments.
In view of the above, following suggestions were made:
• If the Central Government considers it absolutely necessary to establish Central Drugs
Authority, then the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 may be used as a
reference and CDA may be set up on the lines of the National Food and Standard
Authority. Following the scheme under Food Safety and Standard Act, 2006
appointment of Commissioner of Drug Safety in each State should also be made.
• The Central Drugs Authority and the Commissioner of Drug Safety should be given
statutory responsibility to take steps to eradicate menace of spurious drug by
implementing various recommendations made by Dr. Mashelkar Committee.  The
Central Drug Authority and Commissioner of Drug Safety should be legally bound to
take the following measures to tackle the menace of spurious drugs.
• The uniformity in implementation can be secured through following steps:—
■ Building competency at central and state level.
■ Issuing written guidelines and manual.
■ Periodical review and monitoring by Central Drugs Authority.
■ Preparation of National Formulary of Fixed Dose Combination for the
guideline of State Drugs Controllers.
• The Powers, functions and duties of the Central Drugs Authority should be laid down
in an elaborate manner. It should devote its energy and resources in legislation, policy
making, monitoring of implementation at State level, continuous review of the products
approved at State level, import and approval of new drugs including clinical trials. The
Central Drugs Authority should have powers to issue directives to the State Drugs
Control Organizations. The implementation of the Act including licensing should remain
with the State Drugs Control Organizations.
• The CDA should be in addition to  the Drugs Technical Advisory Board and not as
a substitute to DTAB.  It is necessary to ensure that out of five members of CDA,

100
at least two members are technical experts in pharmaceutical field. The State Drugs
Controllers or the officers of  the level of Joint Commissioner with outstanding
record should also be considered eligible for appointment to the post of Chairperson
or Member of the Central Drug Authority.
• Priority needed to be accorded to strengthening of the Drugs Control Organization at
State level. The Statement of Objects and Reasons should have a specific clause to
focus on strengthening of the Drugs Control Organization at Central and State level.
The objectives of strengthening can be achieved by incorporating provisions under the
Bill for appointment of Commissioner of Drugs Safety in each State. He should be a
technically qualified person and should be Head of the Department and controlling
authority. It is necessary to strengthen Drugs Control Organizations at State level in
terms of uniform organizational structure, adequate infrastructure, adequate and
competent manpower.
• The Financial Memorandum attached to the Bill is vague and ambiguous. It states that
“the exact amount of expenditure involved will depend on the number of Members
appointed and will be met out of the revenues of the Central Drugs Authority of India”.
An imminent increase in the fees for the services rendered by the licensing authority
is unavoidable to meet this requirement.
AYURVEDIC MEDICINE MANUFACTURERS ORGANIZA TION OF INDIA (Kerala
branch) brought out very pertinent issues affecting the Ayurvedic drugs industry that arose
from the various provisions of the Bill before the Committee
• The proposal to have a single drug authority to cover all licensing activities
pertaining to manufacture of drugs, includes AYUSH drugs also. Which would have a
serious impact on the growth and survival of Ayurveda industry. The reasons cited
were:—
(i) There is no set up at Central level to take care of licensing activities of Ayurvedic
drugs.
(ii) The method of performing clinical trials in case of Ayurvedic Drugs is different
and complex unlike that of the modern drugs. It requires a technically sound
person who is well versed in the methods of Ayurveda. Therefore the definition
of clinical trials needs to address to these issues. Moreover, there are also
differences between the ‘Drugs’ and ‘Cosmetics’ in ayurveda and these issues
need also be given due care when the issue of clinical trials is dealt with.
(iii) Centralised licensing will be possible only if State level officers are equipped with
adequate staff or set up.
• Since the formulations and preparation techniques for the Ayurvedic drugs and the
modern drugs were different, it is necessary that there should be some technical expert
from the field of Ayurveda in the composition of the proposed Committee of Central
Drugs Authority. Matters pertaining to AYUSH may therefore be excluded till adequate
infrastructure facilities are provided.
SHRI UNNIKRISHNA PANICKER, M.M. (a Senior Lecturer in Hospital and Clinical
Pharmacy Medical College)  who had appeared before the Committee as an Expert has provided
a very succinct view on the Bill bringing out very pertinent points covering various provisions of
the Bill. His views have been appended as ANNEXURE II to this report.

101
SHRI CHITRA THIRUNAL INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(SCTIMST)
The SCTIMST is an Institute of National Importance established by an Act of the
Parliament with the objective of promoting Biomedical Technology and which has been actively
involved in the development of Medical Devices in the country. Following suggestions/
observations were made by them:
• Since the enactment of the over the past few decades, Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940
was enacted and the drugs alone were regulated. Even though the devices also were
incorporated in the definition of drugs, the same was not being regulated for many
decades . The Drugs and Cosmetics Act does not provide proper frame work for
regulating medical devices. With the current regulations, it is insufficient to regulate the
medical devices.
• “Medical devices” as generally defined covers lenses and syringes to critical life-saving
and life-supporting devices like artificial heart valves and hemodialysers; the numbers
are increasing rapidly every year, with the development of new advanced materials and
technologies.
However, as per the definition of ‘medical devices’ in the proposed Bill, all the
devices from scalpel to Cathlab will be covered. Control of medical devices will require
a gamut of expertise from physics to biomaterials. The Drugs and Cosmetics act has
separate provisions for Unani and Siddha, the areas where the pharmacists do not have
the required competence, whereas no separate provision has been made for Medical
Devices.
STATE GOVERNMENT OF KERALA
The Committee interacted with the representatives of the State Government of Kerala on the
Bill, whose views are as stated below:—
• The Drugs Controller stated that at present, all States have authority to issue
manufacturing licences and such drugs can be sold anywhere in India or be exported.
Even the State Drugs Control officials are not sure whether the details of licences
printed on the labels of drugs manufactured outside the State are authenticated or not.
In the case of imports of drugs, the situation remained worse. Import license is
granted by the CDSCO. Their duty ends with granting of licences. State drugs
control authorities are not aware whether someone is actually licensed.  Many
drugs which are not granted permission as new drugs, are available in the
market either as drug itself or as dietary supplements.
• By creating a CDA, the Central Government intends to take away the licensing powers
from the States and with no responsibility of enforcement, such a move will not
strengthen the enforcement system. A Central Government Authority with no
responsibility and States with no authority and only responsibility shall always
lead to confrontation.
• The present CDSCO with four regional offices and very few enforcement staff can do
practically nothing with regard to licensing, endorsement of additional products, etc. of
tens of thousands of manufacturers. Till a few years back, CDSCO didn’t have much
work. Now import registration, Clinical trials, pharmacovigilance, and new drug
approval, have all been added to their responsibility and with decreased staff strength
the situation can go from bad to worse.

102
• Although one of the most vital departments dealing with very confidential
matters, it is mostly run by contractual staff and consultants.  So if the Central
Government wants to equip the CDSCO with licensing powers of the NDA, they need
at least one office in each State and ten times the present staff strength. The CDSCO
do not have the infrastructure and expertise to grant licenses.  An experiment with
four offices and 30 field staff will only be a child’s play. The example of licence
approval of Blood Bank and IV Fluid, even without any responsibility, has proved the
inefficiency.
• There is not only non-uniformity among different States , but also within the same
State. Different Drug Inspectors of the CDSCO have different standards. While
inspecting blood banks and manufacturing units, there is inordinate delay in approving
licenses. It takes six months to one year to get back a license approved by the
CDSCO. The situation when all manufacturing licences would be issued by CDSCO
can well be imagined. Progress can be achieved only through delegation and de-
centralization.
• A very pertinent point about the over the retail counters sales of drugs, was
highlighted. Even in a place like Kerala, where they have better Drugs Control
Administration, over the retail counters sales are not controlled properly. Presently,
half the sales are effected through hospitals and clinics without any drugs licence,
supervision of pharmacists, Sales Bills and price control for drugs. Even in the
licensed retail stores, half of the laws like drugs should be sold through prescriptions,
only qualified doctors can prescribe medicines, he should write and sign it, Bills to be
issued for sale of all drugs, registers to be maintained, prescriptions to be stamped by
the dealer, etc. are not enforced.
• Certain other suggestions on behalf of the State Government, were presented which
while meeting the requirements of a strong National level Administration, will not
disturb the existing Central or State establishments, rather it would increase the
efficiency of the system.
° Drugs Control Administration in many States, Union Territories as well as CDSCO
is presently not independent. These Departments are working under Health
Services Department. They grant Blood Bank licenses to their own bosses. The
CDA should be made an independent Department both in the Centre and in
States. Uniform designations, hierarchy and pay structure should be made in all
States/Union Territory Drugs Control Administration and CDSCO.
° The State level appointments and promotions should be only up to Assistant Drugs
Controller, who shall be the licensing authority for sale licenses in the State and
UT. State shall keep seniority list of Drugs Inspectors. Any promotion above
Assistant Drugs Controller will only be at National level. If an ADC doesn’t want
promotion, he may be allowed to continue in his own State service. Once he
accepts promotion he would have to serve in any State where vacancy arises. At
the time of promotion to Assistant Drugs Controller, he may be given the choice
to opt whether to continue in the State service or accept promotion and enter
Central Services.
° The revenue/expenditure of the Departments shall be borne by the State or Central
Government, as at present is the system.

103
° The present CDSCO, New Delhi will continue as an CDA Headquarters under the
Central Government. All State Drugs Controllers shall be under the Drugs
Controller General India. The seniority list of all Assistant Drugs Controller,
Deputy Drugs Controller and Joint Drugs Controllers working in the States, UT
and CDSCO should be prepared and all further promotions made by the Central
Government. State Drugs Controllers should be in the cadre of Deputy or Joint
Drugs Controller as the case may be and the senior most Joint Drugs Controller
shall be promoted as DCG (I). The Drugs Inspectors of the present CDSCO
offices will continue with the functions of import licensing, port/customs offices,
new product approval and as Intelligence Branch. They should not be connected
with licensing. They would collect random sample of drugs, and conduct surprise
inspections of manufacturing and sales premises and make prosecutions and
conduct measures. Above the level of ADC, they would also be merged with the
common pool.
° Indian Pharmacy Service is to be formed and they shall be posted in the Rank
of Deputy Drugs Controller.
° There is no necessity of creating new offices ; instead the present offices can be
effectively utilized. As the heads of offices are from common pool, there would
be uniformity of administration also. If there be funds, the number of field force
may be increased.
° The system of Joint Licensing should be abolished, as it serves no purpose. One
authority can issue license. If one particular Inspector is not competent to
inspect, there is no meaning in taking him for joint inspections. To get expert
opinion from any source, they need not be taken for inspections. It is not proper
to take any outside person to inspect licensed premises. It is worse when one
licensee is taken as an expert and inspects other licensed premises.
° If we can merge the food control administration also with Drugs Control
Department, like USFDA, it will be ideal. Now in Maharashtra, Gujarat, Andhra
Pradesh, Goa and CDSCO food and drugs are jointly controlled.
° The definition of devices is confusing.
° The amendment proposes issue of all sorts of licence by CDA. Formerly licensing
authority and fees were dealt in the Rules. When the Act specifies CDA as the
Authority and nothing is mentioned about State, it may give an idea that States
are not even authorized for sale licences.
TAMIL NADU
(DATE 11.01.2008)
The Committee interacted with the following entities at Chennai—
The Pharmaceutical Manufacturers’ Association of Tamil Nadu, Confederation
of Indian Pharmaceutical Industry - (CIPI) Tamil Nadu Branch, State Government of
Tamil Nadu, Drugs Controller Officers’ Association of Tamil Nadu, Citizen Consumer
and Civic Action Group-Chennai, The Indian Pharmaceutical Association (IPA) Tamil Nadu
Branch.

104
THE INDIAN PHARMACEUTICAL ASSOCIATION (IPA) TAMIL NADU–BRANCH
The IPA is an all India body representing various sections of pharmaceutical science and
pharmacy profession like, Pharmaceutical Industry, Pharmacy College, Drug Regulatory officials,
Community Pharmacists, Research and Development Scholars and Pharmacy student.
The foremost submission of the IPA (Tamil Nadu Branch) was that the amendments to “The
Drugs and Cosmetics Act”, as proposed by the Drugs and Cosmetics Amendment Bill 2007, are
unwarranted. The reasons they submitted are as below:
• Any growing country will be supported by more of decentralization of procedures and
control than ‘centralizing’ the activities and authorities.
• In the current scenario, most of the procedures in Drug Control Department like
issuing licence, renewal and granting other certificates for exports are done at State
level in an excellent manner. There is no necessity to “plug” these powers from State
level to an autonomous “Central Drugs Authority”.
• The Regulatory officers and the drug controlling authorities in the State are well
equipped and have equal expertise in their role compared to Central Drug Authorities.
For technical reason, there is no necessity to transfer the licensing procedure from the
State to Central level.
• Above all, there is an existing rule that that central DCGI office only can approve any
new molecule or new combinations. The State authorities are currently granting license
as per the standards laid down by Indian Pharmacopeias for old molecules and regular
dosage forms. Centralizing this procedure will be a “Herculean task” and in that
process the “Pharma Industry” particularly the small scale pharma industries will be
thrown out of their business.
• IPA is not against giving “Quality Medicines” to the human kind. Any updation and
training to improve the current status can be given to the existing State authorities
rather than bring a new set up.
• Regional companies will have tough task in going to New Delhi or the Central
Authority for grant or renewal of licences for product endorsement compared with
getting approval from the “State authorities”. Any how these companies are already
manufacturing quality products, as per Schedule-M and for routine “Indian Pharmacopoeia”
products, making them to go to “Central Drug Authorities” are uncalled for.
• They were of the view that these kinds of new procedures will support only bigger
companies and multinational companies.  Instead of this, the Centre can work
towards improving our current infrastructures like Inter linking of all offices
across the country, giving training to the regulatory authorities along with small
and medium companies about the International Standards and make them more
qualified to compete with bigger companies.
• Existing role and procedures for State Drug Control Department and Central Drug
Department is more than sufficient to manufacture quality medicines in India. We need
to update and train them further on current trends rather than going for new
and untested amendments in “The Drugs and Cosmetics Act”.
• Currently Form 10 is issued by the Central Drug Authorities to import pharmaceutical
raw materials. The procedure to get this form is very cumbersome and the delay is
very commonly seen. When existing procedure itself is putting so many burdens on the

105
export and import of pharma products, we should not centralize the entire licensing
procedure. This will become a hurdle for the pharmaceutical companies to grow faster.
CITIZEN CONSUMER AND CIVIC ACTION GROUP, CHENNAI.
The representatives from Citizen Consumer and Civic Action Group were also
opposed to the proposed amendment Bill and cited the following reasons:
• Present trends indicate that decentralization of powers benefit all sections of society till
the grass-roots level. The proposed amendment to the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940
abridges the powers of the State Government and attempts to set up a system
consolidating all the powers to the Centre. Hence State Governments would not be able
to implement the provisions of the Act effectively and the Central Government may
not be in a position to address the issues of consumers effectively and speedily.
Dual control systems have not proved to be either beneficial or effective in the long
run.
• The proposed amendment has been initiated by citing the reason that there are
inadequate infrastructural facilities in the existing system. The Central Government
should not curtail the functions of the lawful authorities of the State Government for
this simple reason alone. Creating another authority will not resolve the problem.
• Instead the Central Government and the State should strengthen the existing regulatory
system with all the functions envisaged under the CDA.
• The funding authority should allocate additional funds and provide adequate personnel
support for the betterment and effective intervention of the existing mechanism.
• This proposed single-window system requires every applicant to approach the Central
Board at Delhi for obtaining or renewing license under this Act. This cumbersome
process will cause inconvenience to the public and will result in undue delay. Instead,
suitable standard operating procedures may be devised for the State licensing
Authorities.
• The existing provisions empowering the State Governments have facilitated easy access
and also ensured speedy redressal to the consumers for their grievances.
• Providing powers to the State Governments facilitates consumers, their representatives
and other stakeholders to participate in decision-making and thereby ensure a
conducive mechanism.
• For ensuring uniformity at the State level, the Central Government may prepare and
circulate a list of comprehensive uniform guidelines to be implemented by the State
Governments within a specified time-frame.
DRUGS CONTROLLER OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION OF TAMIL NADU
The Director, Drugs Control, spoke as the representative of the Drugs Controllers
Officers’ Association of Tamil Nadu. Their views are stated as under:—
• To the Proposal to bring out Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007, the
Director, Drugs Control said that the Bill totally changes the existing system and brings
out a separate body. Instead, the focus of the Bill should be on the issue of
strengthening and creating uniform organizational structure and strengthening the
Drugs Control Organisation at Central and  State level.

106
• Central Drugs Authority of India: – Clause 5(1) of the Bill abolishes the existing
Drugs Technical Advisory Board consisting of technically qualified professionals.
Also, the Proposed Central Drugs Authority does not prescribe qualification and
expertise of  the professionals. The Central Drugs Authority comprising of non-
technical persons will have limitations on handling technical matters.
Hence the existing Drugs Technical Advisory Board has to be restored, as
by abolishing the Board, the representation hitherto available from States will be
abolished. Moreover, the Drug and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and its implementation is
highly technical in nature and requires advisory bodies and implementing agencies
comprising of technically qualified professionals.
• To the proposed provision 5F (1) of the Bill- “The Central Drug Authority may issue
licences under clause (c) of section 10, clause ( c) section 18 and clause (c) of
Section 33 EEC and collect fees therefore.”, it was suggested that:—
(i) The Central Drug Authority will have the powers to grant manufacturing and
selling licences in addition to the existing powers to grant import licence
under Section 10  of Act.
(ii) Hitherto licenses were given for sales concerns and for manufacturing
certain categories of drugs to the manufacturing units by the State Licensing
Authority. By the proposed amendment the power of the State Government
to issue licences has been taken away and this will lead to major problems
to the small and medium drugs manufacturing units as they have to
travel all the way to Delhi even for small matters.
Further, this is against the concept of decentralization of powers to
the grass root level and this amendment will make a centralized structure
which will not be in public interest. The proposal is thus against the principle
of federal structure outlined in the Constitution of India.
(iii) The solution to the problem of spurious and substandard drugs in India lies
in building competence in the State Drugs Control Organizations by
strengthening them and by enhancing technical, managerial, legal and
investigation skills of the officers through scientifically designed training
programmes and not by centralizing of licensing system.
• Hence, the existing set up of State Drug Control Administration in issuing licences for
certain categories may be retained and State Drug Control Administration should be
strengthened for effective implementation by the following measures to be taken
by the Centre:—
(i) Issue guidelines on various issues so as to facilitate proper functioning of the
State Drugs Control Organizations and to ensure uniformity.
(ii) T ake periodical review of the activities of the State Drugs Control Organizations
by conducting regulatory audit.
(iii) Setting up and monitoring the activity of Intelligence Branch to ensure
Inter-State Coordination for eradicating menace of spurious and sub standard
drugs.
(iv) Conduct survey of enforcement and administration of the Act in the
Country.

107
(v) Take necessary steps to ensure that public, consumers’ associations receive rapid,
reliable, objective and comprehensive information through appropriate methods and
means.
(vi) Conduct Training Programmes in Drugs Safety and Standards, technical, legal
and investigation aspects for the Drug Control officers and all the stakeholders.
(vii) Suggest and advice in issuing Fixed Dose Combinations.
(viii) Strengthen Drugs Control Organizations at State level in terms of uniform
organizational structure, adequate infrastructure, adequate and competent
manpower.
• To the proposed provision under Section 18 [In the Principal Act, in Section 33
(1)] relating to “Power of Central Government to make rules on certain aspects”
(a) In sub section (1) for the word “Board” wherever it occurs, the word “Central
Drug Authority” shall be substituted.
(b) In sub section (2)—
(i) Clause (b) shall be omitted,
(ii) in Clause (e),—
(A) for the words “manufacture for sale or for distribution” the words
“Manufacture for sale or for distribution” the words “Manufacture
for sale or for Export or for distribution shall be substituted shall
be substituted; and
(B) the words “the authority empowered to issue the same, the
qualifications of such authority” shall be omitted;
(iii) Clause (n) shall be omitted.
They remarked that the proposal to omit Clause (b) of Section 33 (2) as proposed
under Section 18, which authorizes the Central Government to prescribe the
qualification and duties of the Government to Analyst and the qualifications of
Inspectors,  is a serious flaw in the Bill. In exercise of these powers, the
qualifications of the Government Analyst and the Inspectors have been prescribed
under Rule 44 and 49 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. The Central Drug
Authority has NOT been given any power to prescribe the qualification and duties
of the Government Analyst and the qualification of Drugs Inspectors  and the
matter has been left ambiguous as to which authority will be empowered to prescribe
qualification and duties of the Government Analysts and qualification of Inspectors
under the current Bill.
• Stating their apprehensions, they said that in the absence of such specific provision
and the prescribed qualifications, any person without any professional qualifications
would be entitled to be appointed as the Government Analyst and Drugs
Inspectors, — a situation not desirable in the interest of effective implementation.
Hence, Section 33(2) (b) should not be omitted as proposed, and the powers to
prescribe qualification and duties of the Government Analyst and the qualification of
Inspectors  should remain with the Central Government.
• To the proposal to omit the words “the authority empowered to issue the same,
the qualification of such authority”, they disagreed, as this will result in

108
withdrawing powers of Central Government to prescribe qualification of the
licensing authority.  In exercise of powers under Sec. 33 (2) (e), the Central
Government has prescribed qualification of the licensing authority under Rule 49 (A)
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
The Central Drugs Authority has not been empowered to prescribe qualification
for the licensing authority under the proposed Bill. It is therefore unclear as to which
authority will be empowered to prescribe qualification for the licensing authority.
In the absence of such specific professional qualification, any person without any
professional qualifications would be entitled to  be appointed as the licensing
authority–a situation, undesirable for effective implementation of the Act. Hence, they
suggested that the words “qualification of such authority” should not be omitted
from clause (e) of Section 33(2).
• Omission of clause (n) of Section 33(2) of the Act will empowers the Central
Government to prescribe powers and duties of Inspectors and the qualification of
the Controlling Authority, was not acceptable.  In exercise of these powers, the
Central Government has prescribed duties of the Drugs Inspectors under Rule 51 and
52 and has also prescribed qualification of the Controlling Authority under Rule 50 (A)
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
The Central Drugs Authority has not been empowered to prescribe qualification
for the licensing authority under the proposed Bill. Such situation is not desirable for
effective implementation of the Act.
Hence, clause (n) of Section 33(2) should also not be omitted, as proposed.
The powers to prescribe qualification of the controlling Authority, licensing
authority, and powers to prescribe qualification and duties of Government
Analyst, powers to prescribe qualification and duties of Drugs Inspectors should
remain with the Central Government.
STATE GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
The State Government representatives opposed the Bill stating that the formation of Central
Drugs Authority would lead to huge losses of revenue collected by way of Licence Fees and Fines.
The CDA which is going to be the APEX body (Central Licensing Authority) is a single body
collecting entire National revenue generated by every State Drug Control department. This will lead
into the non-development of Pharmaceutical Industries in the State and cause unemployment of
Pharmacy Professionals.
• They reiterated what was already stated by the Drugs Controllers Officers’
Association of Tamil Nadu. Their contention was that by the creation of Central
Drugs Authority, the stakholders will be put under tremendous pressure in getting their
licences and resolving their day to day problems. The Small Scale Manufacturers in the
State will have to go to Delhi for getting their Licences and the endorsement of
Products. They will be facing a lot of problems and hardships and unnecessary delay
too. This hidden cost would lead to escalating the price of the products which will
burden the consumers financially and defeat the objective of providing quality
medicines at cheaper cost to the people.
• For any complaint regarding quality of the products or their price, consumer will
have to approach Central Drugs Authority which would be situated in Delhi only and
there would be no immediate Taluka/District Level Authorities to redress their
grievances.

109
• Already for every State there is Drugs Control Department is established and
functioning. State Drugs Control Departments are already decentralized by giving their
licensing powers to their zonal level offices for effective control and for the speedy
disposal of License Applications in order to benefit the manufacturers/traders and the
people. Hence, transfer of powers to a central authority is no required.
• Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted at present is representing various.
professionals from each State advising from time to time to the Government of India
for implementation of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and rules thereunder. This is being
scrapped by formation of Central Drugs Authority, consisting only of 5 people who are
appointed by the Government of India and who are without any professional
qualification. Moreover, the representative character of DTAB is being replaced by the
lack of proper representation from various States. Under the circumstances, the
decision taken by the Central Drugs Authority on the technical matters may be adverse
to some States.
• Government of India constituted many committees like Bhatia Committee, Chopra
Committee, Hathi Committee and recently Dr. Mashelkar Committee. All suggested
various measures to strengthen the State Drug Control Administration and Central Drug
Standard Control Organization for the prevention of spurious/adulterated/Misbranded
Drugs. They have not suggested centralization of Licencing system.
• Their opinion was that the aim of forming Central Drug Authority appeared to be only
snatching away the Licencing Power of the State as there were no suggestions for the
quality improvement or prevention from the menace of spurious drugs. There were no
suggestions for strengthening the State Drugs Testing Laboratory for testing the
samples and reporting immediately to ascertain their quality.
CONFEDERATION OF INDIAN PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY – (CIPI), TAMIL  NADU
BRANCH
The views submitted by the representatives from CIPI are as follows:
• The proposed amendments to the Drugs and Cosmetics Act are based on the
recommendations of Dr. Mashelkar Committee suggesting that a Central Drugs
Authority is to be constituted. However in Para 13.0 of the Report, it was only
suggested that the drugs control organizations to be strengthened and no where the
committee had recommended that Central Drug Authority is to be constituted. It has
recommended only Central Drugs Administration headed by DCG (I) under para 5.8.6.
• It was also pointed out that the composition of the Central Drugs Authority is vague
and non-technical persons can be appointed. The Bill does not clarify as to what
role the said authority will play in the implementation of the Drug and Cosmetic Act.
It was felt that the CDA would become a place where retired bureaucrats can be
posted. The quantification of the members has not been given and it is very vague.
The Mashelkar Committee has not recommended such authority and that the purpose
of such authority could not be understood.
Centralizing of Powers
• India is the only unique country in the world where they have different systems of
medicines i.e.
(a) Ayurvedic System of Medicine

110
(b) Siddha System of Medicine
(c) Unani System of Medicine
(d) Allopathic System of Medicine
(e) Homoeopathic System of Medicine
The Homoeopathic and Allopathic Systems were introduced in the last century by
the British during their rule in India. All the five systems of Medicine are co-existing
and used by the patients for different ailments.
• The DTAB Drug Technical Advisory Board both for Allopathic and Indian Systems of
medicine and Homeopathy in the proposed Bill is to be abolished and no alternative
mechanism has been proposed. The DTAB was constituted with large number of
experts not belonging to the Ministry and who were independent. In fact the
industry was asking for additional representation to have a forum to express its opinion
and views. By abolishing the same the powers have been centralized on the drug
controller and this is a fall back to the colonial times. This does not encourage
transparency and widespread consultation which is the need of the day. Even in
revenue like Income Tax, Central Excise and Customs etc. public views are sought and
given importance. The Mashelkar Committee, in fact, has not recommended the
abolition of the DTAS at all.
Financial Outlay
• They went on to submit that the Department has grossly misled the Parliament on the
Financial Memorandum attached to the Bill, saying that no expenditure of non-recurring in
nature would be form the Consolidated Fund of India, which is travesty of the truth.
• It has also been stated that  “Under clause-5 (1)  a fund will be created and
expenditures would be carried out from the above fund. It is pertinent to note that the
Central Drug Authority, which is proposed to be constituted, is to perform a Sovereign
Function, i.e. Implementation of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act. No other body, which
performs Sovereign function viz. Factories Act, Weights and Measurements Act etc.
are able to function only from the fees received and all the expenditures are met by
the respective Governments either State or Central and fees constitute only a very
small portion of income. They went on to cite the details of staffing of the Drugs
Control Department of different States, which may be examined as an example, the
total expenditure which would be far in excess of the fees and the Central Government
has to meet the funding requirements and in this they suggested that Point No. 6.1.11
of Dr. Mashelkar Committee Report may be referred.
They pointed out further that if the licensing powers for the manufacturing of
Drugs were to be transferred from State Government to a Central Authority, the
staffing of the Authority has to be increased enormously and the numbers of staff have
to match the existing staff from the State Government.
Regarding opening of Zonal Offices, they opined that such offices needed to be
opened in all States depending upon the number of manufacturers located in that area.
All of these would lead to increase in the cost.
Indian Systems of Medicine
• They stated that in the proposed Bill, no due representation seems to be given to Indian
Systems of Medicine. Taking into account the number of manufacturers in the Indian

111
Systems of Medicine and in fact, a special Department, AYUSH has been constituted
in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to deal with ISM an important issue
seems to have been missed out in the proposed Bill.
• They were of the view that there were other amendments proposed in the Bill which
were also objectionable and also lacked clarity such as:—
° Section 33(2) has been proposed to be abolished, which authorized the
Government to prescribe the qualification of Drug Inspectors and Government
Analysts under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
THE PHARMACEUTICAL MANUFACTURERS’ ASSOCIATION OF TAMIL NADU
• The Pharmaceutical Manufacturers’ Association of Tamil Nadu, have opposed to the
proposed amendment Bill. Their views have been appended to the report as
ANNEXURE III.
ANDHRA PRADESH
The Committee interacted with the following entities at Hyderabad—
Consumer Care Centre, Hydera bad , Federation of Drug Traders, A.P. - (FEDTAP),
Drugs Control Administration of Andhra Pradesh, Drugs, Inspectors’ Association-Andhra
Pradesh, Sri C. Gopalakrishna Murty, Director, Drugs Control Administration (Retired),
Government of Andhra Pradesh (EXPERT), D. Hanumantha Rao, Ex-Director, Drugs Control
Administration (EXPERT), Varaprasad Reddy, Managing Director, Shanta Biotechnics
Limited, C.V. Narasimha Rao, President, District Consumer Information Center,
Secunderabad, Organisation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers, and Vimta Labs.
CONSUMER CARE CENTRE, HYDERABAD
The representatives of the Consumer Care Center were of the view that there is no mention
of any control over prices in the Bill. It must also be added under the duties of the Central Drugs
Authority. The common complaint of consumers is that the pharmaceutical companies are fixing
the prices without any relation to the cost of manufacture. In the context of the Bill they were
of the opinion that—
• Clause 2 (iv) should be redrafted so as to read such medical devices, medicated
devices, instruments, apparatus, appliances, materials etc., instead of being singularly
dealt with.
• Clause 5(1)  doesn’t speak of forming State Drug Authorities. There is no clarity of
the role of the present State Drug Controllers. It may not be proper to make the
Central Drugs Authority an autonomous body and make it a monopolistic one.
Centralisation and concentration of powers in a single Authority may not prove
productive in the long run. The present Department of Drug Control Administration in
the States should be allowed to function as the State offices. The States must continue
to have powers to grant and cancel licences. The Bill seems to take away the right
of the State Drug Control Administration.
• Clause 5-1 (1) (b) mentions that the CDA can receive funds from such other sources.
There is no clarity as to what such other sources may be. There is every possibility
that the CDA might turn to the pharmaceutical firms for funds. If that happens, the
CDA will be subservient to the drug manufacturers. The industry might also face
harassment if they do not release funds.

112
• Clause 5 A  says only persons who have special knowledge of, and at the least fifteen
years’ professional experience in pharmaceutical industry, research or teaching, or
public administration, finance or law can be appointed as Members. The second
paragraph says that only persons who have held the post of Secretary of Additional
Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the Central Government
or a State Government or a Public Sector Undertaking can be appointed. As only I.A.S.
officers can be appointed as Secretary or Additional Secretary, clause 5A seems to
exclude I.P.S. and other officers. Hence, the words “Finance and Law” may be deleted
and the words experience in Drug Administration should be inserted.
FEDERATION OF DRUG TRADERS, A.P. - (FEDTAP)
The views of the representatives from FEDTAP are as follows:—
• Amendment to Rule 65 (15) (b):
They stated that the existing definition “The description of ‘Chemists and Druggists’
shall be displayed by such licensees who employ the services of a ‘registered
pharmacist’.” may be replaced by “The description of  ‘Chemists and Druggists’ shall
be displayed by such licensees who employ the services of  a registered pharmacist
or a  competent person with matriculation and 4 years experience in dealing with
drugs or holds a  degree with one year’s experience in dealing with drugs.”
Section 18 - Contraventions
• Under prohibition of manufacture and sale of certain drugs, manufacture for sale, or
stock or exhibit (or offer) for sale or distribute “Any drug which is not of standard
quality or is misbranded under Sec. 17, adulterated under Sec. 17 or spurious under
Sec. 17 (b).”, has been proposed.
Their contention was that a chemist can’t be expected to know the quality of drug he
purchases however faces certain punishment and to save himself he must comply in toto
with Sec. 19 (3).
Therefore, in the existing provision in the Bill:—
“that he acquired the drug of cosmetic from a duty licensed manufacture, distributor or
dealer thereof;” amendments may be made as follows:
“That he acquired the drug or cosmetic from a  duly licensed manufacturer,
Authorized distributor” (the words “or dealer thereof’ may be deleted).
• The amendment proposed is to add the word “authorized” before distributor and to
delete the words-“or dealer thereof” following distributor. This will ensure that
Spurious/Misbranded/Adulterated drugs, manufactured by unlicensed/unlawful/
unauthorized persons of criminal nature, can’t enter into the market as distribution
channel stands closed forever for them.
• Another step, to achieve the objective of keeping the market clean, would be to
implement sub rule (2) of Rule 64 which enjoins that Licensing Authority shall
screen the applicant and if not satisfied with his antecedents, he may refuse
granting licence.
By implementing the aforesaid sub-rule (2), purchases from unauthorized sources
even from so called licensed dealer can be cut off thus, and supply of drugs violating
Section 17 naturally dries up.

113
However such instances of rejection of application for license do not appear to be
happening. Hence, the need is to strictly implement sub-rule (2) so that bad characters and
anti-social elements cannot enter the market in the garb off licensed dealers need to be
ensured.
DRUGS CONTROL ADMINISTRATION OF ANDHRA PRADESH
The representatives of Drugs Control Administration provided the Committee the following
views during the meeting. They were of the view that certain provisions of the Bill were welcome
measures while there were others which were objectionable.
Broadening the definition of drug under section 3(b) (iv) of the principal Act:
• The proposed definition in the Bill for ‘Drug’ is comprehensive and is good. The
Broadening of the definition of drug under section 3(b) (iv) of the principal Act is a
welcome measure.
• Introduction of a new Chapter I B covering Clinical Trials in detail is also a welcome
move in the proposed Bill. As new drug molecules after thorough scientific evaluation
are essential for the health management system, the proposed Bill has definite proposals
and steps for thorough examination of drugs under clinical trials before they are
permitted to be manufactured for sale in the country.
Establishment of Central Drugs Authority:
• Chapter 1 (A) clause 5 in the proposed Bill speaks of the structure of C.D.A, as
envisaged consisting of Chairman and not more than 5 members, but at least 3
members. The eligibility criteria specified therein suggests that a person without
pharmaceutical background or/and without experience in the enforcement of drug laws
can become a member or chairman in the C.D.A.
° This is quite opposite to what exists presently in the D&C Act, as specific
qualifications are prescribed for licensing/controlling authorities which
emphasizes for appointment of a person with a pharmacy qualification for
discharging such duties. So this is not in tune with the present day
requirements for a technically oriented enforcement agency.
° The upper age limit for members/Chairman of CDA is given as 70 years
which is greater than the upper age limit of a Supreme Court Judge, and
which isn’t acceptable.
° The Bill proposes to replace Drugs Technical Advisory Board with the CDA.
The present Act has Drugs Technical Advisory Board consisting of 
16
categories of persons with varied scientific/technical background and
experience among its members. They advise the Central and State
Governments in technical matters. The composition of CDA is not as
scientifically sound as DTAB and may result in activities not based on sound
scientific background. Further, the Bill dispenses off with Ayurveda,
Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board which may result in
activities related to these drugs, not in a very scientific manner, because the
matter pertaining to AYUSH drugs requires special scientific knowledge and
techniques.
• Presently, the power of amending the D&C Act and Rules is within the purview of the
Central Government. Now, as per the proposed Bill at Section 5 (L),  if the Central

114
Government makes any rules without consulting CDA, shall have to consult CDA
within 6 months and shall consider the suggestions given by CDA. In view of the
above, the present D&C Act may not be disturbed. As the proposed CDA will
result in centralization of power which is contrary to A.P. Government, vision of
Prajalavaddhaku palana (Administration to the door steps of the public).
• Further the license fee  presently available to the Government of A.P ., as revenue to
the tune of 15.00 crores, will be diverted to  Central Government.
• The present role of DCG (I) and CDSCO is sufficient in achieving the uniform
implementation of D&C Act with coordination among the various State Drugs Control
Originations.
• The present provisions of D&C Act are in tune with the federal structure of our
country. Hence, from the proposed Bill Chapter 1.A may be omitted.
• As such it appears that in no way that the CDA as envisaged in the proposed Bill is
better than the existing system of Drugs Control in the country and do better in
controlling the spurious drugs movement than present Drugs Control set up in the
country.
DRUGS INSPECTORS’ ASSOCIATION OF ANDHRA PRADESH
The suggestions put forth by the representatives from the Drugs Inspectors’ Association are
stated as follows:—
• Appointment of Commissioner of Drug Safety in each state was called for. The
Scheme under Food safety and Standard Act, 2006 should also be referred while
making provision for appointment of Commissioner of Drug Safety in each State.
• The Central Drugs Authority at national level should be established with powers and
functions in such a manner so that the legislative scheme and the division of
responsibilities between the Central Government and the State Government are not
tinkered with. The CDA should be in addition to  the Drugs Technical Advisory Board
(DTAB). It is necessary to ensure that out of five members of the Central Drugs
Authority at least two members must necessarily be technical experts in
Pharmaceutical field. The State Drugs Controller or the officers of  the level of Joint
Commissioners with outstanding record should also be considered eligible for
appointment to  the post of Chairpersons/Member of  the Central Drugs Authority.
• The powers, functions and duties of the Central Drugs Authority should be laid down
elaborately. It should devote its energy and resources in legislation, policy making,
monitoring of implementation at state level, continuous review of the products
approved at state level, import and approval of new drugs including clinical trials. It
should have powers to issue directives to the State Drugs Control Organisations. The
implementation of the Act, including licensing should remain with the State Drugs
Control Organisations.
• Priority should be given to strengthening of the State Drugs Control Organisations.
The Statement of  Objects and Reasons should have specific clause to  focus on
strengthening of  the Drugs Control Organisations at  Central and State level. For
achieving the objective of strengthening of Drug Safety in each State, the
Commissioner of Drug Safety should be a technically qualified person and should be
head of the department and controlling authority. It is necessary to strengthen Drugs
Control Organisations at state level in terms of uniform organizational structure,
adequate infrastructure, adequate and competent manpower.

115
SRI C. GOPALAKRISHNA MURTY, Director, Drugs Control Administration (retired),
Government of Andhra Pradesh. (EXPERT)
• The policy of the Government, in general, is to decentralize powers of licensing.
Therefore, instead of centralizing the licensing of manufacturing by creating Central
Drugs Authority, the Government should strengthen the existing Drugs Control
Organisation at the center and create more effective regional offices throughout
the country and continue the existing setup.
• They should monitor the implementation of the Act for uniformity in all the
States. Periodic review of implementation for the effective uniform enforcement by
sufficiently augmenting CDSO with the staff which will lead to uniform implementation
of the Act.
• The Central Drugs Authority is to be constituted, the functions, responsibilities and
duties should be clearly specified.
• Constitution of the CDA with five members is inadequate and a wider body may be
constituted with persons having experience in the enforcement of the Act as
members, as they will have a better understanding of the various problems in
enforcement.
D.HANUMANTHA RAO, Ex-Director, Drugs Control Administration (EXPERT)
Who appeared before the Committee, had the following observations to make on certain
provisions of the Bill:—
• CLINICAL TRIALS: He was of the opinion that the proposed definition of clinical trial
includes a systematic study of any Drug or Cosmetic. Presently, clinical trial is defined
under Rule 122-DAA of Drugs and Cosmetic Rules, 1945. The proposed definition
covers Cosmetics. It is submitted that Cosmetics are not studied through systemic
study. Hence, inclusion of Cosmetics in the definition is to be deferred. Cosmetics are
studied for their safety, but not for their efficacy.  A reference to the Rules
governing Cosmetic products in the European Union may be of use of knowing about
the safety studies of Cosmetics. Therefore, the definition as exists under rule 122-
DAA may be retained.
• It is also seen that DTAB is proposed to be replaced by Central Drug Authority of
India. While DT AB is a statutory body of individuals who are highly talented in their
own field of specialization either in Pharmaceutical Sciences or in medical Sciences,
the present proposed C.D.A. does not have members with such academic qualifications
etc. Though the proposed Bill says qualifications of the Chairperson and the
members, no qualifications are prescribed under cluase 5A.  It is also seen from
the said section that persons having experience in Public Administration, Finance or
Law are also eligible to hold the position of a Chair person or a member, though they
are not directly involved in drug development/enforcement activities or any field
related thereto. Hence, the purpose of creating C.D.A. for uplifting the standards of
the Drugs and Cosmetics in our country may not be achieved. Further, the age limit
of 70  years for the members is  also to be reconsidered since it is  more than the
age of superannuation of any Government servant.
• The proposed clause 5F (I) empowers only the Central Drugs Authority to issue
licences under Section 10(c), Section 18 (c) and Section 33 EEC(c) of the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act, 1940. In other words, all the licences either for import,

116
manufacture for sale or sell or stock or exhibit or offer for sale of all drugs
including household remedies are to be issued by Central Drugs Authority. The
proposed amendment is  contrary to the present provisions of Law  and challenges
the policy of the Government to reach the public though its services. It is to be
noticed that the proposed amendment concentrates at Centralization instead of
decentralization.
• Clause 5F(5)(b) empowers the Central Drugs Authority to recommend to the Central
Government – the Central Drugs Laboratories for the purpose of testing Drugs and
Cosmetics. This provision should be read as “classes of drugs or cosmetics” to be
tested/analysed instead of “drugs or cosmetics”.
• The proposed amendment excludes offer for sale which is existing in section 18 of the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. The same may please be included.
• Chapter 1B Clause 5N proposes to replace Rule 122-DA of the Drugs & Cosmetics
Rules, 1945.
• Clause 5O (1)  proposes a penal provision for conducting clinical trials without the
permission granted and issued. It is seen from the said provision that only the
sponsor is made liable for a violation under Clause 5N leaving the person who
had actually conducted the clinical trials.
Therefore, in Clause 5N, the words “as well as  the Organisation/Institution
actually conducting the clinical trials” may be inserted.
• Under Clause 5P (1), the authority of authorizing for launching prosecution rests with
the Central Drug Authority. Since the Drugs Controller (India) shall have administrative
control over the Officers and employees of the C.D.A., it is suggested that the
authority of authorizing for launching prosecutions may be shifted to the Drugs
Controller (India), instead of C.D.A.
It is also submitted that the proposed amendment is contrary to the provisions of
Section 32 of the Principal Act.
• It is suggested to include the word Export in Chapter IV and Section 18 of the
Principal Act. However, it is seen that the provisions related to export are not
included in the proposed amendment. Since Chapter III of Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940 relates to imports another section namely Section IIIA may be
incorporated pertaining to Export of Drugs and Cosmetics.
• The purpose of amendment to the present Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 is to ensure
the quality and safety of drugs and cosmetics available to public with an idea of
improving the quality of health services and safe use of cosmetics respectively. This
can be better achieved by improving the present system of Drugs Control
Administration in the county by making necessary amendments as and when required.
The menace of control of spurious drugs can also be controlled better by
amending the Act with higher degree of punishment to all involved in the
violation.
• Therefore, it is suggested to strengthen the existing system rather than redesigning the
policy afresh. In other words, the introduction of Central Drugs Authority may not
achieve the Aims and Objectives of the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 in any better
manner than the existing one.

117
V ARAPRASAD REDDY, Managing Director, SHANTA BIOTECHNICS LIMITED,  who
represented the aforesaid industry, had the following comments to make on the Bill.
• Clause 2 (aaii)
“Clinical trial means systematic study of any drug or cosmetic in human subjects to
generate data for discovering or verifying its clinical, pharmacodynamic or
pharmacokinetic) or adverse effects with the objective of determining safety, efficacy
or tolerance of the drug or the cosmetic”.
The definition of clinical trials, according to him, required clarifying several issues
such as whether the current definition incorporates clinical trials that are conducted for
food substances or food derivatives (oils, nutritional supplements etc.) under its
jurisdiction of this definition and whether permission for conduct of such trials is also
required. Hence he suggested that the nature of biologicals needed to be identified and
included in the definition of a drug or expand the present definition to include all types
of biologicals as against the present mention of the word “biotechnology derived”, in
the definition.
• Chapter 1A Clause 5F (3)
“The Central Drugs Authority shall collect charges for granting permission for conduct
of trails in respect of drugs and cosmetics.”
Clarity as to whether the proposed charges as mentioned above would vary with
different aspects of clinical trials – the phase of the proposed trial, the number of
centers and the number of patients.
• Chapter 1 B Clause 5N
“No person shall conduct clinical trials in respect of any drug or cosmetic except
under, and in accordance with the permission granted by the Central Drug Authority.”
It was opined that the Bill should contain provisions regarding fixing of some
time frame for the Authority for providing permission for the trials, on the similar lines
as various international regulatory agencies.
Similarly, the Bill should also clearly mention as to whether
(i) the above rule applies universally to all the phases of trials,
(ii) the outcomes of the post marketing safety observational studies,
(iii) whether it would be required to seek permission to start such studies or can
the studies be initiated, and
(iv) whether it would be required to submit such reports to the Authority.
C.V . NARASIMHA RAO, PRESIDENT, DISTRICT CONSUMER INFORMATION CENTER,
SECUNDERABAD
• In Clause 5 (3) dealing with the composition of the CDA it was suggested that
without ambiguity it may be explicitly stated that the membership may be either three
or five members.
• In Clause 5A dealing with the Qualification of the Chairperson and Members, it
was suggested that their qualifications need to be strictly from the Pharma field, but
not from Public Administration, Finance or Law areas.

118
• In Clause 5B  dealing with the age limit for the Chairman and members of the CDA,
it was suggested that the proposed age of seventy is not desirable. The age limit
should be made 60 years instead of 70 years.
• Clause 5D dealing with the validation of the act or proceeding of the CDA, it was
suggested that the said clause needed to be deleted totally, as this provided an unasked
opportunity for the people who commits defects and irregularities blanket cover.
• In the old Clause 5, the DTAB comprised of members from different fields. It
was suggested that likewise provisions may be made in the proposed authority,
including one member from a consumer organization,  as this Act is supposed to
be a Consumer Protection Legislation.
• Under Clause 5L, time frame may be fixed for framing rules (as, for several Acts the
framing of rules has taken years together).
ORGANISATION OF PHARMACEUTICAL MANUFACTURERS
The representatives for the aforesaid organization were of the opinion that when
decentralization of administration is the order of the day, making CDA the only licensing authority
would result in the increased time and cost to SSI and thereby hardships to them. They were of
the opinion that creating CDA won’t result in eradication of spurious drugs as the problem was
essentially an outcome of failure of proper monitoring mechanism across the country among the
States/UTs. By centralizing the licensing procedure, exodus of SSIs to Delhi and neighboring States
would be fuelled. Global standards, according to them, could be met with appropriate amendments
to the existing D&C Act from time to time and that central licensing would not be a cure for the
same.
They further contended that the proposed Bill was an attempt to drive out SSI from Pharma
sector, consequently enabling MNCs and large companies to take over their market share. It was
the lack of information and credible statistics that was responsible for driving the present proposed
Bill. The charge of 35% spurious drugs and largely attributing to SSI has not been proven.
For implementing the uniform applicability of the existing Act, the DCGI is vested with sufficient
powers.
Many of the suggestions made by Dr. Mashelkar Committee needed to be incorporated in
the administrative system like active co-operation between the manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers,
doctors and others to curb spurious drugs. As proposed in the aforesaid report, Special proposed
court (Fast Track) may be established to deal with the violators and punish them severely.
This is possible within the existing provisions of the present Act.
It was suggested that the Bill may be dropped in toto and the recommendations of
Dr. Mashelkar Committee may be incorporated in the present Act providing no external
influences to sidetrack the administrative machinery, as this Pharmaceutical industry should be
strictly governed by scientific principles.
VIMTA LABS
• Chapter 1B Clause 5N, and, 2 (c) of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of
the Bill refers to “clinical trials” and related issues.
It was suggested that time lihes for granting permission for clinical trials
especially when scope of clinical trials has been broadened to include cosmetics
and medical devices should be mentioned in the Bill.

119
• In Chapter II Section 5 of the Original Act , in addition to the members of the DTAB
mentioned therein, it was suggested that persons from Contract Research
Organizations who would be testing Drug Substance, Drug Product, Medical
Devices, Evaluate Diagnostic Kits and equipments should be made a part of this
body as a bridge between Sponsors (national and international) and regulatory body, as
work related to research and development is delegated by Sponsor to CRO and
technical issues need representation complying with international guidance.
Hence, they were of the opinion that the DTAB may not be replaced at the outset.
• In CHAPTER II Sections 6, 7 and 7A, persons from Contract Research Organizations
who would be testing Drug Substance, Drug Product, Medical Devices, Evaluate
Diagnostic Kits and equipments should be made a part of this body as a bridge
between Sponsors (national and international) and regulatory body, as work
related to research and development is delegated by Sponsor to CRO and
technical issues need representation complying with international guidance.
• Chapter III Secti on 12 (g) of the Original Act, for Investigational drugs it was
stated that it would not be possible to provide the date of expiry of potency as
stability studies with pivotal batches may not be over and decisions are based
only on the accelerated stability data and insistence on date of expiry is not
meaningful in such cases. They stated that this clause would hold logic for marketed
drugs but not for drugs under investigational stage which needed to be imported for
conducting comparative clinical studies.
• In Chapter IV Section 18 proviso
“Provided further that the Central Government may, after consultation with the Board,
by notification in the Official Gazette, permit, subject to any conditions specified in
the notification, the manufacture for sale or for distribution, sale, stocking or
exhibiting or offering for sale or distribution of any drug or class of drugs not being
of standard quality.’’ ,
and in Section 20 (1), “ The State Government.....in the notification.”,
it was suggested that functions of Central Drugs Laboratories can be assigned to
competent CROs so as to reduce burden on few Government laboratories
provided Central Drug Authority considers a CRO competent to undertake such
activity. This will add to overall efficiency. This will comply with above provisions as
well.

ANNEXURE-III
STUDY NOTE
PHASE II
OF
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
VISIT
TO
Indore, Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Goa
from 12th to 19th February, 2008
on
The Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill-2007
121

123
INTRODUCTION
The Committee in its examination of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill-2007,
(hereinafter referred to as Bill) undertook a study visit to Indore, Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Goa
from 12th to 19th February 2008. During its study visit, the Committee had interacted with
various associations of large and small pharmaceutical companies, NGOs, Consumer Fora
individuals and experts, representatives from IMA and other stakeholders on the various provisions
of the Bill. The list of witnesses who appeared before the Committee is given at Annexure IV . The
views and suggestions expressed by different stakeholders are enumerated in succeeding
paragraphs.
MADHYA PRADESH
The Committee met with the following entities at Indore on the 13th February, 2008.
Representatives of Madhya Pradesh Chemists and Druggists Association, Ranbaxy Labs
Limited, India, M.P. Small Scale Drug Manufacturers’ Association, Indore, M.P.
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers’ Organization (M.P.P.M.O), Pithampur Audhyogik Sangathan,
and Abhyas Mandal.
REPRESENTATIVES OF MADHYA PRADESH CHEMISTS AND DRUGGISTS ASSOCIATION
Following objections to the Bill were highlighted by the representatives from the above
organisation:—
• Under Clause 5 of the Bill, it is proposed to establish a Central Drugs Authority which
would be substituting the Drugs Technical Advisory Board and Ayurvedic, Siddha and
Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board. It was not desirable to create a Central Drugs
Authority by substituting the Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under
Section 5 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani
Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under Section 33-C of the Act as both
these statutory bodies are broad based and are highly technical in nature, while the
proposed Central Drugs Authority would have only five members to be appointed by
the Central Government. Further as per the provisions of Clause 5 of the Bill, the
Central Government is not bound to appoint technical  experts on the Central
Drugs Authority. The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and its implementation is highly
technical in nature and requires the advisory bodies comprising of technically qualified
experts.
• Clause 5B specifies tenure of the Chairperson and members of the proposed CDA.
However, procedure for selection and also the manner in which the Chairperson or
members of the Central Drugs Authority can be removed is not specified.
• Under Clause 5E of the proposed Bill, the Central Drugs Authority is authorized
to appoint Drugs Controller (India) and other officers. However, the qualification
for appointment to the post of Drugs Controller (India) is not stipulated.
Similarly, the manner in which the Drugs Controller (India) would be selected
is also not provided under the said clause. This would give absolute power to the
Central Drugs Authority to select any person to the post of Drugs Controller
(India).

124
• Though the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill declares the intention to
centralize only manufacturing licenses, Clause 5F  of the Bill indicates that the Central
Drugs Authority would have powers to grant the manufacturing and selling licenses
for all categories of drugs including Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani medicines. The
CDA would also have powers to grant cosmetics manufacturing licence to
cosmetics.
• In view of the provisions of Clause 5F, the Central Drugs Authority can also take
over the selling licensing. Such a step would lead to much inconvenience and
hardship to the dealers.
• Presently, the licensee can file an appeal against the order of the Licensing Authority
before the State Government. Once the powers to grant, renew, suspend or cancel
the licenses are given to Central Drugs Authority, the licensee would have to
file an appeal against the order of Central Drugs  Authority before the Central
Government. This means, the licensee would have to go to Delhi for filing an
appeal and also on all dates of hearing till the appeal is finally decided. This
would undoubtedly result in delay in disposal of appeals and also result in
inconvenience and additional expenditure to SSls.
Suggestions made are as follows:—
• Instead of creating an additional authority, it is desirable to strengthen the existing
Central Drug Standard Control Organization (CDSCO)  creating separate divisions
and by making stronger, well-equipped, independent and professionally managed body.
• The Central Drugs Authority, if established, should be more broad based, by
having representatives from concerned Ministries, Industry and Technical Experts
in the field of pharmaceutical industry, professional associations and consumer
associations. At least two representatives of AIOCD should be included in the
proposed CDA.
• Having regard to the federal structure of the country, and the division of the
responsibility between the Central Government and State Governments, it is desirable
to have an apex body at the national level similar to the National Food Authority
established by the Central Government under Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
Health being State subject, all necessary powers and responsibilities should be
shouldered by the State Governments also.
• The Central Drugs Authority or a CDSCO should focus on legislation, policy review
and monitoring, import, regulating clinical trials and approval of new drugs.
• The implementation, including licensing, should remain with the State Government
as per the existing practice. Even if the Central Government decides to centralize the
licensing system, the powers to grant, renew and  cancel licenses for sale and
distribution should remain with State Governments.
• The procedure for selection of Chairperson and members of Central Drugs Authority
needs to be incorporated in the Bill.
• The Selection Committee comprising of senior Secretary from the Central
Government and an eminent technocrat and Chairperson, Union Public Service
Commission needs to be constituted.
• Clause 5B should have a provision to stipulate the circumstances in which the
Chairperson or members of the Central Drugs Authority can be removed.  For

125
e.g. a Chairperson or the member should be disqualified or removed if he acquires
financial interest or other interest affecting his functioning or if he abuses his position.
• The qualification and the experience for appointment to the post of Drugs
Controller (India) should be Incorporated under Clause 5E, or an additional Clause
making it obligatory for the Central Drugs Authority to appoint as Drugs Controller
(India), a person having prescribed qualification and experience under Rule 50A
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 should be incorporated.
Such provision is necessary, as by omitting the words “the qualification of such
authority” under Section 33 (e) of the Act, the Central Government’s power to
prescribe qualification of the licensing authorities have been withdrawn.
• Top most priority should be given to implementation of various recommendations of
Dr. Mashelkar Committee especially on strengthening of Drugs Control
Organizations at State level. This is necessary to curb the menace of spurious
drugs.
• The Central Drugs Authority should be given the statutory responsibility to take all
necessary steps to curb the menace of spurious drugs.
RANBAXY LABS LIMITED, INDIA
The representatives from Ranbaxy Labs was supportive of the views of the previous
organisation. However, they stressed upon the issue of ensuring speedy and cost effective
development and marketing of quality medicine, which was one of the mandates of the proposed
Bill, i.e., to control the menace of spurious and sub-standard drugs.
They made the following recommendations to reinforce the scientific rationale of the Rules
and Regulations which do not compromise patient safety, brings the regulations in line with
internationally agreed principles, and remove ambiguities/irritants that are not conducive for speedy
and cost effective development and marketing of quality medicine:—
• There is lack of uniformity of laws/regulations across the States, Which are either
unreasonably strict or too liberal. Hence, steps should be taken to ensure uniformity
of implementation of the existing laws.
• Definition of new drug needs to be revisited. It needed to be compared with
definitions given in USA/EU. In all regulations, clarity of definitions is required to
prevent inconsistent interpretations.
• Consistency between Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic substances (NDPS Act) and
Drugs and Cosmetics Act do not seem to be there. Also, there is no clarity as
to which is the final authority to resolve an issue in the event of discrepancy.
• The schedules under the existing Act needed to be aligned to facilitate manufacture and
export of NDPS drugs.
• Ranbaxy Labs favoured the system of self-certification stating as it would obviate
the need to testing by a Qualified Analyst under the regulatory authority. This
concept was similar to concept of Qualified Person  in EU.
• Clarity on herbals, ayurvedic preparations and issues on their standardization, quality
standards etc., should be made and in this regard, the regulations in Germany may be
referred.

126
• Definitions of Drugs vis-a-vis Dietary Supplement/Neutraceuticals is needed.
Uniformity is also needed in the administration of Foods/Dietary supplements, which
are under FDA in some States and under Muncipality under other States.
• Limitation of the Shelf-Life of the formulation based on the API shelf-life is not
rational, since greater stability is often imparted through formulation of the API.
Provision for extension of shelf life through retesting close to expiry should be
made a part of the regulation.
• Manufacture of primary packaging (foils), rubber stoppers, ampoules, etc should
be governed by the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules. This will ensure quality
in the packaging of drugs and provide increased shelf-life. Also it will address the issue
of sub-standardisation of drugs due to improper storage.
• Toxicity studies in India should be on the same lines as in EU and the US. A
toxicological study in India is exhaustive. Moreover, in India we have to conduct
Toxicity studies before Preclinical and Clinical studies. Whereas, in EU or US, the
Toxicity studies can be conducted simultaneously with preclinical or clinical studies.
This is so, because requirement of Toxicity studies may vary from phase to phase.
ABHYAS MANDAL
The organisation is a non-political voluntary organistaion of social and cultural activities.
They had the following suggestions to make on the Bill.
• Clause 5(3) of the Bill states that three members are to be appointed by Central
Government by notification in the official gazette.
• It was suggested that for the sake of convenience a zone of three to four States may
be formed and one member fulfilling the requisite qualifications as in Clause 5A
may be taken as a member so as to give adequate representation to every zone.
• With regard to composition of CDA under Clause 5A, it was suggested that if all the
members or anyone of them is from public administration it may be ensured  that
he/she/they possess qualifications and/or adequate experience of pharmaceuticals and
its related branches including those of Pharmaceutical chemistry, Micro Biology, Bio
Technology. This is essential in order to overcome the problem of manufacture and
marketing of sub-standard drugs, spurious drugs. Because such people from public
administration not having the said qualification would have to depend solely on the
reports/feed back given to them by the technically qualified.
• To the proposed Clause 5E (1) , it is suggested that for efficient discharge of
functions and exercise of powers of CDA, its officers, other than the Inspectors in
the Central Government or in State Governments, need to be notified as Inspecting
authorities so as to enable them to visit any pharmaceutical formulation/basic drug
manufacturing unit and make their own judgment about the WHO GMPI all statutory
compliances. At present, the Drugs Controllers are not the notified Inspecting
authorities. They can visit the manufacturing units for inspection only if accompanied
by a notified Drug Inspector. But for compliance of this, it is essential that every
Drug Controlling Officer has to have the qualifications mentioned in Rule 50
A of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945.
PITHAMPUR AUDHYOGIK SANGATHAN
The above organistaion, a representative body of large, medium and small scale
industries in the district of Dhar and Indore, cited that since Indore is the first fully

127
functional multi-product SEZ and a lot of industries were upcoming from the Pharma
sector in the area, it was of the opinion that a separate Licensing Authority and an
independent Central Zone Office of the DCGI be established in Indore.
M.P. SMALL SCALE DRUG MANUFACTURERS’ ASSOCIATION, INDORE and M.P.
PHARMACEUTICAL MANUFACTURERS’ ORGANIZATION (M.P.P.M.O).
Both these organisations had made identical submissions as indicated below:—
• Their submission was that the creation of Central Drug Authority with powers to issue
licenses under Clause (c) of Section 18 and Clause (c) of Section 33EEC and
collect fees therefor is violative of the Constitution of India where responsibility of
health matters rests with the States. Whereas the power to issue license under Clause
(c) of Section 10 may lie with the Central Authority. And the Bill is also violative of
the Government of India Act..1935.
• The substitution of the “Drugs Technical Advisory Board” by the “Central Drugs
Authority” is also unreasonable, illogical in as much as that the qualification of the
Central Drugs Authority has not been prescribed and the experience in
Pharmaceutical Industry, research or teaching should be compulsory. The intention in
the later part of clause 5A and provisio thereto clearly indicates placement of non-
pharmacy persons as chairperson/members in CDA.
• Undoubtedly and also as observed by the ‘Mashelkar Committee’, there is immense
shortage of expert professionalists in States/UT and Central Drugs Control
establishments. The Government laboratories are also ill equipped, with improper
infrastructure and lack of proper expert staff and technicians.
• These shortcomings deserve to be addressed first with top priority instead of
making new rules which would further complicate the industry/trade.
• It would neither be reasonable nor justifiable to centralize the powers to grant/
renew licenses for manufacture of drugs in the country.
• The present structure of licensing by States/UT Drugs Authorities should be
continued. The monitoring by the Central Dugs Standard Control Organization
(CDSCO) should be made more effective.
• The powers to issue licenses/Approval/permission for Blood Bank, LVP, New
Drugs etc, as already with DCGI, may remain as it is but its monitoring needs
to be more stronger.
• Branded drug formulations and their compositions, claims being made, indications,
advertisements, devices, clinical trials, post marketing surveillance, import/export etc.
are the sectors where CDSCO should involve itself more effectively. The recent
example that thousands of Fixed Dose Combinations, conveyed under the definition of
New Drug have been licensed by State Authorities unauthorisedly without clearance by
DCGI and all such thousands of branded FDCs are being manufactured and marketed
by hundreds of so called reputed companies for the last nearly two decades is enough
to substantiate our statement.
• Government should ensure that the entire licensing and issuance of various
certificates by the State/UT should be computerized and interconnected.
• CDSCO be entrusted the important assignment to study various judgments delivered by
Courts in the country in respect of alleged violation of Drugs and Cosmetics Act/Rules

128
in an unbiased manner and also to suggest/recommend their implications to States/UT
Drugs Authorities.
• Thousands of prosecution cases are pending in various trial courts of the country,
where as per assessment, more than 90% are bound to result in acquittal, should be
reviewed objectively by the CDSCO with representation of the Industry/Trade and Law
Authorities and deserving cases should be withdrawn. This process if accepted and
adopted would result in availability of working hours with the field officers to look into
other important matters in the implementation and enforcement of the Act/Rules.
• The substitution of sub-section (2) in Section 7 is a welcome move provided
decisions taken in the meetings are made 
mandatory for enforcement throughout the
country.
• Thousands of branded medicines under the garb of “Ayurvedic”, “Herbal”, “Food
Supplement”, Defective/Outdated/Rejected Devices etc. are available in the market,
majority of them violative of the existing Act and Rules. No check is there due to
‘shortage of honest, dedicated, knowledgeable, trained Inspectorate Staff. Besides that,
many State Food and Drug Authorities are being headed by non-technical
persons despite several judgments against such appointments by High Courts.
• An important area of monitoring the Drugs Price (Control) Order 1995 is not
taken seriously by the CDSCO.
• That the licensing powers enforced by CDSCO, for certain categories of drugs, even
today, are not uniform and in certain cases violate the provisions of the Act/Rules.
• A recent nationwide survey to map the extent of fake drugs like the mission conducted
by DCGI/CDSCO should be carried out at regular intervals by adopting different
methods.
• (M.P.PMO) also suggested that a distinct definition for the Drugs Contravening
patent and copyrights may be introduced in the Drug and Cosmetics Act.
Contravention of this rule should be dealt under the Patent and Copyright Act.
GUJARAT
The Committee heard the following entities at Ahmedabad on 14th February, 2008.
Representatives of the Federation of Gujarat State Chemists and Druggists
Associations, Food and Drugs Control Administration, Gujarat, Indian Drug
Manufacturers’ Association, Gujarat State Board, and Medical Disposable
Manufacturer’s Association.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE FEDERATION OF GUJARAT STATE CHEMISTS AND
DRUGGISTS ASSOCIATIONS.
Following drawbacks of the Bill were highlighted:
• As per the Statement of Objects and Reasons, the Central Government proposed to
establish the Central Drugs Authority on the basis of recommendations made by
Dr. Mashelkar Committee. However, from the report of the said Committee, it is seen
that Dr. Mashelkar Committee had not favoured establishing the Central Drugs
Authority. The Committee had recommended creation of a strong, well equipped
independent and professionally managed Central Drug Standard Control Organization
(CDSCO) which may be given a status of the Central Drug Administration.

129
• It is not desirable to create a Central Drugs Authority by substituting the Drugs
Technical Advisory Board constituted under Section 5 of the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940 and Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board
constituted under Section 33-C of the Act. Both these statutory bodies are broad
based and are highly technical in nature. On the other hand, the proposed Central
Drugs Authority will have only five members to be appointed by the Central
Government.
• As per Clause 5, the Central Government is not bound to appoint technical
experts on the Central Drugs Authority. The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and
its implementation is highly technical in nature and requires the advisory bodies having
technically qualified experts.
• Clause 5B specifies tenure of the Chairperson and members of the Central Drugs
Authority. However, procedure for their selection and removal is not specified.
• The qualification for appointment to the post of Drugs Controller (India) and
procedure for his selection needs to be provided under Clause 5E.  Otherwise it
will give absolute power to the CDA to select any person to the post of Drugs
Controller (India).
• Though the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill declares the intention to
centralize only manufacturing licenses, Clause 5F indicates that the Central Drug
Authority will have powers to grant the manufacturing and selling licenses for all
categories of drugs including Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani medicines. The Central
Drugs Authority will also have powers to grant manufacturing licenses to cosmetics.
Such a change will lead to much inconvenience and hardship to the dealers.
• At present, the licensee can file an appeal against the order of the Licensing
Authority before the State Government.  Once the powers to grant, renew, suspend
or cancel the licenses are given to Central Drugs Authority, the licensee will have to
file an appeal against the order of CDA before the Central Government. He will thus
have to go to Delhi for filing an appeal and also on all dates of hearing till the
appeal is finally decided. This will not only result in delay in disposal of appeals
but will also result in inconvenience and additional expenditure to AIOCD members.
• The Bill does not address the issue of strengthening the Drugs Control Organizations
at Central and State level though Dr. Mashelkar Committee had strongly recommended
strengthening of Drugs Control Organizations in India.
Following are the suggestions made by the Federation:—
• Instead of creating an additional authority, it is desirable to strengthen the existing
Central Drug Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) as recommended by Mashelkar
Committee and as declared in Pharmaceutical Policy, 2002. A strong, well-equipped,
independent and professionally managed CDSCO with separate divisions need to be there.
• The Central Drugs Authority if established should be more broad-based having
representatives from concerned Ministries of the Central Government, State
Drugs Control Organizations, pharmaceutical industry and technical experts in
the field of pharmaceutical industry, professional associations and consumer
associations. The AIOCD should be included in the proposed CDA.
• Having regard to the federal structure of the country and the division of the
responsibility between the Central Government and State Governments, it is desirable

130
to have a Central Drugs Authority as an apex body at the national level similar to the
National Food Authority established by the Central Government under Food Safety and
Standards Act, 2006.
• The Central Drugs Authority or a CDSCO should focus on legislation, policy
review and monitoring, import, regulating clinical trials and approval of new
drugs.
• The implementation, including licensing, should remain with the State
Governments as per the existing practice. Even if the Central Government decides to
centralize the licensing system, power to grant, renew and cancel licenses for sale and
distribution should remain with the State Governments.
• The procedure for selection of Chairperson and members of Central Drug
Authority needs to be incorporated in the Bill. The Selection Committee,
comprising of Senior Secretary from the Central Government and the eminent
technocrat and Chairperson, Union Public Service Commission need to be constituted.
• Clause 5B should have a provision to stipulate the circumstances in which
the Chairperson or members of the Central Drugs Authority can be removed.
For e.g. a Chairperson or a member should be disqualified or removed if he
acquires financial interest or other interest affecting his functioning or if he abuses his
position.
• The qualification and the experience for appointment to the post of Drugs
Controller (India) should be incorporated under Clause 5E or an additional Clause
making it obligatory for the Central Drugs Authority to appoint as Drugs Controller
(India), a person having prescribed qualification and experience under Rule 50 A of the
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 should be incorporated.
Such provision is necessary as by omitting the words “the qualification of
such authority” from Section 33 (e) of the Act, the Central Government’s power
to prescribe qualification of the licensing authorities has been withdrawn.
• Top most priority should be given to implementation of various recommendations of
Dr. Mashelkar Committee especially on strengthening of Drugs Control Organizations
at State level. This is necessary to curb the menace of spurious drugs.
• The Central Drugs Authority should be given the statutory responsibility to take all
necessary steps to curb the menace of spurious drugs and ensuring uniformity in
implementation of the Act throughout the country. The Central Drugs Authority
should issue a written manual and guidelines to ensure uniformity.
FOOD AND DRUGS CONTROL ADMINISTRATION, GUJARAT
The Commissioner, Food and Drugs Control Administration, Gujarat, drew the attention of
the Committee to the following proposed amendments:
Under Clause 5F (1) - The Central Drugs Authority may issue licence under Clause (c) of
Section 10, Clause (c) of Section 18 and Clause (c) of Section 33EEC, and collect fees
thereof.
Under Clause 5F (2) - The Central Drug Authority may cancel or suspend any licence
issued under Sub-section (1)

131
Suggestions made are as follows:—
• Licensing and regulatory functions where no or minimum discretion is required may
remain with the State- e.g. Sales License.
• Licensing and regulatory functions where the required technical competence can
be available with the States may remain with the States.
• The above said functions be so divided among Center and State that Public Interest,
Quality and genuine interest of the pharmaceutical industry are safeguarded to the
maximum possible extent.
• The legislative scheme under Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 may be
followed by setting up CDA as apex body at national level and Commissioner for
Drug Safety in each State.
• Accreditation and involvement of good State Drug Control Administration may be
provided for.
• The virtues of the Drug Technical Advisory Committee constituted under
Section 33C should be retained.
• Clinical trial for Indian Systems of Medicines may be rationalized.
• Punitive provision needs to be rationalized.
• Loopholes in the investigation and testing like contradictory testing results,
saving clause for the dealers (Section 19) may be plugged.
It was also suggested by their office that additional gaps needed to be addressed,
such as:—
➢ Blood banks needed a special focus as secondary and tertiary health care depends
on blood bank/storage facility.
➢ A large number of blood banks remain un-inspected due to inadequate number of
officers.
➢ Inclusion of Medical Devices and Diagnostic test should be reviewed.
➢ Presently there is no separate division for approval. This matter should be looked
into more closely. Draft Medical Device Regulation Bill, 2006, published by the
Department of Science and Technology, Government of India should be used as
a reference.
➢ Medical Device Regulatory Authority of India (MDRA) to be established by
Central Government. MDRA shall regulate and monitor import, manufacture, sale,
usages, and disposal etc. of medial devices. So Medical Devices should be
excluded from the ambit of the Bill.
INDIAN DRUG MANUFACTURERS’ ASSOCIATION, GUJARAT STATE BOARD
Proposal to establish Central Drugs Authority:—
• They were of the view that instead of creating  an additional authority, it is desirable
to strengthen the existing Central Drug Standard Control Organization (CDSCO)
as recommended by Dr. Mashelkar Committee and as declared in Pharmaceutical
Policy, 2002.

132
• It is not desirable to create a Central Drugs Authority by substituting the Drugs
Technical Advisory Board constituted under Section 5 of  the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory
Board constituted under Section 33-C of the Act.  Both these statutory bodies are
broad based and are highly technical in nature. On the other hand, the proposed
Central Drugs Authority will have only five members to be appointed by the Central
Government. The provisions of Section 5 of the proposed Bill indicate that the
Central Government is not bound to appoint technical experts on the Central Drugs
Authority.  The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and its implementation is highly
technical in nature and requires the advisory bodies comprising technically qualified
experts. Central Drugs Authority, if established, should be broader based. The
Central Drugs Authority should have representatives from concerned Ministries
of the Central Government, State Drugs Control Organization, Pharmaceutical
Industry and Technical Experts in the field of pharmaceutical industry,
professional associations and consumer associations.
• Following the legislative scheme under Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 by
creating Central Drugs Authority as an apex body at the national level similar to
the national food authority established by the Central Government under Food
Safety and Standards Act, 2006, and drug commissioners at the State levels would
be a desirable measure.
• The Central Drugs Authority or a CDSCO should focus on legislation, policy review
and monitoring, import, regulating clinical trials and approval of new drugs. The
implementation, including licensing, should remain with the State Government as
per the existing practice.
• The proposal to centralize the licensing system is a marked shift from the existing
system and clearly defined division of responsibility between Central Government and
State Government. The system of legislation, policy, review and monitoring by the
Central Government and implementation by the State Government is followed in all
Central Acts like Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1945, Standards of Weights and
Measures Act, 1976, Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 etc. enacted by the Central
Government on the Concurrent List of the Constitution. The view in this regard was
that the present scheme and division of the responsibility should be left
undisturbed.
• The IDMA, other professional associations and most of the State Drugs
Controllers had opposed the proposal to centralize licensing system before
Dr. Mashelkar Committee. However, Dr. Mashelkar Committee recommended
for centralizing the licensing system in a phased manner overruling the
objections referred to above.
• Centralizing the licensing system will lead to concentration of the powers in the hands
of the Central Government. The CDSCO does not have sufficient manpower to
undertake this responsibility. The CDSCO has offices only at Delhi and at zonal
level as against the offices of the State Drug Control Organizations at every
district place. This inadequate manpower and infrastructure will create many problems
to the stakeholders.
• The proposal to centralize licensing system will lead to delay and therefore harassment
to the stakeholders. The applicants will face inconvenience in filing and processing
of applications as the applicants will have to approach zonal offices. The

133
manufacturers will also face difficulties in getting the product permission. The delay
in getting licenses and product permission especially for export will adversely affect
business and growth of the pharmaceutical industry.
• At present the licensee can file an appeal against the order of the Licensing
Authority before the State Government. Once the powers to grant, renew, suspend or
cancel the licenses are given to Central Drugs Authority, the licensee will have to file
an appeal against the order of Central Drugs Authority before the Central
Government. This means, the licensee would have to go to Delhi for filing an
appeal and also on all dates of hearing till the appeal is finally decided. This
would not only result in delay in disposal of appeals but will also result in
inconvenience and additional expenditure to the pharmaceutical industry.
• From the press reports, it is understood that the Finance Ministry has indicated its
unwillingness to sanction large number of posts for Central Drugs Authority.  It
is also proposed to increase license fees, product permission fees and import
registration fees so as to make the Central Drugs Authority self sufficient. This
would put unnecessary additional financial burden on the pharmaceutical
industry.
Clinical Trials:—
• The definition of the term “Clinical Trials” under Clause 2(aaii) is substantially
different from the existing definition of clinical trials under Rule 122DAA of the
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. The proposed definition covers not only drugs but
also cosmetics.
• The word “Any Drug” used in the definition of clinical trial should be substituted
by “Investigational new drug”. Such change is necessary to harmonize the
requirements for clinical trial with the international guidelines on Good Clinical
Practices.
• The proposed Clause 5N will bring all post marketing clinical trials and academic
research to complete halt. The surveillance studies generate useful data on local
population for drugs that are not tested extensively before marketing in India.
To avoid such situation, we suggest that the word “Any Drug” used in
Clause 5N should be substituted by ‘’Any Investigational New Drug”.
• Confirmatory trials: These trials are conducted on marketed products so as to
confirm their efficacy and safety from other relevant parameters. Since these
products are already marketed we feel there is no need to seek permission to
conduct such clinical trials. Confirmatory trials that are performed before actual
launch of the product can also be exempted.
• Pilot trials: Pilot trials, specifically in case of Bioequivalence studies are usually
performed so as to ascertain the viability of clinical trials. Such trials are of
exploratory nature and are usually conducted on small number of subjects.
Accordingly, such trials may be excluded from the requirements of clause 5N.
• Trials for Submission to foreign regulatory authorities: As stated above, exports
from Indian pharmaceutical industry are increasing over years. One of the pre-requisite
of commencement of export is registration of the drug with Ministry of Health /
Regulatory Affairs of the importing country. The registration dossier consists data on
clinical trials performed on the drug. As this data is meant for submission to the

134
regulatory authorities of importing country, the trial is conducted as per the guidelines
of the respective country. Hence such clinical trials may not be required to obtain
permission from CDA.
• Similarly, multiple trials may be performed with different reference drugs for the
respective importing country. As these are extension of the originally performed trials,
such trials also may be exempted from the requirements of the permission by the
CDA.
• Contract research trials: One of the most expanding areas in pharmaceutical industry
is contract research projects. India is expected to become a hub for clinical trials
by 2010. Leading global pharmaceutical companies are outsourcing their contract
research projects including clinical trials from India. All such trials are conducted as
per the requirements and protocol of such sponsors. These sponsors are complying
with the requirements of the relevant regulatory authorities outside India or
these trials are performed as per the in-house requirements of the sponsor.
Hence these trials also may be excluded from these requirements.
• The Bill proposes to cover the clinical trials for cosmetics also. However, the
requirements of cosmetic registration are totally different from drugs and
therefore the clinical evaluation of cosmetics would not be the same as required
for drugs.
It is therefore suggested that at this stage, the proposal to cover the clinical
trials of cosmetics should be dropped. For this purpose, the words “Cosmetics”
used in the definition of clinical trial under Clause 2(aaii) and used in Clause 5N
should be omitted.
• Under Clause 5(O)  of the Bill, the punishment of imprisonment for a term which may
extend to 5 years and with fine which may extend to Rs. 10,00,000/-  is provided.
This punishment is very harsh. It is likely that the students conducting academic
research in Government institutions or for post-graduate thesis may face such serious
consequences of harsh punishment merely on account of not obtaining permission
from the Central Drugs Authority out of ignorance.
It is, therefore, suggested that a distinction needs to be made between clinical
trials conducted strictly in accordance with the Good Clinical Practices and in
compliance with all ethical requirements without obtaining permission, and
unauthorized clinical trials causing adverse effect or grievous hurt to the volunteers.
Harsh punishment as proposed under Clause 5(0) is justified in case of
unauthorized clinical trials resulting in grievous hurt to the volunteers.  However, for
clinical trials conducted without permission but in compliance with Good Clinical
Practices should have lesser punishment of only fine and should be considered as
compoundable offence.
Other suggestions:
– The word used in the proposed definition of devices indicates that it includes
ancillaries in terms of software and mechanical applications. Therefore, it should
be treated as an independent entity out of definition of drugs category. This is
necessary as Rule 122A and Schedule Y requirement for approval would not
apply to it unless it contains medication.
The definition of devices under Section 3(b)(iv) of the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940 should accordingly be omitted and a separate clause 3(b)(b) defining

135
‘Medical Devices’ should be incorporated under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act to
define medical devices as an independent entity.
– Priority to implementation of various recommendations of Dr. Mashelkar
Committee especially on strengthening of Drugs Control Organizations at state level
should be given.
– strengthening of Drugs Control Organizations at central and State level
– enhancing competency of the officers through continuous training
– providing uniform organizational structure at State level
– issuing written manual and guidelines
– regular audit of the state regulatory agencies
– preparation of national formulary of fixed dose combinations for guidance
of State Drugs Controllers.
Rakanpur Santej Pharma Manufacturers’ Association, Small Scale Indian Drug
Manufacturer’s Association, Gujarat Ayurved Aushadh Manufacturers Association,
and Surendranagar Pharmaceutical Manufacture’s Association had all submitted
similar objections and views on the various provisions of the Bill as made by Indian
Drug Manufacturers’ Association, Gujarat State Board.
MEDICAL DISPOSABLE MANUFACTURER’S ASSOCIATION
• The representatives from the above organisation were of the opinion that the word
“medical devices”  used in the proposed definition in the Bill indicates that it includes
ancillaries in terms of software and mentioned applications.
They, therefore proposed that the definition of devices under Section 3(b) (iv)
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 should be omitted and a separate clause 3(b)
(b) defining “Medical Devices” should be incorporated under the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act to define medical devices as an independent entity. They further
advocated that clarity should be given regarding specifications and manufacturing
practices regarding medical devices. However, it is very important that the regulation
be done by the State Drug Authority and not the Central Drug Authorities as
the draft Act suggests.
• The proposed Central Drugs Authority will have only five members to be appointed
by the Central Government. The provisions of Clause 5 F(1) indicate that the
Central Government is not bound to appoint technical experts on the CDA.
However, the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and its implementation are highly
technical in nature and require the advisory bodies comprising technically qualified
experts.
Central Drugs Authority if established should be broader based . It should have
representatives from concerned Ministries of the Central Government, State Drugs
Control Organizations Medical Qevice Industry and Technical Experts in the field of
medical device industry, professional associations and consumer associations.
Rest of the suggestions, of the above organisation, relating to the division of the
responsibilities between the Center and the State authorities and the role and
responsibility of the CDA proposed or the existing CDSCO were similar to what was
already stated by the Indian Drug Manufacturers’ Association, Gujarat State Board.

136
MUMBAI
The Committee met with the following entities at Mumbai, on 16th February, 2008.
National Integrated Medical Association, Mumbai, Organisation of Pharmaceutical
Producers of India, The Indian Pharmaceutical Association, Vicco Laboratories,
Mumbai, Ayurvedic Drug Manufacturer’s Association, SSI Pharma Association, and
All India Small Drug Manufacturer’s Association.
NATIONAL INTEGRATED MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, MUMBAI.
The representatives from NIMA were of the opinion that there was no necessity to bring
forth the Bill to create CDA and that the existing provisions in the Act were good enough to
address the reasons cited by the Government to bring forth the amendment Bill. Following
suggestions on amendments of ‘the Drugs and Cosmetics’ (Amendment) Bill-2007 were made.
• Under Clause 5(0) regarding clinical Trials the punishments appear to be exorbitant.
They should be rational. Punishments should start with warning, and then fine or
punishment should be given.
• Under Clause 20-(b) (2) at least one representative of ISM (Indian Systems of
Medicine) should be included in the Committee.
Chapter II
• Section (5) (2) of the Act gives the composition of the Drugs Technical Advisory
Board, which is sought to be replaced by CDA. However it was suggested to continue
with this Board with the addition of following members:—
1. President, Central Council of Indian Medicine ( ex officio ) CCIM
2. Director (CCRAS) Central Council for Research in Ayurved and Siddha.
(ex officio) CCRAS
The reason cited was that these are highly qualified technocrats in ISM, Therefore, it
was necessary that their representation be there in the DTAB.
Representative of the National Integrated Medical Association are also proposed to
be included in the Board. The reason stated was that since Indian Medical Association,
which is a private body of allopathic practitioners, is given representation, on the same basis
National Integrated Medical Association (NIMA) is also an independent private
organization of about 5 Lacs Ayurved, Siddha & Unani Practitioners, with branches
all over the country. Hence their representation is justifiable.
• Clause 33 C (2) of the Act which speaks of the ASUTA Board which is proposed
to be replaced by CDA, it was suggested that this Board should also include
– President of the Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM)
– Director, Central Council of Research in Ayurved and Siddha (CCRAS)
The reason cited was that since the above-suggested members are highly qualified
research experts and are advisors to the Government in Indian System of Medicine,
their presence in the Board was justified.
It was further suggested that the Board should also include the President of the
National Integrated Medical Association (NIMA).

137
ORGANISATION OF PHARMACEUTICAL  PRODUCERS OF INDIA.
The representatives from the above organisation stated that as communicated earlier by
them, OPPI supports the initiative of the Government to consider the recommendations of
Dr. Mashelkar Committee and make amendments in the Act  to facilitate the creation of a
Central Drugs Authority (CDA) and introduce centralized licensing for the manufacture for
sale, export or distribution of drugs.
– The formation of the Central Drugs Authority (CDA) would provide the following
significant benefits to the Industry and also to the Government:
– Achieving uniform interpretation of the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and
Rules.
– Standardizing procedures and systems for drug control across the country.
– Enabling coordinated nationwide action against spurious and substandard drugs.
– Upholding uniform quality standards with respect to exports to foreign countries from
anywhere in India.
– Implementing uniform enforcement action in case of banned and irrational drugs.
– Creating a pan-Indian approach to drug control and administration.
– Evolving a single-window system for pharmaceutical manufacturing and research
undertaken anywhere in the Country.
It was emphasized that a single Central Authority that administers and regulates
both pharmaceutical manufacturing and pharmaceutical research is an absolute
necessity in India’s bid to be a global hub for drug discovery. Till the formation of
CDA, registration and marketing authorization for all new drugs and fixed-dose
combinations should only be granted by Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI). There
should be a smooth transition from the existing regulatory environment to the proposed
CDA. All necessary infrastructures along with the required personnel must be in
place so that all permissions are granted to applicants within stipulated timeframe.
Suggestions on the various provisions of the Bill are given as below:
The definition of clinical trials under Clause 2 (aaii) indicates that all clinical trials
that would be conducted in the country would need prior permission from the CDA.  This
may be practically difficult and really not necessary since there would be a number of trials
which would be conducted with an already approved drug/product (in approved indications
with appropriate marketing authorization).
It was suggested to that the definition of clinical trials be modified to include
only studies with an investigational new drug wherein the term investigational new
drug would not only imply a pharmaceutical form being used  as a reference in a clinical
trial that does not have a marketing authorization, but would also include a product with
a marketing authorization when used or assembled in a way different from the approved
form and the results of which may be used for label enhancement/alteration.
• It was also suggested that explicit permission prior to initiation needs to be taken only
for trials involving investigational new drugs (including new dosage forms) which do
not have a marketing authorization for the indication in which the clinical trial is
intended to be conducted.

138
THE INDIAN PHARMACEUTICAL ASSOCIATION
They supported the stand taken by the Government regarding further amending of the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 by substituting the Drugs Consultative Committee (DCC) and Drugs
Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) by the Central Drugs Authority (CDA) based on the
recommendations of Dr. Mashelkar Committee Report. The constitution of Central Drugs Authority,
according to them, would certainly bring more discipline and rational approach in the licensing
process and maintain uniformity in the standards of drugs, which in turn would be a step further
in the healthcare of our society.
Following general observations were made:—
• Looking at the large number of drug manufacturing units in India, the existing facilities
available for the issuance of the licenses with the Central Government appears to
be inadequate, hence it is necessary to develop up-to-date infrastructure at various
places, may be even at districts. The coordination between the licensing Authority
(CDA) and enforcement by the State FDA needed to be explained in detail.
• Considering the advancement in the manufacturing of the pharmaceuticals, the global
regulatory requirements and the policy of the Government to promote export of
medicines, the technical staff required to support the licensing authority should
be qualified, competent and having expertise in the field of pharmacy,
pharmaceutical engineering, clinical pharmacy and pharmaceutical management.
To cater these needs the Government should focus on human resource development
and train the qualified persons in various disciplines of pharmacy profession.
• The Indian Pharmaceutical Association (IPA) is the only national professional body of
pharmacists and has had representation on DTAB for many years. The IPA was
instrumental in bringing advancements in terms of pharmacy education,
pharmaceutical research and regulatory issues through continued education
process. It could be a good reason for giving representation to IPA on CDA.
Suggestions on the Bill are as follows.
• Composition of Central Drugs Authority”, should be atleast Chairperson with 5
members for meaningful decision.
• To the proposed Clause 5A on the subject of “Qualification of Chairperson and
Members”, it was suggested that preferably the CDA should consist of two persons
from pharmaceutical industry, one from research, one from pharmacy education
preferably pharmacologist and one from public administration or from finance or
law.
• To the proposed Clause 5B on the subject of “Term of office of Chairperson and
Members”, it was suggested that the word “further” be substituted by “one more
term” and the age limit should be limited to 65 years instead of 70 years.
VICCO LABORATORIES, MUMBAI
The following points were raised by the members from VICCO LABS:—
• The proposal to establish Central Drugs Authority and centralizing the licensingpowers
in CDA is inconsistent with the selective approach adopted under Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940. The proposal is a marked deviation from the approach adopted by the
Government of India by creating an independent Department of AYUSH headed by the
Secretary.

139
• Different bodies such as AYUSH Pharmacopoeia Committee, ASU Drug Consultative
Committee (ASU-DCC) and ASU Drug Technical Advisory Board (ASU-DTAB) ensure
effective consultation process with the stakeholders and proper inputs from the experts
in the field.
• At State level the ASU Sector is administered by the Food and Drug Administration or
the Directorate of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy. There is also a State
Licensing Authority appointed for the purpose of approving individual drug licenses and
manufacturing premises. Only recently, the Department of AYUSH has taken certain
initiatives to streamline the process of grant of product permission for Patent and
Proprietary medicines.
• There is also an inbuilt legislative mechanism in the definition of the Ayurvedic drugs
under Section 3(a) and 3(h) (i) of the Act to ensure quality, safety and efficacy. By
virtue of these definitions it is mandatory for the manufacturers to follow the method
and to use ingredients listed in the authoritative text books. The existing regulatory
system is thus effective and the proposal to form a Central Drugs Authority for getting
the ASU Sector does not have merit in the scheme proposed in the Bill.
• The proposed Bill does not provide adequately for technical experts from the ASU
stream in the constitution of the Central Drugs Authority. The current provision of
ASU-DCC and ASUD TAB is undermined by their replacement by the CDA. The
formation of the Central Drugs Authority for the ASU Sector is certainly not a
progressive reform based step but actually a set back.
• Due to the unique nature of the ASU Sector in comparison to modern pharmaceutical
industry, the current proposal to include the ASU sector in the scheme of Central
Drugs Authority is an unnecessary and a retrograde step. ASU Sector should be
excluded from the implications of the proposed Central Drugs Authority.
• If the need to establish Central Drug Authority is considered absolutely necessary
following suggestions may kindly be taken into consideration:—
Clinical Trial
• The Bill seeks to regulate all clinical trials  and will cover clinical trials of Ayurvedic,
Siddha and Unani medicines in view of the exhaustive and inclusive definition of the
term Clinical Trial in the Bill. In the absence of any provisions under the existing
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules, 1945 for regulating clinical trials such
inclusive definition to cover Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani medicines is not consistent
with the Act and Rules. Therefore, Ayurvedic, Unani and Siddha medicines should be
excluded from the scope of definition of clinical trial under the Bill.
• The proposed Central Drugs Authority should be in addition to the AYUSH DTAB
and not substitute to it.
• The Central Drugs Authority at national level should focus on legislation, policy,
review. The licensing and implementation should remain with the State
Licensing Authorities.
AYURVEDIC DRUG MANUFACTURER’S ASSOCIATION
The representatives from the above organisation offered the following suggestions:—
1. The Central Drugs Authority will have powers to grant, suspend or cancel the licenses
leading to concentration of powers in the hands of the Authority. The Ayurvedic, Siddha and

140
Unani drugs industry which is mostly small scale and middle scale and located at district
places and in rural area will face major difficulties in filing of application for grant of
licenses, its follow up and filing of appeals etc.
2. Replacement of a highly technical body (A YUSH DTAB) by the bureaucratic body-
Central Drugs Authority is a retrograde step. The Government of India having realized the
need to have selective and focused approach on Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs sector
has established an independent Department of AYUSH headed by the Secretary.
• The current scheme of approval at State level by the State Licensing Authority is
adequate and is satisfactory in service of the ASU Sector.  Providing for the Central
Drugs Authority to administer this category of medicines would be an irrelevant
administrative extrapolation sans rationale. No new formulation can be approved
as a Classical Medicine in the ASU Sector unless due process is followed with the
approval of the respective Pharmacopoeia Committee’ s, consultation with the ASU-
DCC and final decision with the ASU- DTAB. Therefore centralizing licensing for
this class of medicines is infact an unnecessary exercise.
• AYUSH drugs are licensed by the Licensing Authority at State level assisted by a
Committee of experts which approves the medicines. Provisions exist whereunder
sufficient technical information is furnished by the manufacturers regarding “proof of
concept” and quality control standards being enforced for such drugs. AYUSH drugs
are formulated with ingredients mentioned in the authoritative texts and whose quality
standards are prescribed in the pharmacopoeia. This scheme as provided is definitely
superior and more relevant to the proposed in setting up of a CDA under the
Bill. Moreover to imagine that a Committee of experts constituted at Central
level, even if, sufficiently armed with staff and infrastructure, will be superior
and focused and can consistently handle the load efficiently in comparison to 36
such Committees at State level is far fetched. Thus, Centralizing the licensing
process for this class of ASUH drugs will be an exercise that will bring great
hardship to the ASUH Sector.
• The proposed Bill does away with the current provision of ASU-DCC and ASU-DTAB
by replacing the ASU-DTAB by the CDA and reconstitution of the ASU-DCC.
• Creation of Excise duty free zones has already resulted in shifting of industry to
Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal and Sikkim. Due to concentration of licensing
powers, the industry may further shift to Delhi for the sake of convenience in
handling licensing issues. This will also lead to migration of ancillary industry
and will result in loss of large number of jobs.
• Dr. Mashelkar Committee had recommended centralizing the licensing system
mainly on the ground of securing uniformity in implementation. The issue of
uniformity appears to have been raised only for concentrating licensing power in
the hands of the Central Government. It is an established fact that Central
Departments like Income tax and Central Excise etc. are more effective in the States
where the State machinery is well organized and effective. CDSCO is also more
effective in the States where the Drugs Control Organizations are well organized
and strong.
Clinical Trial
• The term Clinical Trial is substantially different from the existing definition of
Clinical Trial under Rule 122DAA of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. The

141
definition now covers not only drugs but also cosmetics. Therefore, it will be
applicable to all drugs and cosmetics. The definition does not use the term “New
Drug” or “New Cosmetics”. The definition will include any activity to determine
safety, efficacy or tolerance of the drugs and cosmetics. This means the
bioequivalence or bioavailability studies will also be covered. The definition does not
make specific reference to the definition of drug under Section 3(b) of the Act.
Therefore, it appears that it will be also applicable for the clinical trials of Ayurvedic,
Siddha and Unani drugs. It is important for us to understand that Ayurvedic, Siddha
and Unani medicines are not formulated on the lines of the modern medicines. So
paradigm of assessing ASU medicines efficacy and utility needs a different approach
and should not be coupled or extrapolated with a policy guide similar to one intended
for modem medicine as described in Schedule Y . However, Chapter IV A of the Act
and relevant Rules framed to regulate quality and safety do not have any provision
with reference to clinical trials. Therefore, it is necessary to exclude Ayurvedic,
Unani and Siddha medicines from the scope of definition of clinical trial under
the Bill.
• In view of our submissions in the opening paragraph, we submit that the Ayurvedic,
Unani and Siddha medicines should be excluded from the scope of the Bill.
• The scheme under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 is ideal in the context of
our federal structure and in the context of division of legislative powers of the Central
and State Governments. Therefore, if the Central Government considers it absolutely
necessary to establish Central Drugs Authority it should be like National Food and
Standard Authority established under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
The scheme under Food Safety and Standard Act, 2006 should also be followed
by making provision for appointment of Commissioner of Drug Safety in each State.
• The Central Drugs Authority at national level should be established with powers and
functions in such a manner that the legislative scheme and the division of
responsibilities between the Central Government and State Governments is not tinkered
with. The CDA should be in addition to the Drugs Technical Advisory Board and
not substitute to DTAB. It is necessary to ensure that out of five members of the
Central Drugs Authority, at least two members are technical experts in
pharmaceutical field.
• The Central Drugs Authority should devote its energy and resources in legislation,
policy making, monitoring of implementation at  State level, continuous review of
the products approved at State level, import and approval of new drugs including
clinical trials. The implementation of the Act including licensing should remain
with the State Drugs Control Organizations.
• Priority should be given to strengthening of the Drugs Control Organizations at
State Level. The Statement of Objects and Reasons should have specific clause to
focus on strengthening of the Drugs Control Organizations at Central and State
level. The objectives of strengthening can be achieved by incorporating provisions
under the Bill for appointment of Commissioner of Drugs Safety in each State
who should be technically qualified person and should be head of the department and
controlling authority.
SSI PHARMA ASSOCIATION
The representatives from SSI Pharma were of the opinion that—

142
• The scheme under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 is ideal in the context
of the federal structure and in the context of division of legislative powers of the
Central and State Government.
• The Central Drug Authority at national level should be established with powers and
functions in such a manner so that the legislative scheme and the division of
responsibilities between the Central Government and State Governments are not
tinkered with.
• The CDA should be in addition to the Drugs Technical Advisory Board and not
substitute to DTAB.
• It is necessary to ensure that out of five members of the Central Drugs Authority,
at least two members are technical experts in pharmaceutical field. The State
Drugs Controllers or the officers of the level of Joint Commissioners with outstanding
record should also be considered eligible for appointment to the post of Chairperson
or Member of the Central Drugs Authority.
• The Central Drugs Authority should devote its energy and resources in
legislation, policy making, monitoring of implementation at State level,
continuous review of the products approved at State level, import and approval
of new drugs including clinical trials. The implementation of the Act including
licensing should remain with the State Drugs Control Organizations.
• Priority should be given to strengthening of the Drugs Control Organization at
State Level. The Statement and Objects and Reasons should have specific clause to
focus on strengthening of the Drugs Control Organizations at Central and State level.
The objectives of strengthening can be achieved by incorporating provisions under
the Bill for appointment of Commissioner of Drugs Safety in each State who
should be a technically qualified person and should be head of the department and
controlling authority.
• The Central Drugs Authority and the Commissioner of Drug Safety should be
given statutory responsibility to take steps to eradicate menace of spurious
drugs by implementing various recommendations made by Dr. Mashelkar
Committee, such as —
° Building competency at Central and State level. Issuing written guidelines and
manuals.
° Periodical review and monitoring by Central Drug Authority.
° Preparation of National Formulary of Fixed Dose Combination for the
guideline of State Drugs Controllers.
• The problem of spurious drugs is a clandestine activity and licensing should be
de-linked for tackling this problem. Hence, centralizing the licensing system is not the
solution to the increasing problem,
ALL INDIA SMALL DRUG MANUFACTURER’S ASSOCIATION
The representatives of the above organisation had the following comments to offer in the
context of the Bill:—
• They agreed with the recommendation of setting of a Central Drugs Authority; but
differed with the recommendation of a system of Centralized Licensing.

143
• In their opinion, the Bill is contradictory to the purpose of the Bill itself. At one end,
the Bill desires to improve drug administration (which is possible by empowering the
implementing authority i.e. the State Drug Administration) while at the other end the
Bill is intending to take away the licensing authority from the State
administration to the Centre by introducing Centralized Licensing System for
manufacturers.
• The manufacture of spurious drugs is a secret criminal activity conducted by the
criminals in the business and it is never done by a licensed manufacturer. The licensed
manufacturer is controlled at the level of district by a Drug Inspector and in many
cases by Assistant Commissioner. Many a times the licensed manufacturer is a source
of information of such activities to the drug inspector.  The licensing authority is the
biggest tool in the hands of State administration to have a control on the
manufacture of Drug, formulation because of which the Drug Inspector is in
contact with the manufacturing fraternity and if the authority is taken away at
Centre by introducing the central licensing system, the State Drug
Administration will loose its control and the problem would surely magnify.
• It is a well-known fact that if we desire to improve the administration, it is possible
by decentralization rather than by centralization. It is the experience of the corporate
world that if they desire to have better controls, it is possible by delegating the
authority with responsibilities to the branches; it can not be vice versa .
• States like Maharashtra, Gujarat, Goa, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka are having better
controls in Drug Administration as compared to other States. Therefore the CDA
should concentrate more on the States where the Drug Administration is weak
instead of taking away authority from the better controlled States.
• If the manufacturing Licensing is taken away to the Centre, for follow up, for
getting manufacturing Licenses our District level manufacturers cannot afford
to have an Office at Delhi or also cannot afford to stay for few days at Delhi
for each License.
• Attention of the Committee was drawn to the situation which was prevailing prior to
1990 in Maharashtra. Before 1990, all the Licenses of the State were issued from
Bombay and there was lot of delay and problems faced by the manufacturers. Only
after realizing the problems, the Government of Maharashtra had formed 11 divisions
in the State of Maharashtra and the problem was controlled to a great extent. After
formation of the State Drug Administration, it took a very long time, nearly four
decades, to have the present control in Maharashtra. The State has a team of well
trained Drug Inspectors. Assistant Commissioners and Joint Commissioners to control
the activities of drug manufacturer. The Bill does not intend to make use of this team
and is planning to create a new team which may take another 40 years to have proper
control.
Following suggestions were also made:—
• CDA should be formed and they should have direct control on the State Administration
for implementation of the policies of the Centre by deputing few officers at the
State for a periodical inspection.
• A separate wing should be provided in CDA for control of spurious drugs. The wing
should act like CBI, supported by the State I. B. Department.

144
• To have the uniformity in the formulations, CDA should prepare a National
Formulary, which will contain all approved formulations by CDA. This book should
be made available at all State F.D.A. Offices for issuing the product License numbers
License other than the formula mentioned in the book should be granted by the
State. This will achieve the object of uniform formulation throughout the country. The
book should be updated by CDA with regular frequency to include the revised
formulations.
• There should be a system of issuing no objection certificate from State Drug
Authority for marketing the new formulations granted by other State authority, so
that if any State authority deviates from CDA guidelines, the marketing of the product
in the State can be controlled by the other State authority in their State.
GOA
The Committee held interactions at GOA on 18th February, 2008.
GOA PHARMACEUTICALS MANUFACTURERS’ ASSOCIATION
The representatives from the above organisation stated the following with respect to the
various provisions of the Bill.
• The genesis of Central Drugs Authority (CDA) stems from Dr. Mashelkar Committee
Report. However, Dr. Mashelkar Committee is vague on this aspect and under
para 13.0, it only suggested that the Drugs Control Organizations be strengthened and
no where the Committee had recommended that Central Drugs Authority be
constituted. They have recommended only Central Drugs Administration headed by
DCG (I) under para 5.8.6.
• Going by the spirit of Dr. Mashelkar Committee Report, instead of creating an
additional Authority, the existing Central Drug Standard Control Organization
(CDSCO) should be enforced to create a strong, well equipped and professionally
managed CDSCO with, if necessary, independent cells therein to monitor the
various aspects of National Pharmaceutical Industry.
• The proposal to substitute Drugs Technical Advisors Board as well as Ayurvedic,
Siddha and Unani Technical Advisory Board by CDA is not at all suitable because
both these Statutory Bodies are broad based and extremely technical in nature.
The CDA is expected to have only 5 members to be appointed by the Central
Government, which again is not bound to appoint Technical Experts on CDA. The
implementation of Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 is highly technical in nature and
requires Advisory Bodies cited as above comprising of technical qualified Experts as
at present. CDA, under its proposed form lacks this expertise and would be ill
equipped to handle the technical aspect of the Allopathic as well as Ayurvedic,
Siddha and Unani Drugs which have deep roots in India unlike in USA.
Under the present system of licensing, the Central Government through Central
Drug Licensing has complete control on the licensing for manufacturing the following
categories of drugs.
(i) Large volume Parenterals.
(ii) Blood Bank.
(iii) Blood products.

145
(iv) Sera and V accines.
(v) Recombinant DNA derived drugs.
(vi) New Drugs as defined under Rule 122 (E) of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules.
(vii) Import of Drugs (API and formulation) for marketing in the Country.
This goes to establish that even now, the Central Licensing Authority has control
over the manufacturing of a substantial part of the drugs available in the Country.  And
further, the Central Licensing Authority has complete control on the import of Bulk Drugs and their
formulation for marketing in the Country. Only that fraction of drugs which are not covered under
the above 7 categories are being permitted for manufacture by the State Licensing Authorities.
Therefore, no significant objective is visualized for creating a Centralized Licensing System. This
would only result in concentration of powers with a single entity and would result in
considerable amount of hardships to small and medium scale manufacturers located in Goa.
• They further stated that Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 and Rules framed there-under
have adequate provisions for the Central Licensing Authority to have an effective
control over State Licensing Authorities who are at present the licensing authorities for
manufacture of Drugs in their respective States.  These powers can be exercised by
Central Licensing Authority under section 33 especially under para 33(p) of the Act.
Therefore objective of control over the standards for drugs and cosmetics
including manufacturing, GMP, GLP can be achieved without creating a separate
Central Licensing Authority.
• Further creation of a Central Regulatory Authority would not be in conformity with the
Federal structure of our country where there is a clear demarcation of responsibility
between the Central Government and the State Government. Manufacturing, sale and
distribution are a composite activity . Therefore, there should be single regulator
for these activities. The Bill envisages having two different Regulators, which
would result in confusion and overlapping of responsibilities.
• Under the present system of licensing where licenses are issued by the State Licensing
Authorities, an aggrieved party can file the appeal with the State Government. If
the licensing system is centralized as proposed in the amendment Bill, the appeal shall
be with the Central Government irrespective of the State where the unit filing
the appeal is located. This would result in undue hardship,  wastage of precious
time and additional financial burden especially to small scale units of the type located
in Goa.
• Under the proposed system of licensing where the licenses are to be issued by CDA,
the units in Goa would not be able to afford the expenses and time and do not
have resources and skills to pursue their matters in New Delhi amidst the vast
magnitude of such issues that would come there from all over India. Such a
Centralized Licensing System as proposed would only lead to delay, hardships to most
of the units located in Goa of the type described in the Preamble. Such units from
Goa would also face difficulty in getting products permission especially for export
which also requires various certificates for registration of the products in the buying
country without which export cannot take place.
• The Drugs and Pharmaceutical Industry is a non-polluting safe industry for Goa,
which has limited resources of land and other inputs but logging impressive growth
of employment generation and contribution to the Revenue of the State. Hence this
Sun-rise Industry needs to be nurtured at this stage for the benefit of the State of Goa

146
and its people. The ease and speed that our local Units experience in access to the
Local Licensing Authority cannot be offered by transferring its functions to another
authority located in New Delhi.
• The establishment of such Regulatory Authority in New Delhi would extend
logistical benefits to the units located in or around New Delhi but create
logistical hurdles for units located outside New Delhi, especially in place like
Goa resulting in red-tapism and its consequential ill- effects.  The fledgling
Pharma Industry in Goa would be subject to suffocation and strangulation as it would
have to face geographical hurdle to compete with large Global players for its survival
and subsistence.
• The proposed CDA is being empowered to regulate All Clinical Trials by modifying
the definition of Clinical Trials under its Section 2(aaii) from what it is at present
under Rule 122 DAA of Drugs and Cosmetic Rules 1945. The word Clinical Trials
under this Section should be differentiated by substituting the words “Investigational
New Drugs” in place of “Any Drug”. This is because the Clinical Trials of the nature
of Confirmatory Trials, Pilot Trials, Trials for submission to foreign Regulatory
Authorities, Multiple Trials are only extensions of the originally Conducted Trials or
Trials conducted as per the requirement of the foreign buyers and need not be
controlled by the proposed CDA.
Medical Devices
• The words used in the proposed definition indicate that it includes ancillaries in
terms of software and mechanical applications. Therefore, it should be treated as
an independent entity out of definition of drugs category. This is necessary as
Rule 122 A and Schedule Y requirement for approval would not apply to it unless it
contains medication.
The definition of devices under Section 3(b) (iv) of the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940 should be omitted and a separate clause 3 (b) defining ‘Medical devices’
should be incorporated under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act to define medical
devices as an independent entity.
• It is felt that the idea of establishing CDA is mooted on the lines of US FDA which
is not relevant to our set-up since we have:
(a) Ayurvedic Systems of Medicines,
(b) Siddha Systems of medicines,
(c) Unani Systems of Medicines,
(d) Homeopathy Systems of medicines,
(e) Allopathetic Systems of medicines,
having strong roots in our country and operating parallel to allopathic system.
• The CDA that is proposed to be formed would not be able to handle all the issues
related to other systems of medicines prevalent in Goa and in India and as such
units in Goa would face hardships in contacting and following their Regulatory
Authority located at Delhi for day-to-day administrative issues.
• The present Regulatory system should be maintained, re-enforced to meet the
same objectives which are envisaged for CDA.

147
• To clear the apprehension of the Industry it was emphasized that the above Bill should
be sent back to the Health Ministry for clarification:
(i) Abolition of technical body like DTAB
(ii) Steps taken to nurture Indian System of medicines
(iii) Stipulation of time limit for development of required infra-structure.
(iv) Exact functions of the proposed CDA and its governing body
• It appears that the proposal of the Bill is biased towards USFDA which cannot be
applied to the Indian Scenario and units in Goa would face many hardships and growth
strangulation if the proposed CDA is established and enforced.
Financial Outlay:
The mode of funding of expenses to CDA is not very clear and Ministry of Finance
should make appropriate arrangement for the same. If the burden thereof is passed on to the
Industry, most of the Units in Goa would not be able to bear the expenses.

148
ANNEXURE-IV
LIST OF WITNESSES AT NEW DELHI
CONCERNING THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
NEW DELHI
9th October, 2007
Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri Deepak Gupta, Additional Secretary
2. Shri. Devashish Panda, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. M. Venkateshwarlu, Drugs Controller General (India)
31st October, 2007
1. Dr. R.K. Srivastava, Director General, Health Services.
2. Dr. M. V enkateshwarlu, Drugs Controller General (India) represented Central Drugs Standard
Control Organisation and Drugs Consultative Committee.
3. Dr. K.R. Mani, Director, Central Research Institute, Kasauli (CRI), represented Drugs
Technical Advisory Board for Allopathy.
4. Dr. M.C. Sharma, Director, National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA), Jaipur represented Drugs
Technical Advisory Board for AYUSH.
5. Dr. P.K. Guha, Director, Central Drugs Laboratory (CDL), Kolkata.
6. Dr. Gopa Ghosh, Director-in-charge, Central Drugs Laboratory (CDL), Mumbai.
25th January, 2008
1. Shri Alok Mishra, Area Manager International,
South Asia, Johnson and Johnson
2. Shri Ajay Pitre, Managing Director, Sushrut Surgical Pvt. Ltd. Confederation of Indian
3. Shri Pavan Choudary, CEO and MD, Vygon India Pvt. Ltd. Industry
4. Shri Ajay Maggo, Director, Finance and Accounts,
Philips Electronics India Ltd.
5. Mr. Lalit Kumar Jain, Vice Chairman
6. Mr. Jagdeep Singh, Secretary General
7. Mr. J. Mathew SME Pharma Industries Confederation
8. Mr. Ramesh Arora
9. Mr. B.K. Gupta
148


149
11th February, 2008
10. Dr. R. K. Srivastava, Director General, Health Services
11. Shri K. Ramamoorthy, Joint Secretary Department of Health and
12. Dr. H. C. Goel, Additional DGHS Family Welfare
7th May, 2008
FEDERATION OF INDIAN CHAMBERS OF  COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY (FICCI)
1. Mr. Anjan Bose, Chairman FICCI Medical Electronic Forum,
2. Mr. Ram Sharma, Country Manager-India, Nepal, Sri Lanka,
3. Mr. Sanjay Banerjee, Managing Director, Zimmer India,
4. Dr. Kulwant S. Saini, Vice-President, Johnson and Johnson
5. Mr. R. Kailasnath, Managing Director, CPC Diagnostics, Chennai,
6. Ms. Sumati Randeo, Manager-Regulatory Affairs,
7. Mr. V . K Topa, Advisor to Secretary General, FlCCI,
8. Ms. Bishakha Bhattacharya, Additional Director, FICCI
1. Prof. Sri Ram Khanna V oluntary Organization In Interest
2. Shri H.K. Awasthi Of Consumer’ Education (V oice),
27th May, 2008
Representatives of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drug Technical Advisory Board
(ASUDTAB):—
1. Dr. S.K. Sharma, Advisor (Ayurveda), Department of A YUSH
2. Dr. S.S. Handa, Former Director, RRL (CSIR), Jammu
3. Dr. P. Jaya Prakash Naraynan, Rtd. Principal, Siddha Medical College, Chennai.
4. Prof. M.C. Sharma, Director, N.I.A, Jaipur
5. Dr. V .R. Seshadri, Secretary, IMP, Co-op. Pharmacy and Stores Ltd. Chennai.
6. Dr. Asad Mueed, Director (R&D), Hamdard Wakf Laboratories, New Delhi
7. Prof. Shakir Jamil, Dean, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi
8. Prof. Anis Ansari, Dean, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh
12th August, 2008
Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, Director General (Retired), Council of Scientific and Industrial Research


150
ANNEXURE-V
LIST OF WITNESSES AT PLACES OF STUDY VISIT
STUDY VISIT PHASE-I
BENGALURU(KARNATAKA)
(7th January, 2008)
1. Shri K.R. Ravi Shankar, President
2. Shri Jatish Shetty, Secretary
3. Shri Sunil, Karnataka Drugs and Pharmaceutical
4. Shri C.P. Bothra, Manufacturers’ Association
5. Shri J.P. Mady,
6. Shri Suresh Khanna,
7. Shri K.R.P. Shenoy,
8. Shri J.S.D. Pani, secretary
9. Shri Vijay Kumar
10. Shri Madhusudan
11. Shri Sailesh Siroya Indian Pharmaceutical Association
12. Shri Rajesh Jagdale
13. Shri Ravinder Nath Guru,
14. Shri Y .V . Aswathanarayana,
15. Shri D.A. Gundu Rao, Karnataka State Pharmacy Council.
16. Shrimati Prema. S Consumer Rights Education and Awareness Trust (CREAT)
17. Shrimati Usha Ganesh, Additional Chief Secretary, Government of Karnataka
THIRUV ANANTHAPURAM (KERALA)
(9th and 10th January, 2008)
1. Shri S. Gopalakrishnan Nair, President, Ayurvedic Medicine Manufacturers
2. Dr. D. Ramanathan, General Secretary Organization of India, Thiruvananthapuram
150
Karnataka Indian Medicine Manufacturing Association
Consumer Care Society

151
3. Shri C.S. Satheesh Kumar, President
4. Shri Shaji M. Varghese, Vice-President
5. Shri Subhas V . Menon, Secretary
6. Shri K.P. Purushothaman, General Secretary, Kerala Pharmaceutical Manufacturers’
Association
7. Shri T.M. Thomas, Chairman All Kerala Pharma Traders Forum
8. Shri Milton J. Thalakottur, General Secretary State Committee, Kannakulam, Trissur.
9. M. George, Drug Controller, Kerala
10. Shri Unnikrishna Panicker, M.K. Senior Lecturer in Hospital and Clinical Pharmacy
(Medical College) Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
11. Shri R. Ashok Kumar, Shree Chitra Thirunal Institute of Medical Science
12. Dr. S.K. Jawahar and Technology, Trivandrum
13. Shri C.V . Narasimha Rao, President, District Consumer Information Center,
Secunderabad
CHENNAI (Tamil Nadu)
(11th January)
1. Shri T.S. Jaishankar, Chairman
2. Shri M. Malleshwara Rao
Confederation of Indian Pharmaceutical Industry
3. Shri K. Babuji
4. Shri S. Ravichandran
5. Shri R. Murugan, Secretary
6. Shri R.S. Jayaraman Rajan, Indian Drug Manufacturers Association
7. Shri S.M.K. Kitchani
8. Shri Sundar
9. Shri B.Sethu Raman, president
10. Shri D. Parthasarathy
11. Shri M.D. Varatharajan
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association
12. Shri M.R Chandra Mohan
13. Shri G. Selvaraj
14. Shri M. Dhilip Kumar
Indian Pharmacy Graduates Association
Kerala State Drugs Control Enforcement
Officers’ Association

152
15. Shri C.V . Ramaiah
16. Shri N. Selvaraj
17. Shri K. Kannan
Experts from Drug Control Administration
18. Shri V . Muthukrishnan
19. Shri T.P. Gurumoorthy
20. Shri M. Sarangapani
21. Shri Rajesh Bhandari
22. Shri S. Sabapathy
23 Shri J. Jayaseelan Indian Pharmaceutical Association, Chennai
24. Dr. V . Ravichandran
25. Shri Mohd. Yousuf
26. Shrimati Shobha Iyer, Deputy Director (CAG) Citizen Consumer and Civic Action Group
27. Shri T. Desikan, CONCERT
28. Shri T. Duraisingam, Chairman, FEDCOT
29. Dr. K.G . Russia, Consumer Protection Forum
30. Shri M.R. Krishnan, Consumer Association of India, Chennai
31. Shri R. Babapallery, President
Indian Pharmaceutical Alliance
32. Shri J. Jayasedan, Secretary
33. Shri C.V . Ramaih, Retd. Director of State Drugs Controller
34. Shri N. Kannan, Rtd. Drug Controller Experts from Drug
35. Shri N. Selvaraj, Director of Drugs Control (Rtd.) Control Administration
36. Shri T.P. Gurumoorthy
37. Shri R.S. Anbu Ilango, Director
38. Shri K.S. Gnanasekaran, Deputy Director
39. Shri M. Baskaran, Deputy Director
40. Shri T. Rajendran, AD
Directorate of Drug Control (Tamil Nadu)
41. Shri K. Bangaruranjan, AD
42. Shri K. Sivabalan, AD
43. Shri P.W.C. Davidar, Special Secretary to Government, Department of Health and Family Welfare


153
HYDERABAD (ANDHRA PRADESH)
(13th and 14th January, 2008)
1. Justice B. Subhashan Reddy, Chairman, AP State Human Rights Commission
2. Shri M. Narayana Reddy, President, Bulk Drug Manufacturers’ Association
3. Shri Ravi Uday Bhaskar, President, Drug Inspector’s Association
4. Shri D.Hanumantha Rao Ex-Director, Drug Control Administration, AP5. Shri C. Gopala Krishan Murooty
6. Shri K.L. Meena, Drug Controller, A.P.
7. Shri B. Hari Babu, President, Federation of Drug Traders, Andhra Pradesh
8. Shri P. Koteshwara Rao, President
9. Shri V .S. Chakravarthi Organization of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers
10. Shri Varaprasad Reddy, MD, Shanta Biotechnics
11. Dr. Vassi Reddy, VIMT A Labs.
12. Shri C.V . Narasimha Rao, President
District Consumer Information Centre13. Shri Kodanda Rao, President
14. Mrs. Rajam Ganeshan, Secretary, Consumer Care Centre, Hyderabad
STUDY VISIT PHASE-II
INDORE (MADHYA PRADESH)
13th February 2008
1. Shri Ramesh Shah, President
M.P. Pharmaceutical Manufacturers’ Organization2. Shri Sanjay Jain, Secretary
3. Dr. Darshan Kataria, Secretary, Pithampur Audhyogik Sangathan, Indore
4. Shri Sunil Makoday, Abhyas MandaI Indore
5. Shri T.S. Bhandari, M.P. Ayurvedic Medicine Manufacturers Association, Indore
6. Shri Goutam Chand Dhing, President Madhya Pradesh Chemists and Druggists
7. Shri Rajiv Singhal, General Secretary Association
8. Shri R. A. Sharma, President M.P. Small Scale Drug Manufacturers’
9. Shri Himanshu Shah, Secretary Association


154
AHMEDABAD (GUJARAT)
14th February 2008
1. Shri Jashvant P. Patel, President
2. Shri Pratapbhai A. Doshi, Chairman Federation of Gujarat State
3. Shri Pradip Trivedi, Secretary Chemists and Druggists Association
4. Shri J.S. Shinde, Gen. Secretary
5. Shri S.N. Chokshi, Chairman, Indian Drug Manufacturers Association
6. Shri Ashwin Shah, President, Rakanpur Santej Pharma Mfg. Association
7. Shri Jaman Malvia, President Small Scale Indian Drug Manufacturers
8. Shri Haiderali Sayad, Secretary Association
9. Shri Prabodhbahi V . Shah, President Gujarat Ayurved Aushadh Manufacturers
10. Shri Punarvasu Agnihotri, Secretary Vaidhya Association
11. Shri Atu1 J. Shah, Chairman, Surendranagar Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association
12. Mr. M.M. Saiyad, President Medical Disposable Manufacturers
13. Shri Mahendra Patel, General Secretary Association
14. Shri Prashant H. Pandya, Secretary General, Gujarat Pharma Small Scale Industries
Association
15. Shri Deepak Padia, President, Indian Small Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association
16. Dr. M.M. Patel, Principal, Kalol Institute of Pharmacy
17. Shrimati Mona Khandhar, Commissioner, Food and Drug Control Administration, Gujarat
MUMBAI (MAHARASHTRA)
16th February 2008
1. Shri R. Hariharan, Secretary-General, Indian Soap and Toiletries Makers’ Association
2. Shri S.W. Despande, Director General
3. Shri Ravi Kant, President All India Drugs Control Officer’s Confederation
4. Shri Uday Bhaskar, Secretary-General
5. Dr. S.N. Parchure, President
6. Dr. V .J.Thakurdesai, Secretary-General
7. Dr. V .D. Purohit, Treasurer National Integrated Medical Association
8. Dr. V .D. Bharadwaj, Vice-President
9. Dr. A.M. Khan, Joint Secretary
10. Shri Tapan Ray, Director General, Organization of Pharmaceutical Producers of India
11. Mr. Shashikant D. Joag, General Secretary, Indian Pharmaceutical Association


155
12. Dr. T. S. Malvankar, President
13 Mr. Gaman B. Shah, Vice-President Federation of Small Scale
14. Mr. Vinay S. Baranth, Secretary Pharma Industries of India
15. Shri Vinay Baranth, President, S.S.I. Pharma Association
16. Mr. Gamanbhai B. Shah, President Small Drug Manufacturers Organization
17. Mr. N.R. Shah, Secretary of India
18. Mr. A.K. Burman, Secretary
19. Shri S.R. Salunkhe, President, Drugs Inspectors Welfare Association (DIWA)
20. Shri P.R. Uttarwar, President
21. Shri D.V. Giri, Vice-President F.D.A. Class-I Officers Association
22. Shri S.T. Patil, Secretary
23. Shri V .J. Savani, President
24. Shri H.P. Gorasiya, Vice-President Bhavnagar Drug Manufacturers’
25. Shri Kanubhai Harsora, Secretary Association (BDMA)
26. Shri Sanjeev Pendharkar, Director, Vicco Laboratories
27. Shri D.G. Shah, Secretary-General, Indian Pharmaceutical Alliance
28. Shri S.B. Shinde, Joint Secretary, All India Small Drug Manufacturers’ Association
29. Shri Pramod Sharma, President
30. Shri Subhartee Dey, Vice-President Ayurvedic Drug Manufacturers’ Association
31. Shri Ranjit Puranik, Secretary
GOA
18th February, 2008
32. Shri D.R. Salgaocar, President Goa Pharmaceutical Manufacturers’
33. Shri Arun Naik, Vice-President Association


Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.