6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
 
SIXTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE THIRD REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2004-2005 (DEMAND NO. 48) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF AYURVEDA YOGA UNANI SIDDHA & HOMOEOPATHY
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 11TH    MARCH, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 11TH    MARCH, 2005)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 MARCH, 2005/PHALGUNA 20, 1926 (SAKA)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
C O N T E N T S
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                              
2.PREFACE                                                                                                         
3.REPORT                                                                                                                                                                 
                    
CHAPTER I    Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
                        Government’s replies
 CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not
been            
                        accepted by the Committee          
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final replies of the Government are still
awaited
4.Annexure  
5.Observations/Recommendations at a glance
6.MINUTES
                                                                                                               
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004-2005)
 
 
1. Shri Amar Singh                       ¾        Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur          
3. Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
4. Dr. A.K. Patel
5. Shrimati Maya Singh
 *6.   Shri Tariq Anwar

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
7. Shri R. Sarath Kumar
8. Shri Lalming Liana
  **9.   Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
 $10.    Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
11.   Vacant
 
LOK SABHA
 
12.  Shri D.K. Adikesavulu
13.  Shri M.H. Ambareesh
14.  Smt. B. Sushila Devi Laxman
15.  Dr. M. Baburao
16.  Dr. R.C. Dome
17.  Smt. Maneka Gandhi
18.  Smt. Bhavana Pundlikrao Gawali
19.  Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
20.  Dr. Chinta Mohan
21.  Shri Rasheed Masood
22.  Ms. Archana Nayak
23.  Shri D.B. Patil
24.  Shri Nakul Das Rai
25.  Shri Rajendra Kumar
26.  Smt. K. Rani
27.  Md. Shahabuddin
28.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29.  Shri Uday Singh
30.  Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
31.  Shri Kailash Nath Yadav
32.  Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
             Shri N.C. Joshi,           Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg,    Joint Secretary
Shri P.R. Guharoy,      Director
Shri  Momraj Singh     Under Secretary
Shri S.C. Dixit,            Committee Officer
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 14
th December, 2004
*Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 31st August, 2004
** Nominated w.e.f. 31st August, 2004      
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREFACE
 
 

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare,
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Sixth Report of the
Committee on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the Third Report on Demands for
Grants (Demand No.48) of the Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2004-2005.
2.         The Third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26 th August, 2004.  Replies of the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of AYUSH were considered by the
Committee at its meeting held on the 3
rd March, 2005.   
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on the 3rd March, 2005. 
NEW DELHI;
March 3, 2005
Phalguna 12, 1926 (Saka)
AMAR SINGH
 Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on
Health and Family Welfare
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-REPORT
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in its Third Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No.48) of the Department of Ayush for the year 2004-2005.
 
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in
the Report.  They have been categorized as follows: -
(i)
                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: (Chapter I) 2.4, 4.2, 6.1,
9.3, 10.1,10.2, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 12.3, 13.1, 13.2 13.3, 14.2, 15.2, 16.2 Total-16
 
(ii)
                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies: (Chapter II) 11.4, 11.5, Total-2
 
(iii)               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:  (Chapter III) 2.2, 2.3, 2.5, 3.1, 3.2, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 7.1, 7.2, 8.1, 8.2, 9.4, 11.7, 11.8 Total-15
 
(iv)              Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:
(Chapter – IV) Nil
 
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
 II        BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observation
2.4       The Committee also observes that a number of Schemes under the Drug Quality Control have been started in
2002-03 with some allocation of funds which could not be utilized as the Schemes were in the formulation stage.  
Position was the same in 2003-04.    The Committee apprehends that there is no likelihood of any improvement during
2004-05 also in view of the token provision being made for these Schemes for this year. The Committee is of the view
that Drug Quality Control is very vital for Indian Systems of Medicine specially in view of maintaining their credibility

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
both in the country and abroad.   The Committee would like to emphasise that prior to launching a new scheme and
keeping a provision therefore, all required procedural aspects should be taken care of.   The Committee feels that
necessary steps need to be taken for streamlining this procedure.
Action Taken
It is a fact that some of the components of the Scheme i.e. Drug Quality Control have not been utilized during the
year 2002-03 and 2003-04 and the situation is unlikely to be altered during the current financial year (2004-05). 
However, it is submitted that the R.E. provisions under the broad budget head “ Drug Quality Control” has been utilized
fully during 2003-04 and is going to be utilized similarly during 2004-05.
The observation of the Committee that the “drug quality control is very vital for Indian Systems of Medicine
specially in view of maintaining their credibility both in the country and abroad” is fully appreciated.   As such, the
Department. of AYUSH has given financial assistance for strengthening of 21 State drug testing laboratories and 40
Government Pharmacies to improve the infrastructure of drug quality control.   The Scheme is being modified further to
make it more focussed and flexible so that funds are utilized and end results are achieved.
 
(IV) RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Recommendations/Observation
 
4.2       The Committee notes that all the Research Councils are continuing to initiate and guide, develop and co-ordinate
scientific research in different aspects of respective systems, both fundamental and allied.    The Committee is happy to
observe that all these Councils have achieved the Physical targets of different research Programmes and allied matters,
in some cases exceeding the assigned targets.   The Committee, however, finds a disturbing trend.   A combined
building complex for all the Research Councils which were set up in 1978, was established in 1995.    Against an
allocation of Rs. 7.10 crores in Ninth Plan, expenditure was only Rs. 4.16 crores.   During the first year of Tenth Plan
i.e. 2002-03, against an allocation of Rs. 1.10 crore, there was a saving of Rs. 13.20 lakhs, due to the pending court
decision of property tax issue.   The Committee is surprised to note that during 2003-04, allocated funds of Rs. 1.20
crore could not be utilized for no evident justification.   The Committee is apprehensive about the fate of funds (Rs. 1.50
crores) allocated for 2004-05.  The Committee strongly feels that the Research Councils carrying out works having a
far-reaching impact need to be housed in a well-maintained building.    The Committee emphasizes that the Department
should make concerted efforts to get resolved all the pending issues so that funds meant for the maintenance of the
building for Research Councils being judiciously utilized. 
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee are duly noted for guidance.   It is submitted that during 2003-2004 the
allocated fund of Rs.1.20 crore has been completely utilized and any indication contrary to this which might have been
projected in the statements submitted to the Committee is highly regretted.   During the year 2004-2005 an amount of
Rs.1.50 crore has been allocated to the Central Council’s Combined Building Complex out of which so far an amount of
Rs.1.20 crore has been utilized.   The building complex is maintained by the Civil and Electrical wings of the Central
Public Works Department and major portion of the funds granted by the Department, will go to Central Public Works
Department, for maintenance work.
 
(VI)     SURVEY ON USAGE AND ACCEPTABILITY OF AYUSH (ISMH)
Recommendations/Observation
 
6.1       The objective of this Scheme is to collect the information on availability of facilities in the CGHS dispensaries
under AYUSH and level of utilisation/non-utilisation of   AYUSH services by the CGHS beneficiaries and also survey
of selected teaching hospitals under AYUSH for collecting information on available facilities and perception of
indoor/outdoor patients.  The Committee notes that this survey continued during Ninth Plan but not on a regular basis.  
What is more surprising is that during 2002-03, the first year of Tenth Plan, out of an allocation of Rs. 60 lakhs, only
Rs. 7.60 lakhs could be spent, the reason being non-approval of first survey, second survey being approved for Rs.7.60
lakhs.   During 2003-04, situation deteriorated as only Rs. 5.70 lakhs could be utilized against a meagre allocation of Rs.
12.00 lakhs due to delay in the finalisation of the survey instruments and consequently survey programme being
delayed.  Allocation of only Rs. 6.00 lakhs in 2004-05 clearly indicates the level of importance being given to this
survey programme.   The Committee is of the view that surveys are meant to be completed in a time-bound manner
otherwise the very purpose of undertaking them gets defeated.    The Committee therefore recommends that this survey

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
should be expedited so that assessment results could be put to use for expansion of AYUSH system of medicine.
 
Action Taken
It is submitted that an amount of Rs.19.00 lakhs was approved for the Survey on ‘AYUSH Beneficiaries
Covered under CGHS and Selected Teaching Hospitals attached to AYUSH Medical Colleges’ during the year 2002-
03.  The survey was assigned to Institute for Research and Medical Statistics (IRMS), New Delhi by the Department of
AYUSH.
            As per the schedule of payment, a sum of Rs.7.60 lakhs (40% of the total amount of Rs.19.00 lakhs) was
released to them at the initial stage and again Rs.5.70 lakhs (30% of the total amount) was released to them during the
month of November, 2003 on completion of the 50% of the field work.  The entire fieldwork, analysis and tabulation of
data of the survey has been completed.  Report from the Institute for Research and Medical statistics is expected to be
received shortly.
 
(IX) NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
Recommendations/Observation
 
9.3       The Committee observes that the Department is also implementing a Central Scheme for Development and
Cultivation of Medicinal Plants whereunder financial assistance is provided for Govt./Semi-Govt
organizations/autonomous/statutory bodies/scientific institutions including the agriculture/horticulture Universities for
setting
up of medicinal plant gardens and developing Agri-techniques of  medicinal plants.   The Committee finds that during
2003-04, out of an allocation of Rs. 1.00 crore, funds amounting Rs. 95.65 lakhs could not be utilized.    The
Committee   was given to understand that the scheme was put on hold for review and restructuring, as it was not giving
expected results.   During the Ninth Plan, out of allocation of Rs. 8.40 crores, only Rs. 6.96 crores – could be utilized.   
The Committee strongly feels that with the setting up of a Medicinal Plant Board, there is no need for running a separate
Scheme and the existing Scheme should be administered by the Board after making the required changes.   The
Secretary gave the impression during the course of deliberation with the Committee    that such a decision had already
been taken by the Department.   The Committee however, is surprised to note that a provision of RS. 50 lakhs has been
proposed for 2004-05 and a proper Action Plan has been also drawn for administering that Scheme.    The Committee is
of the view that the Department should take a proper decision on this issue without any further delay.
Action Taken
 
The Department of erstwhile Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy now Department of Ayurveda, Yoga &
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha & Homoeopathy(AYUSH) has been implementing the following schemes.Central Scheme
for Development and Cultivation of Medicinal Plants.Central Scheme for Development of Agro-Techniques and
Cultivation of Medicinal Plants.The projects sanctioned under the above schemes were under review and restructuring
due to which the entire available money could not be utilized.   Eventually after creation of National Medicinal Plants
Board, these schemes have been merged with the Central Scheme of the Board.  So far as the provision of Rs.50.00
lakhs in the BE for 2004-2005 is concerned, this amount is being re-appropriated by the Department appropriately.  
Therefore, the National Medicinal Plant Board is dealing all the matters relating to medicinal plant sector in the
Department of AYUSH.
 
 (X) STRENGTHENING OF PHARMACOPOEIAL LABORATORIES
Recommendations/Observation
10.1     PLIM and HPL at Ghaziabad are the two Laboratories running for a number of years.  One of the main tasks
assigned to these Laboratories is to maintain quality control of such drugs.  The Committee, however, finds the
expenditure phase very discouraging.   During the Ninth Plan, against an allocation of Rs. 7.20 crores, expenditure
figures stand
at Rs.  2.72 crones only.   During 2002-03, there was under-utilisation of funds at PLIM due to non-creating of posts.  
Position did not improve in the second year and the reasons may be the same – non-creation of posts.  
 
10.2     The Committee is perturbed to note that even after such a considerable time, proper infrastructure is still not
there.  The Committee strongly feels that required action    has to be taken at the earliest for creating and filling up of

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
posts.
Action Taken
The Department appreciate the concerns expressed by the Committee.   It submitted that the posts could not be
created in 2002-2003 as the Department of Expenditure had observed that the proposal for the creation of posts should
be moved in third quarter       of 2003.
The construction of the building is going on in full swing and the building for HPL and PLIM are expected to be
ready by February, 2005.  The proposal for creation of posts was taken up with the Department of Expenditure.  They
have raised certain queries and made certain observations.  The proposal is being modified in view of their queries and
observations.
 
(XI) QUALITY CONTROL
Recommendations/Observation
11.1     Committee’s attention has been drawn by a number of Fake herbal products and Ayurvedic products and
medicines claiming cure of a number of diseases readily available in the country.   On a specific query about the
preventive action taken by the Department  in this regard, the Committee was informed that the Drugs & Cosmetics Act,
1940 and Rules  thereunder regulate the quality standards of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy drugs. 
Ayurveda, Siddha & Unani medicines are manufactured under a valid Drug Manufacturing license which is renewed
every three years.  Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) under Schedule T of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act which call
for hygienic conditions, proper manufacturing processes and quality assurance of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs  
have become mandatory with effect from June 2002.
11.2     The Committee was informed that pharmacopoeial standards of 324 Ayurvedic and 45 Unani drugs have been
published by Government of India and it is obligatory for the manufacturers to comply with these standards.
 
11.3     The Committee notes that licensing and registration of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs is done by the State
Licensing Authorities.  Govt. of India provides maximum of Rs. 1 crore each to State Drug Testing Labs as well as State
Pharmacies of ISMH for the component of renovation of building procurement of   modern equipments and assistance
for human resource for State Drug Testing Labs on contractual basis.  The Committee was informed that 21 State Drugs
Testing Labs and 37 State Pharmacies have been assisted so far and an amount of RS. 45.62 crore has been released so
far as grants-in-aid.
 
Action Taken
No action is called for. However, as per the latest position, the Deptt. of AYUSH has given financial assistance
for strengthening of 21 State Drug Testing Laboratories and 40 Government Pharmacies.   The total financial support
given is about Rs.51 crores.
 
(XII) INDIAN MEDICINES PHARMACEUTICAL CORPORATION LIMITED (IMPCL) MOHAN
(ALMORA) UTTARANCHAL
Recommendations/Observation
 
12.3     The Committee finds the explanation given by the Department for non-utilisation of funds meant for
expansion/strengthening of IMPCL, a public sector undertaking unreasonable.   The Committee is not inclined to
believe that the post of MD lying vacant can result in bringing the activities of a company to a standstill.    The
Committee finds it unprecedented and ridiculous that the expenditure of a Government of India undertaking is so much
dependent upon one official and that his absence has caused complete non-utilization of funds by it.   This the
Committee feels is the worst that could happen to an institution of public importance and recommends that such
situation should not recur in future.
 
Action Taken
Efforts are being made for utilization of funds.  A comprehensive EFC proposal after getting it approved from
Board of Directors of IMPCL has been processed.  Views of the Govt. of Uttaranchal on the proposed investment are
awaited.  As already stated, the Govt. of Uttaranchal hold 49% equity in the company and any change in the
shareholding pattern requires consultation with them.  Govt. of Uttaranchal has to indicate their willingness to share the

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
proposed investment.  Further action will be taken as soon as possible.
 
(XIII) INTEGRATION WITH THE HEALTH CARE SYSTEM
Recommendations/Observation
13.1     Integration of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy (ISM&H) in health care delivery system and
National Programmes to ensure optimal use of the vast infrastructure of hospitals, dispensaries and physicians has been
outlined as one of the basic objectives of the National Policy on Indian Systems of Medicine& Homoeopathy.  
Accordingly, the Union Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is making efforts to integrate AYUSH systems with the
modern medicare institutions and education syllabus. The matter has been pursued in a meeting of the Core Group on
Social Sector.  As a follow-up of Core Group's meeting held on 19
th February, 2004, instructions have been issued to all
the State/UT Governments to make efforts to create AYUSH wings in all existing hospitals/dispensaries.  It is pointed
out to State Chief Secretaries that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is making efforts to fill up vacant posts of
doctors in PHCs and elsewhere with posting of AYUSH doctors.  The diagnostic facilities should be used commonly by
all systems and action should be taken for wider use of certain AYUSH mechanisms effective in RCH particularly
anaemia programme.   Some of the other specific steps taken by the Department of AYUSH to achieve optimum
integration with the Health care system in India are as follows: -
(i)
                  A Golden Triangle partnership for collaborative research on traditional drugs is being initiated
involving the Department of AYUSH, CSIR and ICMR.
(ii)                Scientific organizations like ICMR, DBT, DST etc., are being given R&D projects for AYUSH.
(iii)               Seven Ayurvedic and Five Unani medicines have been introduced in the National RCH Programme.
(iv)              Thirteen institutions of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR) & other National laboratories are
developing standardized manufacturing processes, pharmacopoeial standards and have undertaken shelf
life studies for AYUSH drugs.
13.2     The Committee notes that nine States (Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, Rajashthan, Kerala,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Chhtisgarh and Tamil Nadu) and four cities have been included under the scheme.  While
seven Ayurvecdic drugs have been included under RCH Programme in thes nine States, Five Unani Drugs form part of
RCH in four cities, Hyderabad, Lucknow, Aligarh and Delhi.  The Committee welcomes all the initiatives taken by the
Departments for the integration of AYUSH with the Health care system.  The Committee would like to have the feed
back about the success achieved in the implementation of these projects.
 
13.3
           The Committee welcomes all the initiatives taken by the Departments for the integration of AYUSH with the
Health care system.  The Committee would like to have the feed back about the success achieved in the implementation
of these projects.
 
Action Taken
Integrated Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy in the National health care delivery system is the need
of the hour.  The Deptts. of AYUSH  is pursuing the matter with the Deptt.of Health, Family Welfare and State
Governments.  Similarly, the involvement of CSIR and ICMR is being solicited for scientific and clinical trial of
Ayurvedic formulation and development of new drugs.  A scheme is being formulated in this regard.
No action is called for.  The Deptt. of AYUSH has requested the Deptt. of Family Welfare to extend and expand the
scheme further.
The proposal of the Deptt. of AYUSH for integration has to be implemented by the Departments of Health and
Family Welfare and State Governments.  On its part, financial assistance is being provided under a Centrally Sponsored
Scheme for creation of ISM&H infrastructure in District Allopathic Hospitals etc.
 
(XIV) MISCELLANEOUS -HOME REMEDY KIT SCHEMES
Recommendations/Observation
14.2     The Committee notes that an amount of Rs. 1.14 crore was allotted to all the
States together towards 50% advance in the year 2002. The Committee was informed that the response to the scheme is
not uniform as all the States have not placed funds for supply of Home Remedy Kits with the assigned pharmacies.  The
Committee feels that the Department should pursue with the State Govts. for reviving Home Remedy Kits Scheme.
Action Taken
The Home Remedies Kit Scheme was implemented as a Pilot Project for the first year of 10
th Five Year Plan –

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
2002-03.  Funds have been provided under the scheme for  one identified District in each of the 21 selected States
covering 100 villages (having a population of less than 2000) The scheme is being implemented through the
ANM/Anganvadi Worker/School Teacher, who is the grass root level Service Provider.   Out of 21 States, till today
only 11States have launched the scheme.    All the defaulter States are being persuaded time and again to undertake the
work as early as possible since this is a pilot scheme and has to be completed within the prescribed time.   The
Department of AYUSH is taking it very vigorously and personal contacts with the concerned officials of the defaulter
States are being made, regularly. The State Health Secretaries/there representatives have been reminded about the
implementation. The scheme has been launched. Tamil Nadu, Arunachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Uttranchal, Gujarat, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh & West Bengal.
The 2
nd installment has been released to 6 States Viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Chattisgarh,
Karnataka and Rajasthan.
 
(XV) YOGA AND NATUROPATHY
Recommendations/Observation
15.2     The Committee feels that there is a need for focusing more attention on Yoga and Naturopathy.  The Committee
is of the view that the Department should initiate required action for legal regulation of these two systems.
 Action Taken
The suggestion of the Committee has been noted.  This Department has prepared a draft Cabinet Note for setting
up of a statutory body to regulate education and practice in Yoga & Naturopathy by an Act of the Parliament.   Further
action will be taken after receipt of advice/concurrence by the Ministry of Law & Justice on the draft Note.
 
 (XVI) SCHEME FOR FELLOWSHIP EXPOSURE VISIT ABROAD
Recommendations/Observation
 
16.2     The Committee observes that despite publicity, no realistic proposals could be received during the previous
Financial Years and funds could not be utilized. The Committee was informed that a few proposals are at present under
examination for deputation of experts to USA, West Indies, Hungary and Sri Lanka. Once their Governments approve
the proposals, the experts will be sent and funds under the scheme will be utilized.   The Committee feels that the
Department should actively pursue the proposals with the concerned foreign Governments so that our experts are
benefited from International exposure.
 
Action Taken
It is submitted that Indian Embassies in USA, West Indies and Hungary have informed that the proposals are still
under consideration by the concerned authorities in those countries.  As regard proposal for deputation of an expert to
Sri Lanka, it is in advance stage and once the administrative and financial approvals are received, a Homoeopathic
expert would be deputed under the scheme.
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENTS’ REPLY
(XI) QUALITY CONTROL
Recommendations/Observation
11.4     The Committee   observes that following other schemes are listed under Drugs Quality Control: -
i)
                    Use of modern technology and biotechnology;
ii)                   Scheme for Acquisition of ISO Quality Control Certification for ISMH industry;
iii)                 Scheme for introduction for ASU mark for quality certification.
iv)                 Regulation of health food supplements;
v)                  Support to ISMH industry for creation of labs/quality control facilities;
vi)                 Strengthening of enforcement mechanism for quality control; and
vii)               Assistance to units obtaining GMP certification.
11.5     The Committee notes that for all these schemes indicated above, BE allocation, token or otherwise during 2002-

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
03 was either reduced or totally withdrawn.   Position was the same during 2003-04.    Schemes simply continue to exist
on paper.   The Committee apprehends that during 2004-05 also, the Department does not anticipate their taking off   as
provision has been made in respect of only the following schemes: -
 i)     Use of    technology - Bio-technology                                         -  Rs. 100 lakhs
ii)    Support of ISMH industry for creation of Labs/Quality  - Rs. 150 lakhs control – facilities.
 
iii)    Strengthening of enforcement mechanism for                               -  Rs. 50 lakhs
                     quality control
iv)        Assistance for units obtaining GMP certification           - Rs.100 lakhs
The Committee emphasizes that schemes should be launched only when all the exercise/requisite formalities
have been completed and also after exploring the   feasibility of the scheme thereof.   The Committee hopes that the
Department will make concerted efforts   to start these schemes during the current year itself.
Action Taken
It is respectfully conceded that the Schemes cited by the Committee in para 11.5 of their report have not been
implemented as had been expected.   The Department has taken necessary steps in consultation with Planning
Commission to modify these schemes.  The proposed modification includes deletion of some components and transfer
and merger of others elsewhere.
It is further to be pointed out that the Department has taken steps during the year 2003-04 and 2004-05 to utilize
the full provisions by way of re-appropriation.
 
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II          BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
 
2.2       The Committee was given to understand that higher allocation has been provided to the Department for 2004-05
in view of   almost all Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Department having taken off well as also additional funds
required for the on-going research projects, strengthening the infrastructure of various autonomous bodies under the
Department.   The Committee is, however, not inclined to fully accept Department’s contention that almost all Centrally
Sponsored Schemes have taken off well in 2003-04.   The Committee would like to emphasise that it has taken years to
get started these Schemes.  Following Schemes were started during the Ninth Plan, some of them in the second year of
the Plan period, token funds continue to be allocated therefor: -
(i)         ISM Polyclinic with regimental therapy, Panchkarma, Yoga and Naturopathy
(ii)        Opening of Speciality Clinics of ISMH in Govt. Hospitals
(iii)       Ayurvedic Park/Panchkarma in hotels.
2.3
              The Committee is constrained to note that allocation for the first two years of Tenth Plan for these Schemes
remains unutilized due to prolonged procedure of approval/appraisal. What is more disturbing is that the Scheme,
Ayurveda Park/Panchkarma in Hotels could not take off in 2003-04 for want of approval by SFC.   A provision of Rs. 1
crore for this Scheme was made in 2000-01, which continues to be provided with variations since then.   The Committee
apprehends that this Scheme will continue to be in a formulative stage during the Tenth Plan also with a token provision
of Rs. 1 lakh being made in 2004-05, the third year of Tenth Plan.
Action Taken
It is humbly submitted that there were no centrally sponsored schemes during the Ninth five year plan for (I)
ISM Policlinic with regimental therapy, Panchkarma, Yoga and Naturopathy; (ii) Opening of Speciality Clinics of
ISMH in Government Hospitals and  (iii) Ayurveda Park/Panchakarma in hotels.  However, some provisions did exist
for these components under the Central Sector Schemes and they could not be utilized fully due to operational
difficulties.  During the 10
th Five Year Plan, provisions for the components under reference have been made under the
Centrally Sponsored Scheme and the achievement in terms of utilization of budget provisions during the year 2003-04

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
and 2004-05 has been satisfactory.   The amount set apart for Ayurveda Park/Panchkarma in hotel unit has not been
made as the Ministry of Tourism did not find the scheme feasible.  Funds provided for this component has been spent in
other components by way of re-appropriation
As already explained above, the provisions for Ayurveda Park/Panchkarma in Hotel could not take off as the
Scheme was not found feasible by the Ministry of Tourism during the inter-ministerial consultation.  The proposal to
seek SFC’s approval for implementing the scheme has now been dropped.  No token provisions would be made in the
budget once the scheme is deleted for which steps have already been taken.
Comments Of The Committee
The Committee has been observing that new schemes continue to be launched and funds, sometimes substantial
and sometimes token, continue to be earmarked for years.  Lack of preparatory exercise and non-assessment of
feasibility aspect are the main factors responsible for such a situation.  Scheme of Ayurvedic Park/Panchkarma in hotels
is one such example.   This scheme was started during Ninth Plan, apparently without consulting the Ministry of
Tourism.  Token provision being made for this scheme would perhaps be stopped in 2005-2006 - fourth year of the
Tenth Plan.  The Committee reiterates that any new scheme should be started only after proper groundwork therefor has
been completed.
 
Recommendations/Observation
 
2.5       The Committee observes that against an initial Plan allocation of RS. 266.35 crores during the Ninth Plan,
subsequently raised to Rs. 364.43 crores, utilisation of funds was only Rs. 293.71 crores.   Plan allocation for the Tenth
Plan stands at Rs. 775.00 crores, more than double the allocation for Ninth Plan.   The Committee, however, notes that
during the first two years of Tenth Plan, utilisation can not be said to be satisfactory.     Against an allocation of Rs.
145.00 crores in BE 2003-04, reduced to Rs. 105.00 crores at RE stage, expenditure was Rs. 89.78 crores.   But, during
2003-04, the BE allocation of Rs. 145.00 crores, reduced to Rs. 135.00 crores at RE stage, could be utilized. This year
2004-05 being the third year of the Tenth Plan, the Committee is of the view that this is the right time for an
appraisal/review of both existing and new schemes and taking necessary measures so as to have optimum and judicious
utilization of allocated funds during the Tenth Plan.
Action Taken
It is a fact that the utilization of Plan provisions has not been 100% during the Ninth Plan and in the first two
years of the 10
th Plan.  However, it is worth mentioning that the trend is very positive and the Deptt. Of AYUSH will be
able to utilize more funds than provided in the 10 th Plan.  As such, the utilization of funds during the current financial
year is likely to exceed the B.E.  Additional provisions are being made at the supplementary stage.
 
The Department has also taken steps for mid-term appraisal of the on-going schemes in consultation with
Planning Commission.  The Schemes are being rationalized.   While higher provisions will be made for more useful
schemes, the less important ones will either be deleted or merged with others.
Comments Of The Committee
            The Committee has been given to understand that the Department will be in a position to utilise more funds than
provided in the Tenth Plan.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that the Tenth Plan allocation of Rs.
775.00 crores is almost the double of Ninth Plan allocation of Rs. 364.43 crores.  Seeing the trend of utilization of funds
during the Ninth Plan and also the first two years of the Tenth Plan, the Committee feels that chances of utilization of
more funds than provided for the Tenth Plan seem to be unlikely.   The Committee, therefore, observes that the
Department should take the required steps for the optimum and judicious utilization of funds.  The Committee
understands that mid-term appraisal of the ongoing schemes in consultation with the Planning Commission has been
initiated by the Department.  The Committee would like to emphasize that less important
schemes may not be allowed to continue for long and appropriate decision for their discontinuance / merger with other
schemes may be taken. 
 
III CENTRAL PHARMACY COUNCIL OF MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY
Recommendations/Observation
 
3.1       The Committee observes that the Department proposes to set up a Central Pharmacy Council for Indian
Medicine and Homoeopathy, a statutory body.  As per the Action Plan for 2004-05, the proposed Bill after getting

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
Cabinet approval is to be passed by both the Houses of Parliament and in the third quarter of the year, the Act is to be
enacted.   The Bill is yet to be passed by Parliament and the Committee finds only an Ad Hoc Council is proposed to be
set up in the last quarter of 2004-05.  The Committee is constrained to point out that the action for setting up Pharmacy
Council started in mid-
Ninth Plan i.e. 2000-01 with token provision of Rs. 10.00 lakh each for setting up two separate Councils – Indian
Homoeopathy Pharmacy Council and ISM Pharmacy Council.  Subsequently, it seems that a decision was taken to have
only one Council – Central Pharmacy Council of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy in 2003-04 with a provision of Rs.
19 lakhs therefor.   An allocation of Rs. 1.00 crore has been proposed for this purpose in Tenth Plan.   2004-05 is the
third year of Tenth Plan and not even a token allocation has been made in this year.  
 
3.2       The Committee expresses its serious concern over the progress made on such a vital issue and recommends that
the Department should make concerted efforts for getting the Bill passed during the Winter Session and enacted during
2004-05 only and make a necessary allocation therefore at the RE stage. 
 
Action Taken
 
While admitting the delay in enacting a law and establishing a Central Pharmacy Council for which token budget
provisions have been made from year to year, it is submitted that exercise of drafting a Bill for Central Pharmacy
Council for Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy is almost over.  The proposed Bill will be introduced in Parliamemt
shortly.  Rs.20.00 lakh have been kept in B.E. 2004-05 for the Central Pharmacy Council.   This amount would be
utilized during the current financial year subject to the legal process being completed.
As already stated, the Bill has been drafted.   After obtaining approval of Cabinet, it will be introduced in Parliament
as early as possible.  It is absolutely essential to pass the law expeditiously for regulating pharmacy education and
practices under the Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy.
 
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee expresses its serious concern over the undue delay in enacting a law for establishing a Central
Pharmacy Council of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy.   The Committee observes that no progress seems to have
been made in this regard during 2004-05 also.  The Committee strongly feels that such a Council needs to be set up at
the earliest for regulating Pharmacy education and practices under the Indian systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy. 
The Committee is of the view that any further delay would have an adverse impact on the growing popularity of Indian
systems of Medicine, especially on Ayurveda.
 
(V)       AYURVEDA HOSPITAL, LODHI ROAD, NEW DELHI
Recommendations/Observation
 
5.1       The Committee notes that on its recommendations, the administrative control of the CGHS Ayurveda Hospital,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi was transferred to the Department of AYUSH in August, 2002 to streamline its functioning.  
However, the budget allocation of Rs. 50.00 lakhs for this Hospital could be made only in 2003-04.  Eleven that
allocation had to be drastically reduced to RS. 10.00 lakhs at the RE stage as the possession of building from civic
authorities was delayed.
5.2       The Committee, in the absence of any further explanation as to why the possession of building was delayed,
safely surmises that procedural formalities may be the main culprit behind the delayed possession of the building.  
Since the plan allocation for BE 2004-05 has been restored at Rs. 50 lakhs, the Committee hopes that the proposed
allocation will be fully utilized.
5.3       The Committee notes that in the absence of a regular Medical Superintendent, one of the Advisors of the
Department has been officiating as MS in addition to his normal duties.   What is more disturbing is that against the
sanctioned strength of 64 posts for the Hospital, only 32 posts are in position.   Details of Action Plan proposed by the
Department for this Hospital for 2004-05 clearly indicate that this year would not be sufficient to have the required staff
for   the Hospital.   The Committee enjoins upon the Department to take all the required measures without any delay for
making the Hospital fully functional.    The Department must not forget that the Hospital was transferred under its
administrative control for improving its functioning.
Action Taken

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
            As observed by the Committee, the Ayurveda Hospital was handed over by CGHS to the Department of
AYUSH/ISMH in 2002.  However, hospital administration and accounts except transfer and posting of Physicians still
remains with the CGHS. Completion certificate for the hospital building is yet to be given by the NDMC. The Hospital
is functioning in the building for which the Delhi Urban Art Commission. (DUAC) vide its letter dated 10.9.2004
(Annexure-1) has conveyed its NOC to the NDMC for issue of Completion Certificate.   The matter is being pursued
with the NDMC for taking Possession Certificate.   NDMC is expected to give possession certificate shortly.  Steps are
on to utilise the complete budget provisions. 
            The appointment of Medical Superintendent is being pursued with UPSC.  All possible efforts are being made to
get the hospital fully functional.   A meeting was taken by Joint Secretary (AYUSH) with Director (CGHS) on 13.9.
2004 in which the CGHS authorities were called upon to take all necessary action for filling up the vacant posts for the
Hospital.  The matter has also been taken up at Secretary level for filling up the vacant posts.  It is, however, submitted
that the Hospital is operating optimally despite scarcity of para medical and lower level staff to be posted by the CGHS. 
Services of staff from Research Council and National Institute of Yoga are being utilized to run the hospital as
satisfactorily as possible.
Comments of the Committee
            Ayurveda Hospital, Lodhi Road, New Delhi was handed over by the CGHS to the Department of AYUSH in
August, 2002.  The Committee, however, apprehends that this might not have resulted in better management as hospital
administration and accounts except transfer and posting of Physicians still remains with the CGHS.  The Committee
fails to understand the rationale behind putting the Ayurveda Hospital under the dual control of the Department of
AYUSH and CGHS.  The Committee recommends that the Hospital should be placed under the full control of the
Department at the earliest.  The Committee finds that the Hospital still continues to be run without there being a regular
Medical Superintendent and half the sanctioned posts laying vacant.   The Committee is not inclined to accept the
contention of the Department that the hospital is operating optimally despite scarcity of Para-medical and lower level
staff.  The Committee recommends that the Department should expedite the exercise of filling up of all the vacancies in
the hospital.   Stop-gap arrangement of utilizing the services of staff from the Research Council and the National
Institute of Yoga cannot be considered as a healthy trend as this is bound to be having an adverse effect on the
functioning of the Research Council and the National Institute of yoga.
 
(VII) EXPANSION OF AYUSH DISPENSARIES IN CGHS
Recommendations/Observation
7.1       Expansion of AYUSH (ISMH) Dispensaries in CGHS was another new Scheme proposed during Ninth Plan.  
The Scheme remained conceptual as only a token allocation of Rs. 6.00 lakhs was made which could not be utilized.   
Position was the same in 2002-03 with the provision of Rs. 50 lakhs remaining unutilized.   The Committee is surprised
to note that out of an allocation of Rs. 86.00 lakhs for 2003-04 and in spite of Director, CGHS being authorized to
utilize this amount out of the Budget head of Department of AYUSH for opening of 2 Ayurveda, 2 Homoeopathic, one
Unani and one Siddha dispensaries and one Yoga Centre in the premises of existing Allopathic CGHS dispensaries only
the location could be identified for opening of these dispensaries, Ayurveda & Homoeopathic at Trivandrum and
Guwahati and Unani, Siddha & Yoga at Delhi.   The Committee is constrained to note that whereas dispensaries
at Trivandrum and Delhi are expected to start functioning, more time is required for starting the Ayurvedic and
Homoeopathic dispensaries at Guwahati.
 
7.2       The Committee is not prepared to accept that non-availability of manpower was the reason for the allocation
remaining unspent.   The Committee finds it hard to believe that in a country like India, so well endowed in terms of its
human resources, the Department could not find suitable manpower, resulting in delayed opening of dispensaries.  The
Committee is not satisfied with the temporary measures undertaken by the Department by transferring senior level
Medical Officers of concerned system and posting them to each of the locations and also hiring the services of a second
doctor and the Pharmacist in each of these dispensaries.    As the Plan allocation for BE 2004-05 has been substantially
increased to Rs. 1 crore 30 lakhs, the Committee recommends that the Department should take necessary steps so that
the proposed expansion/opening of AYUSH dispensaries in CGHS can actually take place during the current financial
year.
Action Taken
The Department of AYUSH concedes gracefully the deficiency of manpower in AYUSH dispensaries because
of large number of vacancies.  However, it needs to be appreciated that the process of new recruitment is to be taken up

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
by UPSC and revival of posts is complicated and time taking process.  The Department is fully aware of the fact that
utilization of B.E. of Rs.1.30 crores will not be possible if the existing situation is not altered.   On its part, the Deptt. of
AYUSH will continue to take steps to utilize the budget provision and open new dispensaries.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is constrained to observe that the expansion of AYUSH Dispensaries in CGHS, a new scheme
proposed during the Ninth Plan, continues to remain on paper although the Tenth Plan has also reached its mid-term.  
The Committee finds that no progress seems to have been made in starting the two Ayurveda, two Homoeopathy, one
Unani and one Siddha Dispensary and one Yoga Centre in the premises of existing Allopathic dispensaries at
Trivandrum, Guwahati and Delhi.  The Committee strongly feels that the Department should expedite the process of
making the new dispensaries functional by making an assessment of the delaying factors and getting them removed at
the highest level.  The Committee observes that the reply of the Department does not give much hope about the filling
up of the required posts for these dispensaries during 2004-05 also.  The Committee is well aware that the procedure of
recruitment through UPSC and revival of posts is complicated and time taking.  Nevertheless, viable remedial steps are
required to be taken by the Department.
(VIII) NATIONAL AYURVEDIC HOSPITAL IN DELHI
Recommendations/Observation
 
8.1
       During the Tenth Plan, against an allocation of RS. 2.00 crores and Rs.1.00 crores in 2002-03 and 2003-04,
expenditure incurred is only Rs. 12.60 lakhs and Rs. 15.00 lakhs respectively.    The Committee is surprised to note that
it has taken four years to purchase the required land and getting in-principle approval of Ministry of Finance for setting
up the Hospital in Govt. sector which could be received on 3rd October, 2003.
Action Taken
            The Deptt. Of AYUSH admits the delay in implementing the National Ayurveda Hospital which is now re-
named as the “All India Institute of Ayurveda”.  Foundation stone for the proposed Institute was laid on 14th February,
2004 by Hon’ble Vice President of India.  As the proposed Institute required additional land, as per the CCIM norms,
the Delhi Development Authority was approached by the Department accordingly. The DDA has issued orders
conveying allotment of about 6.5 acres of additional land.  Provisions are being made for payment of base value of the
additional land at the supplementary stage.  A Note for consideration of the E.F.C. has been prepared and put up for
Government approval.  The revised cost for the project as estimated is Rs.325 crores out of which an amount of Rs.150
crore will be provided during the next two years of the 10
th Plan.  Steps are being taken to make the required plan
provisions.
Recommendations/Observation
8.2       The Committee is constrained to note that only noteworthy achievement in this ambitious Project is the change
in the name from National Ayurvedic Hospital to All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi.    The Committee
apprehends that by the time all the necessary formalities are completed, initial cost of the Project would become
meaningless.   The Committee would like to emphasise that the Department should take all the required steps to
expedite this Project.
 
Action Taken
All out efforts are being made to implement the project of establishment of All India Institute of Ayurveda at
New Delhi.  This Department has been allotted additional land of 24647 Sq. Mtr. By DDA for constructing the Hospital
vide letter No.F-22(25)2001/I.L./DDA date 16.9.2004.  A comprehensive EFC proposal has been drafted for the
establishment of the Institute with the total expenditure of Rs.325.00 crore in 10th Plan and the 11th Five Year Plan.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Department in the setting up of the All India Institute of Ayurveda
in Delhi during 2004-2005.  The Committee would, however, like to observe that formal allotment of additional 6.5
acres of land from the DDA is still at the processing stage.  The Committee apprehends that if things are further delayed
due to procedural formalities, estimated cost of the hospital project would continue to be revised and in the process
becoming costlier.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should pursue the matter with all the
concerned agencies and make the hospital functional at the earliest.

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
 
(IX) NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
Recommendations/Observation
9.4       The Committee is in agreement with the Department’s view that it is necessary to strengthen the Board with
appropriate infrastructure and logistic support.  The Committee is aware that additional allocation for professional
achievements and captive cultivation of medicinal plants will be required.   The Committee would like to point out that
the idea of having a Board of Medicinal Plants come into place with a token grant of Rs. 1.00 lakh in 1999-2000, the
mid-year of Ninth Plan, and 2004-05 is the mid-term of the next Plan and still the Board lacks proper infrastructure. 
The Committee feels that the Department should give priority improving the infrastructure of the Board.
 
Action Taken
The Department of Expenditure has agreed for creation/outsourcing of only 6 posts including CEO for the
Medicinal Plant Board.  The proposal for creation of 31 other posts alongwith the proposal for grant of status of
registered society for Medicinal Plant Board is also under consideration.  The Department of AYUSH fully agrees that
the structure of Medicinal Plants Board needs to be strengthened to achieve the higher results and is taking up steps
accordingly.
 
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee expresses its serious concern over the undue delay in making the Medicinal Plant Board fully
functional.  The process of setting up the Board started in 1999-2000 and the year 2004-05 is nearing its end but the
progress made so far, is approval of the Department of Expenditure for creation/outsourcing of only 6 posts including
CEO for the Board.  The Committee is not aware whether these posts have been filled up.  The proposal for creation of
31 other posts is under consideration.   The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction on the pace of progress due to
prolonged procedural formalities to be completed.  The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the Department should
pursue this matter vigorously so that the Medicinal Plant Board becomes fully functional.
 
(XI)     QUALITY CONTROL
Recommendations/Observation
 
11.7     The Committee expresses its serious concern about the variety of drugs of ISMH, particularly Ayurveda easily
available in the country.   It seems that manufacturers of such drugs and also doctors prescribing such drugs have
nothing to fear.   The Committee would like to mention that, in its 143
rd Report presented to the House in December,
2003, the Committee had drawn the attention of the Department to advertisements by a doctor from Rishikesh claiming
to treat and cure epilepsy.  At that time too, the Department had justified their action saying that the clinical data had not
been made available to the Department for verification.  The Committee had then drawn the attention of the Department
to a specific Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question 3718 dt. 24.4.2000. As per the reply, to the Question, a team of doctors
was deputed by IMA to Rishikesh in 2000.  IMA found that Dr. R.K. Gupta was prescribing aurvedic medicines, having
no proven effect on the patients of epilepsy.  The Central Council of Ayurvedic Medicines took up the matter with the
Controller, Bhartiya Chikitsa Parishad, Lucknow.  The Committee was subsequently informed that the State
Government of Uttaranchal was asked to investigate the matter and take appropriate action under the Drugs      
Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act vide a letter dated 3
rd June, 2003.  Thereafter, a reminder was sent on
10th September, 2003.
 
11.8     The Committee expresses its serious concern on the pace of investigation in this particular case.  It is an example
of the lack of seriousness on the part of the Department towards such a sensitive issue which has a far-reaching impact.  
It has taken four and a half years to initiate legal action against a person who was playing with the lives of a very large
number of people by prescribing toxic and dangerous drugs.  This could be possible only after the matter was
highlighted through a Rajya Sabha Question which drew the attention of the Committee on HRD.  The Committee
believes that things would not have moved, had the matter not been reported by it and pursued with the Department.  
The Committee is of the view that the Department should take the initiative in the event of such cases coming to its
notice, by media or otherwise by taking up with the concerned State Government and monitoring the outcome of the
investigation if any initiated by the State authorities.

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
 
Action Taken
    As per the legal provisions, Licencing authorities of respective States are required to take actions against those
who indulge in manufacturing and administration of substandard or spurious drugs.  On its part, the Deptt. of AYUSH
has been issuing advisories to States/licencing authorities to deal with the offenders in accordance with the legal
provisions.
            As regards the case cited in the 143
rd Report, the Department of AYUSH had been constantly writing to the
State Government of Uttranchal to initiate action  against Dr. R.K. Gupta who was prescribing Allopathic medicines for
epilepsy  in very high dose.  The State Government was also advised to take action against Dr. R.K. Gupta under Drugs
& Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act.  He was violating the Medical Ethics by advertising
vigorously.  The Department of AYUSH also discussed the matter with Chief Secretary & Principal Secretary of the
Govt. of Uttranchal to initiate action against Dr. R.K. Gupta.   Ultimately, the Drug Controller and Police Department of
Uttranchal Government vigorously followed the case.  Dr. R.K. Gupta was arrested on 13.8.2004 under the Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (Central Law 61 1985) for storing restricted medicines in large quantity.
Secretary (AYUSH) called a meeting of State Drug Controllers and Licensing Authorities and State Secretaries
dealing with ISM&H on 23 rd August, 2004 and 24-25 th September, 2004 respectively in which all aspects of quality
control, enforcement concerning ISMH drugs were discussed and necessary advisories given.
 
Comments of the Committee                       
            The Committee would like to reiterate its serious concern about the easy availability of fake and spurious drugs
of ISMH, particularly Ayurveda in the country.  The Committee is not satisfied with the initiative taken by the Secretary
(AYUSH) in calling a meeting of State Drug Controllers and Licensing Authorities and State Secretaries in which all
aspects of quality control, enforcement concerning ISMH drugs were discussed and necessary advisories given.  The
Committee strongly feels that the Department has to take corrective action in the instances of spurious / fake ISMH
drugs being sold in any part of the country, coming to its notice through media or otherwise.
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
--  NIL  --
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
II          BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Comments Of The Committee
The Committee has been observing that new schemes continue to be launched and funds, sometimes substantial
and sometimes token, continue to be earmarked for years.  Lack of preparatory exercise and non-assessment of
feasibility aspect are the main factors responsible for such a situation.  Scheme of Ayurvedic Park/Panchkarma in hotels
is one such example.   This scheme was started during Ninth Plan, apparently without consulting the Ministry of
Tourism.  Token provision being made for this scheme would perhaps be stopped in 2005-2006 - fourth year of the
Tenth Plan.  The Committee reiterates that any new scheme should be started only after proper groundwork therefor has
been completed. (Para2.2&2.4)
 
Comments Of The Committee
            The Committee has been given to understand that the Department will be in a position to utilise more funds than
provided in the Tenth Plan.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that the Tenth Plan allocation of Rs.
775.00 crores is almost the double of Ninth Plan allocation of Rs. 364.43 crores.  Seeing the trend of utilization of funds
during the Ninth Plan and also the first two years of the Tenth Plan, the Committee feels that chances of utilization of
more funds than provided for the Tenth Plan seem to be unlikely.   The Committee, therefore, observes that the

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
Department should take the required steps for the optimum and judicious utilization of funds.  The Committee
understands that mid-term appraisal of the ongoing schemes in consultation with the Planning Commission has been
initiated by the Department.  The Committee would like to emphasize that less important schemes may not be allowed
to continue for long and appropriate decision for their discontinuance / merger with other schemes may be taken.  (Para
2.5)
 
III CENTRAL PHARMACY COUNCIL OF MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee expresses its serious concern over the undue delay in enacting a law for establishing a Central
Pharmacy Council of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy.   The Committee observes that no progress seems to have
been made in this regard during 2004-05 also.  The Committee strongly feels that such a Council needs to be set up at
the earliest for regulating Pharmacy education and practices under the Indian systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy. 
The Committee is of the view that any further delay would have an adverse impact on the growing popularity of Indian
systems of Medicine, especially on Ayurveda. (Para3.1&3.2)
 
 
(V)       AYURVEDA HOSPITAL, LODHI ROAD, NEW DELHI
 
Comments of the Committee
            Ayurveda Hospital, Lodhi Road, New Delhi was handed over by the CGHS to the Department of AYUSH in
August, 2002.  The Committee, however, apprehends that this might not have resulted in better management as hospital
administration and accounts except transfer and posting of Physicians still remains with the CGHS.  The Committee
fails to understand the rationale behind putting the Ayurveda Hospital under the dual control of the Department of
AYUSH and CGHS.  The Committee recommends that the Hospital should be placed under the full control of the
Department at the earliest.  The Committee finds that the Hospital still continues to be run without there being a regular
Medical Superintendent and half the sanctioned posts laying vacant.   The Committee is not inclined to accept the
contention of the Department that the hospital is operating optimally despite scarcity of Para-medical and lower level
staff.  The Committee recommends that the Department should expedite the exercise of filling up of all the vacancies in
the hospital.  Stop-gap arrangement of utilizing the services of staff from the Research Council and the National
Institute of Yoga cannot be considered as a healthy trend as this is bound to be having an adverse effect on the
functioning of the Research Council and the National Institute of yoga. (Para 5.1,5.2&5.3)
 
(VII) EXPANSION OF AYUSH DISPENSARIES IN CGHS
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is constrained to observe that the expansion of AYUSH Dispensaries in CGHS, a new scheme
proposed during the Ninth Plan, continues to remain on paper although the Tenth Plan has also reached its mid-term.  
The Committee finds that no progress seems to have been made in starting the two Ayurveda, two Homoeopathy, one
Unani and one Siddha Dispensary and one Yoga Centre in the premises of existing Allopathic dispensaries at
Trivandrum, Guwahati and Delhi.  The Committee strongly feels that the Department should expedite the process of
making the new dispensaries functional by making an assessment of the delaying factors and getting them removed at
the highest level.  The Committee observes that the reply of the Department does not give much hope about the filling
up of the required posts for these dispensaries during 2004-05 also.  The Committee is well aware that the procedure of
recruitment through UPSC and revival of posts is complicated and time taking.  Nevertheless, viable remedial steps are
required to be taken by the Department. (Para 7.1&7.2)
(VIII) NATIONAL AYURVEDIC HOSPITAL IN DELHI
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Department in the setting up of the All India Institute of Ayurveda
in Delhi during 2004-2005.  The Committee would, however, like to observe that formal allotment of additional 6.5
acres of land from the DDA is still at the processing stage.  The Committee apprehends that if things are further delayed
due to procedural formalities, estimated cost of the hospital project would continue to be revised and in the process
becoming costlier.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should pursue the matter with all the

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
concerned agencies and make the hospital functional at the earliest. (Para 8.1&8.2)
 
(IX) NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee expresses its serious concern over the undue delay in making the Medicinal Plant Board fully
functional.  The process of setting up the Board started in 1999-2000 and the year 2004-05 is nearing its end but the
progress made so far, is approval of the Department of Expenditure for creation/outsourcing of only 6 posts including
CEO for the Board.  The Committee is not aware whether these posts have been filled up.  The proposal for creation of
31 other posts is under consideration.   The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction on the pace of progress due to
prolonged procedural formalities to be completed.  The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the Department should
pursue this matter vigorously so that the Medicinal Plant Board becomes fully functional. (Para 9.4)
 
(XI)     QUALITY CONTROL
Comments of the Committee                       
            The Committee would like to reiterate its serious concern about the easy availability of fake and spurious drugs
of ISMH, particularly Ayurveda in the country.  The Committee is not satisfied with the initiative taken by the Secretary
(AYUSH) in calling a meeting of State Drug Controllers and Licensing Authorities and State Secretaries in which all
aspects of quality control, enforcement concerning ISMH drugs were discussed and necessary advisories given.  The
Committee strongly feels that the Department has to take corrective action in the instances of spurious/fake ISMH drugs
being sold in any part of the country, coming to its notice through media or otherwise. (Para 11.7&11.8)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES 
 MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
 
X
 
TENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 3 rd March, 2005 in Committee Room 63, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
 
1. Shri Amar Singh                       ¾        Chairman
2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur
3. Shri R. Sarath Kumar  
4. Shri Lalming Liana
 
     LOK SABHA
 
5. Shri D.K. Adikesavulu
6. Dr. M. Baburao
7. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
8. Dr. Chinta Mohan
9. Shri Nakul Das Rai
10. Shri Uday Singh

6th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/6threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:55]
11. Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
12. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 
   SECRETARIAT
             
  Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
              Shri P.R.Guha Roy, Director
              Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
              Shri S.C. Dixit, Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. The Committee then considered and
adopted the draft 4
th, 5th and 6th Action Taken Reports of the Committee on action taken by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare on the     1 st, 2nd and 3rd Reports of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2004-05) relating to the
Departments of Health, Family Welfare and AYUSH respectively. 
 
2A.      The Committee also decided that the 4 th, 5th and 6th Reports will be presented in Rajya Sabha by the Chairman
and in his absence by Smt. Sukhbuns Kaur and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha by Shri Uday Singh and in his absence
by Dr. Karan Singh Yadav on the 11th March, 2005.
 
3.         The Committee decided that the next meeting on Demands-for-Grants (2005-06) relating to the Departments
within its purview will be held on 28th and 29th March, 2005.
 
4.         The Committee adjourned at 10:25 a.m.
NEW DELHI 
3rd March, 2005
MOMRAJ SINGH
UNDER SECRETARY
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------